 The Kennedys of Boston gave all their children three options: living a life of pleasure and leisure, increasing their wealth in the private sector, or performing public service . Every one of the clan admirably chose the latter .
 American history is almost unique among large prominent families in U.S. history . The commitment to American history continues to be unique among prominent families .
 JFK would tell Time magazine in 1957, “Dad persuaded us to work hard at whatever we did.” JFK would say, ‘Dad persuaded them to work .’
 "Competition in the family was a kind of dry run for the world outside. We soon learned that competition in the . family was kind of a dry run"
 Kennedy’s first assignment was to a desk in naval intelligence in Washington, preparing a news digest for the navy chief of staff . Kennedy's first assignment in Washington was to prepare the news digest .
 He called on his father’s influence to get him transferred to the patrol torpedo boat training station in Melville, Rhode Island, to prepare him for combat duty in the South Pacific . But this was not what he wanted, and once again he called for him to be transferred to
 Kennedy was such an outstanding student that he was selected for the training squadron at Melville . In his oral history at the Kennedy library in Boston, John Harllee, the executive director of the PT boat school, said, “Kennedy was such a . outstanding student"
 This was in the days before there were enough combat veterans to fill the ranks of the instructors... a few of the best students were made instructors . This was before the military was able to recruit combat veterans .
 "I thought I had made another enemy for life, but I insisted that he remain with us. As a matter of fact, he and I had some pretty hard words about this assignment, and I thought he had made a pretty hard word about it."
 When Kennedy learned he was assigned to Panama, he got busy trying to find the right string to pull to get out of Squadron Fourteen and into combat, authors Joan and Clay Blair Jr. write .
 I was somewhat surprised by the orders and suspected that some strings had been pulled. I suspected some strings were pulled. "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm very pleased with the results."
 The suspicion was later confirmed when I had occasioned to review his record in the Bureau of Naval Personnel in 1947 . The suspicion of his involvement in the Navy was confirmed when he was in the bureau of naval personnel .
 Many other people have previously uttered articulations very similar to these words by Kennedy . The general sense of historians is that the idea was not Kennedy's and he had heard or read some variation of it elsewhere .
 Knowing that Kennedy was a voracious reader, my guess is that he picked it up from a 1925 article by the Lebanese philosopher Kahlil Gibran .
 The title of Gibran’s article was “The New Frontier,” and we all know this appellation was associated with Kennedy's years in office . The second reason is that the title of the article is “New Frontier” This appellation is associated with
 He first used “The New Frontier” in his acceptance speech for the Democratic nomination in July of 1960 . The New Frontier is the name of the New Frontier .
 Even Kennedy’s speechwriters never came up with the injunction, only a more concise and dramatic way of saying it . Even Kennedy's speechwriters didn't come up with an injunction, instead of a more dramatic way .
 “Over two thousand” books, he said, “Too high” figure of “over two thousand books,” he said . Introduction him about the frequently quoted figure was “too high’
 The compilation includes non-assassination books also—indeed, books that only have a chapter or two on the assassination .
 Sawa says he'd be happy to cull out only JFK assassination books . He says he's happy to do it .
 "I told him that I would be calling him close to the time the book was going to press for a number up to that point," he says . The book was published in late November 2006 .
 He told me that more than 2,000 books had chapters on the assassination . He said 2,300 books have chapters about the assassination.
 I have been asked over and over again how Gerry Spence and I ended up trying to try the case. I have a lot of people who want to know how we got through the case . I have no idea how I got involved in the case, but I'm sure it's
 Producer of the docu-trial, Mark Redhead, answers the question . Redhead: "If any reader of this book has the same question, I can only quote the producer of the trial" Redhead.
 Redhead started talking to lawyers at the American Bar Association convention in London in 1985 . He followed this up with speaking to trial lawyers at bar conventions in the U.S. Redhead told me that he first started speaking to lawyers in 1985, and followed it up with talking to trial
 The first contact I had had with Spence prior to the London trial was when he prosecuted a case in the late 1970s, serving as a special prosecutor in a murder case in which he had been a close friend of the victim, whose wife and child were also murdered . Spence
 Spence called me to find out how, as a prosecutor, you get around this argument . Spence: "I'm not going to go to jail. I'm going to jail"
 Most biblical scholars interpret the original language of the fifth commandment to mean, “Thou shalt not commit murder’�’” (murder being an unlawful killing, not a sanctioned one), which is how it appears in the New English Bible .
 In other words, you can’t kill in the first instance, which would be murder, but if you do, it’s not against the Bible that you yourself be killed . In other . words, the Bible says that you can't kill in first instance .
 The Bible doesn't prohibit killing, but it commands it when someone has committed murder . The Bible commands it to kill someone who commits murder, the author says . "I am not a biblical scholar, but I knew from my prosecutorial background"
 By the way, Spence got a conviction of first-degree murder and the death penalty in that case . Spence was convicted of murder and sentenced to death in 2010 .
 I’ll never forget the first time I met Spence, a joint appearance with him a few years later in Wyoming . He’s never forgotten the first meeting with Spence .
 Bugliosi: "We have a problem around these parts. We have a lot of problems," he says . He says the Italian government has a "problem" in the area .
 A few years later Spence and I would be squaring off in London, with me “prosecuting” someone whom I believed to be guilty of murder and Spence defending him . Little could I have known that just a few years after Spence’s arrest
 Past courtroom opponents and co-counsels of Spence’s spoke of his stopping at nothing to win, including “trying to physically hurt” his opposition . Spence is accused of ‘physically’ hurting’ his opponents .
 Spence’s extremely competitive nature is just one of the reasons why he is the great trial lawyer he is, separating him from his peers . Of course, Spence also has a competitive nature .
 "I thought I was a courtroom battler, but Spence exposed me to a level of legal confrontation that I had never dreamed about," he says . Spence: "I'm not a fighter, but I'm a fighter. I'm just a fighter"
 In several instances I was clearly able to turn his conduct around, right in front of the jury, to my distinct advantage . I don't intend to go into them here, except to say that Spence is such a colorful rogue that when you catch him with his hand in the cookie
 Two out-of-court instances, one ended in a stalemate, the other which Spence won . I do, however, want to mention two out of court instances, which ended in stalemate .
 The reason why I want to mention the stalemate one is that it ostensibly tended to confirm what the media, on both sides of the Atlantic, were saying about Spence and me, which didn’t begin to tell the whole story .
 Going into the trial I didn’t know Spence well, but I was aware of his superlative record, respected him, and certainly had no dislike for him . Spence was convicted of murder in 2007 of attempted murder of two women .
 Judge Bunton may have said this to Spence and Spence, but he may have, he may not have, said Spence . Spence: "I don’t recall, now, saying this to me directly"
 He certainly told the reporter this, but in a later note to me, he said his remark “had nothing to do with the courtroom performance of you and Gerry.” He said it had “nothing to do” with the performance of Gerry. Gerry.
 "What happened at the pretrial conference was, looking back, humorous, at least to me," he says . "Looking back, it was humorous, to me. What happened was humorous," he adds .
 "You gotta be kidding. Looking back, obviously Spence couldn’t have been serious, and perhaps was just trying to intimidate me," he says . But at the moment he was stunned and responded, “You must have been kidding.”
 "You’re not going to get by with it here. I don’t know what you’ve been getting by with around the country," he says . "You're in the majors now, and you're not going by with that," he adds .
 Judge Bunton and the typically proper Brit, Mark Redhead, sat there open-out-outhed and left speechless . The judge Bunton was speaking at the end of the interview .
 Spence said, “I don’t see any reason why I have to sit here and take this kind of abuse,” Spence left the room with his law partner, Ed Moriarty .
 I forget what happened next, but Gerry returned to the room in a few minutes . Gerry returned with a smile and a handshake .
 Later that afternoon, Moriarty called to say, “Gerry is downstairs in the dining room.” Moriarty was in the Savoy’s dining room .
 "It ain’t to any of our benefit to fight like this. Now, Vince, we’re in this f-trial together," he said . "Now, Vince," he added .
 Gerry “thinks’ he’s a cowboy, coming into court with his Stetson hat, suede jacket, and cowboy boots . To this day, I call Gerry ‘cowboy, not in denigration, because Spence is a great trial lawyer
 He does own a thirtyfive-thousand acre ranch eighty miles from his home in Jackson Hole, Wyoming . The ranch is located in Wyoming .
 The trial that followed contained many tense moments between Spence and me, from that moment on we got along fine and have become good friends . Though the trial contained many confrontational moments, Spence has since become a good friend with me .
 Spence is someone I have a lot of respect for, not only because he's the best criminal defense attorney and plaintiffs lawyer in the country, but because he’s a man of compassion for the little guy, as I am . Spence: "He's someone of compassion
 He also happens to be one of the finest writers of nonfiction books in America . He brings a wonderful literary quality to his writing .
 He’s a golden nugget waiting to be discovered by mainstream book reviewers, he says . He says he's a 'golden' book' waiting for mainstream reviews .
 The night before the trial we all appeared in court to familiarize ourselves with the courtroom and everyone’s position in it, right down to the court reporter . About the incident that Spence won, the night before he won, he says .
 Spence proceeded to sit at the counsel table closest to the jury and always occupied by the prosecutor . The defense attorney sat at the other end of the table, the defense attorney invariably sitting at the end .
 The Brits were absolutely terrified, having invested well over a million dollars and a year and a half of very diligent effort to track down witnesses and put the trial together . "The Brits are absolutely terrified," the author says .
 Mark Redhead was as pale as a ghost and was once again shocked by the conduct of Spence and me . Spence said he was 'shocked' by Spence's conduct and was 'once again shocked'
 In Britain, lawyers are very dignified and reserved, and now twice, within two days, Redhead was being exposed to conduct that was both foreign to him and an assault on his British sensibilities .
 Spence: "I told you that I would insist on sitting next to the jury and you gave me your word I could. But Mark took my side in the dispute, whereupon Spence said to him, “I told him that he would sit next to him”
 Even among American lawyers, Gerry and Mark Redhead are on the fringes, he says . Redhead finally broke the impasse, once again finding the situation humorous, by telling Redhead with a smile .
 "You people here in England are civilized, I’m half-civilized, and the cowboy is completely uncivilized," he says . The cowboy is "completely uncivilize," he adds .
 Spence, who refers to himself as a gunslinger, won the fight and sat next to the jury throughout the whole trial . Spence sat alongside the jury during the trial .
 Spence, at the lectern, started reading from an HSCA volume in his cross-examination of Dr. Dr. Michael Spence .
 Dr. Charles Petty was Dallas medical examiner who was Dallas's expert forensic pathologist . Dr. Petty: "I was a great friend to many of my family and friends"
 I asked Spence from my position at the counsel table to Spence’s right. I asked him to move from his position to the right. Spence's right. He said he wanted to ask Spence to move to his right .
 Spence finally told me volume 7 of the HSCA, and then resumed his reading . Spence, showing a little irritation, showed no sign of interest .
 I again popped up, not to interrupt Spence, but to make sure he wasn’t missing a word, or reading selectively . I popped up not interrupting Spence but to check his reading comprehension . Spence: "I don't want to interrupt him. I want
 The judge was clearly irritated when he heard a persistent voice coming from his right . He answered sharply, "Page 129,” and said to the witness, “I’ll read it again now, without counsel’s interruptions , if I might’�
 Gerry, now more than irritated, and feeling I had gone too far, did not reply, telling Dr. Gerry, "I'm not going too far," he said . Gerry was more than annoyed by the remark .
 The jam-packed courtroom was already smiling and enjoying the interplay when Spence said to Bunton, “I’ll even give it to counsel so he can see it.”
 "Here you go, counsel,” he said as he left the lectern and approached me at the counsel table . “Here are you going, counsel. Here you go. Here are your lawyers, counsel .
 The situation was getting more and more humorous, and the courtroom burst into laughter . Judge Bunton said from the bench, “It’s nice to see both of you sitting side by side.” The courtroom was filled with laughter .
 Spence finally reads to Dr. John Sutter . Spence and Dr. Sutter were laughing hysterically at the joke .
 The autopsy photos of the president's brain did not indicate the degree of laceration that would be expected if the bullet had entered the president’s skull at the point the autopsy report said it did, the back of his head .
 The language was taken out of context, it could easily lead the jury to believe that maybe the shot never came from Kennedy’s rear, where I was maintaining Oswald was . It was perfectly proper crossexamination by Spence, but because of the language, the jury could
 Judge Bunton allowed me to conduct redirect examination, where I could clarify the matter . Spence got up from his seat beside me to return to the lectern after he finished reading what he wanted to Dr. James Spence . Dr. Spence: "I wasn’t
 In any event, the trial received rave reviews from virtually every major news outlet in the country .
 Bugliosi questions cops, people who were there that day, and experts on forensic firearms, photography and chemistry . He also interviews people who knew Oswald, who knew him, and people who didn't .
 Judge Bunton said Bugliosi and Spence were “extraordinary well-prepared” for trial .
 The trial was of the highest caliber, one that measures up any legal standards . The trial is of the utmost caliber, and measures up the legal standards, CNN.com reports .
 Gerry Spence conducts three-week seminar for trial lawyers at his ranch in Dubois, Wyoming . Since 1994, Spence has been conducting seminars for lawyers throughout the country . Spence: Trial lawyers should be able to learn from each other .
 Called “Trial Lawyers College,’ it has become very popular, almost to the point of becoming a mecca for trial lawyers . It is attended not just by new trial lawyers but by successful, experienced ones who want to rise to a higher level .
 A trial lawyer has to ‘bond’ or connect emotionally with the jury, get them to like him, he says . I'm told that the key thing he teaches among many points is that a trial lawyer must connect emotionally .
 Lawyers should talk to the jurors at a gut level and expose the lawyer’s own human weaknesses and vulnerabilities to the jury, he says . And one technique he urges lawyers to employ is to talk to jurors at the gut level .
 I have to swear to you something that I think some of you will find hard to believe. And I have a promise to you: "Some of you won't find it very difficult to believe to believe."
 "I never start a final argument in a case like this without my belly just going lickety-split split," he says . "I feel shivers going down my arms, and I’m uptight," he adds .
 In the past several years Spence has conducted regional three-day seminars around the country .
 Lawyers who attended speak to the fact that not only have started becoming more successful in their trials, but also what they learned gave them a better sense of who they are as human beings, thereby enriching their lives . The many, positive testimonials I’ve .
 "That might be hard for you to believe from somebody as experienced as I that has been in these courtrooms all these years," he says . "It's hard to believe that you can't believe," he adds .
 If you stop to think how you feel right now, as a part of a very important historical trial, then maybe you know how I feel . The jury trial is a jury trial that has historical significance that will go on for generations . It will be a trial that will continue for generations
 You folks are the first American citizens who have ever had a chance to pass judgment on the government’s case . Because you folks are first Americans to have a chance at passing judgment on government's case .
 CNN.com: "I think we’ll find some answers here this evening that are going to be important for history. And together, together, I think we'll find answers here tonight that are important to history."
 "The one thing that always makes me proud of being an American is the fact that I get to join with other good Americans who sit here in a jury trial and give of their time," he says .
 "I’ve had a client. Excepting, you know, in every jury trial that I have been in before, I’m having a client," he says .
 "Someone that looked at me with his eyes, and—and needed somebody to care," she says . "I needed somebody that looked like me," she said .
 I began to think about what I was going to say to you folks this evening . And I wondered what it would be if Lee were here. Lee would have been here .
 "I think he would look to me for some answers and for some reassurance," she says . "He would look for answers," she adds. "And I think he'd look for reassurance"
 CNN's John Sutter says he would say to Lee Lee that when they charge you, that doesn’t mean you’re guilty in this country. And maybe I would say that, Lee, when they charged you, it doesn't mean you're guilty in the country
 You know, there has got to be 12 good and true men who find you guilty beyond a reasonable doubt . You can't be found guilty beyond reasonable doubt, he says .
 CNN.com: "You can trust the jury. And Lee, Lee, I want to tell you something, in my experience, you can trust a jury" "Lee, Lee" says. "I want to say something to say: 'I think you can't trust the
 Lawyers may think they are pretty smart, Lee says, and doctors, scientists may think that they are smart . Lee: Because, you know, lawyers and doctors think they're smart, they're pretty smart .
 The people with the great educations and the wonderful qualifications, Lee, they think they are great, Lee says . Lee: "They think they're great. They are great. The people who have the great education, Lee said .
 A jury, Lee, is a composite of ladies and gentlemen like this one, maybe with an average age of 40 years old . Lee says a jury is made up of women and gentlemen . Lee: A jury is not a jury, it's a composite .
 This jury has more judgment and more intelligence than the brightest scientists, the greatest orators and the smartest lawyers that have ever walked into a courtroom . A jury is a composite mind, because a jury is composite mind . This jury is brighter than the best scientists and the brightest orators,
 "When you have people from all walks of life, from every kind of background and experience, and you bring them together, it isn’t the flat information that you get from a single witness on the stand, it becomes whole and round and complete," he said .
 I want to tell you something else I might say to Lee under those circumstances . "I want to say something else to Lee," he says .
 President Obama: "In this country we have great rights. I might say, Lee, you know, in this country . In this country, Lee"
 Jury members are protecting their rights for themselves, jury member says . Jury member: "When a member of this jury demands those rights be given to you, they are protecting those rights" Jury member says jury member is protecting his rights .
 The jury says this case has to be proven to us, not just me, but to every one of my colleagues, beyond a reasonable doubt . They protect you, but they also protect themselves, and they protect this system and this country that is different from every other country in the world
 There aren't any juries in Cuba, and there weren’t any in Nazi Germany or China, Lee says . And you may have discovered by now, Lee, that there aren't . No juries are in Cuba or Nazi Germany .
 "We’ll be free as long as we have a jury like the one that is going to judge you, and see you," she says . "We'll be free if we have jury like a jury," she adds .
 The judge is going to instruct you after this case is in and my argument is over, and one of the things that you will see in the charge is this language . Now, folks, folks .
 All of the proof has to come from Mr Bugliosi, this government’s representative, says the Italian government .
 We don't have to prove anything, because we are, you and I are, American citizens. We don’t have to proof anything,’s President Obama said . Obama: ‘We are ... American citizens'
 "They have to prove every element of this case beyond a reasonable doubt," judge says . "When there are reasonable doubts that are raised by this evidence, which was my obligation to do, fairly, if I could"
 But the raft of doubts that you have heard in this case have to somehow disappear unanimously, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "But the rafts of doubts" have to disappear unanimously .
 Each one of you has the power to stop this thing, and so none of you can say, you know, I just went along with the majority, he says . "Each of you have the power of stopping this thing," he adds .
 You have heard the testimony of doctors who testified the majority said this, and the minority said that . The majority of doctors in the U.S. have said that, but the minority of doctors said that.
 In this case, if you decide no, I have a reasonable doubt, you can stop this conviction all by yourself . In the case, he says, "You can stop it by yourself"
 You have the power, you have the right to do it if in good conscience you can’t go along with a conviction in this case . You can't convict a man in the case if you can't go along in conscience .
 If one single doubt remains in your mind, you have the right and the responsibility and the duty to have the courage to say no . You have the responsibility to say 'no' if you have a doubt .
 President Obama says Lee Oswald should not have been allowed to stand trial . He says the jury is composed of people that have the courage to say no . Obama: "I turn to Lee Oswald, and I say, Lee Oswald"
 There is one truth in this case, and that the closet involved here is locked, still locked . EndNOTES: The closet involved in the case is locked .
 "This man suggests to you that I have some obligation to prove something that is in his locked closet," he writes . "He suggests to me that he has something that's in his closet. This man suggests he has nothing to prove"
 "Every one of us have had prejudices from the standpoint of history that have been brought to us. Every one of those prejudices," she said .
 The FBI’s Shaneyfelt is accused of using a diary to prejudice you . He says it was probably written in two or three days, but it was likely written in just a few days . He asks: How does it feel?
 How does it feel to have your prejudices turned on and messed with so that suddenly you find yourself hating a human being, hating him because somebody from the stand read something from a letter and from a diary? How does your prejudices feel?
 If you have seen that as an attempt to influence you, then you must see me as some person who has no respect for you. And if I have been too friendly during the course of this trial, if you have . seen that, if . you . have seen . that as
 "You must see me as some person who believes that you would sell your vote, sell your conscience," she says . "I'm not selling my vote, I'm selling my conscience for a smile," she adds .
 I hope it's been all right that I have smiled at you from time to time. And I have been smiling at you, I've told you .
 If he can do this, it can only help him in his quest for the verdict he is seeking, it will help him get a verdict .
 There is another, perhaps superceding, dynamic and reality at play here . But there is also a supercedes-superceding dynamic, and reality, in this case .
 If he's not, the jury will pick up on the phoniness just like that, and this can only hurt him in the jury’s eyes . The jury will be picking up on that phoniness, and it will hurt him .
 Although it is natural for Spence to play to the jury and try to get them to like him, it would not be natural for me to do so . Spence will not be able to play for the jury at the end of this year's trial .
 "I make no effort in that regard. Although I obviously want them to also like me," he says . "I obviously want [the fans] to like me, but I don't want to like them," he adds .
 "Not only would I feel very uncomfortable making such an effort, since it’s not my personality," he says . "I’m too absorbed in the trial anyway to be thinking about such things," he adds .
 What I introduced into the record may possibly have had that effect, but that was not my intent in introducing it. And by . introducing it, I introduced it, it may have had the effect of that effect . And by introducing it to the record, he said: 'That was
 To Oswald, Kennedy probably was the quintessential representative of a society for which he had a grinding contempt . I presented evidence of Oswald hating America and capitalism to fortify my argument .
 "There's a little intrinsic danger in playing to the jury. I would imagine there’s a little inherent danger," he says . He says .
 If you happen to smile at some jurors more than others, this may possibly cause the latter to feel slighted, especially if, accidentally, no smiles come the way of a particular juror who sees you smiling at his fellow jurors .
 A smiling, friendly counsel might think he can get a juror to sell his vote or conscience, which would be very insulting to the juror . There is also the problem that Spence himself seemed to be concerned about .
 "What I try to convey to the jury is sincerity, honesty, substance, and stature," he says . The jury is expected to hear from the jury .
 "They all add up to credibility, which I want with the jury above all else," he says . "I want to have credibility, and I want the jury to have with me," he adds .
 An example of my seeking to have stature and credibility with a jury happened in 1966, only two years after I had become a prosecutor at the Los Angeles district attorney's office .
 The situation had gotten so bad that many drivers refused to drive without a police officer present on the bus . The situation was so bad it had become so bad many drivers refuse to drive .
 A seventy-one-year-old driver who was due to retire within one month was shot and killed when he resisted two robbers . This is the first homicide that the Rapid Transit District bus line in Los Angeles had ever had .
 It was an important case in the office, and we were seeking the death penalty against the two defendants . The two defendants were charged with the murder of two women .
 The judge "felt that since I hadn’t been in the DA’s office that long, I was a relative rookie and could be pushed around," he says . "The judge obviously felt that since . I hadn't been in . that long," he adds .
 "If you tell me to stand up and sit down like a yo-yo in this courtroom, I'm not going to have that," she said . "I’m not going for that. If you tell you to stand . up and . sit down, I’
 From that point on in the trial, I made all my objections sitting down, not standing up, and the judge never said a word . You can believe it or not, he said, but from that point, he sat down and didn't stand up . The judge didn't say
 Of course, a trial lawyer talking to a judge like that risks being held in contempt of court . A trial lawyer could be held in jail if he talks to the judge in contempt .
 LWT’s chief outside consultant was Paul Hoch of Berkeley, California, whom neither I nor Spence worked with in the preparation of our cases . Hoch is not the same person as Hoch, who neither I or Spence used .
 Peter Dale Scott has added a third group from which not one word has ever escaped . Not impressed with the improbability that two groups of conspirators could keep a secret for decades .
 If we wait long enough, Scott, whose passion for speculation and hypotheticals is matched only by his aversion for hard facts, will surely come up with some fourth group whose members have all remained silent for over forty years .
 This book will make it very obvious how unreliable Oswald was, yet many conspiracy theorists contend he wasn't only a secret agent for the political left or right, but a double agent . Oswald was unreliable and independent Oswald, yet conspiracy theorists say he was a double .
 At times I found the sheer weight of the case almost too much, saying to myself that I might not have enough time to get a handle on one of this magnitude . But at times, I found myself not having time to handle the case too much .
 Oswald's guilt was not proven beyond all reasonable doubt, but critics would seize on this fact as confirmation that when a jury of twelve objective and impartial American citizens had heard and considered the evidence against Oswald, they concluded he was not guilty . These low moments, however, were always immediately qu
 The theorists would unquestionably cite this fact in the future in their books . And the theorists would undoubtedly cite it in their new books .
 In preparing for the trial, "Nearly all of my time was spent on getting a solid grasp of the case and all its major issues," says CNN's John Sutter .
 I never had the time to really familiarize myself with the many pages of direct examination, crossexamination, and final summation I had prepared to the point where the whole page was in my mind .
 I therefore had to make reference to my yellow-pad notes more than I would have in a normal trial . The trial took place in a bid to prove that the trial was not a success .
 One of the biggest problems was how to compress the prosecution of a murder case of this magnitude into only ten and a half hours, my half of the time allotted for the trial . Two other murders inextricably related to the Kennedy assassination I had to deal with—Oswald
 The jury should be able to make the case in a persuasive way for the jury . And to do so in a structured, understandable, and persuasive way, the jury must decide .
 Because of the time limitations, I was also forced to proceed at a markedly faster tempo than normal with my questioning of witnesses . The time limitations also meant that I was forced to question witnesses faster than normal .
 "I invariably opted for the historical record, determined to shoehorn as much substance into the record as possible," says the author .
 Jurors may conclude you’re trying to suppress relevant evidence they want to hear . Because of these same time constraints, although it is good trial technique anyway not to object to your opponent’s questions too often .
 Producer Mark Redhead told me years ago that on the first ballot back in the jury room, the vote was slightly in favor of an acquittal, like 7 to 5 or so . Redhead: "The vote was about 7-5 or so. The vote was a slightly in
 Though the trial was twenty-one hours long, Showtime showed only four and a half hours of it . The trial was over 21 hours long .
 London Weekend Television and Showtime, which helped fund the project, wanted to have a poll from the national audience (in which people calling in would have fifty cents added to their phone bill) on whether Oswald was guilty or not guilty .
 If a real juror had to miss even 1 percent of a trial, they would automatically be replaced by an alternate juror . If a juror has to miss 1 percent a trial they would be automatically replaced by alternate jurors .
 It was not alleged in the indictment that Oswald was part of a conspiracy, and it was not an issue for the London jury to decide . Secondly, as stated in the main text, the indictment did not allege Oswald was involved in a conspiracy . The jury was not asked to decide whether
 I agreed to go along with the poll if it was limited to a call-in for guilty or not guilty, with no vote on the conspiracy issue . The poll will only be limited to the call in for guilty, not guilty verdicts, and no conspiracy vote .
 "I thought the television audience would be responsible enough to vote on the only issue before it. That was my mistake, thinking I thought it would be the only thing before it," he said .
 85 percent voted not guilty, only 15 percent voted guilty, according to a national poll . When the result of the national poll came on the screen and announced by the host, network commentator Edwin Newman, it showed that 85 percent vote not guilty .
 National polls at the time showed that approximately 85 percent of the American people believed that Oswald was part of a conspiracy in the assassination .
 The television audience, unable to vote for its belief in a conspiracy, expressed their belief in the only way available to it, by voting not guilty . The TV audience was unable to choose the way to vote .
 Geraldo Rivera's trial was again shown on national television in 1988 in a Tribune Entertainment special from Dallas on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the assassination . This conclusion of mine was virtually confirmed when the four and a half hours of trial was shown again on national TV in 1988 .
 I had learned my lesson, and even though I knew the audience shouldn’t be voting on anything, I insisted that they vote separately on the issue of conspiracy . I now insisted that the audience vote separately .
 Showtime special had not put on the screen the number of voters who called in . The Showtime special did not put the number on the screens .
 The 1988 Tribune Entertainment special was a phenomenal 221,516 . The special was broadcast on Sunday, July 28, 1988 . It was the first time the show had aired on PBS .
 Eighty percent voted guilty, 20 percent not guilty, and 71 percent of the television audience said that Oswald was part of a conspiracy . After the audience watched only four and a half hours of the trial, the number dropped to 71 percent .
 "If the audience had seen the entire twenty-one hours, the percentage would have been considerably lower," he said . He added that the audience would have seen the full twenty-21 hours .
 The only verdict for the London jury to return was guilty or not guilty . But they were also asked to give their informal opinion as to whether Oswald acted alone or as part of a conspiracy .
 In the law, not guilty and innocent are not synonymous terms . Actually, in the law ... not guilty or innocent is not synonymous term .
 Whoever wrote these words either knew nothing about the FBI’s investigation, or should have his or her mouth washed with soap .
 FBI and Warren Commission knew beyond all doubt that Oswald killed Kennedy . By definition any conspiracy had to have involved Oswald . Oswald was the prime suspect in Kennedy's assassination .
 Church Committee statement that FBI investigation “focused narrowly” on Oswald correct correct . Only in that sense is the statement that the FBI investigation was focused on Oswald .
 Since it knew Oswald killed Kennedy, the narrow focus on Oswald’s association with others was mandatory . The narrow focus was mandatory, since Oswald was known to have killed Kennedy .
 Church Committee statement suggests that virtually no investigation of conspiracy was conducted . Church Committee says there was no investigation into conspiracy .
 Proconspiracy author Harold Weisberg pointed out that the FBI and Warren Commission “checked into almost every breath drew” (Weisberg, Oswald in New Orleans,214) This fact is an investigation of a possible conspiracy .
 There can be no question that the FBI spent thousands of man-hours investigating matters that had nothing to do with Oswald killing Kennedy . The FBI spent the majority of the time looking into whether Oswald was involved with anyone else in the assassination .
 With a large staff and eleven senators on the Church Committee, it's remarkable that a historical falsehood and blasphemy like the aforementioned statement would not have been caught by someone and corrected before publication .
 The Church Committee was unaware of the FBI’s very extensive investigation of the Sylvia Odio incident, the considerable number of FBI interviews of anti-Castro Cuban exiles . The Warren Commission took sworn Introduction testimony from several members of that community concerning the Carlos Bringuier incident .
 The HSCA should have been more proactive in investigating Oswald's possible association with the CIA, FBI, and KGB . The Warren Commission and FBI investigated all aspects of Ruby's involvement in the assassination weekend .
 HSCA should have sought FBI electronic surveillance tapes of mob members, he says . He says motive is circumstantial evidence, but circumstantials are circumstantially evidence .
 The Commission should have asked the FBI to investigate this group in depth . Many of the anti-Castro elements hated Kennedy over his failure to provide air support during the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 The presence of motive is itself a lead to pursue in a criminal investigation . You don't blindly spin your wheels pursuing that which doesn’t exist . You follow leads for the most part .
 The only observation I would add to Cornwell’s critique of the Warren Commission is that since the Commission knew beyond all doubt that Oswald killed Kennedy, by definition, if there was any conspiracy, the conspiratorial group (mob, anti-Castro Cuban exiles, CIA)
 Inasmuch as the Warren Commission, FBI, and Secret Service probably conducted the most comprehensive and meticulous investigation of Oswald that has ever been conducted on any individual in history, even though the Commission and FBI did not go out and do what Cornwell said they should have done .
 Eleven volumes of exhibits comprising 9,833 pages contain a number of dubious evidentiary value . But there are, in the 11 volumes, there are some dubious features .
 In this limited category, he cites two newspaper photos of Mark Lane, an FBI interview on the treatment of Jack Ruby’s baldness, lyrics of a Russian song, and a few others . Among them, he says, are photos of Marina's dental records .
 Witnesses testifying before the Commission either specifically referred to the exhibits in their testimony, or gave testimony that prompted the FBI to go out and try to confirm something they said . Witnesses testified that the FBI went to question the exhibits .
 The Warren Report, of course, is only a summary of the twenty-six volumes . Warren Report: "The Warren Report" is only one volume .
 The volumes contain testimony, statements, exhibits, and affidavits of the witnesses . And it’s these volumes that contain the testimony and statements . It's these volumes of testimony and exhibits .
 The Commission of Investigation: Many people believed the shots came from the railroad bridge over the Triple Underpass or from the area to the west of the Depository . On page 71 of the report, the Commission writes .
 Posner’s conclusion is correct, but Milteer was considered sufficiently important and troubling by the HSCA to appear on forty-six pages of its volumes .
 The San Francisco Chronicle and Washington Post may have been the only exceptions . Virtually all of the media reviewers of Posner’s Case Closed assumed that Posner was somehow responsible for the computerized analysis .
 The American Bar Association’s mock trial is a matter of public record, but it was a very obscure event that at least ninety-eight out of a hundred people had to be completely unaware of of .
 Posner, in his book, clearly wasn’t eager to increase the number of people who did know about it . Posner: "I'm not sure how many people are aware of it, but I'm sure it's a good thing to know"
 The only references to the mock trial are buried in the back of the book in citations to the text, and nowhere in his book does Posner tell his readers that the American Bar Association commissioned FAA’s work .
 Posner’s citations, as he indicates, do refer to the mock trial . Much more important and relevant is the fact that while Posner's citations, they don’t refer to mock trial, they refer to Dr. Dr. David Perry . Perry: Posner
 Piziali’s testimony at the trial, they in no way refute (or even address themselves to) the reality pointed out by Frank Posner that Posner had led his readers to believe that he had commissioned FAA's work . FAA's testimony did not refute the reality
 Media thought Posner had commissioned the FAA work . Posner's FAA work is thought to have been commissioned by Posner .
 It almost had to be Thursday morning because Ruby didn’t get to bed Thursday night until after four in the morning . Hansen said he always took for a shower, breakfast, dressing meticulously, and getting ready to leave his apartment . Ruby was seen in front of the police department where
 A booklet of astrological predictions by Andre Barbault is published by Albin Michel in Paris .
 Conlon had left early for lunch to be able to get back for the presidential motorcade, so she wasn't in the building when Ruby arrived . Craddock said she had no conversation with Ruby that day other than his shouting out from a distance across the lobby that “the president
 Former President George W. Bush was the subject of a new book, The Washington Post reported . He said he was looking for a plug in column for an act .
 He'd start to talk, and as he talked, he got louder and louder . And then, he’d start talking, he'd start talking again . He'd then start talking about his life .
 "I was Italian, and that’s the kind of neighborhood I was brought up in. I was Italian," she says . "I’m Italian. I’ll be Italian," the actress says .
 Ruby said Zoppi was not at the Dallas Morning News on the morning of the assassination when he came by . The probable reason he didn’t is that in the writing of the book Case Closed, author Gerald Posner confronted him with the fact that Ruby said he was not
 Zoppi proceeded to tell Posner that Ruby was right, and that he had not told the truth to the HSCA investigators . Ruby was wrong, and he told Posner, Posner .
 Posner, on a Washington, D.C., radio station said, “He admitted to me that he just tried to make the story sound more interesting by putting himself there.” Posner admitted to the story .
 Conspiracy theorists have wondered why, if Ruby cared for the president so much, he wouldn’t have been somewhere along the motorcade route . Ruby was a familiar figure attending so many events in Dallas .
 Ruby was watching a motorcade pass by for 15 or twenty seconds . The dog was in the middle of the action at the time of the incident .
 Ruby’s testimony before the Warren Commission, in attempting to explain why he didn’t go out in the street and watch the presidential motorcade, said he didn't want to go where there big crowds . Ruby said in his testimony that “I don't want go
 ‘I can’t explain it to you’ , makes no sense at all, and hence, cannot be reasonably explained. ‘It’s made no sense to you,’ says the author of the book, "I can only explain this to you
 His limited intellect tried to come up with a reason that made sense as to why someone who loved the president as much as he did wouldn’t be out on the street greeting him . He uttered a completely irrational statement .
 There was a 12:00 noon deadline for the ads . Ruby had a good reason to be where he was as opposed to watching the motorcade .
 SAM26000 was only one plane that served as Air Force One in 1963 . SAM2600 was the only plane that was used to fly the Air Force 1 .
 The vice president would always fly on one of the Air Force Two planes . Vice President George W. Bush would fly on Air Force One .
 The oft-stated belief is that since the bubble top was plastic and not bulletproof, it wouldn’t have made any difference if it had been used in Dealey Plaza . The bubble top would have made no difference in the shooting .
 Oswald would have shot Kennedy if the bubble top was on the car, and we don't know that. But that presupposes that Oswald . We don’t know that, but that is not the case .
 The limousine being a presidential one, he may have assumed the top was bulletproof and therefore concluded that he could not shoot and kill Kennedy . It may have been a mistake to assume the top is bulletproof .
 After the assassination, the limousine was sent back to Hess & Eisenhardt for modification, which included a reinforced steel roof and bulletproof glass . The limo was sent to Hess and Eisenhardt after the assassination .
 The rebuild was completed in less than six months and the limousine returned to the White House . The new president, Lyndon Johnson, rarely used it .
 It remained a part of the White House fleet until it was retired in 1977 . It was the first aircraft to be retired from the fleet in 1976 .
 Charlie Givens provided another explanation as to why he didn’t fulfill Oswald’s request . “Well, I, you know, kind of excited, wanted to see the parade, so when I got downstairs I really forgot it," he said . Oswald's request
 Bonnie Williams testified that “at the time I couldn’t see too much of the sixth floor’s sixth floor because the books at the time were Four Days in November stacked so high.’
 Dr. Pepper for lunch at that exact place, that should have been the end of it . "Dr. Pepper" was the first time he had lunch at the exact place . "That's not what happened," he says .
 Day later found out the food and drink had belonged to Williams . He decided to use the lunch bag and Dr. Day's lunch bag as evidence of Williams .
 Dr. Pepper bottle had no value to the case and threw the sack and bottle away .
 Meagher points out normal inconsistencies in the recollections of witnesses, but nowhere does Meagher tell her readers what the relevance of these inconsistencies was . Other than her and her colleagues’s insatiable passion for pointing out inconsistencies, Meagher says .
 Bonnie Ray Williams told the Warren Commission on March 24, 1964, that he could not remember the exact time he descended to the fifth floor . Williams said he was not sure when he entered the elevator .
 He first suggested it was “ten to fifteen minutes after twelve” when he said he finished his lunch . He said he was ‘ten to 15 minutes after 12” at the time of the interview .
 Williams left the sixth floor around 11:55 to get his lunch, and probably arrived back at around noon or shortly thereafter . Williams would have taken close to twenty minutes to eat his lunch . It is unlikely that Williams, who left at around 11.55, would have been able to
 FBI agents Tom Carter and Will Griffin reported that earlier, in a January 14,1964, interview, Williams told them he went back down to the fifth floor around 12:05m. Williams said he went to the 5th floor at around 12.05m .
 Jerry Boyd Belknap was working part-time in the mail room of the Dallas Morning News at the time of the assassination . In any event, the man was twenty-three-year-old .
 Belknap said he was struck by a car several years earlier, suffering a head injury that required him to take medication three times a day to avoid fainting spells . He said he did not believe the spells were any type of epilepsy .
 He neglected to take his medication on November 22, and when he felt a fainting spell coming on while waiting for the motorcade, he fainted . He attempted to move back from the crowd, but fainted and fell backward on the sidewalk .
 President Kennedy was brought into Parkland Hospital shortly after ambulance attendants carried him on a stretcher . Belknap said there was “much confusion” and “little attention” was paid to him . He said that shortly after he was taken to the hospital, there was
 The man walked out of the hospital without registering as a patient, and returned to work . He did get a glass of water from a nurse, took his medication, and when he felt much better, he walked out .
 Belknap said he didn’t know Oswald, but had seen Jack Ruby on one or two occasions . He never met or spoke to him .
 Amateur films taken by Elsie Dorman and Tina Towner prove the limousine made a smooth, uninterrupted turn from Houston onto Elm Street using the center lane . Dorman, Towner and Towner took the photos .
 The exact time of the assassination being at 12:30m. was established by several witnesses . Witnesses say the assassination was at 12.30m .
 Royce Skelton, a mail clerk at the Texas Louisiana Freight Bureau, also testified that he saw a bullet strike the pavement . Royce Skelton was standing on top of the Triple Underpass when the shooting occurred .
 According to Skelton, the bullet struck concrete to the left front of the president’s car, scattering pavement dust away from the Depository . The president's car was hit by a bullet that struck concrete, scattering dust from the pavement . The bullet hit concrete in front of
 Governor’s recollection is at odds with that of two other witnesses and a film of the event . Governor's recollection of the incident is disputed .
 Zapruder film supports the recollection of both women, showing Mrs. Mrs. and Mrs. Smith . Mrs. Smith was killed in June 1944 .
 If true, this would be just another piece of circumstantial evidence that the shots came from right below the pigeons—Oswald’s sniper nest . If true it would be the latest piece of evidence that Oswald shot pigeons .
 The problem is that when you look at the official record, and in view of the fact that we know people don’t always speak with precision, it cannot be categorically stated that the pigeons flew from the roof of the Depository .
 Earlier in testimony he said (perhaps loosely) that he saw the “pigeons began to fly up to the top of the building” suggests the pigeons were not originally on the roof . But earlier in his testimony, he said he saw them fly up .
 Baker said he saw "any activity of pigeons" at the time he heard the shots . Baker: "Yes, sir, I did. I did" Baker said at trial .
 Dallas Police officer Earle Y Brown adds to the confusion with his Warren Commission testimony that from his position on top of the railroad overpass above the Stemmons Freeway he saw pigeons “all take off” around the time of the shots . Officer Brown says he saw
 Counsel obviously was interested in where the shots came from . One would have expected Harkness to have mentioned the pigeons coming from the Dal-Tex Building .
 The stronger inference is they were on the northwest corner of the building, not the southeast corner where Oswald was . Oswald was shot at Oswald's home in 1963 .
 Whether Brown was referring to the same pigeons referred to by Baker and Rackley, or other pigeons, is not known .
 Zapruder film shows the president's limousine dramatically slowing down, but not stopping . The conclusive evidence that it did not stop is the film itself, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Eyewitnesses are divided on whether the car stopped or merely slowed down . Witnesses say they were split on whether it stopped or slowed down.
 Many erroneously thought the limousine had come to a complete stop . But just as many or more erroneously believed the limo had stopped, it was actually stopped .
 From the rear, which is where most of the witnesses were, it would be much more difficult to discern whether the car (slowing down many yards away) had slowed down or stopped than for someone very close to the car or to the side of it . It has to be noted
 In fact, if one is, for instance, traveling in his car on a straight road, it cannot be determined if a car traveling in the same direction ahead some distance away is actually traveling or stationary . Jean Hill told the Warren Commission that “I jumped to the edge of the
 The same would be true if one were the same distance away but in front of the vehicle . The same thing would happen if one was in the front of a vehicle but not behind it .
 Though we aren’t dealing with these distances here, the above phenomenon is something that has to be factored in .
 Kennedy seen looking to his left in the direction of Mrs. Mrs. Kennedy, but nowhere at the time of the shooting in Dealey Plaza is seen looking at her .
 Jean Hill took a lot of ribbing for telling reporters in a national TV interview shortly after the shooting that President and Mrs. Obama were in the midst of the shooting .
 Hill and Kennedy were looking at a little white dog on the seat between them as the car came abreast of Hill’s position . Kennedy and Hill looked at the dog on their seats between them .
 Conspiracy theorists tried to restore her credibility by claiming that photographs taken at Love Field show that Mrs. Love Field had taken place at the time .
 Kennedy had been given a stuffed-toy version of the famous Sheri Lewis TV puppet, Lamb Chop . The puppet was a white, stuffed toy version of Lamb Chop, the TV puppet .
 The claim was based on poor-quality images posted on the Internet . The claim, however, was based upon poor quality images posted online .
 When asked whether he could see what Oswald was firing at, Brennan replied, “Subconsciously I knew what he was firing .” Brennan said he knew what Oswald had been firing at .
 President Kennedy’s car should be, but there was something obstructing his view . ‘I looked towards where President Kennedy's car should have been,’ he said. ‘But immediately I looked towards . But immediately . I looked at where . President Kennedy should be
 Kennedy's description of the president's head wounds, as she saw them, was deleted from her published Warren Commission testimony . Kennedy’s description of her head wounds were deleted from the Warren Commission .
 On June 5,1964, just six and half months after her husband was murdered at her side, the Warren Commission had the delicate task of having to ask her to provide testimony about the day's events .
 The Untold Story of the Warren Commission,”40), was subsequently published . Her testimony was published in a book published by the Warren commission .
 Kennedy reached the time of the shooting in her testimony, she said, “And just as I turned and looked at him, I could see a piece of his skull and I remember it was flesh colored."
 Early critics of the Warren Commission were outraged at the deletion of testimony . They launched a legal battle to get the omitted testimony released .
 Conspiracy theorist David Mantik claimed that “these details could have been valuable to the House Select Committee on Assassinations” Mantik never explained exactly how exactly he explained .
 Kennedy wasn't asked for even “more detail” since she had an opportunity to view the wounds as they originally existed longer and closer than any other person . Kennedy wasn’t asked for more detail .
 "Why would withhold an accurate description is open to debate, but the fact that they put out an altered transcript is telling," a critic said . Another critic added, “Why would withholding an accurate depiction is open-to- debate,” another critic added .
 Critics have proved that the hearts of the Warren Commission members were not made of stone . Frankly, the only thing the critics have proved from the episode is that the heart of the . Warren .
 It is improbable that Greer sped up while his head was turned away from the road and he was preoccupied with looking at the president . Greer could see Special Agent Clint Hill running to catch up to the limousine to board it .
 Greer himself felt he did not react instantaneously, and hence blamed himself for the president’s death . Some witnesses say Greer felt he didn't react instantly and blamed himself . Greer said he felt he had not reacted instantaneously and therefore blames himself for death .
 Greer told the Warren Commission that he accelerated after the third shot . Author William Manchester writes that at Parkland Hospital, “Those who had been in the motorcade were racking their brains with if only this, if only that.” Greer accelerated .
 Bill Greer, his face streaked with tears, took her head between his 30-year-old bodyguards . Greer only speeded up after the head shot, there is disagreement as to when he slowed down .
 The limousine is believed to be slowing down, according to Dr. John Sutter . When asked if additional evidence of the limo slowing down was Dr. Sutter's statement of Dr. Martin Luther Luther King Jr. The limo is said to have slowed down .
 David Mantik said that from his review of the Muchmore film he noticed that the right taillight of the limousine was on at least by Z frame 311, he said, “No, it is not that clear from the muchmore film that the . taill
 The Warren Report, however, said that “motion pictures of the scene show that the car slowed down momentarily after the shot that struck the President in the head and then speeded up rapidly” The citation it gives for this is not a good one .
 She says she heard somebody say ‘Get going’... and that is when the Presidential limousine shot off’s . hands and squeezed until she thought he was going to squeeze her skull flat .
 Of course, overcome by the tragedy, he couldn’t be expected to be precise in his words . He said: “I’m not going to be able to be exact in my words.”
 If he, in fact, did emote to Jackie at the hospital, it would clearly appear he felt he had failed the president . Failure had caused the president’s death .
 Former Kennedy aide David Powers spoke of the remorse Greer felt over not speeding up quickly enough to save Kennedy’s life . Greer said in a CBS interview that Greer was remorseful .
 Warren Commission critic Patricia Lambert concluded that Norman had “fabricated” his testimony . Lambert looked at contradictions in several statements made by Harold Norman . Lambert: Norman's testimony was a fabrication .
 Of course, he could have told them this and they neglected to include it in their brief summary report or he could simply have not mentioned it, even though it happened .
 Norman fabricated the story, his wife says . But she doesn't say why he would do this other than to say it's "suspicious" She says Norman's actions are suspicious .
 In other words, I guess we should just forget about the sworn testimony of four other witnesses who saw a rifle in the sniper’s nest window, three of whom saw the rifle being fired . Three other witnesses (Howard Brennan, Amos Euins, James Worrell, James
 The FBI report is most likely in error since it is unlikely Williams and Norman would have only said the shots came from inside the building when they both told the authorities from the very beginning that the shots were from directly above them .
 Lambert doesn't stop at accusing Norman of fabricating evidence against Oswald . Lambert also accuses Norman of inventing evidence against him . Norman is accused of lying about Oswald's murder .
 Williams and Jarman changed their stories when they mentioned things for the first time, she says . She says this casts doubt on the integrity of the investigation conducted by Dallas field office .
 If these stories are fabrications, the witnesses who supplied them had guidance from someone . For if these stories were fabricated, they would have to have come from someone else .
 That the Secret Service set out to frame Lee Harvey Oswald for Kennedy’s murder. That was not the case . That was the case? That the secret service was trying to frame Oswald for JFK's murder .
 It's virtually no step at all to conclude that it was behind Kennedy's murder, and this is why it tried to frame someone else for it . But of course if the agency did that, it’s virtually no steps to conclude .
 Lambert doesn't ask herself why in the world would the president’s own security force kill him, or, at a minimum, frame someone for his murder . Lambert doesn’t ask herself . Lambert: "I don't think it's possible"
 If the Secret Service was getting the three book employees to tell lies and was “coordinating” their stories, Ms. O'Neill said .
 Lambert also doesn’t explain how come the Secret Service said in its report that Norman heard the bolt action and three shells falling above, but said Williams and Jarman did not . The Secret Service also said Williams, Jarman and Norman did not hear the shots .
 Williams and Jarman were going to tell other lies for the Secret Service, as Ms. Jarman said, "but if you're going to lie, you're not going to"
 Lambert is a very intelligent and decent woman who went on to write the best book on the Garrison case, False Witness . Lambert is the author of False Witness, a book that chronicles Garrison's trial .
 Charles Hester, in suit and tie, and his wife, Beatrice, had been sitting on the grassy slope north of Elm Street watching the motorcade . Hester and Beatrice Hester were sitting in the grass on the slope .
 Wiseman asks a woman employee how many exits there were to the building . Wiseman: "There are no more exits than there are in the building," she says .
 When told four, he exits the building, rounds up some Dallas police, and reenters with them . He reentered the building with them after he was told four .
 Wiseman runs up the stairs all the way to the attic and gives each floor a quick search on the way down, finding nothing . Wiseman finds nothing on each floor of the attic .
 The exact time of arrival at Parkland varies depending on the source . However, Captain Will Fritz testified the building wasn’t sealed off until twenty-two minutes later .
 Critics claim that the backseat was washed out with a bucket of water . Photographs allegedly show a bucket near the limousine .
 Nurse’s aide Shirley Randall reportedly asked to perform such a task, but in the excitement, never got around to it . Randall was reportedly a nurse's aide . Randall died in a hospice in New York City, New Jersey .
 It is unclear when and how Kennedy started having back problems, different biographies of him giving different accounts .
 JFK suffered a ‘spinal injury’ in a junior varsity scrimmage at Harvard, a biographer writes . JFK entered Harvard in 1936 after attending part of the previous year at Princeton .
 Kennedy's reliance on adrenal extracts and/or parathyroid hormone to control his colitis may have caused osteoporosis and deterioration in his lumbar spine .
 Kennedy helped save at least two burned and injured crewmates who were thrown into the water . Despite his back injury, Kennedy was able to save the two burned crewmates .
 In the process, Kennedy swallowed much gasoline, which later gave him stomach problems . Kennedy swallowed a lot of the gas, causing him to suffer stomach problems later .
 A member of the varsity swimming team as a Harvard undergraduate, he then managed to swim for four hours to a small island, Plum Pudding Island . He then pulled one of his badly burned crewmates by clasping the man’s life preserver straps in his teeth .
 Kennedy sent out to Rendova, the main base for the PT boats, with natives, with a coconut shell with a rescue message . The natives brought back a PT boat from Rendova to rescue JFK and his crew .
 "I venture to say there are very few men would swim out in that ocean alone without knowing what was underneath you," he said .
 If Connally hadn't looked over his right shoulder after the first shot to see if the president had been hit, the shot that entered under his right armpit would have hit more to his left, entering his heart and killing him .
 Critics have questioned whether Howard Brennan was really the source of Sawyer’s detailed description .
 Brennan wrote in his 1987 book that he it was JFK's boat . Meagher is correct in reporting that any description given by Brennan to Sorrels could only have occurred after Sawyer’s 12:44m. broadcast . Brennan said in 1987 that he thought the boat was JFK
 Robinson said JFK had an executive officer on board with him, another officer he had asked to come along . Robinson said that JFK had ten crew men, including a crewman .
 He took a strap from the life jacket of a crew member named McMahon, who had been badly burned in the explosion of three thousand gallons of high-octane gas our boats carried, and attached it to his teeth, and towed him to the nearest island .
 All his crew are now dead, but when they were alive, not one of them ever said a negative word about him . "All his crew were now dead," he says .
 Robinson recalls that Kennedy had “a great sense of humor” and was “one of the guys’s guys” Robinson says Kennedy had a “great sense” of humor .
 Robinson said JFK was “in bad shape, but he never talked about it.” Robinson said that when he tented with Kennedy, JFK was in “bad shape,” but he didn’t mention it .
 "He was extremely thin, and from his demeanor you could tell he was not in good health," says actor . "From his demeanor, you can tell he is not in health," he says .
 He had orders to go home but he insisted on going back up the line where he went on several other PT missions before they sent him home . He had been ordered home by the U.S. Navy but refused to comply with orders .
 “His knowledge was very versatile—everything from poker to philosophy”; “He was a fine man. His knowledge was . very versatile,” says George W. Bush Jr.
 Meagher's claim that Sawyer did not remember speaking to Brennan or anyone who resembled him is only a quartertruth . Meagher’s claim that he didn’t remember talking to Brennan was only a fraction of the truth .
 Sawyer remembered that he was a “white man” who was “a few years either way” of thirty-five . Sawyer said the witness was a "white man" who was a few years older than he was .
 Only two witnesses who claimed to have seen the gunman firing the rifle were known to police at that time . Amos Euins, a fifteen-year-old black youth, and Howard Brennan, a white construction worker, Howard Brennan were also witnesses .
 Brennan was escorted to the sheriff’s office by Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels . Like Sawyer, he was escorted by the Secret Service .
 Sawyer responded, “Well, it was thought that the shot might have come from this building," Sawyer said . Sawyer responded to the question: "Well, well, it might have been this building"
 Meagher sees this as an indication that Sawyer’s witness was someone who hadn’t actually seen the gunman in the window . Meagher says the loose language on Sawyer's part likely reflects his initial uncertainty about the accuracy of any of the early reports he and other police officers
 Brennan’s report was later confirmed by a subsequent investigation . Subsequent investigation, of course, did later confirm Brennan's report .
 William Duane Mentzell, a friend of Tippit’s, was assigned on the 7:00 m. to 3:00m. shift to Districts 91 and 92, right in the heart of Oak Cliff, the same district he was killed in . Ment
 After responding to a “Signal 7’ , he heard an officer had been shot on his beat . He was shot by a police officer in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 He couldn’t figure out who it could be and learned it was his friend Tippit, whom he had worked with in the past, when he arrived at the murder scene . He said he was surprised when he found out who had been murdered .
 Each of the officers assigned to the three shifts for the district would have the same call number . Each shift would have a different call number for each shift .
 Amos Euins provided details to investigators, but there is considerable doubt about the details he provided . There is also considerable doubt that Amos EUins provided investigators with details . The case is not the first time the case has been brought to light .
 The construction worker could not have been Howard Brennan, known to have been in close proximity to Euins at the time . Brennan had seen no one run out of the back of the Depository, nor had described the gunman as having a bald spot . Brennan did not see no one
 This statement contradicts his remarks to newsman James Underwood immediately after the shooting in which he was convinced that the gunman was a black man . This statement, of course, contradicts his earlier remarks .
 In the end, it is difficult to understand how Euins could possibly have seen a bald spot on the top of the gunman’s head . The man was facing the street, looking down the rifle barrel, when the bald spot was seen .
 Forrest Sorrels and Howard Brennan stood on the top step, just outside the entrance to the Depository, for a few minutes .
 Brennan spotted Depository employees Harold Norman and James “Junior” Jarman leaving the building . Two of the three black men he saw in the fifth-floor window just below the sniper’s nest window .
 William Whaley's original testimony to the Warren Commission was that he had dropped Oswald off at the corner of Neches and North Beckley, one-half block north of Oswald's rooming house . Whaley’s original testimony was that Oswald was dropped off at a corner of
 Oswald's rooming house at 1026 North Beckley was close to four blocks from Oswald’s rooming home . He specified the intersection of Neely and Neely at the time of Oswald's death .
 Conspiracy critics have made a big deal out of this rather benign conversation . Conspiracy critics make a lot of fuss about the conversation .
 Theorists see Murray Jackson’s “be at large” comment as some sort of code message that ultimately led to Tippit's fatal encounter with Oswald . Theoristists see the comment as part of a code message .
 Tippit would have automatically responded to any emergency that came up and didn’t need to be told to do so .
 The fact that Jackson pointed out this obvious fact to his former partner is strongly supportive of Jackson’s later explanation that the remark was nothing more than his way of needling Tippit about the previous incident .
 Roberts’s claims as supportive of the charge that Oswald met up with police conspirators after leaving his rooming house are devoid of logic . The housekeeper's account of seeing a Dallas police car is rife with discrepancies and devoid of any logic .
 Roberts admitted she was “completely blind” in her right eye, and couldn’t ‘see too good” with her left . Roberts told the FBI the license plate number of the police car was 207 .
 There was only one Alexander on the force, a Lieutenant Floyd T Alexander . He was a firearms expert who worked in the crime lab, and didn’t drive a squad car .
 Sergeant Floyd Alexander left the force in 1957 . There had been another Alexander on the force, Sergeant Floyd J Alexander .
 Oswald remains at the curb without getting in the “police car” and the car presumably drives off . Of course, this sequence of events hardly seems conspiratorial, since this version has Oswald remaining .
 Roberts gave the numbers for two police cars that were proved to have been elsewhere at the time of the incident . It is a non sequitur to conclude, as some anti-conspiracy theorists have, that this means no police car was there . Roberts: It is not a non
 If you give the incorrect address of your new apartment on a job application, your apartment doesn't really exist . That would be the equivalent of saying that if you . give the . incorrect address on a . job application on a new apartment doesn’t really exist, it doesn�
 Roberts giving two police car numbers that didn’t check out is relevant to the issue of whether or not she made the story up . Roberts’s story is not clear whether she made it up or whether she did .
 "Just have a creative mind, there’s nothing to it, and just make up and keep talking until she just makes a lie out of it," she said .
 Hugh Aynesworth, the Dallas Morning News reporter who covered the assassination story from ground zero, interviewed Roberts in depth . He went to the rooming house right after the police had searched Oswald’s room .
 Aynesworth said he interviewed Roberts at least two more times thereafter and she never said a word about the alleged incident . He said Roberts never said anything about it .
 Ewell said he interviewed Roberts separately and she never mentioned the incident to him either . Ewell, he said, had also interviewed her separately and said she had no recollection of the incident .
 When I went back to her and brought it up, she became very flustered and never had a satisfactory answer why she hadn’t mentioned the incident to us. She became very frustrated when she was asked why she had not mentioned it to us .
 The Earlene Roberts story has no evidence or logic to support it and therefore cannot be given any weight . It is not the first time the story has been reported to have been true . The story is not backed up by logic or logic .
 Oswald was wearing the zippered jacket he was wearing when he left the rooming house in November . The color of the jacket was the color of Four Days in November was not the same as the jacket he wore that day .
 All of the direct and circumstantial evidence is that the jacket was light-colored (see main text), but when Mrs. Mrs. Smith died, her jacket was dark-colored . The jacket is light, but when she died, it was light .
 Roberts was shown the jacket by Warren Commission counsel . She said the jacket Oswald had put on “was darker than that’s what Oswald put on .
 The time of death was estimated at 1:00m. Although this is the time that has been accepted through the years, Dr. Dr. John Sutter's death is accepted . Dr. Sutter died at the time of his death .
 At 1:32 a.m., the Associated Press reported that “two priests who were with Kennedy say he is dead of bullet wounds” even though Father Thompson had said nothing, and bullet wounds had not been mentioned . The Associated Press had not mentioned the death of Kennedy .
 Author William Manchester wrote that Hoover called Robert Kennedy and when Kennedy came to the phone, Hoover said, snappily, “The president’s dead,” and hung up . Hoover called Kennedy and said snappyly, "The president's dead," which on its
 Hoover learned of the president’s death from Robert Kennedy, FBI memo says . Hoover advised Kennedy of the condition of Governor Connally and Mrs. Connally .
 Hoover also gave Kennedy up-to-the-minute details on the search for the assassin . Hoover also inquired whether Kennedy intended to go to Dallas . Hoover asked Kennedy whether he intended to visit Dallas .
 Kennedy said Hoover seemed to be upset, and Kennedy said no . Manchester later asked him if Hoover seemed upset, Kennedy said he did not .
 RFK was referring to Hoover’s first call to him when Hoover told him, “I have news for you.” RFK says . Hoover told RFK that RFK had a problem with the White House . RFK: "It's reasonable to believe that
 Dallas police tapes now being played by many throughout the country are notoriously poor in fidelity . The Dallas police tape tapes are notoriously bad in fidelity. The Dallas tapes are not the best of all recordings .
 Two copies were for the FBI, one for Chief Curry, and one copy for himself, which he transcribed from himself .
 Henslee transcriptions were only made for the Dallas Police Department . It is not known whether they ever left the department .
 Henslee transcribed channel 1 and 2 police radio logs, but only transcribed the channel 2 log . The log was transcribed by Hensle himself .
 I say that because his signature only appears at the end of the channel 2 transcription , not at the beginning of the . 1 transcription . I say because his . signature only appear at the . end of . the channel 1 transcription, not the end . of channel 2 .
 On March 25,2004, Bowles, who had a copy of the channel 1 recording in his office, played it over the phone for me . We could hear the second ‘seventyeight” call at 1:08m., though not completely clearly, but could
 Officer Tippit's car number 10 had a clipboard installed on the dashboard for him to take notes and keep his wanted persons’ names on . As with all Dallas police squad cars, there was a clipboard attached to the dashboard .
 In 1983, Detective James R Leavelle, who headed up the Tippet murder investigation, told author Dale Myers, “I looked at some of the stuff that Tippit had in car, but, to my knowledge, there was nothing found—that was written
 Leavelle said the absence of a note in such a situation was very common . Leo said it is very common for such an incident to take place in France .
 FBI report says Helen Markham’s bus came by each day “at about 1:12m.,” not 1:15m., says FBI . I tend to doubt that time for two reasons .
 FBI never nailed down which of two separate buses Markham could have taken at Jefferson and Patton . FBI never asked her what corner at the intersection she got on her bus, not what corner she was at the time .
 Markham was smart enough to hold down a job as a waitress, where one has to deal with numbers on a customer’s bill . We know that she was not a bright woman, but she was intelligent enough to get to work every day .
 Dallas Transit System advised the FBI that the bus was scheduled to come at 1:12,1,1 . It requires no intelligence to read a watch or clock, and though the FBI advised that the FBI would not expect the bus to arrive at that time, it's hard to believe
 Dale Myers has come up with an even better reason why Tippit may have stopped Oswald . Myers says he is not definitely rejecting the conventional wisdom . He says he has found a new reason why Oswald was stopped .
 Myers cites three sources for the proposition that Oswald had been walking west on Tenth Street before his confrontation with Officer Tippit . Oswald was walking west from Tenth Street on the night of the confrontation .
 Oswald was walking east on Tenth Avenue in New York City . Both sources and those who said Oswald was at the time were talking about different times . Both were correct in that they were talking at different times, he says .
 A witness says he saw the same man running away from the squad car south on Patton . Though he didn't see the shooting, he said he could not identify the man . The witness said he saw this same man run away from a squad car .
 Tippit was shot to death at the corner of Ninth and Denver streets, about a block and a half from the murder scene . He told the FBI that at the time of the murder, he and his friend, William A Smith, were seated inside his brother Billy Burt�
 He and Smith immediately left the house, got in his car, and drove to the murder scene . Smith was found dead at the scene of the murder .
 Burt's friend, Smith, does not corroborate it on a key point . Smith does not refute Burt’s story, but it does not disprove it .
 Unlike Burt, he said he did not see the assassin walking west in front of Burt and him before shooting .
 There is no evidence to support this statement, it has to be written off as a foundationless assumption . In any event, since there was no evidence of support, it must have been written off, as is the assumption .
 Scoggins was never asked if he saw a man walk in front of him just prior to the shooting, it’s the type of thing he would be expected to volunteer if the man killed Tippit shortly thereafter .
 Scoggins had only “taken one or two bites of my sandwich and drank a couple of swallows out of my Coke” when the shooting occurred . Oswald had crossed Patton on Tenth going east before returning to his cab . It's possible Oswald crossed Patton before Scogg
 Of course, King was not a Dallas police detective and may have gotten this “information” for his speech . King may have got this ‘information’ from his department’s “Homicide Report’ on Tippit's murder prepared on the day
 Elcan Elliot waited thirty-one years to tell his story for the first time to author Gus Russo . Myster Myers doesn’t mention Elliot in his book because of the person’s phony story .
 Elliot claimed that after the president was shot, “there was no one on the streets” because everyone was home watching the assassination news on TV or radio, or simply out of fear . Elliot said everyone was either watching the news or simply watching it on the news .
 In the Tippit incident alone, we know Helen Markham, William Scoggins, and William Lawrence Smith (see main text) were walking on the street, and people were in their cars . Jack Tatum and Domingo Benavides (e.g., Jack
 Most people were watching the news of Oswald's assassination at the time of the assassination . Tippit's actions could have contributed to his stopping Oswald .
 Elliot, who claimed he lived near Oswald, said he was driving his car on the streets of Oak Cliff searching for his 14-year-old daughter . Elliot said he feared for his daughter's safety because he was afraid for her safety .
 There is no indication in Russo’s book that Elliot gave any reason for his thirty-one-year silence on this matter, which alone would almost seem to disqualify Elliot as a credible source . The book is published by Russo .
 After being shown photos of Oswald, he felt sure Oswald was the man he had seen walking by him while he, Smith, was going to lunch . Oswald was shown photos and Smith felt sure he was Oswald .
 Smith not indicating the man did anything at all to draw anyone’s attention to him . Also, at the time Smith saw the man walking west on Tenth, he wouldn’t have had any reason to remember what he looked like . Smith says the man didn't have any
 Smith’s identification, though not to be dismissed out of hand, has to be considered suspect . Smith's identification is not always a good reason for police to question his identification .
 Jack Tatum told the HSCA in 1978 that he saw Oswald walking east on Tenth as Tippit’s car pulled over to the curb to talk to Oswald, and repeating this observation to me at the London trial . On the other side of the issue as to the
 Helen Markham testified that she saw Oswald “walking away from me” before his confrontation with Tippit . And we know she saw him ‘walking east’ (i.e., walking east) before the confrontation .
 Markham’s and Tatum's observations, even if true, do not negate Myers' position that Oswald was originally walking west . Of course, neither Markham's nor Tatum’�s observations, or even Myers, are true .
 Scoggins and Markham’s testimony that they saw Tippit proceeding very slowly eastbound on Tenth is much more consistent with his having been following Oswald for some time from behind as Oswald was walking east, than Oswald walking west on Tenth .
 Oswald’s seeing Tippit and suddenly turning around and walking in the opposite direction would be inconsistent with his conduct that day . Also, it would seem that Oswald's . suddenly turning back and walking the opposite . direction would seem inconsistent with Oswald's conduct .
 Even a child would know that turning around and walking in a different direction when seeing a police officer makes one look guilty of something . Turning around makes a person look guilty .
 It seems unlikely Oswald would have changed directions right in Tippit’s view, that is if Oswald could see him, he would see him . Oswald would not have changed direction right in his view, he says, if he could .
 Tippit allegedly seeing Oswald turn around is the basis for Myers’s conclusion as to why he pulled over . In fact, as indicated, the reason for the pullover is the reason he pulled off .
 Oswald was walking westbound on Tenth at the time Tippit pulled over would be "way out of his way," says Sheriff Bowles . Oswald could have taken several routes to reach Patton from his rooming house, he says .
 Letter carrier Drenas, a letter carrier from Lowell, Massachusetts, told me that taking this route and walking at a “fast pace” took him 16 minutes and thirty-five seconds . If Oswald left the rooming house around 1:00m., as is believed,
 No evidence has ever surfaced to indicate Oswald did this . The only other way he could have gotten there on time would have been “if he had hitchhiked part of the way,” Drenas said .
 Oswald was dropped off at the main point of Marsalis and Tenth . Two changes of street direction (at Colorado and later at Marsaslis) from the intersection of Beckley and Zangs Boulevard would have to be made, requiring that Oswald have been picked up by someone willing to chau
 Murray Jackson, who worked with Tippit in the past, said he would never look directly at people but would look either sideways or down at the ground .
 Oswald's lack of eye contact plus the fact that he usually walked with his hand on his gun butt could have alarmed Oswald . Oswald's hand on the gun butt may have alarmed him, according to the book .
 Tippit always kept his eyes averted when he was talking to you, police say . Billy Fowler, another Dallas police officer who partnered with Tippits for awhile, said the same thing . Tipperit was a force force in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald got the drop on him in the first place . He was shot in the head by Oswald . Oswald was shot to death by the assassin .
 Fowler said he was Tippit’s partner, and if he hadn’t had the day off, he would have been with him . Fowler said that he was the partner of the pair . Fowler: "If he hadn't had a day off he'd have been
 Tippit wouldn’t look anyone in the eye for more than a second or two, Henslee and others even criticized him for this habit . He never changed, but he never changed. He would never look at anyone again .
 For years, critics have alleged that Oswald’s known movements that day precluded him from being at Tenth and Patton in time to kill Tippit . Warren Commission critics have claimed that Oswald's known movements precluded his from being in time .
 Oswald would have taken six and a half minutes to walk the seven blocks to board the bus at Elm near Griffin . Oswald was walking at an average pace, the FBI reconstruction shows .
 Oswald's bus timed as taking four minutes to travel the two blocks on Elm to the point near Poydras where Oswald got off . In heavy traffic, the bus was timed to take four minutes for Oswald to get off . Oswald was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 Oswald took three minutes to walk at an average pace, putting Oswald there around 12:48m . Oswald walked approximately three blocks from Lamar and Jackson to the cabstand at Lamar . Oswald's three blocks to the taxi stand at Lamar took him around three minutes .
 Whaley reconstructed with Whaley the route he took with Oswald, leaving the cabstand at the Greyhound bus depot around 12:48m., most likely several minutes later than Oswald actually left there . Warren Commission assistant counsel, with a stopwatch, reconstructed the route Whaley took with
 Oswald would have probably been walking at a fast pace from the time he left the Depository . The most reasonable assumption is that Whaley put 12-12-45m. on his trip ticket because he left at some time prior to 12:45m., making the Warren Commission estimate
 It makes little sense that if Whaley left the depot at 12:48, he would record his departure time as being between 12:30 and 12:45m . Whaley's departure time was recorded at 12.45m, according to the MailOnline .
 With a minimum three-minute error by the Warren Commission, the real arrival time was most likely around 12:56m. or earlier . With a probable minimum of three-minutes error, it is most likely to be around 12.56m or earlier.
 There is no reason to assume that Earlene Roberts’s guestimate of 1:00m. should be given precedence over the reconstructed time minus the three minutes . But there is also no reason for the reconstruction to be taken into account .
 Oswald would have left his home around 12:59, or earlier, according to the new time reconstruction . Oswald's time would be based on the fact that he left his house at around 12.59 or earlier .
 Oswald's best estimate of the time of Tippit's murder was around 1:12m. or earlier . This gave Oswald twelve minutes to reach Tenth and Patton, eight-tenths of a mile away . Oswald arrived there around 1.11m.
 Oswald could have taken several routes to get to Oswald's final resting place . Oswald was captured in a sketch in the photo section of this book .
 Warren Commission assistant counsel David Belin points out there are two “direct” routes from Oswald’s rooming house to the Tippit murder scene . Belin: Two ‘direct’ routes’ are possible from Oswald's rooming home to Tipp
 The first one is from Beckley south to Davis, then left or east on Davis a very short block to Crawford, Crawford, and then continuing south or right on Crawford to Tenth . The second is from Patton to Patton to the murder scene . The first block is left or right from
 The second direct route is to take Beckley to Davis and stay on Davis all the way to Patton . Then take Patton south to Tenth to Tenth, then go east to the murder scene .
 Belin's book on the case tells the reader that at a normal pace, the first route took him fourteen minutes and the second route twelve minutes . In Belin’s book, he tells the . reader that the first . route took . 14 minutes to complete .
 Since Kennedy was shot at 12:30, Roberts’s remark is a non sequitur . tHSCA investigators concluded that Oswald was at Beckley for five minutes, an inordinate length of time .
 Walking to Tenth and Patton from Beckley took 14 and a half minutes by what they said was the shortest route . They have him arriving there at around 1:15m.
 At some point he would have had to pass Markham on the sidewalk and be walking in front of her . For her to see him walking east on Tenth, as she said she did, he'd have to reach Tenth and Patton before she did .
 When I walked the same route Belin did (and the one the Warren Commission assumed Oswald did) on September 22, 2004, it took me 11 minutes and twenty-23 seconds going at a quite brisk pace, the pace I assumed Oswald would be walking . It took me eleven minutes
 Oswald would have had sufficient time to get where, from all the evidence, we know he was at the time Tippit was shot . Oswald's time would have been enough time for him to get to where he was, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Oswald was most likely walking at a fast pace, and that this immediately stood out to Tippit . Oswald was walking at an extremely high speed, and this stood out . Oswald's speed was likely to have been the reason for the stop .
 Helen Markham was not asked at what speed or gait Oswald was walking before the shooting . The documents on the matter don’t indicate that any of the witnesses who purportedly saw Oswald before shooting were asked what speed he was walking, and this is not the case .
 Jack Tatum first noticed Oswald walking eastbound on Tenth, it was right before Tippit pulled him over . Even if Oswald had been walking fast earlier, he would have been slowing down, Tatum says .
 Oswald's murder happened at 1:10, or even earlier they say, making it even more difficult for Oswald to have been the killer . Oswald was shot in the head at the time of 9/11, according to investigators .
 Even if Bowiey is correct, and Tippit was killed at 1:10 or earlier, it would be irrelevant, since we know Oswald killed him . Of course, even though Bowiey was correct, even if he was wrong, it's irrelevant .
 How he managed to get there on time to do it would only have academic value . How he got there was only academic value, but it's only academic .
 If we didn't know that Oswald killed Tippit, then Bowley’s affidavit would be more relevant . Bowley's affidavit would have been more relevant if we didn’t know that . Oswald killed Oswald, Bowley said .
 In an affidavit she gave to the Secret Service on December 2, 1963, it’s not completely clear what happened .
 Ity that with an officer lying apparently mortally wounded on the ground, Bowley would want to look at his watch, we don’t know that Bowley’s watch was not off by several minutes, as so many watches are . We also don't know that
 A Dealey Plaza witness, Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy Kennedy, was a witness to the assassination . Mrs. Kennedy was killed at 12:30 a.m. on June 4, 1963 .
 Bowley says he tried to help Tippit at the scene of the murder . Benavides was trying to operate the police radio but couldn’t, so he did, so Bowley did .
 Dallas police radio dispatch records show that Benavides didn't start trying to operate the police radio until 1:16m. (which would prove that Bowley’s watch was five to six minutes off) Bowley established contact with the police close to 1:18m.
 Tippit called in on his police radio at 1:08m., two minutes after Markham says he was dead . But we know Markham is wrong since we know we know he was killed .
 Mark Lane alleges in his book Rush to Judgment that Helen Markham was not the only female witness to the murder of Tippit . Mark Lane also alleges that Mrs. Markham may not have been the only one witness .
 Acquilla Clemons was an alleged victim of the Commission . Clemons says the Commission knew of her existence and didn't want to know the truth she had to tell .
 Lane presents no evidence that the FBI or Warren Commission knew of Mrs. Mrs. Lane . Lane says there is no evidence the FBI, Warren . Commission knew about Mrs. Clinton's death .
 Lane says Clemons told investigators she saw two men standing near the police car moments before one of them shot Tippit . Lane says she told investigators that Clemons saw two people standing near a police car . Lane: Clemons said she saw the men before the shooting .
 He cites an article in the New Leader of October 12,1964, by George and Patricia Nash based on a tape-recorded interview of Clemons in 1964 as support for this . Clemons was a member of the Cleveland Indians in 1964 .
 Clemons said she saw one of two men shoot Tippit, but the New Leader article doesn't mention Clemons saying she saw it . Clemons says she saw the two men run off in opposite directions . The New Leader doesn't make any reference to Clemons' account .
 Another of the endless and countless kooks in the Kennedy assassination . The Kennedy assassination is another of the countless and endless kooks .
 Conspiracy theorists have raised the issue of Jack Tatum’s legitimacy as a witness because he never came forward to the authorities at the time with his observations . Conspiracy theorists say he should have been a witness to the events .
 Moriarty found Tatum initially reticent about getting involved . Moriarty said Tatum ended up cooperating when he found out more from Moriarty about the HSCA investigation . Tatum said he felt the case was closed .
 Moriarty was impressed with Tatum when he interviewed him for the London trial . Moriarty interviewed Tatum in 1986 for the trial in London . He interviewed him again in 1986 .
 Tatum’s story is completely compatible with everything else we know about Tippit, and he certainly wasn’t someone looking for his fifteen minutes of fame or trying to cash in on his story . Tatum is not looking for fame or fame .
 Tatum told a London Weekend Television interviewer he was driving a red Ford Galaxie XL500 car that day . He later told an interviewer that he later told him that he had been driving the car .
 Only Tatum reported seeing Oswald fire at Tippit, the HSCA noted . The autopsy report found one wound to the body that slanted upward from front to back .
 Tatum was a key witness at the London trial of Michael Tatum in 2012 . The actor has been a key figure in the prosecution's case against him . Tatum has been described as a 'solid witness' in the trial of his client .
 Gerry Spence did not even cross-examine Tatum on the issue of whether he was at Tenth and Patton . Tatum told the jury he got a “very good look’s killer, and said there was no question “whatsoever” in his mind
 Spence conducted an extremely and uncommonly brief crossexamination of Tatum on the issue of his identification of Oswald as Tippit’s killer . Spence also conducted a rare and unusual interview with Tatum .
 Spence, a highly experienced trial lawyer, obviously made an assessment that Tatum could only hurt him . Spence said Tatum's actions would only hurt the actor, who has a reputation for his character .
 Domingo Benavides testified in 1964 that he ultimately contacted the dispatcher after one failed attempt . Starting around 1:16m. on Dallas police radio tapes, one can hear the sound of someone making noise with the microphone button of the police radio .
 Bowley used it to successfully contact the police dispatcher at about 1:18m. Bowley, from Bowley's home, called the police at 1.18m . Bowley was able to contact the dispatcher at around 1:20m.
 When they heard the shots, she looked out the window and saw a man lying on the street in the next block . She looked out and saw the man lying in the street .
 Police mistakenly called the wrong address for the shooting victim . The shooting victim's address was incorrect, police say .
 If anyone was more confused about what happened after the shooting than Mary’s husband, Frank, it was Frank, she says . Mary's husband was confused by what happened to her, she writes . She says he was confused about the shooting .
 Frank walked outside to see what happened to his wife when she called 911 . Frank's wife was dialing the operator, and Frank went outside to check out what happened .
 The only thing he saw that we know was a man lying on the ground near the left fender of his car and a man looking down at him . About the only thing that he saw was that was correct was that he had been hit by a car .
 Frank Wright claims he saw the man who was standing run to a car, an old gray coupe, and race away . Frank Wright went psychedelic, claiming he saw him run to the car . Wright says he saw a man run away from the scene in a car .
 The coupe could not have driven off in a direction away from Wright, as he claimed it did, without making a U-turn . But if that was so, unless the coupe was parked on the wrong side of the street, it couldn’t have driven away from
 Wright also said that before the ambulance arrived, other than he and a woman who had “come down from her porch, there wasn’t anyone else out there at all,” when we know that at least Benavides, Markham, and Bowley were at
 "There were at least 10 people standing around" Tippit when he arrived, an ambulance driver says .
 Wright says that “nothing in the world is going to change my opinion’s opinion.” He says that when Wright sees the gunman run away, not drive, it will not change his opinion. Wright says he doesn’t want to see the gunman’
 Conspiracy theorist Josiah Thompson figured that the bullet was probably probably found by Tomlinson at about 1:50m . Conspiracy theorists say it was probably found at the same time .
 Dr. Warren Reynolds claimed to have crossed the street immediately after the gunman disappeared behind the buildings near Crawford and Jefferson, and checked the parking lot . But considerable evidence exists that about five minutes elapsed before Reynolds checked the lot .
 Lieutenant Day and Captain Fritz photographed and examined the rifle . Mr Pinkston of the FBI, a Secret Service man, and two men from the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Unit of the Treasury Department .
 Oswald took only four bullets with him when he left in the morning to kill the president . Since one live round was found in the chamber, and Oswald fired three rounds, this means that for whatever reason Oswald took just four bullets . Oswald fired only three rounds .
 We knew he left after three rounds, not firing the fourth . Either he never had two more to put into his six-round clip, or he felt he was such a good shot that four rounds were more than he needed .
 The rifle was a 6.5-millimeter Mannlicher-Carcano, police say . Conspiracy theorists continue to yap that the rifle found on the sixth floor was not a rifle, but some other weapon, such as a Mauser .
 All of the evidence, including photographic and eyewitness, proves this, says CNN.com.com . "All the evidence is clear, and it's not a hoax," says CNN's John Sutter .
 WFAA-TV photographer Tom Alyea was on the sixth floor at the time of the shooting . He filmed the recovery of the rifle .
 The rifle was originally designed in 1891 as a 6.5-millimeter weapon . It was produced in new models from 1891, 1938, and 1941 . New models were produced in three different models .
 After the outbreak of World War II, the Italian government continued to produce many 6.5-millimeter versions in order to use up large stocks of ammunition on hand . The Italian government produced many versions of the weapon in WWII .
 The 6.5-millimeter Carcanos are designated as model 91/38, to distinguish them from model 38, the designation for a 7.35 millimeter rifle . The 6/38 model is the same name as model 38 for model 38 .
 A Secret Service report about an incident outside Trauma Room One is set forth in the Secret Service's report . The Secret Service says the incident took place in Trauma Rooms One .
 I was outside of the President’s room with SA Berger when Chief Nurse Nelson entered the President's room . SA Berger was also in the room at the time of the incident . The incident occurred in the president's room, the hospital said .
 When SA Berger and I stopped him he said, ‘F.B.I.I.,’ and made a determined effort to enter the President’s room . ‘When SA Berger . Berger and . Berger stopped him, he told the FBI he was going to
 He tried to forcibly enter the President’s room and had to be restrained . He again tried to enter the . President's . room .
 The FBI agent involved in the incident, Doyle Williams, said it happened . But that’s not the way the FBI agent . Williams' version doesn’t make too much sense .
 On the afternoon of the incident he wrote a memo stating that around 12:35m., he was instructed by the special agent-in-charge in Dallas to go to Parkland and establish contact with the Secret Service . He said he did with Special Agent Roy Kellerman .
 Chief nurse on duty in the emergency ward took him to another part of the hospital where he was able to use a telephone and contact the special agent-in-charge . He said the chief nurse then took him out of emergency ward .
 He said he immediately identified himself, whereupon Kellerman appeared on the scene and asked him to leave the area . Kellerman said he identified himself and asked the man to leave, which he did .
 When got the report that the president had died, he grabbed a nurse and told her he was an FBI agent and that he needed a phone immediately . He grabbed the nurse and said he needed to call immediately .
 The nurse told Williams to follow her and the two of them moved hastily down the emergency unit’s hallway . Williams was taken to a hospital room in the emergency room .
 The nurse came to a curtained-off corner and told Williams there was a phone in there . The nurse then pulled the curtain aside and said she was going to use the phone in the room . Williams was later taken to a hospital where she was treated for her injuries .
 The instant he walked inside the curtained area, a burly man coldcocked him square in the nose . "The instant he . walked inside was coldcocking him," the man says .
 Hosty was under the impression the incident took place outside the new president’s door, but Williams, in a December 1,1963, memo to his personal file, said it took place in the area “where the President and Mrs. Hosty were staying . Hosty
 Williams ended up filing a Workman’s Compensation claim, but nothing came of it . Hosty said Williams filed for Workman's Compensation, but it was never successful .
 Billy Lovelady told the media back in 1964 that “a roll call was taken of the dozen or so men in my work gang’s work gang. “A roll call’ was taken,” he said . Billy told the press that a roll call
 No record of an established institution in America exulting over his assassination . At least there is no record of a record of ex-President Obama's assassination .
 The Church Committee Report said this Teletype from FBI Director Hoover was sent out by FBI headquarters in Washing. ton, D.C., at 9:40m. ET .
 FBI waited seven hours after the shooting in Dealey Plaza before sending out instructions to its field offices around the country, which makes little sense . FBI started working on the case almost immediately, but it waited at least seven long hours .
 Hosty's immediate supervisor told him to 'get back to the office fast' from where he was at Parkland Hospital . The Teletype was the reason that Ken Howe [Hosty’s immediate supervisor] told me on my car radio to ‘get back . to �
 In the original copy of the FBI Teletype there are many times stamped on it, but the earliest time is 2:39m. The earliest time on the original version of the Teletype was 2:40m.
 This article insures the continuity of the executive branch of government . It gives the vice president the same powers that the president had . The vice president has the power of the presidency .
 The line of succession is somewhat murky since Article II, Section 1 does not provide that the vice president becomes president on the death of the president . Article II: Section 1 doesn't provide that vice president become president on death of president . The vice president is expected to be the next president
 If there was any ambiguity in this language, it was not clarified by the Twentieth Amendment in 1933 . “If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the president, the president elect shall have died [Kennedy was not a president elect], the Vice
 This is why it is so remarkable that with LBJ, as with the prior seven vice presidents who had been elevated by the death of a sitting president, this nation has blatantly ignored the Constitution . The nation has elevated vice Four Days in November presidents to the office of the presidency on the
 President William Henry Harrison died in office of pneumonia exactly one month after being sworn in . John Tyler, his vice president, arrogated to himself the title as well as the powers and duties of the president . This practice, which has no constitutional basis, all started in 1841 .
 In any event, all illegitimacy and ambiguity was removed by the ratification of the Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution on February 10,1967 .
 There are those who believed that between the time of Kennedy’s death and the oath-taking of Lyndon Johnson as president two hours later, the nation had a president, but one who, under Article II, Section 1, could not act as president .
 If there had been an election following the deaths in office of the seven presidents before Kennedy, it’s fair to assume that one or more of the vice presidents who succeeded these presidents would not have been elected . With a different presidential administration, history almost assuredly would have been different
 If there had been an election, there is a good chance the president’s brother Robert would have actively sought, or been pressured into running for, the office of the presidency . After his death, Robert Kennedy would have been pressured to run for president .
 RFK was more likely to represent in voters’ minds a continuation of the JFK presidency than Johnson . RFK might have been elected, but the mood of the country was so sympathetic to the president’s surviving loved ones .
 The conflict is between Article II, Section 1 and Section 1, which gives the vice president the powers and duties of the president . Section 1 seems to contradict Section 1 by saying he can’t carry out these powers until he is sworn in, in effect rendering Section 1 a null
 Assistant Special Agent-in-Charge Lem Johns was aboard Air Force One at the time and was of the belief that the Constitution itself technically prohibited Johnson from ordering a nuclear response prior to his swearing in .
 There is something that trumps and is above the Constitution where necessity and national security are involved, and that that is common sense . Common sense .
 Lincoln’s temporary suspension of the constitutional right of habeas corpus during the Civil War . One is reminded of Lincoln's temporary suspension . Lincoln was reminded of the temporary suspension. of the . constitutional right to habea corpus .
 It was rabidly anti-Kennedy for what it felt was his appeasement of Khrushchev and Castro in the cold war . It felt that he was appeasing the Soviets in the Cold War . It was also rabidly against Kennedy for his willingness to fight back .
 The argument goes that the ACCC was a part of the conspiracy to murder Kennedy and the Abundant Life Temple was to be a convenient refuge for Kennedy’s and Tippit’�s killer . The ACCC has been accused of being a cover-up for
 Warren "Butch" Burroughs told conspiracy theorist Jim Marrs that the person who had sneaked into the theater could not have been Oswald because he saw Oswald enter the theater a minute or so after 1:00m.
 Oswald came up to his concession stand at 1:15m. He bought popcorn at the end of the day . Oswald also bought popcorn from the concession stand .
 Burroughs testified before the Warren Commission on April 8,1964, not only did he say he never saw Oswald enter the theater, but he didn’t say anything about Oswald being inside the theater at any time prior to when the police arrived, or selling Oswald popcorn .
 Conspiracy theorist Robert Sam Anson suggests that this man who fingered Oswald was part of the U.S. intelligence plot to frame Oswald . Anson quotes this article by McDonald, then suggests this man is part of a conspiracy conspiracy .
 Anson gives no source for this ‘then disappeared’ assertion of his, which bolsters his story of a frame-up, almost undoubtedly because none exists . Anson: "Then disappeared" is almost certainly because there are no sources for this assertion .
 McDonald’s article, beyond what I’ve already quoted, makes no further mention of the man who fingered Oswald, not saying anything about him, much less that he disappeared . The article says Oswald fingered the assassin, but McDonald's article doesn't mention him .
 Anson doesn't bother to tell his readers that McDonald later found out who the man was who pointed Oswald out to him . Anson says McDonald found out the man who pointed out Oswald .
 The nick or indentation was in the “wrong” location, not being in the center of the primer . Moreover, the nick is in the "wrong" location . The nick was not in the 'wrong' location .
 The Commission concluded it was the trigger snapping back that made the snapping sound . The trigger snaps back, not the snap of the hammer, which bears the firing pin, makes the sound .
 The five-story gray stone structure at 2000 Main Street in downtown Dallas can't be expected to be named . The city of Dallas has not decided on the name of the new building .
 City Hall, the Municipal Building, and the Police and Municipal Courts Building are located at the same location . They are located between Main and Commerce on the north and south and Harwood Street on the west . The Warren Commission and HSCA volumes are spread throughout the volumes .
 Although there is only one solid structure at this location, it actually consists of two buildings . Complicating the matter further is that although there are only two solid structures, there are also two other buildings at the site .
 From Warren Commission testimony and talking to Dallas old-timers like Jim Bowles, a thirtyyear member of the police force, this is the best I could do to decipher the matter . The best way to decipher it is to ask the question: "What do you think?"
 The first structure on this block was built in the early 1900s at the corner of Commerce and Harwood . People called it “City Hall” because the mayor, the city council, and the city departments had ENDNOTES their offices there .
 In 1958 this building was renamed the Police and Municipal Courts Building . The Dallas Police Department took over the second through the fifth floors . The Municipal Court occupied the first floor of the building .
 A new Municipal Building (City Hall) was built as an addition to the old Municipal Building, and faced Main Street . A new municipal building was built in the 1950s as a result .
 At the time of the assassination, the formal name for the two collective buildings was the Municipal Building . Most Dallasites called it “City Hall” and that title included, as indicated, the Police and Municipal Courts Building . The formal name was Municipal Building, but again, most
 The traffic lane leading down into and up out of the basement of the single structure was below and right in the middle of the Police and Municipal Courts Building on one side and City Hall on the other . City Hall is located on the opposite side of the building .
 The parking area or garage in the basement was under the City Hall part of the structure . It was not under the Police and Municipal Courts Building, but was only for the use of the police department .
 The department operated, of course, around the clock seven days a week . It needed a basement area for security purposes when transporting prisoners to the jail .
 City Hall occupants parked in a lot on the east side of the building facing the Pearl Expressway . The parking lot is located on the side of a lot facing a busy highway .
 Captain Fritz had been offered the position of chief of police a number of times but always turned it down, preferring to work in the Homicide and Robbery Bureau . Detective Elmo Cunningham, who knew Fritz well, said that Fritz “told me he didn’t particularly want
 Fritz “didn’t believe in writing, and his reports on the investigations were usually very brief.” Cunningham said . Cunningham said Fritz didn't believe in in writing .
 Two and a half pages of Fritz’s handwritten notes were discovered at the National Archives . Fritz's notes were found in the archives of the National Museum of Art in Washington .
 Oswald's interrogations of Oswald began, and with two of them, the second and fourth, when they ended . They are obviously scribbled and extremely sparse for twelve hours of interrogation, but they do set forth when each of the four interrogations began and where they ended.
 Fritz’s recollection had to be compared with those of others present to determine during what session, and in what sequence, the questions and answers took . However, Fritz could not take even this at face value, so he had to compare his recollections with others' recollections of
 First interrogation session started at the very latest around 3:00m. But we know from the testimony of several witnesses that the first interrogation session was around 3.00m . Witnesses say the interrogation session began at the earliest of the morning .
 Wherever possible, timing of other events helped determine when a series of questions took place .
 Oswald could not have been asked about the backyard photos during the first interrogation session because they hadn’t been found at that point . Oswald was not asked about those photos during that session .
 Oswald was interrogated by Dallas police captain Will Fritz and others for a total of approximately twelve hours between 2:30m. on Friday, November 22, 1963, and 11:00m. November 24 . Oswald was questioned by police for approximately 12 hours on November 24, 1963 .
 It would have been good for the historical record if the sessions had been tape-recorded . The sessions should have been taped-recorded, says historian .
 Conspiracy theorists have darkly suggested that Dallas law enforcement didn't want anyone to know what Oswald really said . It wasn’t because, as some conspiracy theorists, it was because Dallas police wanted to keep quiet about Oswald's words .
 Alexander has suggested in the past that even if Fritz had had a recorder, it is likely he wouldn't have used it because "if had said, ‘Yeah, I killed the no-goodo.b. president,’ it would have been inadmissible in any
 If he then refused to sign it in the presence of a witness, it would be useless . Even if we gave him the proper warning, and then reduced his statement to writing, it was useless .
 Law enforcement would never want to tape-record any interrogation . But under that reasoning, which would apply, by the way, in any state, law enforcement would not want it .
 Texas is a state of origin in the U.S. where it comes from . It's not the first time the state has done so, but it has been in place for years .
 Alexander conceded that if Oswald had voluntarily confessed, there would be a good chance that he would also sign such a confession . Alexander conceded this point, acknowledging that Oswald would also have signed such a statement .
 Such a signed confession would obviously be something that law enforcement would very much want .
 If the suspect refused to sign it, the police wouldn't be any worse off than if they hadn't even attempted to get his confession . And if he didn't, they would be even worse off if they didn't get it .
 In the majority of states, oral confessions or admissions of a defendant made to police while in custody are admissible against him at his trial . This is a legal oddity and curiosity that in a state noted for its conservatism, it is admissible .
 Four Days in November even today, for the lack of proper safeguarding of the constitutional rights of indigent defendants, in the one area of oral admissions and confessions by defendants by defendants, Texas was way ahead of virtually every other state . Texas was well ahead of almost all other states in
 Lawrence F. O’Brien, Kennedy’s special assistant for congressional relations, told the Warren Commission it was he who went to get Jackie for the swearing-in ceremony . O'Brien, JFK's special assistant, said he was the man who got her to the ceremony
 Samuel Byck, a professed Nixon hater, got on a Delta airline flight at Baltimore-Washington International Airport on February 22, 1974 . Byck was the first person to fly with a Delta flight .
 He ordered the pilot to take off, and when the pilot refused, Byck started shooting . The pilot was shot dead by Byck when he refused to take flight .
 Before it was over, Byck had shot and killed the copilot and an airport policeman . The pilot was seriously wounded in the shooting .
 A second airport policeman shot through a plane window and struck Byck with two bullets, in the abdomen and chest, before Byck killed himself by shooting himself in the temple with his gun .
 Author James W Clarke researched the Byck case and heard a tape recording, which the FBI had, that Byck had made the day before his attempted hijacking in which he said he wanted to make his death and President Nixon’s a “smashing success” by
 In Byck's attache case, he had two gallons of gasoline in plastic containers wired to a destructing mechanism . The explosive wouldn't be necessary if the plane crashed into the White House, he says .
 If he had intended to blow up the plane with his incendiary device, he wouldn't have had any need to hijack the plane . On the other hand, if he had only intended to bomb the plane he wouldn’t have needed hijacking the plane, he would have had
 In 1972, the Secret Service investigated Byck as a result of an alleged threat he made against Nixon . The Secret Service had investigated him as a threat to Nixon .
 He was picked up and committed to a Philadelphia pital for mental observation . He was committed to the 66 pital .
 LBJ may have been insecure because of the way he became president . Few have ever been more knowledgeable about, or expert at, the manipulation of the levers of power in accomplishing their presidential agenda than LBJ .
 The “Master of the Senate” (the title of one of Robert A Caro’s three biographical volumes on Johnson) felt otherwise comfortable in the presidential chair . Apart from his unease over how he ascended to the Oval Office, the “master of the
 Lyndon Johnson was Kennedy’s strongest opponent for the Democratic presidential nomination at the Democratic national convention in Los Angeles in July of 1960 . Johnson was JFK's strongest opponent .
 It was not Johnson's intent to be Kennedy’s vice presidential running mate . After a half-hour meeting with Kennedy the following day, he was talked into it .
 Kennedy, needing to shore up his support in the South, chose Johnson over people like Senator Stuart Symington of Missouri, Senator Henry M Jackson of Washington, and Governor Orville L Freeman of Minnesota . Kennedy chose Johnson instead of people like Symington and Jackson .
 His supporters committed themselves to Johnson’s campaign for the presidency . His supporters had committed themselves . Johnson's supporters had pledged themselves to the president .
 Johnson was moved to tears at one point, knowing the sense of dismay their friends and supporters would feel . Johnson: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not sorry for it."
 The surveillance, beginning at about 5:00m. on November 22 and ending at midnight November 24, proved negative . The surveillance was carried out in the early hours of November 24 .
 There is a considerable difference of opinion about the exact circumstances surrounding this incident . The incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Hosty and Revill agree that the conversation took place, but disagree over the precise words that were used . There is also a dispute over the exact words used in the conversation .
 Revill testified that he may have “misunderstood” what Hosty said about Oswald being “capable” of the assassination . Revill said he would give Hosty “the benefit of the doubt” about this portion of the conversation .
 After the purchase he took them to the Depository Building that same day and showed them to Roy Truly . He intended to hide the rifles in his office because he was going to give the .22 rifle to his son as a Christmas present .
 On second thought he feared the rifles might be stolen so he took them home that day, November 20 . But on second thought, he decided to take them home and take them back .
 William Manchester’s book The Death of a President is by all accounts a very important literary contribution to an understanding of the human drama surrounding the assassination, and probably will remain the definitive account of this aspect of the tragedy .
 The Kennedys had sent copies of the book to their nieces and nephews as Christmas presents .
 Death of a President generated more controversy than any book in publishing history . Death of the President was published before it was published . The book was published in 1996 .
 Both the Kennedy and Johnson camps were convinced the book was going to hurt their side politically and stain their legacy . The problem is that both the JFK and Johnson campaigns were convinced that the book would hurt them politically . The book was published in 1964 and 1964 .
 The Johnson camp was convinced that “from leaks” the Kennedys were dictating the thrust of the book . The book would depict Johnson in such a boorish, unflattering way that it would cause serious harm to Johnson politically, thereby enabling RFK to defeat him
 Washington correspondent William White spoke of the “unremitting hostility” of the Kennedy people toward LBJ . The Kennedy people viewed LBJ as a “crude usurper” to the throne, he said .
 Manchester ended up being hospitalized for twelve days from exhaustion in the writing of the book . Manchester, himself, himself would say that Mrs. Manchester would say, "Mrs. Manchester" Manchester was hospitalized for 12 days .
 Kennedy reminded him of “Marie Antoinette, completely isolated from the world by her courtier-advisers,” he said . Kennedy was “completely isolated” from the rest of the world, he added .
 RFK, he said, was “surrounded by people who have hitched their wagon to his star’s star” RFK was ‘surrounded’ with people who “hitched’ his star,” he said . RFK:
 It wasn't just the LBJ side that was having kittens worrying about the book . But it wasn’t just LBJ .
 Jackie Kennedy, whom Manchester interviewed on tape for ten hours, also was dissatisfied with the manuscript of the book . She sent an urgent, handwritten plea to Manchester to revise his manuscript in designated areas, which he refused .
 "There are many other matters, I know, but these are all of that sort, and they are absolutely necessary to me and my children," she says .
 Jackie was believed by many that she was mostly concerned about what the manuscript said about her innermost private self . But many believed she was concerned by what it said .
 The public squabble became so involved and bitter that an entire book, The Manchester Affair, was written on it . Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and William Manchester were embroiled in a bitter feud .
 President Johnson reportedly declined Manchester’s request to be interviewed for book .
 This simply can’t be squared with the testimony of the three members of Dallas law enforcement who came to her door, she says . "This simply can't be squared" with the three law enforcement officers' testimony .
 Critics often use this reference to portray Oswald as a bewildered victim, caught up in a plot not of his own making . Critics often say this reference is a reference to Oswald .
 Hosty testified that the word “frantically” should have been “emphatically” Hosty said that . Hosty says that is a small, but significant change in the meaning of the word "frantic"
 Alexander said, “In those days, we didn’t have supporting, probable cause affidavits.” Alexander said . Alexander said in the 1970s, "We didn't have supporting" probable cause affidavit affidavits."
 Critics have charged that the four Oswald lineups, including the one for Markham, were grossly unfair . Critics say the lineups were unfair . Markham is the only person to be named in the Oswald lineup .
 Oswald was the most likely suspect among the four men, according to the FBI . Oswald was one of the four suspects in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Oswald was the only one of the four men in the lineup who was physically bruised . Oswald had a cut on his forehead above his right eye, and his left eyelid was puffed up . Oswald is the only member of the lineup with a bruised eye .
 Oswald was verbally belligerent to the police detectives throughout the lineup, in contradistinction to the other three men . Oswald was verbal belligerent to the police detectors throughout the lineup . Oswald is the only person in the lineup who was not belligerent
 Oswald's attire differs from the other men in the Warren Commission lineup . Oswald's clothing is not the attire of the men he was in the lineup for the commission .
 The Dallas Police Department had no policy with respect to taking photographs of lineups . The Dallas police department has no policy on photographing lineups, police say .
 Detective James Leavelle conducted three of the Oswald lineups . He never once took a photo of the people in the lineup, and unfortunately, the photos were no exception .
 Dallas Police Department sent photos of Clark, Perry, and Abies standing next to each other in a pose taken months after the lineup . The Warren Commission did send photos of the three men standing together .
 Two of the photos appear in the Warren Commission volumes . Clark and Perry are in suit and tie in the photos .
 Abies is wearing a sports shirt, but couldn’t possibly have looked more neat . Abies was in the middle of a row with the team at the time .
 Oswald is a bruised, unshaven Oswald in a plain Tshirt . This, of course, contrasts sharply with the bruised, unmasked Oswald in his T-shirt . Oswald is now a regular member of the Oswald clan .
 Critics have railed against this obvious disparity . Understandably, the critics have been railing against this .
 At the time of the lineup, none of the three were dressed as they were in the photo taken for the Warren Commission . The photo was taken at the same time as the photo of the photo .
 Each testified to their attire before the Warren Commission, and corroborate Leavelle’s recollection .
 Oswald’s T-shirt was a contrast to the clothing the three men were wearing at the time of the lineup . Oswald was wearing the same clothing as the other three men in the photo .
 Oswald wore the very jacket that witnesses had seen Tippit’s killer wear . Oswald had been wearing the same jacket as the murder suspect . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 The police would have had to put the gray Four Days in November jacket on all the men in the lineup . They could not do this simultaneously, or on none of them, they chose to do .
 Oswald's name may have been added to the Tippit's killer's list . Oswald was the only person to have been named in the lineup . Oswald is believed to be the only suspect in the murder of Tippits .
 The Warren Commission said it was “satisfied that the lineups were conducted fairly” I am willing to concede that the Tippit lineups weren't fair lineups . Oswald himself was partially responsible for this, although he was partly responsible for it .
 Witnesses picked out Oswald not because he looked like the man they saw at the Tippit murder scene, but simply because he stood out in many other ways from the other men in the lineup . To accept that proposition, one would have to presuppose that the witnesses picked Oswald out,
 Oswald was the only one in the lineup, and therefore there wasn't even anyone else to choose from . Even if Oswald was only one, their observation that he was the man they saw at the Tippit murder scene would have to be accorded great weight .
 Critics believe if Arnold Schwarzenegger or anyone else took Oswald’s place in the lineup, with the same bruises and disheveled appearance, and acted like Oswald did, all the witnesses would be positive that he was the one they saw kill Tippit or run from the murder
 Oswald returned Oswald to Captain Fritz’s office at 4:20m. Detectives Richard Sims and Elmer Boyd wrote that they returned Oswald back at 4.20m . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the shooting at the time .
 There is some discrepancy as to the exact time the search was conducted . The search was carried out at the time of the search . There was some discrepancy between the time and time .
 Bill Alexander asked whether detectives who were with him had the same fears as he . Alexander: "I asked Bill Alexander whether the detectives who had the . same fears" as he. had the detectives .
 Secret Service agent Lem Johns says he didn't know what was going on in people’s minds on the plane . He didn’t personally notice the tension between JFK and LBJ staffs .
 Commander James Humes was unable to reach him earlier in the afternoon . He tried to call him earlier this afternoon but he couldn't get to him .
 General McHugh spoke with Admiral Galloway about having Kennedy embalmed on the grounds of the hospital following the autopsy . Kennedy's funeral was held in Bethesda, Maryland, following his death .
 Galloway resisted, saying the hospital didn't have the facilities to perform an embalming service . Galloway: "The hospital didn’t have the facility to perform a service"
 The general persisted, telling Admiral Galloway that it was what the Kennedy family wanted . Adm. Galloway said it was not what he wanted, but that the family wanted.
 Galloway eventually acquiesced, and arrangements to bring portable embalming equipment were made with Gawler’s Funeral Home .
 Confusion surrounding the manner in which the president’s body arrived at the rear of the hospital later resulted in charges by conspiracy author David S Lifton that a decoy ambulance was used to deceive those present and cover up the fact that the president had already been surgically altered at
 They returned to the front entrance and escorted the first ambulance to the morgue entrance . The first ambulance was then escorted to the entrance of the first morgue .
 The honor guard, along with a Navy enlisted-man driver, the other duty officer, and me, rode to the morgue on the guard truck at high speed, believing that the ambulance was following . "The honor guard thought that the ambulances were following," she says .
 Since the Secret Service driver was unfamiliar with the grounds, we decided he was lost . The Secret Service was unable to find the driver .
 The ambulance was still at the front of the hospital amid onlookers . Retracing our path, we found the ambulance still there .
 In our haste we had left without confirming that the ambulance was behind us . We had left the ambulance behind us without confirming it was behind them .
 Hall clocks visible in television footage and still photographs show the time as 6:16m. However, hall clocks show that the time was 6:15m. Lieutenant Day carried the rifle through the third floor hallway .
 McWatters testified that he never told police of what he now believed to be his mistake that night (2 H 290), which explains why the police record was never corrected . The police record of the incident was never changed .
 Critics have charged that McWatters’s testimony impeaches his alleged encounter with Oswald on November 22 . Critics say that Oswald must have used some other form of transportation to get to Oak Cliff .
 McWatters testified that a man did board his bus at about Elm and Griffin after having knocked on the door of the bus, and exited two blocks later, taking a transfer as he left . Jones-Oswald mix-up was the result of a police mistake .
 The description, a close approximation of Oswald, is less important when one considers the physical evidence of the transfer itself . The transfer itself is the evidence, and the transfer is the proof .
 Some critics have contended that the bullet wound in the back wasn’t discovered until the latter stages of the autopsy . The bullet wound was discovered during the autopsy, a claim Dr. Dr. John Sutter says .
 Humes told the HSCA that the back wound was found during the initial examination of the body . Humes said the wound was discovered during the autopsy .
 Marguerite Oswald insisted on talking with FBI men “from Washington” about her suspicions that Lee was a secret agent . Oswald was arrested at police headquarters in New York City .
 She finally agreed to talk with Dallas FBI agents, telling them, “For the security of my country, I want this kept perfectly quiet until you investigate"
 Oswald’s wallet included a snapshot of Marina, one of him in a Marine uniform, and one of a small baby in a white cap, most likely his daughter Rachel . Oswald's wallet also included a photo of Marina and a picture of his daughter .
 A paycheck stub for a James A Jackson from American Bakeries Company dated August 22, 1960, or August 27, 1960 . The amount of pay as $66.17, less federal income tax of $7.40 and Social Security tax of . $1.99 for a net
 He said that he had never met Lee Harvey Oswald and had no idea how Oswald came into possession of the stub . Only conjectures that perhaps he had accidentally dropped the stub on the street and someone picked it up .
 Oswald would have on his person a three-year-old paycheck stub of Jackson’s is unknown . Oswald would not be surprised to find the paycheck stub .
 The document’s reverse side further identifies the card as a “Uniformed Services Identification and Privilege Card,” DD Form 1173 .
 Conspiracy theorists have suggested this privilege card shows Oswald was somehow connected with U.S. military intelligence . Some conspiracy theorists say the card was proof Oswald was connected to military intelligence in the United States .
 Oswald's privilege was discontinued on December 7, 1962, almost a year before the assassination . The buffs don’t bother to ask themselves why, if Oswald was a U.S. agent or operative, they discontinued his privilege in 1962 .
 Chester H Boyers, the navy corpsman who typed the receipt, gave HSCA investigators an affidavit under penalty of perjury that contained his handwritten notes at the time of the autopsy . He jotted down during the autopsy that “there were bullet missile fragments recovered”
 Agents Sibert and O’Neill confirmed to the HSCA that they received two bullet fragments, not a missile . Both agents said they received the fragments from a bullet fragment . The agents said the fragments were fragments of two bullets .
 Sibert: "I do not recall exactly how the receipt described the fragments but it was certainly not for a whole missile, rather it was for some fragments" Sibert says the receipt for the missile was for fragments .
 "A single missile to me means considerable substance, more of a whole bullet," he says . A single missile means "more than a single missile" means "a whole bullet"
 This receipt was prepared by someone else and typed up by a naval corpsman . The receipt was written by a navy corpsman, who typed it up for the Navy .
 In 1975, Dennis David, a navy first-class petty officer at the time of the assassination, claimed that he was the one who typed up the receipt for the bullet fragments . Dennis David later became a key cog in conspiracy author David Lifton’s zany bodyalteration
 David claimed that a Secret Service agent reportedly dictated the receipt in the administrative offices, describing the physical characteristics of four bullet fragments . Lifton’s book, Lifton's book, was published by Lifton .
 'This is considered classified material. And he made some comment about, ‘This is classified material,' he said .
 His name doesn't appear on any list of personnel involved in the autopsy . His story about typing the receipt for four bullet fragments is not corroborated by anyone .
 David Lifton has persisted in trying to keep the “fourth bullet rather than two fragments” argument alive . Lifton's argument is deader than a doornail, and his weapon is the faulty memory .
 No one else had told the committee about seeing a slug on the autopsy table or anywhere else at Bethesda . Of course, throughout the HSCA’s entire investigation no one else else had said anything .
 The HSCA said it “recontacted Admiral Osborne and informed him that the body of the President had not arrived in any clothes , but was wrapped in sheets, and that no one else recalled anything about the discovery of a missile .
 Lifton contacted Osborne the next year and he said Kennedy arrived in his casket in his clothing, and a “reasonably clean, unmarred” bullet fell from the clothing . Lifton told Lifton that the bullet fell out of Kennedy's clothing and a bullet fell
 Stover was the commanding officer of the United States Naval Medical School . Osborne was in the autopsy room during the autopsy . Stover had been in the room at the time of the death .
 Two large bullet fragments, not a missile or bullet, were found during the autopsy, was found during an autopsy, the author says . "It has been established beyond any reasonable doubt," he says . The author concludes that the fragments were not found in the autopsy .
 James Humes and his two fellow autopsy surgeons were completely perplexed over the fact that they could not find or figure out what happened to the bullet that entered the upper right part of the president’s back . Humes only determined what happened the following morning when he spoke on the
 JAMA reported Lieutenant Colonel Pierre Finck arrived at 9:15m. Although the May 27,1992, issue of JAMA said that Lieutenant Colonel Finck . Finck's arrival was reported as early as 9.15m .
 All other accounts show Finck arrived at about 8:30m. EST (Breo, “JFK’s Death—The Plain Truth from the MDs Who Did the Autopsy,”2798), all other accounts .
 Other testimony indicates that the heart and lungs were not removed until the latter stages of the autopsy . However, other testimony indicates they were removed during the autopsy process .
 The difficulty of finding the bullet that entered Kennedy’s upper back is reminiscent of the much longer search for a bullet to the back of President James A Garfield, shot by Charles Guiteau on July 2,1881 .
 Doctors probed for the bullet that entered Garfield’s right back with unsterilized instruments or their bare hands, a common practice at the time . Garfield lingered near death for eighty days after the bullet entered his right back .
 Guiteau severely criticized Garfield’s doctors, claiming that it was they, not he, who killed Garfield . He also claimed that Garfield's doctors were responsible for the death of Garfield .
 The bullet was finally found during the autopsy following Garfield’s death on September 19, 1881 . Garfield died in 1881 from complications complications .
 The location of the bullet in Garfield's body became a national obsession . Many people offered advice on how to locate it .
 One citizen wrote to the White House that the doctors should simply turn the president upside-down and see if the bullet would fall out . The White House responded to the request .
 On March 15, 2006, the FBI notified all of its field offices that the bureau would no longer analyze gunshot residue in its investigations . The FBI has since decided not to analyze residue in investigations .
 In his book Rearview Mirror, former FBI agent William Turner writes that in the mid-1960s Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease .
 Oswald supposedly fired from the same mail-order house in Chicago . Vincent Guinn, who at the time was the head of the General Atomics project in San Diego, ordered an Italian Carcano rifle such as Oswald .
 There simply is no way to square this with the testimony and experience of the Dallas police and FBI in this case, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Oswald's cheek was the only time in nine years of doing such tests that he had ever been requested to test one’s cheeks to determine if the person had fired a rifle . Barnes, who conducted the test, testified, as noted, that it was a rare occasion .
 No one could really believe this is perjured testimony, if for no other reason . No professional would lie under oath on a matter that he knows other experts could easily refute him on .
 Oswald's casts were washed after paraffin tests were conducted by Dallas police . Oswald's cast was washed after tests were carried out by police .
 Though no nitrates were found, the washing hadn’t removed all the barium and antimony on the casts . The washing had also removed barium, antimony and barium from the cast .
 Five witnesses, four of whom knew Ruby, testified that they saw him on the third floor of police headquarters at City Hall . Four of them said they saw Ruby earlier that Friday evening, between 5:30 and 8:00 .
 Most assuredly, all of these people did see Ruby Friday evening at police headquarters . But the likelihood is that they are simply mistaken as to the time, they are just mistaken .
 Ruby admits to hanging out outside Captain Fritz’s door and helping reporters, but after he arrived on the third floor around 11:00m. Ruby admits doing the things they saw Ruby doing, such as hanging outside the door . All of the things people saw Ruby do, such
 The Warren Commission tended to believe the witnesses had been mistaken in their time . It makes no sense, and the Warren Commission tends to believe they were mistaken . It would be easy to do when the intensity of the drama was all focused on Oswald .
 Eva Grant, Ruby’s sister, was very candid in her testimony about her failure to even remember approximate times . Eva Grant said her brother stayed in her apartment the last time he visited her on the day of the assassination, she said, “I would say a good two
 Waggoner Carr testified that he couldn’t “for the life of me” remember who it was who called him . Carr testified he can't remember who the call was from .
 Alexander, in an interview with author Larry A Sneed, doesn't say this . Wade may have said this, but he didn’t suggest anything like this in his Warren Commission testimony .
 Wade, in Commission testimony, never indicated he spoke to anyone in Washington about the matter . Wade says he never indicated that he spoke with anyone about the issue .
 Marina found the ring on the day of the assassination, she did not move it from its place in the cup . Whenever Marina found it, she kept it in place in her cup .
 Marina told FBI agents she wanted them to retrieve her husband’s ring for her . Marina is now being held in protective custody of the Secret Service . She told agents to retrieve the ring from the Paine residence .
 FBI agent Bardwell D Odum and another agent showed up at Ruth Paine's door . The only message was that Marina wanted her husband's ring, and asked Ruth if she had any idea where to look for it .
 Ruth, who hadn't been told by Marina that Lee had left his ring behind, told the Warren Commission, “I said I’ll look first in the little tea cup that is from her grandmother, and on top of the chest of drawers in the bedroom where had
 Autopsy ended at about midnight, according to those at the autopsy . Autopsy was due to take place at about 1.30 a.m. local time on Monday morning .
 For more than a year, O’Neal’s Funeral Home in Dallas tried to collect the $3,995 bill for the Britannia casket and services .
 The government’s General Services Administration questioned the amount . It finally paid on February 26, 1965, after O’Neal knocked $500 off the bill . The government finally paid the bill in February 1965, 1965 .
 The funeral home’s business in Dallas fell off 50 percent in the wake of the adverse publicity . Funeral home's business in the city of Dallas, Texas, fell off .
 The lab was transferred to the FBI’s new headquarters in the J Edgar Hoover Building in Washington .
 The lab is at the FBI’s longtime training facility in Quantico, Virginia, about forty-five miles south of the capital .
 Internal FBI memorandum dated November 22, 1963, indicates that these arrangements were made by 8:18m. A conflicting internal FBI memo dated November 23rd indicates that the arrangements had already been made by November 22nd 1963 .
 Ruby frequently carried his revolver with him, it doesn’t sound improbable at all . Coupled with the fact that he frequently carried a gun with him .
 Ruby said in testimony before the Warren Commission, “I lied about this. But in his testimony, Ruby said, ‘I lied’ Ruby said he lied . Ruby says he lied about his role in the CIA .
 The sophisticated argument (if this is what Ruby was referring to) that if he didn’t shoot Oswald on Friday this would indicate that what he did on Sunday was unpremeditated, is certainly not the type of thing he would have been thinking about . Ruby testified his defense would
 Ruby had to decide which story was a lie, and he chose to say his first story was . However, his lawyers may have come up with this at a later date . Ruby chose to go with it .
 This jail card entry of 12:23m.m. is an apparent error, or at best misleading . It is not the first time the jail card has been entered into the system . It was entered at 12:24m.
 Oswald made a phone call at or around that time, he says nothing about Oswald making a call . Oswald is believed to have been Oswald's assassin . Oswald was killed in November 1945 .
 The times for the three phone calls at *Ruby was hopelessly inconsistent on this matter . And when we look at the aforementioned jail card, we can't believe the times were inconsistent .
 Ruby handwrote, on three-by-five-inch cards, his version of the events surrounding the shooting of Oswald . Ruby's version of events is substantially before his polygraph examination . Ruby was acquitted in 1964 .
 Oswald made a telephone call at 12:23m. The bottom of the card is listed as 1:40m., 4:22m., and 8:00m.:23m.: 23m. is not listed . Oswald made the phone call in the middle of the call at
 Oswald made a call after he was brought up to the fifth floor, CE 2003,288, where there is no reference to a call being made by Oswald . Oswald had been brought to the 5th floor of the building .
 Oswald was arraigned at the time of his arraignment . There is no record of Oswald being checked out of jail for this arraignment. Oswald was taken into custody in November .
 Maybe, he speculates, Ruby thought he was the kind of hero Scudder was talking about . He speculates that Ruby thought she was the hero . Ruby thought Ruby was a hero .
 Ruby thought he would be viewed as a hero for killing Oswald, and indeed, many in America viewed him that way after his act . We do know, of course, that Ruby thought that he would have been viewed a hero . Ruby was killed by Oswald in September 1945 .
 The language from the Heroism flyer did seem to be tailor-made for inciting an already fervently patriotic person who also happened to love Kennedy . "Heroism" flyer was created in honor of Kennedy .
 "The building of this nation . . . required the leadership and achievement of heroes," President Obama said . The nation's "heroes" helped build up the U.S.
 Whether he answers the call depends on his character, his values, and the strength of his will, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Crafard doesn't indicate he did, only that Jack said he wanted to go to the post office . Senator says he dropped him off at the Carousel, the two presumably were on their way to post office with Jack and him . Senator also says CraFard went to the
 Crafard’s memory is clear on the sequence of what took place that night, Senator admits his memory was not . Senator admits he has no memory of the events that took place .
 There's some confusion as to when Ruby and Senator got back home . As with so much else in this case, there’s some confusion .
 Ruby told the FBI he and Senator dropped Crafard off at the Carousel Club at around 6:00m. Ruby said he and Sen. Sen. Ruby told FBI he was dropped off at 6:30m. The FBI has not confirmed the exact location of the shooting .
 Webb is correct since he may have arrived at his shop around the same time every day every day . What time Ruby and Senator returned to their apartment in large part is dependent on whether they went to the post office after leaving the shop .
 Ruth Paine and Marina Oswald are estranged from each other since the assassination . Paine's relationship with Marina Oswald is a surprising one of the surprising consequences of the assassination aftermath .
 After Secret Service took custody of Marina, Ruth lost track of her for several weeks . Mail coming to her house for Marina from around the country was sent by Ruth to the Irving police for forwarding .
 Since the assassination weekend, other than one phone call from Marina to Ruth expressing her gratitude to Ruth for everything, Marina was making herself very scarce . The assassination weekend was the last weekend .
 Included in the mail that Ruth would forward to the Irving police were letters from Ruth herself to Marina . The letters eventually took on the tone of near beseezing to Marina to contact her .
 Marina wrote to Ruth that "you wrote me as if I were an old grandmother and not a friend" Ruth said she had "zero content" in a Christmas card that she sent .
 Ruth tracked Marina down to the home of James Martin in Dallas, the manager of the inn that the Secret Service had taken Marina to on November 24 . James Martin's invitation to Marina to live in his home with his wife and children was accepted by Marina .
 On December 21, 1963, Ruth Martin knocked on the door of the Martin residence, laden with mail and packages for Marina and wanting to see her . Ruth was the last person to see Marina Martin, who died in 1963 .
 Marina went to the back of the house and remained out of sight . Martin told Ruth he had been asked by Marina not to reveal her whereabouts to anyone . The implication was that Marina was not in the house, which, as indicated, she was .
 After months of separation, Ruth met briefly with Marina one evening at the home of Mrs. Mrs. Marina . Ruth met Marina for the first time in months at her home .
 Declan Ford, a mutual friend in the Russian emigrant community in Dallas, Texas, met up with a Russian immigrant family . Ford and Ford have a history of Russian emigrants living in the U.S.
 Ruth had suspected that Marina was not being given Ruth’s letters to her, but Marina said she had, and said she hadn’t responded because Martin, who Four Days in November had become her personal manager, had urged her not to do so .
 Though Marina was friendly, the two did not have a really substantive discussion, and Ruth wasn't particularly encouraged . Ruth wasn’t particularly encouraged.
 The next and final time they saw each other was when Marina, Ruth felt, wanted to show off her new home just north of Dallas in Richardson, Texas . Ruth felt that Marina wanted to be proud of her new house .
 Marina, justified or not in her sentiments, has been quite explicit as to why she rejected Ruth . Marina has been very explicit about her reasons for rejecting Ruth .
 Marina said, “I think that she wants to see me in her own selfish interests.” Marina said .
 "She likes to be well known, popular, and I think that anything that I should write her, for example, would wind up in the press," she says . "I think that she would like to be very well known and popular," she adds .
 The first time that we were in jail to see Lee, she was with me and with her children, and she was trying to get in front of the cameras, he says . She instructed her children to look this way and look that way, he adds .
 Her biographer, Priscilla McMillan, raises this possibility, at least for consideration . She says her biographer says it's possible that she may have died in a car crash .
 McMillan writes that after Oswald’s funeral, “Marina expected to go on living at Ruth Paine's.” He says that after his funeral, Marina expected to continue living at the house .
 The Secret Service agents who were protecting Marina seconded Robert’s advice to Marina not to live with Ruth . Additionally, the Secret Service Agents who were . protecting Marina told her to avoid living with Ruth.
 Michael Paine was under some undisclosed cloud with the police, perhaps because of the fact that his father had once been a follower of Leon Trotsky . The Paines were active members of the ACLU, considered left-wing by most Americans .
 "Marina was allowed to understand that if she wished to remain in the United States, she had better put distance between herself and the Paines," the judge says .
 Ruth sent Marina two books after the assassination, in one of which the Secret Service found the note of instructions Lee had left for her on the night he went out to murder General Walker . Marina “blamed Ruth for the fact that she had been compelled against her wishes to go into
 Luce estimated a loss of close to a million dollars in discarding the previously completed November 29 edition . Luce would later say it was the best million dollars he had ever spent on Time-Life .
 The previous edition (the cover story had featured U.S. Naval Academy All-American football quarterback Roger Staubach) now ripped apart . Life' s editorial team managed to put out its completely new assassination special edition on November 29 .
 Z313, the frame showing the president’s head exploding in blood and brain tissue, was not shown to Life's readers . The edition had a four-page spread of many Zapruder frames, but the gruesome frame wasn't shown .
 Life was extraordinarily possessive of the Zapruder film, perhaps unusually so . Life didn't allow it to be shown on public television or anywhere else, and electing to show only selected frames to its readers .
 In Marina's mind, Walker was still alive and her husband’s attempt had come to nothing . Other than claiming to tell a local Dallas FBI agent where the FBI could find the original money order ,^ since the FBI already had all the information .
 She had kept the fact of her husband’s attempt on Walker from the authorities . Coupled with the fact that she felt “Lee had too many murders on his soul already,” she had kept it from authorities .
 Marina made joint appearances with McMillan to promote the book in 1977 . When it was published in 1977, Marina made a number of joint television appearances .
 In an interview for Larry Sneed’s 1998 book, Holmes relates a verbatim conversation with an FBI agent who he says was waiting in his office when Four Days in November . Sneed gives no dates for his interviews throughout his important book of interviews .
 He and his staff in Dallas were involved in a flurry of activity to locate the stub (retained after a money order is ripped off and given to the customer) of the money order used to buy the weapon . They were understandably unable to locate it .
 The Dallas FBI gave Holmes this misinformation, or whether Holmes got it confused, it's not known .
 The original money order purchased by A Hidell in Dallas on March 12 was recovered . The FBI learned that Washington, D.C., had the records .
 Humes told the HSCA that he returned to Bethesda Saturday morning and met with Drs. Humes and others . Humes said he returned Saturday morning to Bethesda to meet with the doctors .
 Dr. Boswell and Finck called Dr. Finck between 10:30 m. and 12:00m. and that it was during this time that the call was placed to Dr. Finck . The call was made during the time of the call between 10 and 12
 It is likely that the call was placed later in the morning considering that Humes first went to church . The fact that he couldn’t have been certain that Dr. Humes had gone to church was likely the reason for the call call .
 It is unlikely that Humes met with Finck on Saturday morning . Finck, who worked at Walter Reed Army Hospital, didn't mention a Saturday meeting in any of his reports or testimony .
 The compound at Hyannis Port was the heart and soul of the hard-working, fun-loving Kennedy family . Members always returning to it for emotional sustenance through the years .
 Hyannis Port was where John Kennedy spent the night of the election night in 1960 . Kennedy spent that night receiving the news that he had been elected president . Kennedy was elected president of the United States in 1964 .
 Holmes testified before the Warren Commission just over four months after the assassination . His story was that when he arrived for work that Saturday morning, the postal inspector on duty told him that an FBI agent had phoned and inquired how to get the original money order . The inspector told Holmes he had
 In Holmes’s version many years later, the inspector told Holmes the FBI agent was up in his office waiting to talk to him . In Holmes's version, Holmes said the inspector said Holmes was waiting for him to talk with him .
 “Iting the Kennedys” at Hyannis Port was drafted by a close friend, Dave Hackett . CE 1799; 23 H 419) 92 ENDNOTES: A close friend of Hackett.
 Each Kennedy will ask you what you think of another Kennedy’s dress, hairdo, backhand, latest achievement . Anticipate that each Kennedy will be asking you if you think about another .
 The only way I know of to get out of playing is not to come at all, or to come with a broken leg, is to not play . I'm not going to play again, I'm going to have to play, he says . I'll play again. I'm
 If you don’t have a broken leg and if you come, you will play, you'll play . You will if you don't want to take your supper in the kitchen, or if you want to talk to anyone for the weekend .
 "Make a lot of noise and make out that you never had a better time in your life. Make a little bit of noise," says the author of a new book .
 Look glum if your team doesn't score a touchdown, and become gleeful when your team does . Don't look glum when you're playing for your team, look glummy if you're not scoring .
 Curry revealed he sent a letter to Earl Warren in 1964 detailing Shanklin’s request . Curry revealed that he had sent Earl Warren a letter detailing the request in 1964 .
 Oswald was checked out of jail at 12:35m., back in at 1:10m; checked out again at 10:25m, 10:30m, 11:33m; back in again at 7:15m . Oswald checked out a third time at 6:
 Oswald was checked out of jail for the last time at 9:30m. on November 24, 1963 . Oswald was released from jail in New York City on November 25 . Oswald's last day in jail was November 24 .
 A brief listing of the property seized during this search (CE 2003, 24 H 348; Stovall Exhibit B, 21 H 598) does not list the backyard photographs specifically .
 Stovall testified (7 H 194) that the line item “Miscellaneous photographs and maps” represented these items as well as others uncovered . The line item "Miscellaneous Photographs and Maps" represented these .
 Oswald’s blue suitcase was found in a suitcase found in Oswald's suitcase . Oswald's belongings were found in the suitcase . The suitcase was one of Oswald's possessions .
 Critics have questioned the value of the police lineups involving Oswald . Oswald's lineups have been questioned by some .
 A letter from FBI Director J Edgar Hoover to the Warren Commission’s general counsel, J Lee Rankin, dated February 4, 1964, details an investigation into four telephone numbers found on a slip of paper found in Oswald's trouser pocket after his murder .
 Several friends had telephoned him, saying they had heard on the radio that Oswald was requesting his representation . Oswald was requested by friends, according to friends .
 Abt says Oswald or anyone claiming to represent Oswald did not talk to him that weekend . Abt said that at no time did Oswald actually talk to Abt, who he says was Oswald . He says no one from Oswald claimed to have talked to him .
 The theorists felt they had solid evidence linking Oswald and the assassination to U.S. intelligence . Hurt served in United States Military Intelligence during World War II . Hurt was later revealed to have served in World War Two .
 As late as April 11,1978, three investigators for the HSCA interviewed Hurt in Raleigh, North Carolina .
 Hurt served in the Army Counterintelligence Corps in Europe and Japan from 1942 to 1946 . Hurt said he had never received a telephone call from Oswald and had never even heard of Oswald prior to the assassination .
 It was a “complete mystery” to him how his phone number had turned up on the slip of paper . He said it was ‘a complete mystery’ to how it turned up .
 John Hurt admitted the truth to his widow before he died in 1981 . He was so upset that he got extremely drunk that he tried to get in touch with Oswald at the city jail . Hurt's widow told author Henry Hurt that her husband had admitted that .
 When he couldn’t get connected to Oswald, he left his phone number, and had been too embarrassed about it ever since to tell anyone about it . He left the phone number and was too embarrassed to talk to anyone .
 Detectives may have held him on the fifth floor until word was received that Dallas Bar Association president H Louis Nichols had concluded his television interview with reporters, which was being conducted just outside the jail elevator door on the third floor .
 Videotapes show detectives bringing Oswald through this same door at 6:24m., shortly after the Nichols interview had concluded . Oswald was brought through the same door as Nichols .
 Captain Fritz's interrogation started at 6:35m., per Captain Fritz’s handwritten notes . Captain Fritz started his interrogation at 6.35m, per his handwritten notes, according to his notes .
 Detectives Sims and Graves leave and are replaced by Dhority and Montgomery . After bringing Oswald down from the jail, detectives are replaced with Montgomery and Sims .
 The search of the Four Days in November 95 Paine residence, during which the photos were discovered, did not occur until after 1:00m.m. However, the search of Paine's home in November 1995 did occur after 1.00m .
 Secret Service inspector Thomas Kelley correctly reported that these questions were asked during the 6:00-7:15 m.m. interrogation session after Oswald had been confronted with the pictures .
 Captain Fritz later testified, “I have always felt that was Ruby who made that call.” Captain Fritz testified . Captain Fritz said he felt Ruby made the call .
 Contemporary reports written within days of the event show this testimony to be in error . However, contemporary reports show that this testimony was in error.
 The HSCA said that entrance through this door would have been along an easy and relatively direct path for Ruby . Ruby would have had a direct path to the entrance .
 He said he was told by an unidentified maintenance man at the time he was securing the basement that it was locked on both sides and could only be opened with a key . He said the man told him that the basement could not be accessed by a key, and that he could not open
 Dean answered unresponsively: “I had the maintenance man open this door for me” Counsel simply let the witness take him into a new direction without returning to try to get an answer to his original question .
 Dean said the door was “used as a—oh, I think they sometimes throw materials—it’s not even an elevator.” Dean said it was used as a door used to throw materials .
 Conspiracy theorists have suggested that Larry Crafard’s sudden departure may have been connected, in some way, to the assassination .
 JFK and Oswald were killed in the deaths of Kennedy and Oswald in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 . President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas in 1963 . He was killed by Lee Hagan and Lee Oswald in September 1963, 1963 .
 The Warren Commission concluded that his departure “does not appear to have been uncommon for him” and saw no connection between it and the events in Dallas . Crafard hitchhiking one time with his wife and their two infant children from Dallas to California .
 The Commission accepted Crafard's reasons for leaving, including Ruby’s having berated him for waking him up early on Sunday morning (November 24), his never considering the job anything but temporary anyway, and his not being fond of his work . Ruby had berated Craf
 In fact, he had given notice to Ruby on November 17 that he intended to quit working the next day . Ruby talked him out of leaving, but he did not .
 Crafard also said he wanted to visit his sister in Michigan, whom he was worried about because she hadn’t, as was her custom, answered ‘right away” a letter he had written to her . He also said his sister had not answered "right away
 When asked why he was leaving town, Crafard merely said he could not find work and was tired of carnival jobs . When asked about why he left town, he said he couldn't find work . He said he wanted to leave town .
 Crafard's driver did not notice any unusual or troubled behavior on the driver . The driver said he did not see any unusual behavior on Crafardo .
 There is a possibility that while Ruby was downtown, he stopped in at police headquarters . Ruby is believed to have visited police headquarters in the past .
 Someone heard Ruby talking to a newsman over the phone on Saturday afternoon saying he had been to City Hall and had information Oswald was going to be transferred that afternoon . It cannot be certain that Ruby had picked up this information on a visit that day to Dallas police headquarters, or whether he
 Several witnesses claimed they saw Ruby that Saturday at the police department . Their description of his conduct sounds just like Ruby . However, several witnesses claimed to have seen Ruby that day .
 NBC veteran Frederic Rheinstein said he was working in his mobile unit Four Days parked between the front entrance to City Hall and the ramp leading down to the basement . Network newsman Tom Pettit handled the reporting from the third floor .
 The first time Rheinstein said he saw the funny-looking guy in the fedora was just before lunch . The fellow pushed aside the window curtain keeping the inside of the van dark and stared in at the bank of monitors .
 Rheinstein shooed him away, but saw him again on the sidewalk outside . He said he saw him a couple more times outside .
 One of the WBAP engineers thought he was the guy who swiped one of the chicken dinners brought in for the crew’s lunch . Eventually they picked him up on the monitors of the cameras they had stationed on the third floor .
 Rheinstein knows the type, one of those who will do anything to get himself into what he considers high places . He says he knows the kind of person who wants to be in high places in his life .
 They are nuisances, but so omnipresent and indefatigable that they come to be not only tolerated but often almost invisible . They come to an almost invisible state of mind in the United States .
 Some time later Rheinstein was told by a WBAP engineer that he had seen this ‘creep’ disappear into the office on the third floor where they knew Henry Wade was and to which they themselves couldn’t gain admission .
 Ruby was asked by a Parisian newspaper correspondent who asked him who he was and what he did for a living . Ruby says he's not a man but a man who does not know who he is .
 Ruby responded, “Oooh la la, Folks BergeresV ’ That, Labro saw, just about exhausted Ruby’s acquaintance with the French language. Labro told him, and Ruby responded .
 Labro noticed that Ruby addressed several of the police officers by their first names . Ruby gave him a card for the Carousel and invited him to come up for a drink, Labro said . Labro also noticed that he addressed several officers by first names.
 Ruby eventually handed Waldo a card with the names of his clubs on it, telling him, “Everybody around here knows me.” Waldo . Ruby eventually gave Waldo the card, saying, ‘Everybody around around here know me'
 UPI photographer Frank Johnson also said he saw Ruby at City Hall "during the day" French journalist Francois Pelou recalled Ruby “passing out sandwiches to members of the press” on Saturday afternoon . Ruby "passed out sandwiches" to journalists, photographer says .
 It’s certainly possible that the above-described incidents did take place Saturday afternoon, when Ruby, already downtown, would have been likely to drop in where he knew the action was .
 Witnesses could be wrong as to the day and time, and time of day, the incidents took place .
 The problem so far is that under this version, Ruby would have been arriving in Dealey Plaza in the early afternoon, yet Chaney said he first saw Oswald around 3:30m. Yet Wise said it was around 3,00m.
 There is support for Ruby showing up at Sol’s Turf Bar around 4:00m. And there is also support for him to appear in the show . Ruby will be appearing in the next episode of the show at Sol's Turf bar .
 At this point, it certainly starts to look like the 4:00m. time at Sol’s was correct . At this time, it seems that the time was correct.
 It's impossible to know how the next point affects any of what’s set forth in the text or this endnote on the matter . Garnett Hallmark, the manager of Nichols parking garage, said that Ruby came by the garage around 2:50m. and he last
 Brown said the incident took place between 1:30 and 2:00m. and Hallmark said it took place around 3:00 m. Yet Brown said it was between 1,30 and 3:30m. Brown said incident occurred at around 3 a.m. Hallmark
 Ruby offered to be a de facto reporter for KLIF and Kenneth Dowe agreed . This almost certainly was the telephone conversation Ruby had with Dowe at KLIF .
 Oswald, as indicated, was scheduled to be transferred to the county jail that day at 4:00 p.m. Oswald was scheduled for the jail at 5:00 a.m., so obviously Ruby wouldn’t be talking to Dowe between that time . Oswald was transferred
 Just before 4:00m. that day, Ruby was, indeed, seen among a large crowd that had gathered in front of the county jail entrance on Houston Street between Elm and Main, but the transfer didn’t take place .
 Existing evidence doesn’t even lend itself to any kind of informed opinion, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The resolution of this matter is not important to any issue in the assassination . Fortunately, this is not the resolution of any of the issues in this case, he says .
 In what is almost certainly erroneous testimony, John Branch, the manager of the Empire Room in Dallas, told the Warren Commission that on Saturday evening around 9:05m., Ruby showed up at his club, passed out a few five-dollar bills, as he frequently did, and told
 Branch said Ruby stayed about thirty to forty minutes, never spoke about the assassination, then left . Branch: Ruby stayed for about 30 to 40 minutes . Branch said he never spoke to the assassination .
 Ruby’s schedule that night would not allow the time it would take for his alleged visit to the Empire Room . Not only would this behavior by Ruby be out of character for the mental grief he was going through, as witnessed by a considerable number of people, but Ruby would not
 Branch’s testimony was on June 26, 1964, seven months after the assassination . He claims Ruby came to his club on the Saturday night after the murder, but he obviously was confusing the date of the visit . Branch's testimony was in June 1964 .
 In addition to the above reasons for not believing the accuracy of his testimony, one telltale sign that he was wrong was his telling the Commission that on the night of his visit, Ruby was “in a hurry” to leave around 10:00m. because he said Ruby
 Branch also told the FBI on December 9, 1963, that he saw Ruby on Saturday evening, November 23, but in this earlier statement he said he saw him out on the street in front of the Hall Diner, spoke to him for about ten minutes concerning getting a piano player for
 Lawrence Meyers told the Warren Commission that Ruby’s competitors remaining open was what he “assumed was talking about” when he said he was “going to do something about it,” because that was the context in which Ruby made his statement . Meyers
 He said he thought he was talking about the Weinsteins when he said he wanted to do something for them . But he later said he believed he was referring to the Kennedy family, that is what he said . He said later that he has since begun to believe that he was not
 Ruby’s activities on Saturday afternoon, November 23, is a nightmare . Things don’t improve too much for Saturday evening, as is Saturday evening .
 Eva was on pain medication from her abdominal surgery, her credibility on this issue is enhanced by the fact that she candidly acknowledged to the Warren Commission that she could not remember the exact sequence of events over that hectic weekend or their precise times . Eva's credibility on the issue was enhanced
 She said she knows her brother was at her apartment from around 4:00 to 8:00 a.m. So when she said she knew he was there, it's entitled to more weight .
 Armstrong testified that Ruby came into the Carousel around 6:00 to 7:00m. on Saturday and told him “the club was going to be closed and immediately I got on the phone and started to making phone calls ... to all the people” Armstrong was obviously confused
 The evidence is strong and clear that Ruby showed up at the Carousel sometime late Saturday evening, police say . Ruby is believed to have been killed in a car crash on Saturday night .
 Dallas police officer Harry Olsen and his girlfriend, Kay, saw Ruby standing outside of the Carousel around ‘ten or eleven at night’ (14 H 635, WCT Harry N Olsen; Kay Olsen testified it was around 9m.); and most importantly, the Car
 Ruby called Paul at Paul’s restaurant for nine minutes from phone number LA 6-6258 . At 10:44m, Ruby called him at Paul's restaurant for 9 minutes .
 Ruby had registered under his name, but the number is his sister Eva’s phone number . Ruby's sister Eva's phone number was registered under her name . Ruby is the sister of Ruby and Eva, who has been charged with murder .
 Paul believes this conversation was the last he had with Ruby that night, but he almost has to be wrong . Paul says he believes this is the last conversation he has with Ruby .
 The last telephone call Ruby made to Paul, at 11:47 that Saturday night, was from the Carousel Club . Ruby's last call to Paul that night was from 11:36 and 11:18 .
 The crying conversation had to have taken place during the nine-minute conversation at 10:44 m. m. So the crying conversation must have been during the conversation .
 This makes sense since it is a little more likely that such a conversation took place during the nine-minute call at 10.44m. than during any of the three later calls .
 Eva either forgot her brother had returned to her apartment for the night or didn't mention it because no one asked . Since it is clear that Ruby called Paul from Eva’s apartment at 10:44m., it is also clear that Eva forgot that Paul had returned .
 Ruby's calling Paul from Eva’s apartment at 10:45m. creates somewhat of a time problem for Ruby . Ruby's call comes from Eva's apartment at the time of the call .
 Even if he left her apartment immediately, that would have given him only twenty-five minutes to drive downtown to his club, park and pay the attendant the five dollars the latter had advanced Little Lynn . Little Lynn's first call to Paul from the Carousel Club at 11:18m
 But again, these problems and conflicts in the chronology have no relevance to the murder of President Kennedy, the author says . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Preludin is a synthetic form of Dexedrine which makes some users not only alert, but confused, anxious, and even paranoid . Ruby believed the diet pill he believed to be harmless, but it is basically speed, a synthetic version of the drug .
 "I was so carried away emotionally that I said, ‘If something happened to this person, that then Mrs. Mrs. Smith’s life would be saved,’ she said .
 There is a conflict as to when this last interrogation of Oswald began . Oswald is being questioned by the FBI .
 If this is accurate, surely it wouldn’t have taken them a half hour to do so . If this was accurate, it wouldn't have taken half an hour to complete the job .
 Inspector Holmes testified the interrogation began at 9:30m. , and he wrote a memorandum to the FBI on December 19, 1963, that it started at 9.25m. And Inspector Holmes . Holmes testified that the interrogation was interrupted by the FBI .
 Holmes’s estimate is tied into the time he normally went to church, it is likely to be correct . Holmes's estimate will be tied to the times he normally goes to church .
 The final changes in the report were finished and the report was about to be typed up when the pathologists heard that Oswald had been shot (2 H 374, WCT Dr. Dr. Oswald) Oswald was shot in the head .
 Humes delivered the autopsy report to Admiral George G Burkley at 6:30m. Humes then delivered the report to him at 6.30m .
 Three Dallas TV technicians say they saw Ruby near City Hall at various times between eight and eleven o’clock Sunday morning . WBAP-TV technicians told the Warren Commission they believed they saw him .
 None of them knew Jack Ruby, none looked at him for any extended period of time, and “all were occupied with their duties and had no reason to remember the appearance of the man they saw” until they saw Ruby’s picture on television .
 Two of the three gave descriptions that don’t match Ruby at all . One described him as an “unkempt person that possibly slept with his clothes on,” whereas we know that Ruby was characteristically clean and well groomed .
 The three technicians were mistaken, but there's a better reason for knowing they were mistaken . There's a good reason for the technicians to be mistaken .
 Pappas said he was going to be a sharp guy, get a big scoop and interview upstairs . However, he said he thought he would be a "sharp guy" and get a "big scoop"
 Detective James Leavelle has thrown into question one of the arguments made by those who do not believe in a conspiracy in the assassination . If Oswald had not gotten a change of clothing, Ruby would not have made it to City Hall in time to kill Oswald .
 Oswald's clothing must have been some distance away, most likely on the fifth floor, where his jail cell was . Oswald’s clothing must be some distance from the fifth-floor jail cell, where he was likely to be in jail . Oswald's clothes were likely to have been
 Leavelle: Inmates were not given jail garb to wear . But he says inmates were given jail clothes in the days of the time .
 We had no place on the fifth floor or anywhere else to store inmates’ clothing . We were not allowed to store inmate's clothing in the prison .
 Oswald's extra clothing was in a small room within the homicide office no more than twenty to twenty-five steps from Fritz’s private office, where we temporarily kept odds and ends . Oswald was in the small room where he kept his extra clothing .
 Oswald would have worn the same item of clothing as he did in the photo shoot . Oswald would be wearing the same outfit as the president .
 There is some confusion over whether Lieutenant Woodrow Wiggins was called before or after Oswald left the third-floor homicide office . Wiggins was not called before Oswald left or after he left the office .
 Lieutenant Baker disputes that he made the call after Oswald left the homicide office . Baker says he placed the call before Captain Fritz left with Oswald . Baker disputes the claim .
 In an earlier report, Baker wrote that “prior to leaving the office, Capt. Baker’s office, he said, “previously to leave the office” was “a matter of concern”
 Brown: "If Ruby ... did not go down that ramp, then he had help getting in" Brown: A conspiracy in the assassination of Kennedy (whose killer Ruby supposedly “silenced”) involves the Dallas Police Department .
 Of the four, only Vaughn seemed to be very confident that Ruby didn't enter through the Main Street ramp . Only Vaughn seemed very confident Ruby didn’t enter .
 Vaughn said he was satisfied “beyond a reasonable doubt” that Ruby didn’t do so . Vaughn’s blunder in not spotting and stopping Ruby from entering the basement would give him far more reason than anyone else to state, as he did, that he
 Vaughn was walking out of the ramp, clearing away the small group of people who had congregated at the top of it, and making sure eastbound traffic on Main was clear for Pierce’s car to enter Main Street . We also know that Vaughn was very distracted at the time
 Pierce: "I’m saying the possibilities are very great that had he been there I might not have seen him" Pierce says he may not have been there if he'd been there .
 Napoleon J Daniels, a former Dallas police officer who was positioned on the sidewalk on the Western Union side of the ramp, has some credibility problems with the stories he has told . Daniels is a former police officer .
 Officer Vaughn had seen Daniels, whom he knew, standing on the sidewalk to his right, so he naturally called Daniels at his home the next day to ask him if he recalled seeing Rio Pierce’s car coming out of the basement .
 The HSCA may have been partly influenced in its conclusion by the fact that Dallas police sergeant Patrick Dean, who was in charge of basement security at the time Ruby shot Oswald, said he was given a polygraph . Vaughn told Daniels, “That’s the way Ruby
 The HSCA was unable to find the test or any report of it . Dallas Police Department may have withheld this mrormation from Warren Commission .
 He gave an affidavit to the State of Texas, County of Dallas, on November 29, 1963 . He said he did not see Officer Vaughn challenge this person nor did he show any signs of recognizing him, nor even being aware that he was passing .
 Daniels told the FBI that he saw a man he saw in December 1963 . Daniels said the man looked vaguely familiar to him, as someone he had seen around the police station, and was partly bald .
 When shown photographs of Ruby he said the man looked ‘similar’ to Ruby, but could not say it was he . When shown photos of the man he said he could not identify him .
 He said the man had an intent look on his face and was walking fairly fast . He said he had a look of intent look of the man's face and walked fairly fast.
 The problem is that his “impression” came over four and a half months after he had the opposite impression . The problem was that his "impression" came over 4.5 months ago .
 Daniels may have had a motive for trying to make the Dallas Police Department look bad, police say . Daniels may also have a motive to try to make police look bad .
 Daniels, who was black, was found to be working while on duty for someone whose real estate he was managing, and he was fired from the force . Daniels was black when he was with the department .
 Westbrook told Larry Sneed that Daniels failed a polygraph, and the inference is that the polygraph pertained to the matter for which he was fired . Westbrook said Daniels failed the test, and that the matter was the subject of the test .
 Westbrook indicates Daniels also took a polygraph on the Ruby matter . Unlike Vaughn and Flusche, he did not say what the result was . However, Westbrook indicated Daniels took the polygraph .
 Daniels’s stories can easily be dismissed, but the statement of another witness, Dallas police officer Donald Flusche, cannot, cannot be dismissed . The statement of a witness, a police officer, can be dismissed easily .
 In 1978, Flusche told the HSCA as well as Dallas police captain Jack Revill that on the subject Sunday morning, he had parked his patrol car on Main Street across the street from the police and courts building . The incident occurred in 1978 .
 While standing outside his car with the door open, he was monitoring his police radio . He was hoping to see Lee Harvey Oswald being moved to the sheriff’s office .
 Flusche said he knew Jack Ruby and he did not see Ruby walk down Main Street . Ruby entered the ramp from Main Street leading down into the police basement . Ruby was right across the street from where Flusch was .
 Neither Revill nor the HSCA questioned Flusche’s credibility, which is not the same thing as saying they believed that he said Ruby did not enter the Main Street ramp .
 Revill did say that Flusche’s statement “tends to dispute the findings of the investigative team [Dallas Police Department] investigation of the issue of how Ruby got into the basement—see later discussion] I was assigned to. The Dallas Police Department investigation of how
 The Dallas Police Department conducted a three-week investigation of how Ruby got into the police basement, interviewing many Dallas police officers . The investigation was conducted by the Dallas police department .
 If Flusche never knew about this investigation, it is inconceivable that Lieutenant Knox would not have known about it .
 Flusche and Knox never came forward with this important information, which they would have had to know the police department’s investigative team would have wanted . Yet we know that not only Flusch and Knox did not .
 There is evidence, common sense, and Ruby’s knowledge of events that prove he entered through the Main Street ramp . No, there is evidence and common sense that proves he entered .
 Jimmy Turner, a TV director at WBAP-TV in Fort Worth, testified that he saw Ruby coming down the Main Street ramp no more than a half minute before he shot Oswald . Turner was on assignment for NBC on November 24, when Ruby was shot .
 Officer or officers would be at the entrance to the two ramps, most likely along with other people . He certainly could assume that an officer or officer would be there .
 From his position across the street he said he could see the Main Street entrance to the ramp . Anyone walking on Main Street from the Western Union office toward the ramp could be seen, he said .
 In December 1963, he told the FBI he had left his cab and was standing near the Main Street ramp with the people congregated there . But he said he had been standing there for about five minutes before the shooting .
 The focus of his statements at that time is that he saw no one enter the ramp, not that he didn't see no one walking on Main toward the ramp . "The focus of that statement is that no one entered the ramp," the mayor says .
 The next day, November 25, Ruby added details that he could never have known if he hadn’t seen them with his own eyes . Ruby also probably also told the authorities additional details in this very first interview .
 Vaughn is accused of killing four police officers in custody . The officers' statements and testimony of the four officers attest to the killing . Vaughn is charged with the murder of four people .
 Vaughn admits that as Pierce’s car started to come up the ramp, he was a few feet “inside the ramp” and was not on the sidewalk . Vaughn admits he had to walk backward as the car approached the top of the ramp .
 Ruby says he stepped out on the sidewalk somewhere between the sidewalk and the curb . His back was facing "towards the east,” which, of course, is where Ruby was walking from .
 Pierce says Vaughn moved “toward the street... to let us out,” that is, he was moving backward . Pierce: Vaughn moved toward the street . Pierce says he was trying to get to the street to let them out .
 Pierce adds that Vaughn “was facing me,” meaning Vaughn’s back had to be facing Ruby . Pierce says Vaughn was facing him, meaning Vaughn had to face Ruby .
 Dallas police chief Jesse Curry appointed an investigative team to determine the “operational security involving the transfer of Lee Harvey Oswald on November 24, 1963,” that is, how Ruby got into the basement and was able to kill Oswald .
 Ruby entered the Main Street ramp as the car driven by Lieutenant Rio Pierce was leaving the basement . The report concluded, “This investigative team believes that Jack Ruby entered ... the Main St. ramp .”
 If Dallas Police Department had any reason to lie, it would not have been to place full blame for Oswald’s death on the negligence of its own department, as it did . Note that if the Dallas Police . had any . reason for lying, it wouldn’t have
 Chief Curry would later tell author Seth Kantor that he never criticized Vaughn, or called the patrolman into his office, or put any reprimand of Vaughn into the record . Curry later said he never reprimand Vaughn into his record .
 I just didn’t want them to think I was trying to shift the blame onto him. "I just didn't want them . I just wanted them to be honest," she said of her husband .
 If they let him in to silence Oswald, this would necessarily mean that members of the Dallas Police Department were part of the conspiracy to murder Kennedy . No rational person would want to conclude, at least in the absence of evidence, of which there is none .
 If this is what happened, Oswald’s murder was due to Fritz's considerable negligence . If this was the case, Oswald's murder may have been the result of Fritz's negligence .
 If so, it would be a terrible cap to a sterling law enforcement career . It would be the worst cap to an officer's sterling career .
 Leavelle’s version may, of course, be correct, but I have rejected it for the narrative here because the weight of the evidence is that it is not . The weight of evidence is the evidence that the truth is not true .
 Fritz told the Warren Commission that when he emerged from the jail office, he asked if the way was clear and “two officers,” a detective whom he didn’t identify and Lieutenant Woodrow Wiggins, answered that everything was clear . For his own part, Fritz told
 Wiggins, understandably not wanting to admit his negligence, for all intents and purposes did . Wiggins was not keen on admitting his negligence . Wiggins has been charged with failing to meet up to his contract .
 When your boss, the head of detectives for thirty-one years at the time, asked you a simple, but extremely important question, you didn’t just stare at him . You didn't just stare . You had to look at him. He was a detective for 30 years
 A French newspaper journalist, Francois Pelou, reported that when Oswald turned to his left, Pelou followed his gaze and caught sight of Jack Ruby as he lunged from the crowd .
 Pelou's story eventually evolved into a rumor that Oswald recognized Ruby as he lunged from the crowd . Pelou’s story eventually led to a rumor of Oswald recognizing Ruby . Oswald was killed in August 18, 1918 .
 Detectives Don Ray Archer and Thomas McMillon thought Jack Ruby was the one who made some sort of statement as he fired the shot . Detectives thought Ruby made a statement before he shot .
 Oswald then went limp, and both Detectives Leavelle and Graves believed Oswald died at that point . Oswald died from a gunshot wound to the head . Oswald's body was found in a pool of blood .
 Price agreed that Oswald shouldn't be treated in the same room where the president died . Price told Crenshaw he was glad he had thought of it and agreed .
 Crenshaw wrote that when he noticed two nurses preparing Trauma Room One, he told one of them, “In deference to President Kennedy, we will not treat this patient in Trauma .” He told one nurse that in deference, he would not treat the
 Rose said he and his searching party tried to put everything they looked at in Ruby’s apartment “back in exactly the same place” they found it . Rose: “Everything we looked at was put back in the exact place’ they found .
 Whether the department was fully responsible is a question that is more difficult to answer . Whether the police were fully responsible for the deaths is a difficult question .
 The Dallas Police Department has been blamed completely for what happened . Many members of the force feel positive the force is not to blame for the shooting .
 "We were trying in the police department to let the press have an opportunity to observe the proceedings as they were. We were trying to ... observe the press," police said .
 Dallas city manager is the most powerful man in city government, not the mayor . The mayor is mostly a ceremonial figurehead . City manager is city manager, not mayor, who is mostly ceremonial figure .
 The city manager at the time, Elgin Crull, had personally hired Chief Curry and had the power to fire him . Crull hired Curry as a city manager .
 Crull added that not only did Cabell say he didn't, but it was Crull who had responsibility over the police department, not the mayor . Crull said not only Cabell said he didn’t, but Crull had responsibility for police department . The mayor said
 Since Curry has died, no one will ever know the answer to that question . Since Curry's death, there will be no one who knows what happened .
 The members of the Dallas Police Department who were there were in a much better position to hear and know what was going on, have no question in their minds that it was Crull who made the decision to transfer Oswald right out in the open .
 Dallas police sergeant Gerald Hill said the idea of transferring Oswald the way he was, was not Chief Curry’s idea . Hill said, “I want to defend Chief Curry because the idea . was not Curry's idea’
 Westbrook said he doesn't know if Curry had a sense of guilt that he didn't disregard the city manager’s orders . Westbrook said, “I don’t know whether Curry had any sense of remorse,” Westbrook said .
 He would have ridden the storm by doing it and moved that night about 10:30 or 11:00 by car to the county jail . "I think he would have rode the storm," he says. "He would have stayed in the car"
 The city manager had control... over just about everything in the city, including the police department . The police department was the subject of numerous scandals .
 Officers Charles Dhority and Charles Brown are two of the police officers who accompanied Oswald’s body from the second-floor operating room to the X-ray department .
 Marina and Marguerite viewed the body, as was Sergeant Patrick T Dean . They were present at the scene of the murder, as well as the police .
 After the women left, Brown and Dhority accompanied the body to the morgue at Parkland Hospital . They witnessed the postmortem photos being taken by Dr. Dr. David Brown . Dr. Brown and Dr. Jan. Janice D. Brown witnessed the body being taken to
 This was one of the early rumors circulating among the press in the City Hall basement . The rumors were circulating in the basement of City Hall .
 Rumors circulated that Ruby had helped two television men push a camera into the basement garage . Another rumor circulated that he had helped push a TV camera into a garage . Ruby died at the age of 92 at age 81 .
 A rumor was based on the observations of Detective Wilbur J Cutchshaw, who saw three men pushing a WBAP-TV camera into the basement two to three minutes before the shooting .
 Immediately after the shooting, Cutchshaw stopped and questioned the television crew . He noticed only two of the men pushing the camera out of the basement . The incident occurred in the basement of a building in the area .
 FBI agent C Ray Hall testified that Ruby’s refusal to say how he got in occurred before his meeting with attorney Tom Howard . Ruby refused to say he got into the U.S. during a meeting with Howard .
 Captain Fritz may not have said that the case was “cleared” in response to a reporter’s leading question . Fritz was criticized for saying what he did, and should not have made the remark . On his own, Captain Fritz should have said it even in response
 Secret Service decision to temporarily house the Oswalds at the Inn of the Six Flags would prove to have considerable consequences for Marina and the motel manager, James Martin . Marina and James Martin were in the hotel at the time .
 Martin volunteered to let Marina and her two children move into his home with his wife and three children . Martin had had Marina, her children, and Robert over to his home for Thanksgiving dinner .
 Marina moved into the Martins’ Dallas home shortly after Thanksgiving and stayed for two and a half months . Marina's suggestion met with everyone’s approval, including that of the Secret Service .
 There were two Secret Service agents and a Dallas police officer at the home 24 hours a day . The house was crowded .
 Martin quit his job at the inn and became Marina’s personal manager . Martin signed a ten-year contract on December 6, 1963, that guaranteed him 15 percent of her earnings . Martin became Marina's personal manager in 1963 .
 Marina received thousands of dollars from the public from donations from the American public . The amount eventually reached $65,795, which allowed her to buy a modest home .
 Marina confided to Vada that Martin had professed his love for her . As early as December 29, 1963, while visiting Robert Oswald and his wife, Vada, Marina told Vada of her love for Martin .
 Marina told Vada she liked Martin as a friend and as her business manager, but was not in love with him . Vada asked Marina to tell her how she felt about Martin .
 Vada cautioned Marina to make it very clear to Martin what their relationship was and was not . Vada did not tell Robert what she had learned from Marina .
 Martin and Thorne accompanied Marina to Washington, D.C., for her testimony before the Warren Commission starting on February 3, 1964 . Martin, Thorne and Marina traveled with Marina to testify before Warren Commission in 1964 .
 Marina confided to Yada that she had consented to having sexual relations with Martin on one of the nights she was in Washington . Martin insisted that he loved her and assured her he would leave his wife . The following day at Robert and Yada’s home, Marina conf
 Though Martin stayed in her room on two of the nights, this was the sole time she had been intimate with him . This was the only time she'd been intimate .
 The following day, when Marina returned to the Martin residence to pick up her clothes, Mrs. Marina returned . The next day, the Martin family was forced to move out of the home .
 Martin confronted her about ‘the talk’ concerning Marina’s relationship with her husband, but Marina made no comment . Martin confronted Marina about her relationship with husband .
 Mrs. Yada returned to Robert and Yada’s home that day, she called Martin and when she found out Mrs. Martin had returned she called him back . Martin called the couple and when he found out she said, “I’m not going to be
 Martin was listening on an extension phone, she proceeded to tell her of the relationship she had had with her husband . Martin was in the middle of the conversation, she said .
 She also thought that Marina enjoyed talking to her friend Katya in Russian . She also said that she enjoyed talking with her friend in Russian.
 On February 18, William McKenzie, a lawyer retained by Robert to represent Marina, wrote a letter notifying him that Marina no longer wanted him to represent her . He asked for an accounting of all monies earned by Marina up to that point .
 Martin and Thorne didn’t go quietly into the night. But they didn't go away quietly into a night. They were not going away quietly .
 Some of Marina's relatives in Leningrad believed her to be a woman of loose morals, though there seemed to be no confirmation of this . The reader will see in the Oswald biography section of this book that some of Marina’s relatives believe she was a woman .
 "During the year after the assassination, emotionally traumatized and very lonely, she drifted into this type of life," she says . "I was very lonely. I was very traumatized, very lonely," she adds .
 FBI agents, wiretapping her phone conversations and monitoring her activities, gave her the nickname “hot pants” (Interview of FBI agent Thomas Trettis)
 FBI wiretap of a conversation between Marina and Katya Ford, a friend of hers in the Dallas Russian emigrant community, appears to show . Mrs. Marina apparently had also told a friend about the night in Washington, the FBI says .
 During this period, she believed that some of the men she had relationships with were FBI agents watching her closely . She believed that if she ever changed her testimony about her husband they would discredit her .
 Marina's marriage to Kenneth Porter, a Dallas carpenter, brought stability into her life . Marina quickly settled down, and her marriage the following year brought stability to her life.
 Gordon Shanklin lied under oath not only at the FBI oversight committee hearings, but before . Shanklin's testimony is "very substantial" that he lied under the oath, according to the FBI .
 J Edgar Hoover wrote a memorandum to the United States attorney general stating that on July 3, 1975, he and Deputy Associate Director James B Adams met in his office with a reliable informant . The informant requested that his identity not be revealed to third parties .
 Hoover learned for the first time from the informant that Oswald had left a threatening note at the Dallas FBI office prior to the assassination . Oswald's visit and note were not properly reported to FBI headquarters following the assassination, according to Hoover . Hoover says he learned for first time that Oswald left a
 Hoover proceeded to tell the attorney general about the extensive investigation he personally oversaw into the charges . Hoover then told him about the investigation and the charges against him . Hoover: "I'm not going to be surprised by the results of the investigation"
 Affidavits under penalty of perjury were taken from nine FBI employees of the Dallas office at the time of the assassination . Five agents, four clerical personnel and four agents were among those who signed the affidavit .
 One wonders how much a revelation about Lee contributed to her dissipation . Hosty’s affidavit that Shanklin knew that Hosty knew about Shanklin's actions was revealed .
 Marina was shocked to learn that Lee had married her to get even with Ella German . Marina had seen him make entries into High Noon in Minsk frequently as he was singing the theme song to High Noon .
 She denounced herself for not going to the police after Lee’s attempt to kill General Walker . Another contributing factor to her loose conduct may have been the debased view she had of herself .
 If he had been prosecuted and convicted of attempting to murder Walker, Kennedy would still be alive . Kennedy could not forgive herself for this moral lapse on her part, she says .
 The first article ever published on the note was Johnson’s “Oswald Threat Revealed” in the August 31, 1975, edition of the Dallas Times Herald . She had no idea that he intended to kill Kennedy the next day if she didn’t come
 Shanklin said he had no knowledge of Howe bringing the note to him . Shanklin: "I can state categorically that I have no knowledge" of Howe's actions .
 Sullivan recalled Shanklin seemed unwilling to discuss the matter other than to say he was handling it as a personal problem with assistant to the director, John P Mohr, a close friend and mentor . Sullivan recalled that Shanklin was unwilling to talk about the matter .
 Former SAC Shanklin was "vulnerable to prosecution for perjury and obstruction of justice," says FBI . Hoover's inquiry found Shanklin vulnerable to prosecution . Shanklin said he had no knowledge prior to July, 1975, of Oswald's visit to his office .
 District Attorney Wade said a Dallas city map with “X” marks and a line similar to the trajectory of the bullets that killed Kennedy was found in Oswald’s apartment . The district attorney also said that a line in the path of the bullet was similar to that of the
 The Dallas Morning News of November 25, 1963, quoted a “reliable source” as saying that “Oswald had placed marks at all major intersections along the motorcade route’s route”
 The Enco map of the Dallas-Fort Worth area had eight markings on it in Dallas . The map was published in the 1930s and '60s .
 They do not set forth the parade route and there is no trajectory of fire on it . The parade route is not set out and there are no trajectory plans for the shooting .
 Former Dallas police lieutenant Elmo Cunningham, who participated in the search of Oswald's room, saw the map . Cunningham: "The map definitely had the president’s route on it"
 Russo writes that “the original Oswald map, stored in the National Archives, is too faded to be of any use.” Russo writes . Russo: “The original Oswald maps are too faded . to be used .
 The map, after the fact, was laminated, which obliterated the faint pencil markings on it . In addition, the map was laminate, and the faint markings were erased .
 Dallas-based Kennedy archivist Mary Ferrell made a photocopy which retains some of the markings . Prior to the lamination, the Kennedy archive lamination was made by a Dallas archivist .
 Oswald trace the route of the motorcade when it was already in the Dallas Morning News . One wonders why Oswald would even need to trace the way he did it .
 Whatever is on any alleged copy of the map today would have had to have been superimposed after Fritz looked at the map and the FBI photographed it . The FBI photographed Fritz Fritz's map and photographed it.
 Starting on Friday afternoon and for the three days following the assassination, all three networks devoted every minute of their airtime to coverage .
 Before the assassination, television was mostly an entertainment medium . It was used to be used for entertainment .
 For the first time in its young history, television received the respect of the print media as partners in conveying the news, and partly because events in Dallas were unfolding too fast to print, became an integral part of a historical event .
 The FBI divided its investigation of the assassination between two main divisions . The Domestic Intelligence Division was responsible for the investigation of Oswald’s activities, associations, and motivations, including the question of conspiracy .
 Oswald was a Marxist who defected to Russia, agents from the division’s Soviet section were assigned to work on the case . Oswald was the son of a former Marxist who had defected from Russia .
 J Edgar Hoover would do almost anything to avoid being criticized and blamed for the assassination, to his credit that “almost” did not apparently include violating what he felt was the proper administration of his office . Hoover would seem to indicate strongly that although he would do .
 Hoover ordered an internal probe by the bureau’s Inspection Division to determine if his office was negligent in its pre-assassination investigation of Oswald . Hoover ordered, the day after the assassination, an internal investigation to determine whether his office had been negligent .
 Gale recommended disciplinary action be taken against seventeen members of the bureau . Gale recommended that disciplinary action was taken against 17 members of staff . Gale also recommended that the bureau members should be disciplined .
 Hoover approved Gale’s recommendation for censure, probation, and so on, was approved by Hoover . Assistant Director Alan Belmont wrote that “all of the supervisors and officials who came into contact with this case ... as well as agents in the field are unanimous in the opinion
 Hoover wrote, “Such gross incompetency cannot be overlooked nor administrative action (discipline) postponed,” Hoover wrote . Most of the agents received their discipline within days thereafter .
 The HSCA said a former assistant director stated Gale, whose Inspection Division found all the ‘delinquencies,” testified . Gale testified before a 1978 hearing that “even if the investigative shortcomings . . had been carried out, it would not have made any difference in
 Hoover would have had no reason to be sanguine about the disciplinary actions not being leaked shortly after they were imposed . No discipline of the agents leaked out until an article in the October 13, 1964, Dallas Herald .
 Hoover was willing to lie to the Warren Commission and the outside world about what he thought was the incompetence of some of his agents, as we have seen . Hoover was unwilling to compromise the effective management of his office by not disciplining the agents .
 The Warren Commission concluded that the FBI had more than enough information in its possession to list Oswald as a potential threat to the safety of the president . Oswald's pro-Castro activities, his contact with the Soviet embassy in Mexico led to the Secret Service, the commission said .
 Commission did not go on to say that if the FBI had done this, the assassination would not have occurred . It was a serious indictment by the Commission of the FBI’s pre-assassination investigation of Oswald .
 Eight of the bureau agents against whom disciplinary action had already been taken in December of 1963 were again disciplined for reasons identical to those that led to action being taken against them previously . Three agents who had not been previously disciplined were disciplined by formal censure . Four days later, eight of the
 The actions of the agents involved were appropriate under the circumstances as they knew them. The actions were appropriate, the agent said . The actions should have been appropriate, he said .
 That Oswald turned out to be an assassin should not have been used to fault the agents, since they had no reason to that would be the case when they were dealing with him . Oswald was an assassin, but agents were not there to blame .
 William Sullivan’s findings certainly weren’t hurting Hoover in his supposed effort to limit the investigation . Hoover was supposed to be trying to keep the investigation under wraps . Sullivan's findings weren't hurting Hoover .
 The charge has been made that if the CIA were involved in the assassination, Dulles had a conflict of interest in being a member of the Commission . Dulles was the former head of the CIA and the Commission’s unofficial liaison to the agency .
 Dulles left the CIA almost two years before the assassination . Even if the CIA was behind the assassination, it would be unlikely that those who hatched the idea would inform him of it once he left the agency .
 Oswald’s check from the Texas Unemployment Commission might have been delivered by the postal authorities in New Orleans, Louisiana, on or about September 24, or 25, 1963 . By letter of March 18, we asked that the Bureau make certain inquiries .
 Some new evidence has come to light which relates to the same problem, and we believe that the invesigation in connection with this new evidence might conveniently be carried on as part of the previously requested investigation .
 D-22 includes, among other things, a notice of change of mailing address signed by Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald signed the address in D.C. Oswald's home .
 The notice bears a stamped mark of 11:00m., September 25, 1963, on the reverse side, and on the front side there is a stamp of September 26, 1963 . The front side of the notice is marked with the date of the event .
 This card bears two postal marks, one dated June 11, 1963, and the other apparently dated October 3, 1963 . It is scarcely legible, but appears to be dated from June 11 to October 3 .
 The Commission would like to know the significance of the postmark, especially its significance as to when Lee Harvey Oswald could have deposited the card in the mail or handed it in personally at the post office, and where this probably occurred .
 Oswald appeared at the Louisiana Employment Commission regularly, at weekly intervals, throughout August and September 1963 . The last such appearance was on September 24, 1963, according to the report .
 The Commission would appreciate the Bureau’s looking further into the whole matter of what Oswald did on his weekly appearances at the Louisiana Employment Commission . If discrepancies appear between this evidence and the evidence in connection with the timing of the mailing of Oswald's check from Texas, we would like the
 The purpose of the questions posed in this letter and in the aforementioned letter of March 18, 1964, is to determine the earliest and latest times at which Lee Harvey Oswald could have left New Orleans for Mexico . The purpose is to find out when Oswald was leaving New Orleans at the time of
 We would therefore like the Bureau to carry on any investigation that it may deem useful for this purpose, based upon any additional facts that might come to light in connection with the investigation requested in this letter . We would like to see the Bureau continue to investigate any further facts that may come to
 It set forth such matters as personnel available to assist the staff, terms of employment, and the outline and organization of their work . It asked each team of lawyers to “prepare as soon as possible a comprehensive memorandum,” which was to include a “summary of the
 The transcript of Marina’s testimony itself proves that she did not give incomplete answers . No commission lawyer is named as saying this, and there is no quote to this effect .
 The story also says that Commissioner John McCloy complained openly about Warren’s ‘kid gloves’ treatment of Marina . The story says that McCloy also complained openly .
 Rankin, indeed, was very civil with Marina . The vast majority of Commission witnesses were treated in the same way .
 It's hard to cite Meagher’s other examples because they are not contradictions, clearly appearing to be simple errors of memory . Meagher herself was confused about where Oswald might have kept the rifle in his home on Neely Street .
 At one of these meetings, a dispute arose over whether or not witnesses should be “prepared,” a usual practice in which trial lawyers interview witnesses prior to their testifying to find out what they’re capable of testifying to, as well as question inconsistencies .
 Rankin told the attorneys to use their own discretion in preparing witnesses . Rankin said lawyers were to submit a memorandum of their off-the-record interviews with witnesses . Originally, a compromise was reached in which lawyers submitted a memorandum .
 One staff lawyer, Burt Griffin, was reprimanded for using too much discretion while questioning Dallas police sergeant Patrick Dean about Ruby’s entry into the police basement . It wasn’t until March 16, 1964, that the Commission formally prescribed, by a resolution, some of
 Griffin cleared the room and bluntly told Dean he was lying . Griffin offered to help Dean keep his job if he told the truth . Dean's statements were contradictory, Griffin said .
 Chief Justice Warren stated that “no member of our staff has a right to tell any witness that he is lying’s testimony falsely’. “No member of the . staff has . no right to say he lied or that he was testifying falsely.’ Chief
 At a Warren Commission executive session on June 23, 1964, the Commission attempted to determine how to handle a KGB defector . Yuriy Nosenko claimed to U.S. intelligence that he had information about Oswald’s presence in Russia . Oswald was not connected to the
 The commissioners had been receiving drafts from their staff on many sections to be included in the final report . One titled “Lee Harvey Oswald’s Life in Russia” had ten references to Nosenko in it . The commissioners were receiving drafts of their final report, which had
 I just think we shouldn't put our trust in any defector unless it is known absolutely and positively that he is telling the truth . We shouldn't trust defections unless he can be corroborated in every respect, he says .
 John Dulles spoke to his former colleagues in the CIA about Nosenko over the weekend . Dulles: "They are not yet in a position to determine his bona fides" Dulles added that he had spoken to former CIA colleagues about the matter .
 Rankin added to Warren’s earlier remark that Warren and he had discussed a few months earlier whether to take Nosenko's testimony before the Commission . Rankin said they had agreed it was contingent on his bona fides being established, which had not occurred .
 The sense from the transcript was that Nosenko, and his allegations, would be mentioned in the report . Ford and Rankin’s observations seemed to carry the day, and when the session recessed the session was adjourned, the sense was that the report would mention N
 Assistant Counsel David Slawson was the author of the draft (Assistant Counsel William Coleman reviewed it) on Oswald in Russia that was the subject of the executive session . The draft was the topic of the session .
 Nosenko says he met with CIA representative at Warren Commission headquarters . He says he was told about the effort the CIA was making to establish his bona fides . He said he met alone with a CIA representative in March .
 Slawson said he hadn’t even heard of Nosenko at the time . He said the CIA had taken physical custody of the defector to determine if he was bona fide . The CIA had to determine whether he was a bona fide.
 The CIA representative told Slawson that his agency wanted him to keep the entire Nosenko matter quiet and under wraps, even at the Commission, until after the CIA was through with the CIA . The CIA rep said he wanted the matter to be kept under wraps until after Nosen
 Slawson only shared the information about Nosenko that was furnished to him by the CIA . FBI interview included FBI interview with Coleman, Coleman, Rankin and Rankin .
 Slawson believes the Warren Report yielded to CIA pressure not to mention Nosenko in its report . The CIA hadn’t even come close to resolving the question of the bona fides before the report published in September .
 I am assuming that the various drafts leading up to the Commission’s final report were not to be seen by anyone outside the Warren Commission and its staff . The draft report was released to the public, but not the final report .
 We know that someone on the Commission or its staff was furnishing the FBI with a copy of the drafts . It's far less likely to have been the typist, it's likely someone on Commission or staff .
 State Department press officer announced at a press conference in Washington, D.C., that Nosenko had defected from the Soviet Union and had requested political asylum in the U.S. In fact, on February 10,1964, a State Dept. press officer said at a .
 Max Holland, a Warren Commission historian, agrees with the essence of Epstein’s position . In a more scholarly, less strident, and not as blatantly wrong way, and without accusing the Commission of being dishonest, he says .
 The Warren Commission had concealed ‘some of the truth’ from the U.S., Holland writes . But then Holland says that the inquiry had taken place at ‘the height of the Cold War,” and must be judged in that context .
 He says concealed truths would not have changed the ultimate conclusions . Moreover, he says, they would have not changed the conclusions .
 Holland only mentions one, but the support for his position crumbles when he admits that really, the Warren Commission never concealed it, the CIA concealed it . The CIA’s Operation Mongoose, the enormous United States government-sponsored plan to overthrow Castro following the Bay of Pigs invasion
 The Warren Commission cannot be vilified for the CIA's concealment of its secrets . But the Warren Commission, of course, cannot be blamed for the cover-up .
 Holland seems to impute the CIA’s guilt to the Warren Commission, in loose writing for such a fine writer, he seems to imply that the CIA kept certain things from the Commission .
 He doesn't expressly do this but it's implicit in his writing when he uses the words CIA and Warren Commission interchangeably in a discussion of the cover-up issue .
 Holland fails to meet his burden, failing to provide evidence of what he believes the Warren Commission covered up . Holland's last three paragraphs of his article fail to meet the burden .
 He said it many months earlier, following the testimony of Marina Oswald on the very first day of the Warren Commission hearings on February 3,1964 . Oswald's testimony was the first of the hearings on that day .
 The agency may not have mentioned Mongoose to the Commission, but everyone already knew about it, so there was nothing to conceal . He told newsmen that as Marina Oswald continued with her testi, the agency continued with its investigation .
 Thousands of U.S. government and anti-Castro Cuban exiles worked on the project . Mongoose was a very well-known secret .
 The main thing the CIA kept from the Warren Commission was the CIA plots to assassinate Castro . What wasn’t well known at the time was the plot to kill Castro . The Warren Commission kept the CIA from the CIA .
 "There may be some things that would involve security. I am not referring to anything especially," says President Obama .
 Former President Ford acknowledges, ‘Judgments made back then that seemed rational and reasonable.’ He writes, “As former President Ford now acknowledges, 'Judgments were made back . That seemed rational, reasonable,” he writes .
 Ford’s use of the words “today with the totally different atmosphere those judgments might seem improper” would strongly suggest that he was not referring to national security matters . Even today nothing has changed, certainly with the government, or even the American people, about the accepted wisdom
 What Ford most likely was referring to were things like the Commission’s acceding to the wishes of the Kennedy family that autopsy photos of the president not be furnished to the Commission for fear they might get into the hands of the public and be exploited .
 The Warren Commission’s investigation cut across the entire national-security apparatus during the height of the Cold War . Holland concludes his article by saying, “Even a national trauma could not be allowed to disturb the inner workings and unalterable logic of that struggle.”
 Enduring controversy over the assassination has helped foster deep alienation and cynicism . The assassination has led to a loss of respect among the American people for their government and its citizens .
 Griffin, now a judge, confirmed to me the essence of what he told Posner in a telephone conversation I had with him on December 6, 2004 . Griffin is now a federal judge in the U.S.
 Boswell acknowledged that Carl Eardley, a deputy attorney general in Ramsay Clark’s office at the time, asked him to write the letter . Boswell, in a February 26, 1996, deposition before the ARRB, said he wrote the letter in a deposition .
 Eardley sent Boswell to New Orleans in February of 1969 presumably to rebut testimony of fellow autopsy surgeon Pierre Finck during the Clay Shaw trial that some construed as meaning that army generals, not autopsy surgeons, were in control of the autopsy . This, naturally, has caused some
 The Rockefeller Commission was established on January 4, 1975, not to review President Kennedy’s autopsy . It was established to determine whether the CIA had conducted illegal activities in the United States that violated the rights of private citizens .
 The commission found itself examining certain aspects of the autopsy findings . However, during the commission’s work, and only as an incidental part of it, the commission examined certain aspects .
 Richard E Sprague (not related to Richard A Sprague) was convinced the CIA murdered Kennedy and had “controlled” the Warren Commission to keep this fact from the public . He served as a photographic consultant to the latter during the latter’s brief tenure as HSC
 Chief Counsel Sprague, his chief assistant, Robert Tanenbaum, and Chief Investigator Cliff Fenton, suspected the CIA killed Kennedy and were out to prove it, so the CIA decided it had to get rid of Sprague . He maintained that Sprague and his chief . assistant,
 The Warren Commission arranged top-secret security clearance for every member of its staff . Some information in the hands of the security agencies was kept from the Warren Commission on the grounds that it was classified .
 The committee made its own determination on each clearance . After consultation with the two agencies, the committee made the decision .
 Committee members signed memoranda of understanding with each of the agencies to establish procedures on how sensitive documents were to be handled . At the same time, committee made sure that its own procedures for handling classified documents respected the integrity of the security system .
 The committee wanted to ensure that its members and staff would have access to all classified information completely unsanitized . No “sources or methods” information was removed from the material, committee says .
 Robert Blakey affirmed that experts in the various fields wrote the original drafts, with staff help, and he and Billings put the finishing touches on them for publication .
 With respect to the pathology report, he indicated that the statement in 7 HSCA 75 that Dr. Dr. John Sutter made was correct . Dr. Sutter indicated that Dr.'s statement in HSCAs 75 that said Dr. Gerald Sutter was correct was incorrect .
 Dr. Loquvam prepared the initial draft and it was redrafted and edited by Dr. Dr. John Defterios .
 The federal government allegedly “sealing” literally several-million pages of assassinationrelated documents until the year 2039, that is for seventy-five years after the Warren Commission completed its investigation . Very few things have convinced the American public that there was a conspiracy .
 The Oliver Stone movie JFK was perhaps more responsible than any other single event for the enactment of the JFK Act . Remarkably, the Oliver Stone film JFK was more responsible for the passage of the act . The JFK Act was enacted by President Richard Nixon .
 The ARRB used the conjunctive “and” perhaps to avoid the embarrassment of acknowledging that a Hollywood movie alone had been responsible for the Act .
 Absent these two great misconceptions, virtually the entire, immense issue of secrecy would never have arisen . The secrecy of the U.S. government has never been fully explained .
 One misconception can be refuted by the facts, the other by the dictates of common sense . Both misconceptions are refuted by facts and common sense, the facts .
 The American public's belief that “the Warren Commission sealed the records” for seventy-five years is the genesis of the American public’s conclusion that the federal government has been withholding many of the facts about the assassination . Chief Justice Earl Warren was specifically responsible for this,
 Mark Zaid is a critic of the Warren Commission . Zaid says he is a conscientious and fair critic . The Warren Commission was created by the White House in 1968 .
 In 1992, after Stone’s movie, Stokes was a key sponsor of the JFK Act . The JFK Act included all of the HSCA records on the case .
 Conspiracy author Anthony Summers retitled the new edition of his 1980 book, Conspiracy, now calling it Not in Your Lifetime . Summers took this myth to an even higher level when he retitled it to a new edition . Summers: "Not In Your Lifetime"
 Even if he put the date of Warren’s remark in the opening paragraph of his book, it would still have required the reader to put two and two together, something most people don't always do .
 Summers’s book is that Warren and his Commission decided not to tell the American people, for seventy-five years, what he had learned . Summers: A major premise of Summers's book is to say Warren decided to not tell the U.S. people what he and his
 The reality is that Warren has been quoted completely out of context, and because of it, millions of Americans and people the world over have been misled for over four decades . Warren has not been quoted in context .
 There is no evidence whatsoever that the Warren Commission sealed any part of its records, documents, or findings, says CNN.com.com .
 The origin of this myth and misconception is one single remark Warren made that, as indicated, has been taken completely out of context . To the contrary, the exact opposite is true, and this myth is true . Warren made the remark completely out-of- context .
 As alluded to in a previous endnote, after Marina Oswald testified on February 3, 1964, which was the very first day of the Warren Commission hearings, Warren told newsmen outside the hearing chambers in Washington, D.C., that as Mrs. Oswald, as well as her husband
 Warren: "Yes, there will come a time—but it might not be in your lifetime" Warren went on to say that in view of this, “There will be a time’s a time,” but that it might “not be in a lifetime
 He spoke only hypothetically of the possibility of the records being sealed . And he did not state that they actually would be sealed .
 New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison didn't think the records were sealed . Garrison was one of the few people who did not think that the Warren Commission sealed the records .
 Warren Commission critics have no basis in fact, this contention has no basis for fact . Like virtually everything else critics have alleged about this case, this is not true . The Warren Commission has been accused of wrongdoing in the past .
 If Warren had clearly said, on February 3, that he did intend to seal the records, even that would have been irrelevant if he ended up not doing so . Even that would be irrelevant if Warren ended up sealing the records . Warren said he did not want to seal records .
 President Obama encouraged the release of all the records to the American people . Not only didn’t he do so, but instead he and his Commission encouraged it to be released .
 I would look for the source or citation, but it was never there. Whenever I would read the assertion in the many conspiracy books that Warren and his Commission had sealed the records for seventy-five years, I would never find the source of the claim .
 Critics of the Warren Commission have simply continued to repeat the canard, yet have never offered any evidence to support it . No such evidence exists for the simple reason that there is no such evidence .
 Lesar says he raised the matter with Lesar while talking to him on another issue . Lesar: "I raised the issue with him"
 Lesar says there's no question the Warren Commission did not seal its records . Lesar is a conspiracy theorist who believes “there’s physical, medical and ballistics evidence that leads you to conclude that one person could not have fired all of the shots .
 The National Archives had a rule, which applied across the board to all historical records that federal agencies and commissions turned over to them, that the records would not be released to the public for seventy-five years .
 NARA began its existence as an independent federal agency called the National Archives Establishment in 1934 under President Franklin D Roosevelt .
 It was incorporated into the General Services Administration, answerable to the administrator of the GSA, in 1949 . The GSA is now a part of the General Service Administration .
 In 1984, it was separated from the GSA and currently is once again an independent federal agency . The agency is an executive branch of the United States government .
 Tilley did not have immediate access to the documentary evidence detailing how the records ended up sealed . Tilley was extraordinarily cooperative in sending to me every document on the matter he could find, he says .
 In abbreviated form, the chronology of events leading up to sealing of the records is shown . The chronology is shown below the events leading to the sealing .
 The Warren Commission resulted from President Lyndon Johnson signing Executive Order 11130 on November 29, 1963 . President Johnson signed executive order 11130 in 1963 . Warren Commission was the result of the order .
 The records were sealed under a general policy that applied to all federal investigations by the executive branch of government . The records are sealed under that policy .
 Johnson told the president that if there was any “justification for withholding from the public” the records, it was “incumbent” upon the president “to make it clear why’s not being released .
 The Cedar Rapids mayor sent copies of his letter to Vice President-elect Hubert Humphrey, Chief Justice Warren, two senators, a congressman . The Associated Press and American Society of News Editors have also sent copies .
 President Johnson referred the matter to McGeorge Bundy, his special assistant, who in turn asked the National Archives for a background memo on the subject . President Johnson, moved by the letter, immediately referred it to Bundy .
 The study should include, he wrote, asking Chief Justice Warren what his position is on the matter, he said .
 Chief Justice Warren left no ambiguity as to his state of mind in a letter to Attorney General Katzenbach on April 5,1965 . Warren left . Warren's letter to attorney general Katzzenbach left no ambiguous as to what he thought .
 It wished them to be held there for the benefit of the American people, it said . The U.S. wishes them to remain in the U.K.
 At that time, it decided that it was in the best interests of all concerned that the policy relating to the Commission’s records provide for the fullest possible disclosure .
 The Commission, after full consideration, concluded that it did not have either the authority or the necessary information to determine the technical questions as to when the classified materials should be released without injury to the security of the country .
 It decided that the responsibility for that decision must of necessity be left with the originating agencies and the Attorney General, as the chief legal officer, in accordance with established law and policies .
 The Commission assumed that all of the determinations by the agencies and the Attorney General would be made in recognition of the overriding consideration of the fullest possible disclosure .
 We hope that this report of the attitude and conclusions of the Commission concerning the full disclosure of its records will be helpful to you in the formulation of your proposal for making the materials of the . Commission now in the National Archives available to the public .
 Warren, in all likelihood, had never even heard of the seventy-five-year rule at the archives . Ironically, Warren had never heard of that rule at archives .
 When it was in existence, as previously indicated, the rule only applied to records of the executive branch of government . The rule was applied only to the records of government records, but not to the Warren Commission records .
 Freedom of Information Act never covered congressional records . And as we shall see, as we will see, it never did .
 House rules state that a simple resolution not enacted into permanent law expires at the end of the Congress that passed it . Tilley told me in his November 14, 2001, letter that House rules say that . But Tilley says House rules states that a resolution not passed by Congress expires at
 Rule XXXVI of the House, passed in 1979, was amended by the House to provide that investigative records of the . House transferred to the archives shall be sealed for fifty years and all other House records for thirty years . In 1989, the fifty-year rule became official .
 Conspiracy theorists and the public want all Warren Commission records unsealed . Conspiracy theorists believe we can learn the truth about the assassination only if the records are unsealed. The second great misconception is that the records must be unsealed, he says .
 In other words, we’ll know the truth about the assassination only in 2039 . The truth will be known only in the 2039 of that year .
 Such a silly notion can be easily demolished since its premise is illogical and contravenes human experience . The premise of such a notion can't be built up and it's easily easily demolished . The idea of a deity in a religion is an example of a belief system that is ill
 In the first place, the belief that any alleged conspirators who plotted Kennedy’s assassination would commit to paper anything that expressly, obliquely, or in any other way referred to the murderous plot is ridiculous .
 If that were the case, these people would simply destroy these documents, not leave them in any file . But you see, if that were to be true, they would just destroy them, not leaving them in files .
 If they were immoral enough to murder Kennedy, surely they would eliminate an incriminating document? Surely they would have eliminated incriminating documents?
 The disclosure movement has been fueling the idea of transparency, but that’s what the whole notion fueling it has been. Yes, but it's what the notion fueling the disclosure movement is. That's what it's been.
 Some of the alleged criminals' actions would necessarily have to have governed the actions of any alleged criminals for there to be any viability to the disclosure movement . But one or the other of these two states of mind, or some close variation thereof, must have governed any of these actions .
 If there were any documents that pointed to a different gunman or the existence of a conspiracy, these documents would have been destroyed years ago . To summarize, if there was any . point to a . different gunman . or the . existence of an . conspiracy, the author says .
 The JFK Act and ARRB were almost, by definition, an exercise in futility . Therefore, if the purpose of the JFK Act was to find out if such documentary evidence existed among the previously unreleased Warren Commission and HSCA records, it would be futile .
 JFK Act and ARRB have become an important part of the historical record of the assassination . However, despite this inherent futility, inasmuch as this is called for, a brief discussion of them is needed .
 The Warren Commission and HSCA records have been released to the public . However, the situation perhaps isn’t quite as black and white as I have painted it here . The whole debate has been raging for decades over the wisdom of releasing them .
 Though a smokinggun incriminating document would never be found in the archives, it is undeniably true that whenever anyone attempts to destroy much incriminating material, here and there hints of conspiracy and complicity somehow continue to survive .
 A surviving document, by itself, would appear to be benign, and hence wasn’t destroyed . But in the hands of a good researcher this document may contain information that, in conjunction with other information or documents, becomes a part of the mosaic pointing toward wrongdoing .
 If there was a conspiracy to murder Kennedy, the diligent search for documents that are part of the assassination record is not, per se, an automatically fruitless undertaking . So if there was there was an assassination record, an examination of documents is possible .
 This fight over secrecy reached its zenith in America during the paranoia of the cold war . It continued, almost unabated, until the collapse of the Soviet Union helped shift, at least somewhat, the free world’s emphasis .
 Prior to 1946 in America, there was no federal statute entitling any citizen to secure the records of any federal agency . Short of a subpoena in an ongoing lawsuit, short of subpoena, a subpoena was required in the case .
 Congress passed a law in 2010 requiring every federal agency to publish final opinions or orders resulting from administrative proceedings . The law requires that every agency publish or “make available to public inspection” of its final opinions .
 Freedom of Information Act of 1966 went into effect on July 4, 1967 . First major breakthrough and crack in the federal secrecy armor came in the landmark act of 1966 . Department of Justice guidelines were never codified into statutory law .
 Most FOIA requests do not deal with the Kennedy assassination, indicating Americans' appetite for government information of all kinds . It should be noted that most FOIA requests don't deal with Kennedy assassination .
 In 1990, federal agencies received 491,000 FOIA requests and spent $83 million responding to them . For instance, in 1990, the federal government responded to more than 500,000 requests .
 The Defense Department received 118,000 requests; the Justice Department, 62,000; the Immigration and Naturalization Service, 45,000 . The Environmental Protection Agency, 39,000, the FBI, 11,000 and the CIA, 4,000. The Justice Department received 62,
 Jim Lesar is considered by many to be the leading FOIA private lawyer in the country . Lesar's FOIA client is considered the nation's leading FOIA lawyer .
 Lesar has no hesitation in declaring that “FOIA has done an enormous amount of good.” Lesar: "FOIA is a very important part of our democracy"
 The vast records of all congressional investigations that dealt exclusively or partially with the Kennedy assassination are off-limits . Under FOIA, under FOIA, all records of those investigations are off limits .
 President Bush left the appointment of the board members to his successor, President Bill Clinton, and they were sworn in on April 11, 1994 . The appointment was left to Clinton by President Bush .
 It wasn't until October 1, 1994, that Congress appropriated funds for the Review Board’s operation . Congress twice extended its life, the ARRB finally turning off its life on September 30, 1998 .
 Lesar: “They throw up many threshold defenses,” some of the defenses bringing an infrequent laugh to Lesar . Lesar says he's proud of his work in the field of sports .
 He addressed himself to the issue of why the FBI, CIA, and other federal agencies try to prevent the release of documents whose contents won’t even hurt them .
 There are several reasons for this, he said, proceeding to mention a few . "There is several reasons" for this," he said .
 In many cases, they don't know for certain whether information in a document is harmful, but they consider there’s always a possibility it might be in some way they don’t even know about .
 They view requesters as subversives, a class of people who are looking for information to hurt them . The government says requesters are people who want to hurt the government .
 There’s also the notion that government officials somehow come to believe that they are the owners of the information that they obtain .
 In getting this information they were working on the taxpayer payroll, using taxpayer-owned equipment, even paper, so the taxpayers own the product . But in getting this info, they were using taxpayer owned equipment .
 Board members met two full days every three weeks, although its paid staff of twenty-six (including two investigators with law enforcement backgrounds) worked full-time . Board met two days a week, but paid staff worked full time, including two law enforcement investigators .
 Previous assassination-related commissions and committees were established for the purpose of drawing conclusions about the assassination . Previous commission and committees have been established to examine the assassination of JFK .
 Under the JFK Act, all congressional records on the assassination, including, most importantly, the records of the HSCA that had not been published in its twelve volumes were now subject to release to the public .
 Under FOIA, under FOIA, nondisclosure could be permanent under many situations . But under Section 6 of the JFK Act, only a "postponement" was possible .
 JFK Act limits "postponements" under JFK Act . JFK Act has a virtual limit under the law . The act was passed by Congress last year .
 The JFK Act allowed only the ARRB, not private citizens, to procure assassination records under it . The courts have held that throughout the period of the Act, private citizens and the general public still had to continue to seek assassination records .
 Assassination Archives and Research Center sought some FBI records under FOIA relating to assassination figure Marita Lorenz . In 1993, the FBI denied some FOIA requests relating to Lorenz, which the center sought under FOIA . The FBI denied the request .
 Most of the same litany of grounds (in addition to national security) for nondisclosure exists under the JFK Act as under FOIA . Even if the source or method of operation were not currently being utilized, an exemption could still be sustained .
 The “current” requirement was an obvious compromise between the public’s right to know and the traditional concern of law enforcement and intelligence agencies like the FBI and the CIA to protect, above all else, their sources and methods of operation .
 The Review Board says that definition is too restrictive and won't satisfy the conspiracy community . The Board says it would not satisfy the community, which had a reputation for seizing on a far-out tidbit of information .
 The Review Board expanded the definition of an assassination record to include all records . The JFK Act also compelled the release of assassination records of “any State or local law enforcement office that provided support or assistance”
 The Dallas Police Department released all of its documents on the case for inspection by the public in 1992 . Months before the JFK Act was even enacted, the Dallas City Council voted to release the case files .
 The ARRB, with broad powers, began to implement the JFK Act on April 11,1994 . It includes the power to subpoena witnesses and documents and grant witnesses immunity from prosecution .
 JFK Act went into effect October 26, 1992, and it set forth its objective of releasing JFK assassination-related documents to the public . By April of 1994, federal agencies had voluntarily declassified thousands of documents .
 The Review Board was dealing with about sixty-two-thousand assassination-related documents . The documents were being opposed by one of the twenty-three agencies or entities that possessed them .
 Of these, 33,176 were eventually released by the agencies without a ruling by the Review Board . Of those released, only 33,000 were released by agencies . The Review Board has yet to rule on the issue .
 The Review Board would not grant postponements for certain types of information, so they voluntarily withdrew their request for postponement before the ARRB ruled on them . This was so because once the Review Board started to establish its voting patterns, agencies or entities began to .
 Only 29,420 documents were reviewed by the Review Board . 49 percent of those documents were CIA documents . 34 percent were FBI documents .
 Judge Tunheim told me that these approximately twenty-nine thousand documents contained redacted material . Most of them had not been released by the agencies involved in the investigation, he said .
 The materials were legally transferred by the Kennedy family to the archives on October 29, 1966 . The materials are now housed in the archives .
 The JFK collection of all assassination documents prior to the ARRB was “more than four and a half million pages. Stored in special vaults at the archives, the JFK collection .
 Judge Tunheim said that either he or another member of the Review Board has personally examined all of the redacted material . Tunheim: "Nothing in any of the documents that was central to the assassination"
 Conspiracy theorists have spent considerable money and time to get one or more assassination documents released from the archives . Without exception, when successful, they found there was nothing of any value in them .
 They found that their assumption that the government’s fighting so tenaciously with them to withhold the document meant it was hiding something of relevance to the assassination was a non sequitur, they said .
 A federal agency was only withholding the identity of an intelligence source or methods of operation . Over and over they found, to their consternation, that a federal agency had only withheld the identity .
 In those cases where it wasn't, it was just plain bureaucratic obstinacy . In some cases, it wasn’t, it’s just plain bureaucracy .
 The ARRB released the same document unredacted, they learned the redacted material was of no evidentiary value to them . Later, the ARRB learned that the material was not of any apparentiary value .
 Nothing was found to contravene the findings of the Warren Commission and support their various theories of conspiracy . The conspiracy community were disappointed when nothing was found .
 Either the title or description of a document was provocative and the document itself itself was banal, or upon close inspection, a seemingly significant line of inquiry turned out to mean something completely different than initially thought .
 The ARRB got everything from the Secret Service it asked for, including a document containing the names of all known people who had threatened Kennedy within six months of the assassination . Eventually the ARRB was able to get the document .
 The Secret Service said that since many of these people had been institutionalized, to release their names, even though many are now dead, would compromise the Secret Service’s relationship with mental health providers for the mentally ill . Many of the names of the dead people are now deceased .
 The Secret Service appealed the Review Board's demand for the document to the president . President Clinton denied the Secret Service’s appeal before his term expired in 2001 . Under the JFK Act, the only person or entity an agency can appeal to is the president, not the courts .
 The other agency that wasn’t completely cooperative was President Clinton’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, a White House agency . The board was a bipartisan panel of intelligence experts .
 It appealed to the president the ARRB’s demand for minutes of the board during meetings in 1962-1963 regarding Cuba and Russia .
 Just before his second term expired in January of 2001, President Clinton also rejected the appeal of the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board . President Clinton rejected the decision .
 The ARRB discontinued its operations on September 30,1998 . No future requests could be made under the Act .
 Documents will be disclosed at least in 2017 because of JFK mandate, he said not necessarily so . When I mentioned that he was seeking documents would be disclosed in 2017, I asked if they would be released .
 In 1962 the CIA’s Office of Biographic Registry compiled a five-volume set of profiles on Cuban leaders . When I asked for an example, he said he said that in 1962, the CIA had compiled five volumes of profiles .
 No smoking gun or even a smoldering ember of conspiracy was found . ARRB scoured the country for documents “reasonably related” to the assassination . The ARRB conducted an unprecedented four-year scavenger hunt .
 Dallas Police Department has two other official repositories of assassination documents . Documents relate to Parkland Hospital and custody of Jack Ruby following shooting of Oswald .
 In early 2006,1 asked John Slate, the city archivist at the Dallas Municipal Archives, to furnish me with the history of the JFK assassination records of the Dallas Police Department .
 I am grateful to Slate for writing me back on July 10, 2006, with the history I requested . I am also grateful for Slate for sending me back a copy of this article .
 The John F Kennedy/Dallas Police Department Collection contains 11,406 documents and photographs . It includes homicide reports, affidavits, witness statements, newspaper clippings and correspondence . The collection includes homicide and murder reports .
 The Dallas Municipal Archives possesses all of the original files except those that have been transferred permanently to the federal investigation collection held at the National Archives . The files are housed in the Dallas Municipal Archive .
 A first set of documents related to the Kennedy assassination were discovered by the city’s records management officer . The documents were discovered during a records inventory of the Dallas Police Department .
 The documents were housed between 1963 and 1989 in a filing cabinet with other historical materials . They were appraised as no longer administratively needed by police department .
 The documents were added in 1992, largely in response to the release of Oliver Stone’s film JFK, parts of which were shot in Dallas .
 In absence of meaningful local of federal open records laws until the 1970s, the Kennedy records were more forgotten than actually restricted . Few made specific written requests to the department or the police chief .
 Most citizens’ requests to the DPD for information were of a general nature . Most were directed to the Warren Commission volumes or to the National Archives .
 While it appeared the records were closed, in truth they were never meant to be restricted . The records were not closed, but they were meant to remain open .
 "We believe it can and should become public information. Unless we are specifically instructed otherwise from Washington, we believe it should be public information"
 Nearly thirty years later the chief’s forgotten utterance finally became reality . Nearly 30 years later, the chief's forgotten utterment finally becomes reality .
 The six series in the collection are organized according to the organizational functions of the police department . They are kept in the same order as they were physically stored at the department .
 During the processing of the collection a subject and name index was generated to create further access points . During the process of the . processing of . the . collection a . subject and . name index were generated to generate further access . points .
 In 1967 through 1969, photocopied newspaper and magazine articles relating to New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison’s investigation were added to document that case . In 1969, the photos were used to document Garrison's investigation .
 In 2005, duplicate photographic prints and documents (concerning Oswald’s murder and the sending of his clothing to the National Archives) stolen from DPD at an undetermined time were discovered and seized during a 2004 drug raid . Oswald's clothing was sent to the Archives in 2005 .
 Several items of correspondence in the collection are requests for access written during the 1960s connected with the official federal investigation of the incident . The collection includes correspondence from the federal government .
 An early transfer of material to the FBI is documented in a December 3,1963, letter from Chief Curry to FBI field agent J Gordon Shanklin . Chief Curry transferred material to FBI in 1963 .
 The FBI microfilmed files on Lee Harvey Oswald’s murder upon receipt . The FBI returned a roll to DPD while the originals were sent to Washington . Curry confirmed that files on Oswald's murder were microfiled .
 Subsequent requests for information on various aspects of the larger investigation were made by the FBI or other federal agencies over a number of months . There is a reasonably consistent paper trail of what was sent to Washington .
 Lee Rankin, general counsel for the Warren Commission, requested the police department to provide everything they had relating to Lee Harvey Oswald to the Commission . The letter was sent in 1964 by Texas attorney general Waggoner Carr .
 Approximately 30% of DPD Kennedy records in the Dallas Municipal Archives are second-generation carbon copies or photocopies from originals . Many original items were never returned and retained permanently by the Warren Commission or FBI .
 Author William Manchester contacted Chief Curry in June 1964 as he was conducting research for Death of a President . Chief Curry was the subject of a book called Death of the President .
 A request to visit Curry was apparently made to review police records . The request was apparently a request to see Curry, but also review records .
 Byrd to request a thorough review of all DPD Kennedy records . HSCA vice chair Henry B Gonzalez subpoenas Byrd to appear before the committee . Byrd to be subpoenaed by the committee for his request .
 There is no further correspondence with Byrd, nor did Byrd appear at the hearings, as far as is known . Byrd died in 1968 .
 In 1976, David Martin, legal counsel to the U.S. Secret Service, received approval to release documents in possession of the federal agency to early Warren Commission critic and activist Mark Lane .
 A pioneering digitalization project funded by Wang Laboratories in 1992 created a virtual collection for use at a public computer terminal . Because of the fragile nature of the majority of original materials the . majority of . original materials was microfilmed and photocopied for public access . The complete collection was
 Improvements in digital scanning technology will necessitate the re-scanning of portions of the collection . The original project was a significant achievement .
 Researchers may continue to use the photocopy and microfilm sets by appointment . Researchers may also continue to collect microfilm samples from the library .
 The Sixth Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza received the Dallas County Sheriff’s Department known files and records pertaining to the Kennedy assassination on February 3,2005 .
 Ownership of the records was officially transferred to the Museum by Sheriff Lupe Valdez on April 4, 2005 .
 Dallas County Commissioners Court ordered all county records pertaining to the Kennedy assassination be located and transferred to the Dallas County Historical Foundation . The foundation operates the Museum .
 At that time, the Museum received numerous original and photocopied Parkland Hospital records related to the assassination . The Museum received many original records from the hospital .
 The order also encouraged county elected officials to also round up Kennedy files . Kennedy files should be transferred to the Dallas County Historical Foundation, the order says .
 The files were brought to the attention of the Museum at that time and arrangements were made to receive them early the following year .
 Former Dallas County sheriff Jim Bowles was a longtime friend of the Museum's archivist and curator . Bowles is a former Dallas County Sheriff's deputy .
 The county had no assassination files in storage from either the sheriff or anyone else . The county's sheriff's office says the files are in storage, but the county has no files .
 The HSCA’s eleventh-hour finding left the committee scrambling to rewrite its already written draft of its final report . It had concluded, like the Warren Commission before it, that Oswald was the lone gunman .
 Four of the twelve committee members disagreed with the HSCA’s conclusions, contending that the panel rushed to judgment in concluding that a conspiracy existed . House Representatives Harold S Sawyer, Robert W Edgar, Samuel L Devine and Charles Thone are among the members of the H
 Representative Edgar said, “We found no evidence to suggest a conspiracy.” Rep. Edgar said the investigation was inconclusive .
 No entry wounds from the front into any person, including President John Kennedy and Gov. John Kennedy, were found in the attack . President Kennedy was shot in the head with a bullet wound .
 No bullets or fragments of bullets that did not belong to the Oswald weapon were found in Oswald's weapon, police say . The Oswald weapon was the only weapon that was found to be connected to Oswald .
 "We found little, if any, evidence of partnership with Lee Harvey Oswald," Oswald's widow says . Oswald was found to have been involved in the assassination of President Kennedy . Oswald had been involved with the CIA, the FBI and CIA .
 In the following pages, let’s take a look at the facts and controversy surrounding this acoustic “proof” of conspiracy and show how it has been thoroughly discredited . In the pages of this article, we look at how the acoustic ‘proof’ of conspiracy has
 Gary Mack, then program director for KFJZ-FM in Fort Worth, Texas, developed an interest in the assassination after seeing the Zapruder film on Geraldo Rivera’s ABC national television show the year before . Penn Jones Jr. met with conspiracy theorist Penn Jones
 Jones felt that the communications were jammed on purpose, and even though the open microphone was on channel 1, which was not being used for motorcade communications, he believed it was a motorcycle that was part of the motorcade .
 Jones suggested that perhaps the open microphone picked up the sound of the shots fired at the president and transmitted them back to Dallas police headquarters, where they were recorded on the tapes .
 Dallas Police Department had two radio channels to commumcare with policemen . Each of the radio channels was on a different frequency . The Dallas police department had two different radio channels .
 The cyclist, by clicking a switch, could go from one channel to another but could never be on two channels at the same time . The dispatcher, at police headquarters, had the ability to transmit simultaneously on both channels .
 To transmit, cyclist had to pick up the microphone, depress the transmitter button (“pushto-talk button”) on the microphone . Cyclist had to keep the button depressed while talking .
 McLain asked if it would be possible for the microphone button to be stuck in the open position . McLain said yes, and said it was possible for it to be possible .
 When the microphone button is not depressed, the police radio is in the “receiving” or “monitoring” position or mode in which the cyclist can hear transmissions from the police dispatcher . When the radio is not engaged, then the cyclist is able to hear
 Occasionally, the microphone button will stick when pressed down, leaving the radio in transmission mode even after the officer has finished speaking and released the button . The microphone button can stick in the microphone while the officer is talking .
 Once a motorcyclist depresses the microphone button to transmit, this does not preclude all other cyclists from talking to the police dispatcher at that time . Once a rider depresses a microphone button, all cyclists can talk to the dispatcher .
 If two or more cyclists are talking at the same time, you’d normally have almost incomprehensible voice-overs . They can still transmit on that channel, but can still be heard on the other channel .
 The term cross talk refers to a conversation being broadcast on one radio channel that is picked up by a nearby police microphone that is on a different radio channel . The conversation is retransmitted, by this other microphone, back to the dispatcher’s Dictabelt at police headquarters
 Made by Dallas radio reporter Sam Pate, it later appeared on the Colpix Inc. record album Four Days That Shocked the World .
 Pate admitted, during an FBI interview, that most of the tape had not even been recorded in Dealey Plaza, but in a studio after the assassination . Pate said he recorded the tape in an interview with the FBI .
 Commission arranged for a scientific analysis of the tape . Commission nonetheless arranged for the analysis of tape by Dr. Dr. John Defterios of the University of Cambridge .
 Bell Telephone Acoustics & Speech Research Laboratory. Lawrence Kersta of Bell Telephone acoustics . Kersta is a member of the company's Acoustical Research Laboratory . The research was conducted by Bell Telephone .
 Kersta found some “spikes’ of noise on a key eight-second part of the tape . Kersta did not say anything about them being gunshots .
 Parts of the tape had been recorded near Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963, but not during the shooting . James E Barger of Bolt, Beranek and Newman Inc. Inc. found parts of the recording were recorded in 1963 .
 Mack feels his background in broadcasting helped predispose him to his thought . Mack says he is proud of his work as a broadcaster . Mack is proud to be able to talk about his career in broadcasting .
 Mack should have thought of this before Mack did so many years after the assassination . But certainly, someone in law enforcement should have . Mack did .
 Jones gave Mack a multigeneration copy of the tapes of the two channels, which Mack took back to the radio station . Jones subsequently gave the tape to Mack .
 Mack thought he could hear gunshots on the channel 1 tape, but the "muddy" quality of the recording prevented further study . After filtering them through a graphic equalizer, Mack thought they were gunshots .
 In January 1977, Mack obtained clearer copies of the two Dallas police tapes from researcher Mary Ferrell . He took them to two recording studios (TM Productions and January Sound in Dallas) where he talked some sympathetic sound engineers into working with the tapes .
 Mack took the tape home and synchronized it to Zapruder film at various points to see if he could match it to the movements seen in the film . Mack took it home and matched it with the movements of the film in various parts .
 Posner said he had heard a rumor in Dallas that a former reporter for Dallas radio WFAA, Travis Linn, had an audio recording of the shooting in Dealey Plaza . Posner: Linn is a former Dallas radio reporter . Linn was a reporter for WF
 He said he asked an associate of his to take a small portable tape recorder to Dealey Plaza and set it on top of a column near the reflective pool close to the corner of Houston and Elm to pick up the sound of the motorcade going by .
 Since the associate was going to be there anyway, why Linn wouldn’t just have him hold it in his hand, and closer to the street, is not known . Why Linn didn't just have the associate hold it, and why he didn't have it, is
 Linn went to Dealey Plaza and found that his associate had left, but the recorder was still there . In any event, after the shooting, Linn found that Linn had left the recorder .
 Oswald was sent to Oswald's apartment by the station's news director . He played the tape back at the station and heard three shots on it, but while he was starting to duplicate it, his news director sent him to Oswald’s apartment .
 Sixth Floor Museum curator Gary Mack proved the story was false . Mack has no visceral opposition to far-out stories as long as they're not fraudulent .
 When Linn told Mack the story around 1989, Mack told him he interviewed Walter Evans, Linn’s news director at the time of the assassination . Evans just laughed, saying it never happened and he hadn’t even heard about it before, Mack said .
 Mack also spoke to Pierce Allman, the station’s program director at the time, who told Mack he had never heard it either . Allman also told Mack that he has never heard the station's show .
 L’Hoste, the WFAA-TV photographer Linn supposedly asked to record the motorcade, is dead . Linn was killed in a car crash in Dallas, Texas, on Sunday .
 Linn's late father filmed the motorcade on Main Street, not Dealey Plaza . He told Mack his late father had never heard of Linn’s story . The motorcade took place on Main St, not Main Street .
 L’Hoste’s film, shot about nine blocks east of Dealey Plaza, appears without sound in the WFAA-TV videotapes recorded on November 22, 1963 . L'Hoste's film, which was shot nine blocks from Dealey plaza, appears
 Mack looked at the Elsie Dorman film, which picks up the area where the tape recorder was supposedly left, and saw no such recorder . Mack also saw no recorder left in the film . Mack: "I don't believe it was a tape recorder"
 A stylus makes an impression on a thin celluloid belt, just like the stylus cutting a groove on the channel 2 Gray Audograph disk . The stylus cuts a groove in the groove of a channel 2 channel 2 gray Audograph .
 Tapes were made of the belt and disk, some relatively clear, some multigenerational and of very poor quality . Some of the tapes were relatively clear but some were not . Some recordings were made from the disk and disk .
 The terms Dictabelt and channel 1 tape are used interchangeably in this section . Channel 1 tape is used to refer to a tape used to record the contents of the tape .
 To preserve the Dictabelt, the HSCA worked, for the most part, from a magnetictape copy of the original . The two terms were used interchangeably in the DICTabelt . The DSCA used the terms interchangeably .
 HSCA chief counsel G Robert Blakey had substantial misgivings about the benefits of such a conference . Blakey: "I'm not sure what I think about the conference. It's not a conference"
 Any noise close enough to the motorcycle microphone to be picked up, would activate the recording machine back at police headquarters . The recording machine would activate a recording machine at the police station .
 The machine belt and disk would also continue rotating if the transmitter button were stuck in the “on’s” position . The transmitter button would also keep rotating if it were stuck to the ‘on' position .
 After a noise or transmission ended, the Dictabelt or Audograph would continue to rotate and operate in recording mode for an additional four seconds, then stop . After a signal or transmission ends, the recording mode would continue for an extra four seconds .
 Mack says the HSCA found a fourth shot on the tape at around the time of the shooting . Mack says he still believes in the conclusion . Mack: "I heard what I believe are gunshots"
 Mack found evidence of seven gunshots in the case . Mack told Blakey about Mack’s study and how he found seven gunshots .
 Bolt, Beranek and Newman Inc. of Cambridge, Massachusetts, is one of the top five firms in the U.S. At the top of a list of five firms, Bolt,Beranek was one of its founders .
 Richard Bolt was chairman of a panel appointed by Judge John J Sirica to investigate the Watergate tapes . Bolt had been the chairman of the panel appointed to look into the mysterious eighteenminute gap in the tapes .
 Prosecutors from the Justice Department used BBN’s analysis of the tape to establish which guardsmen were the first to fire shots . BBN's analysis combined with photographs taken at the time of the shootings, helped determine which Guardsmen were first to shoot .
 BBN scientists say Dallas police tapes contain gunshots . They say they could resolve a number of questions about the assassination . HSCA senior staff attorney John Hornbeck met with scientists in October .
 A copy of the police tapes would be electronically ‘cleaned up’ and converted into a graph showing duration and volume . A graph was created to show the duration of the tape and volume of the tapes .
 Test shots fired in Dealey Plaza would be recorded and compared to the sounds on the police transmissions . Second, test shots fired would be compared to police transmissions in an effort to see if any of the “shapes of sound” on the channel 1 tape matched the test shots
 Due to the poor quality, BBN was unable to determine whether a portion of the channel 1 recording did or did not contain the sounds of gunfire . The poor quality of the recording means it could not be determined if a portion did contain gunfire .
 The motorcycle with an open microphone was not in Dealey Plaza . This fact alone, as you’ll see, is strongly suggestive, though not conclusive, that the motorcycle with the microphone is not in the area .
 The Dallas police communications system was routinely recorded onto thin, plastic belts and disks by two separate duplex recording units . The Dallas communications system is routinely recorded on thin plastic belts, disks .
 Channel 1 was recorded on a Dictaphone A2TC, Model 5, belt recorder purchased by the department in 1957 . Channel 1 recorded on Channel 1 on a belt recorder .
 Channel 2 (the one for special-event radio traffic) was recorded on a Gray Corporation “Audograph” flat disk recorder that was bought in the early 1950s . Channel 2 was recorded using the Gray Corporation "Audograph" flat disk recorder .
 Both duplex devices consisted of one unit set to record and one set to standby mode . The second unit was set to take over as soon as the first unit contained a full recording . The duplex device was used to record a full version of the recording .
 McCaghren moved the files to his office in the Intelligence Division, where they were stored until late 1971 . The files were later stored in his office .
 Committee says it also received “a tape recording of transmissions over channel 2” The implication is that unlike the original Dictabelt, the committee did not get the original Audograph channel 2 recording .
 When I called Robert Blakey about this, he said, “This was just sloppy drafting," he said . "This was sloppy drafting. It's just slitty drafting," Blakey said .
 If that turned out to be the case, he reasoned, there would be no need to go to Dallas to do additional acoustic tests . If that's true, he said, it would be easier to send the team to Dallas for additional tests .
 The HSCA agreed, committing $40,000 to the project, with $20,000 held in reserve just in case Barger turned something up . Barger says he wants to find out what's going to happen .
 If the sounds fail to pass any one of the test questions, he could safely assume that they were not caused by gunfire and the study could end . If the test fails to pass the test, he can assume that the sounds are not from gunfire .
 If they passed the test questions, expensive acoustic tests would have to be conducted at the scene of the assassination . The tests would need to be carried out at the site of the shooting .
 A match of any “acoustical fingerprints” would be further evidence that the impulse sounds were gunfire . BBN team would then be able to determine the timing of the shots on the Dictabelt as well as the location of the weapon and the target .
 House Select Committee chairman Louis Stokes asked that Senator Edward M Kennedy, the late president’s brother, be briefed about the proposed Dallas test firings .
 On August 2, 1978, several committee members met with Senator Kennedy in his Capitol office . Senator Kennedy was a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee . Kennedy died at the age of 92 in 1975 .
 At 12:31 (about 5 seconds after the decrease in the sound), he said he heard on the channel 1 tape “four groups” or “patterns” of “impulse sounds” that his BBN team thought might be gunshots . Also at
 Dallas police radio system had a “limiter’s built into it that takes an extra loud sound and reduces it down to an acceptable level for transmission through the radio . The limiter has made these sounds, if indeed they were gunshot sounds, “quiet.”
 It is so distorted that you don’t have the impression of hearing gunshot. So it’s so distorted you don't have to hear gunshot. The sound of the gunshot is distorted, so it is not the sound of a gunshot .
 The ability of an officer to transmit a message from his cycle when a microphone from another cycle is stuck in the open position was based on its proximity to a number of relay towers located throughout the city . The towers routed radio signals back to the central dispatch room via voice-grade telephone lines
 An officer whose radio was close enough to a relay tower might be able to override the signal from the stuck mike and transmit a message, though distorted . Others, in more distant locations, might only produce brief heterodyne tones .
 Others might not be able to transmit or produce any sounds at all . Still others might be unable to produce any sound .
 The closest relay tower to Dealey Plaza, less than a mile away, was atop the Adolphus hotel, a witness says . The closest tower was atop a Dallas Police Department radio dispatcher at the time .
 Bowles had worked in the dispatcher’s office for ten years and is probably the leading authority on the channel 1 tape . Bowles worked for the dispatcher's office for 10 years .
 Bowles prepared a rebuttal to the HSCA’s fourth-shot conclusion in 1979 . Bowles listened to the same magnetic copy of the original Dictabelt he had used in 1964 and put on earphones .
 "A series of randomly spaced, loud clicks and pops" can be heard, lasting around ten seconds . tHorsefeathers, says Bowles, last for around 10 seconds .
 Bowles told me in November of 2004 that several times before and after the assassination he personally has heard the sound of gunshots on channel 1 tapes . Bowles said several times .
 The microphone becomes unstuck, turning off, then back on again . The noises could be the result of motorcycle engine misfiring, or noises generated by the motorcycle’s ignition system .
 The impulse sounds could also be due to scratches on the surface of the Dictabelt . The impulse sound is also thought to be caused by scratches in the surface . The sound is similar to the sound waves of the iPod touch .
 Blakey briefed the House Administration Committee on the acoustic evidence . The timing of the sounds suggests a second gunman may have been firing at the president at the same time as Oswald, he said .
 The committee postponed its decision on whether to provide additional funds for the proposed acoustic tests in Dallas, Texas . Blakey committed his cash reserve of $20,888 .
 The BBN’s preliminary acoustic analysis had found that there had been more than three shots fired by Oswald, hence, a conspiracy . To Blakey's horror, someone had leaked a story to Dallas Morning News correspondent Earl Golz .
 Early on Sunday, August 20, 1978, a crowd began to gather in Dealey Plaza to witness the historic test firings . The tests began just after dawn, and began just before dawn .
 Part of tem had a limiter, but he said it only “cut off the extreme highs and lows” of a loud sound . The two hundred or so people who showed up were mostly members of the media .
 HSCA staff members, seven acoustic experts, photographic consultant, and thirty-three Dallas police officers assembled . The investigative team that had been assembled consisted of four staff members . Thirty-three police officers were also present .
 Acoustic experts from BBN decided that none of the changes would significantly alter the acoustic fingerprints of the test shots they planned to fire .
 Dallas police sharpshooter Jerry Compton was instructed to fire, from the sniper’s nest, a Mannlicher-Carcano rifle similar to the one found on the sixth floor in 1963 . Clint L Metcalf, the marksman stationed behind the stockade fence atop
 The type of weapon allegedly fired from the grassy knoll was unknown . Acoustic scientists wanted to make sure they had examples of test shots fired from both supersonic and subsonic weapons .
 Neither marksman used the telescopic sights of their weapons, preferring the safety of the iron sights, which allowed them to see the immediate area around the targets .
 Preliminary examination of tape shows ‘pops and clicks” at intervals that matched position of limousine at Zapruder frames 160, 200, and 313 . Three were based on preliminary examination of the tape .
 A fourth target was placed at the south curb of Main Street, near the Triple Underpass, where a bullet ricocheted . The 1963 investigation showed that the 1963 investigation was inconclusive . The investigation found that the fourth target had been placed at Main Street .
 The HSCA ultimately concluded that the Z200 shot was fired a few frames earlier than believed at the time of the test firing . The biggest problem for the acoustic team was finding a method of determining the origin of the shot .
 The BBN experts decided that the motorcycle had to have been somewhere within Dealey Plaza to pick up the sound of the gunfire . The experts say it had to be somewhere within the area to hear the gunshots .
 The motorcycle was likely to be no more than about 18 feet from the center of the 40-foot-wide street . BBN arranged three groups of twelve microphones each (for a total of thirty-six possible positions) spaced at 18-foot intervals .
 Test shots would be fired and recorded for each of the three separate groups of microphone positions . Test shots were fired to record each of three separate positions .
 In this way, scientists reasoned that in a worst-case scenario, motorcycle position would be no more than 18 feet from any test microphone location .
 The theory behind this rather complicated acoustic test was that a gunshot produces an initial impulse sound, followed by a series of echoes . The test was designed to test the sound of a gunshot fired .
 Each microphone position would record a sequence of uniquely spaced impulse sounds depending on the location of the shooter, the target, and echo-producing structures surrounding that microphone . The sound is unique to the position of each microphone position and the location .
 The committee could obtain unique “acoustical fingerprints” of various combinations of shooter, target, and microphone locations .
 If acoustical fingerprints produced in the 1978 reconstruction matched those on the 1963 police dispatch tape, it would be “a strong indication” that the impulse sounds on the police tape were gunshots recorded by an open microphone in the motorcade .
 Over the next seventeen days, BBN experts made 2,592 comparisons between the recorded test shots and the impulse sounds on the Dallas police tape . Over the course of the day, experts compared the test shots to the sounds recorded on the tape .
 Police were looking for a close match between the police tape impulses and the arrival of echoes at each microphone position as recorded during the test firings . What they were looking at was a . close match .
 The location of the motorcycle’s open microphone was unknown . It was sixty-eight degrees in Dallas on the day of the assassination, while the temperature hit nearly ninety degrees .
 The difference in temperature was figured into the final calculations by the acoustic experts . The temperature was also figured into calculations by acoustic experts.
 Each potential match also had to have a sufficiently high “correlation coefficient,” a number that describes the quality of the match between a test echo pattern and an impulse sound sequence on the tape .
 A correlation coefficient of 0. or higher (with 1. being perfect) was considered sufficient to catch all impulse sound sequences that might actually represent true gunfire . The correlation coefficient was 0.5 to 0.7% .
 The correlation coefficient was set to be high, but it also allowed the possibility that “random noise or other factors” would also read as a match . On the other hand, setting the correlation coefficient that high allowed .
 After comparing all 2,592 combinations of echo patterns recorded during the test firing with the ‘pops and clicks” on the eight-second sequence of the 1963 Dallas police tape, BBN acoustic team discovered fifteen test echo patterns that were within the .006-second window and
 Fifteen patterns were found to be grouped around four different periods of time on the Dallas police tape, an indication that four shots had been fired . The patterns were grouped around the time four shots were fired .
 The BBN team plotted the location of the microphone of each “match” against the time shown on the police tape . To determine which of the fifteen “matches” were valid gunshot sounds, if any, and which were false, the team plotted each of the
 BBN calculated the probability that this could have occurred at random as less than 1 percent . The probability of this happening at random is 1 percent, BBN said .
 A motorcycle with an open microphone moved through Dealey Plaza and that it did record gunfire . According to BBN, this fact, in and of itself, tended to confirm that there was a motorcycle with a microphone moving through Dealy Plaza .
 BBN scientists said that the expected number of false alarms in an analysis this size was 13, but, as indicated, only six had been found . Though nine correlations remained, with “no other acoustical evidence that would help to determine which of the remaining nine correlations are false
 BBN believed there was only a fifty-fifty chance that any of the nine remaining correlations were actual gunshots . BBN believes two of the correlations almost certainly were gunshots .
 Time span between onset of first impulse pattern and onset of fourth impulse pattern was 7. seconds . From the channel 1 tape, the time span between the onset of the first . impulse pattern . and the onset . of the fourth impulse patterns was 7 seconds .
 When corrected for the time span, the real time span was 8. seconds . The tape recorder was running about 5 percent too slowly, BBN said .
 Barger called to give the committee the news . Barger found evidence of four shots, one of which came from the grassy knoll . The final calculations were completed on September 6, 1978 .
 Blakey suggested he come to Washington the day before he was scheduled to testify to discuss his work . Blakey: "I'm going to testify before a panel of experts will be able to discuss my work"
 Barger met with Blakey, Congressman Floyd J Fithian of Indiana, and Deputy Chief Counsel Gary Cornwell . Barger explained his methodology to explain his methodology .
 The men examined photographs taken at the time of the assassination to see if they could identify the motorcycle with the stuck microphone button . None of the photographs covered the time and place where they expected the motorcycle to be, Blakey said .
 For grassy knoll advocates, such as Blakey, Barger’s testimony was a disaster . For the HSCA, grassy-kills advocates, the testimony is a disaster, Blakey says .
 Blakey later understated the disaster when he wrote, “Barger turned out to be not very persuasive.”
 All the virtues that had made him a fine scientist worked against him as a witness . All of the virtues he had made himself a scientist, he said .
 Barger said he was only confident that two of the four impulse sounds were actual gunfire, not false alarms . Barger was poor at explaining himself, Blakey said . Everyone who understands the English language easily understood his testimony .
 The Warren Commission presented a massive amount of testimony that three shots were fired over the same period of time that Barger and his people analyzed, hearing two of those shots meant nothing . Barger's people say hearing two shots from the time of the time was meaningless .
 There is only a probability of “somewhere between 60 or 70 percent” that three shots were fired, Barger said . Barger went on to say that there was only a . probability of the three shots fired .
 Barger capped his damaging testimony by saying his findings were only a “potential corroborating force” for a finding of four shots . He added that they were also a ‘potential discrediting force’ to such a theory .
 HSCA staff huddled to work out a strategy in the hope of reducing the uncertainty of Barger’s analysis . Barger testified before the House of Representatives on Tuesday night .
 They didn't want to leave the question of a conspiracy in the Kennedy assassination to the flip of a coin . They didn’t want to . leave the . question of . a conspiracy to the . assassination to be left open to speculation .
 If they could only refine BBN’s work and come up with better percentages, they might help eliminate some of the doubt .
 Mark Weiss and Ernest Aschkenasy failed to find a way to take the data further . The BBC asked them to take a further look at the data, but they were initially optimistic .
 Barger, Weiss and Aschkenasy came up with a mathematical extension of BBN’s approach . They thought it could reduce the element of chance in their findings .
 Barger was unable to say that the grassy knoll shot actually existed with any certainty greater than fifty-fifty was because the position of the alleged motorcycle with the open microphone was unknown at the time of the test firings .
 Barger’s team was forced to place test microphones at 18-foot intervals along the motorcade route and fire from only one of many possible locations behind the stockade fence atop the grassy knoll .
 Barger used a .006-second coincidence window that allowed for the possibility that the open microphone was at least near, if not exactly at, one of the test microphone positions .
 The probability of deducing an actual gunshot was limited to 50 percent . The downside of using such a large window was that it increased the possibility of including false alarms in the test results .
 Weiss and Aschkenasy assumed they could increase the level of confidence in the result by finding a way to reduce the coincidence window to .001 of a second or less .
 BBN’s tests had already narrowed the likely location of the motorcycle with the open microphone at the time of the third shot to a small area at the beginning of Elm Street . Theoretically, they reasoned, this was possible because of the fact that the motorcycle was in the
 One way to rework the study would be to go back to Dealey Plaza and place test microphones 1 foot apart and fire from various locations atop the grassy knoll .
 This approach, however, could not be implemented because of the limited time and funds available to the committee . This approach would have been implemented, but it was not implemented .
 Weiss and Aschkenasy figured that the only practical way to acquire the necessary test echo patterns was to predict them analytically . Weiss: "Only practical way" to acquire necessary test patterns is to predict their patterns .
 Weiss and Aschkenasy located one sequence of impulse sounds on the Dallas tape that was “very similar” to the sequence of predicted echoes . Weiss: “Very similar’s sequence of echo sounds on Dallas tape is ‘similar’ to that predicted echoes
 A visual inspection showed that “almost all” of the impulse sounds and predicted echoes fell within the .001-second coincidence window they had established . “Almost all’s of the impulses sounds and predictions fell within .001 seconds,” they said .
 The impulse sounds on the police tape, identified as coming from the grassy knoll, were something other than gunshots . Weiss and Aschkenasy noted that the “high degree of correlation” between the sounds and the echo predictions did not preclude the possibility that the impulse sounds
 The probability that the impulse sounds on the tape would match the echo pattern predictions (within .001 of a second) and not be gunshots was very small, less than 5 percent . However, the probability of the sounds matching the pattern is very small .
 The path of the microphone, as it received the muzzle blast and its echoes, extends for about 6 feet along Elm Street . It received a muzzle blast, and its echo echoes, along the street .
 The uncertainty in the initial position is plus or minus 1 foot, which corresponds to the accuracy of measurements made on the topographical survey map” . tone wonders how Barger could feel that Weiss and Aschkenasy had validated his work .
 Weiss and Aschkenasy disagreed with every other impulse sound that Barger had identified as a gunshot . Weiss agreed that the head shot was fired at frame 312, but disagreed with the other impulse sounds . Barger was shot in the head .
 Barger and Weiss had to know that they were on the cusp of becoming important historical figures, and there was an intoxicating buzz, not only among them but also among Blakey and his closest associates . Barger, and particularly Weiss and Aschkenasy, had .
 Weiss and Aschkenasy, along with Barger, met with committee members in executive session . Weiss and Barger presented their united position on December 11, 1978 . Barger was elected to the House of Representatives .
 Many of the committee members were surprised by the finding . Although some had seen it coming, many had been surprised by it .
 They took turns quizzing experts, struggling to come to terms with what it meant if the experts were right .
 Congressman Sawyer broke a no-leak policy and told a Grand Rapids, Michigan, radio audience about the executive session and the finding of a 95 percent certainty that a shot had come from the grassy knoll . Nine days later, Sawyer told a radio audience that the shooting had come
 Barger had discovered the evidence in July and presented in public hearings in September . Blakey later pointed out that everyone seemed to forget the fact that the evidence wasn't new at all .
 Chief among the tasks was confirming that there actually was a motorcycle in the position predicted by the scientists . It was a necessary and key step to validating their conclusions .
 On December 29,1978, in the eleventh hour of the HSCA’s existence, the committee met in the Caucus Room of the Cannon House Office Building for one final day of televised hearings .
 The inclusion of five of Blakey’s seven witnesses is more than questionable . But the inclusion of the five witnesses to the case is more questionable .
 Landis also wrote that he “was not certain’s about the origin of the second shot . Landis said he was “not certain” about the origins .
 Royce Skelton reported what he “guessed” was a bullet hitting the pavement near the president’s car late in the shooting sequence . He said it was "in direct line from the Texas Depository" The Depository, not the grassy knoll
 Following this rather unpersuasive prelude, Blakey called Mark Weiss and Ernest Aschkenasy to testify . Weiss and Aschkinasy testified in court .
 McLain was challenged by HSCA deputy chief counsel Gary Cornwell . Cornwell conjured up the image of the lionhearted fighter who, though being clubbed to the canvas over and over again, continues to stagger to his feet for more punishment until miraculously, he ultimately prev
 Since Curry gave this command on channel 2, this testimony by McLain seemingly tore the whole mathematically constructed theory of the HSCA asunder . McLain's testimony seems to contradict the theory of how to do it .
 The committee knew that since the shots fired during the assassination were believed to have been recorded over Dallas radio channel 1, if McLain’s microphone was switched to channel 2, not 1, then the alleged gunfire transmission could not have come from his motorcycle .
 McLain remembers catching up with the presidential limousine on the Stemmons Freeway as it crossed Continental Avenue during its race toward the hospital . McLain: "It was a race to the hospital. It was a nightmare," McLain said .
 McLain was shot by a cyclist in 1977 . McLain's radio was set at the time of the shooting .
 McLain says it would have been common for him not to be on channel 2, which Chief Curry was using to handle the motorcade traffic . McLain is a motorcycle officer and uses channel 2 to handle traffic control .
 McLain identified himself in a series of still frames taken from amateur films . McLain identifies himself in the still frames of two amateur films taken from two amateur film clips .
 McLain testified that McLain did not share the HSCA’s conclusion . But by inference from his testimony, it couldn’t have been clearer . McLain himself did not agree with the conclusion .
 HSCA members Samuel Devine and Robert Edgar wrote in dissent to the conclusion . “There is another reason to doubt the open-microphone evidence.” The HSCCA concluded that the evidence was consistent with the fact that the audio was recorded .
 McLain of the Dallas Police Department identified by acoustics experts as being the motorcycle operator of the motorcycle with an open mike to the left and rear of the President’s limousine . McLain was identified by the acoustic experts as .
 The officer himself rejects the assumption, which led to the test and reenactments . But, apparently, the officer himself rejected the assumption .
 Officer McLain's memory of where he was relative to the time of the first shot did, in fact, correspond— though it clearly did not . McLain said he was midway between Main and Elm on Houston, Barger estimating that the motorcycle with the open mike was very .
 The only challenge to the HSCA’s acoustic work at the time was submitted by Anthony J Pellicano, president ofVoice Interpretation & Analysis Ltd. in Chicago .
 Pellicano’s conclusions were based largely on the sound of sirens, which appear for the first time on the channel 1 open microphone recording more than two minutes after the presumed time of the shots .
 Channel 2 dispatcher Gerald D Henslee thought at the time that the open microphone was on the Stemmons Freeway . Pellicano noted that channel 2 dispatcher thought it was on Stemmon Freeway, telling an officer handling security for the motorcade .
 Barger testified that McLain's motorcycle would have picked up the sound of Chief Curry’s siren if McLain had been where Barger said he was . Barger disagreed with the claim that he disagreed with . McLain .
 It would require the most unlikely and unreasonable of assumptions—that the presidential limousine itself didn’t have its siren on while en route to the hospital .
 Berkowitz disagreed completely with HSCA acoustic experts . Berkowitz disagrees completely with acoustic experts. Berkowitz: "I'm not sure what's going to happen"
 Berkowitz’s research found that the motorcycle that picked up the suspect impulses was parked somewhere outside of the motorcade through Dealey Plaza . Berkowitz said the impulses weren’t even those of gunfire .
 A later report said that on the open mike channel 1 recording, the “clear and unambiguous sounds ... of sirens . . from a group of at least 3 vehicles” could be heard, a report said .
 McLain was a well-known law enforcement officer . McLain died in a car crash at the scene of the crash . Police say McLain's death was an accident .
 At the conclusion of the committee’s final hearing, Blakey had the Zapruder film shown again, this time synchronized to the 1978 test shots fired in Dealey Plaza . The film was edited to match the four sound events described by the acoustic experts .
 Blakey later wrote, “It was as if we had all been returned to Dealey Plaza to hear, as well as see, the assassination’s assassination. Blakey: “We had all had all of us to hear and see the assassination.”
 On December 31, 1978, the HSCA announced its judgment, reached after six hours of heated discussion behind closed doors, that “scientific acoustical evidence established a high probability that two gunmen fired at President John F Kennedy” and that the president was “probably assassinated
 Committee concluded Oswald fired his first shot at 12:30:47 . Committee also concluded that Oswald fired first shot in Zapruder film to channel 1 Dictabelt .
 At the very eve of its dissolution last week, the committee, in a “rush to judgment,” went off in “diametrically opposite direction” The committee,’s chairman, says, was “in a rush to judgment” at
 Two weeks before the testimony of Weiss and Aschkenasy, the HSCA was prepared to conclude that there was no conspiracy in the assassination . After two years of intensive investigation, the investigation was concluded that no conspiracy was involved .
 Two young professors from Queens got the HSCA to reject the Warren Commission's findings . They used just a survey map of Dealey Plaza, ruler, a hand calculator, a length of string, and an oscilloscope . The two young professors used a ruler, ruler and a hand
 If the conspiracy conclusion of the professors at least had a little common sense behind it, that would be one thing . If the fourth-shot conspiracy conclusion had been more common sense, that's one thing.
 Justice Department responds with anger to HSCA request to review acoustic evidence . Justice Department says committee wants to finish what committee started . Committee says it wants to look at acoustic evidence, among other things, to review evidence .
 The HSCA conclusion is in conflict with its own finding that 80 percent of witnesses in Dealey Plaza heard three shots and 10 percent only two .
 90 percent of the witnesses heard three or fewer shots, not hearing the fourth shot . The HSCA came up with the idea of a fourth shot, not the first .
 The acoustic conclusion rejected the on-site hearing of 90 percent of the Dealey Plaza witnesses and accepted the hearing of 3.5 percent . Therefore, the acoustic conclusion of the hearing rejected 90 percent .
 It didn't take long for the HSCA’s questionable acoustic evidence to begin unraveling like a bargain-basement sweater .
 McLain met with James C Bowles, who, as previously indicated, was a Dallas police radio dispatch supervisor around the time of the assassination . Bowles gave him an opportunity to listen to both channels of the police radio transmissions, including the channel 1 recording that allegedly originated from McLain
 McLain recalled many of the motorcade instructions heard on channel 2 . He didn't recognize any of the sounds on channel 1 . McLain said he didn't know what sounds were heard on Channel 1 .
 The sound of the motorcycle clearly indicated the cycle was traveling way too fast to have been in the motorcade, he said . Though he had turned his siren on, there were no siren sounds from the motorcycle with the stuck microphone . When the sound of sirens did appear,
 McLain felt he had been sucker-punched by the committee, coaxed into giving answers in response to counsel’s ‘could this be’ questions . McLain said he felt the committee had coaxed him into answering questions that fit their acoustic theory .
 McLain says committee counsel asked him only “ could that have been my microphone, and I said, ‘Yeah, it could have been.” McLain said . McLain testified as he had testified in Washington .
 McLain is one of the important witnesses in the Kennedy assassination saga who has not been interviewed that much, so I decided to contact him, even at this late date, to see if there was anything he could add to his testimony . McLain's testimony was published in the HSC
 In a series of conversations with him over a two-year period, there were a few points. In a few of those points, he said: "In a few years, I've had a few things to say to him. I'm not sure if he'll be able to
 He specifically asked the people from the HSCA who worked with him when he went back to Washington to listen to the channel 1 and 2 tapes .
 I looked in the HSCA volumes to see if there was any reference to this matter, he said . Moreover, after he told me this, I looked into the volumes to find out what had happened .
 McLain: "The only thing I could find, though not explicit, tends to support what McLain said . The only thing he could find is that McLain was wrong .
 The HSCA Report says, “McLain was asked by the committee to come to Washington to testify.” The report says that the committee asked him to testify . The report also says he was asked to testify before the committee .
 McLain emerged from a room with Bowles after hearing the tapes . McLain said committee members had not played the tapefs] for him Friday in Washington, but instead had shown him three photos of a motorcycle, which he identified as his .
 Larry Sneed's book, No More Silence, came out in 1998 . I looked at what Jim Bowles had told Sneed for Sneed’s book . It was even later, when I looked once again at what he had told him .
 Bowles told Sneed that McLain had told him there was no way it was his mike that was stuck open . McLain said the HSCA “didn’t let me hear those tapes,” Bowles said McLain added, “They just
 Bowles, in 1990 interview with Sneed, was recounting a conversation with McLain twelve years earlier and simply misquoted McLain on this point . My conclusion is that Bowles was misquoting McLain in 1990 .
 Cornwell is now practicing law in Beaumont, Texas . Cornwell says Cornwell was a successful lawyer in the 1980s .
 McLain was ordered to be on channel 2 and remember many of the channel 2 transmissions during the motorcade . The importance of McLain being on channel two cannot be overemphasized . McLain will be remembered for his role in the event .
 The HSCA’s acoustic conclusion of a fourth shot, by itself, destroys the conclusion . McLain was the cyclist with the open microphone . The committee is basing it on McLain being the cyclist .
 McLain said he was “sure” the stuck mike was not his . He said the sound on the channel 1 cycle was ‘not the sound” of his cycle, a two-wheeler that day . McLain explained that he had ridden “both
 He added, “These people back there had already made up their minds and they tried to tell us what happened and they weren’t there’s there.” He said. ‘These people had already decided,’ he added .
 They had a specific place where they needed to know why I wouldn't have let him listen to them, unless there was some obstacle like the tapes not being in my hands, or a recorder not being easily accessible, or we were rushed for time .
 He said he does not recall telling McLain that there was no need for him to hear the tapes . McLain says he doesn't recall telling him that there is no need to hear tapes .
 A former Dallas police officer who knows and likes McLain told me that “this was fifteen years later, and H B. simply got rattled in his testimony” (Telephone interview of former Dallas officer, who spoke to me for nonattribution, on January 20, 2006
 McLain recognized many of the channel 2 transmissions when Bowles had him listen to the tapes in Dallas . This would mean, by definition, that he could not have had a stuck mike on channel 1 . McLain was on channel 2 and heard Curry’s instructions .
 If it had been stuck on open, he would not have been able to hear any broadcast . He would have been unable to hear the broadcast if it were stuck open .
 He could not have had any activity of any kind in connection with channel 1 . Also, by being on channel 2, he could have had no activity of interest in channel 1, he said .
 All cyclists in the motorcade like McLain literally had to be on channel 2 during the event . Dallas police motorcycle escorts were also involved in the motorcycle escorting . McLain: "I'm not surprised"
 Bobby Joe Dale was pulling up the rear on Houston at the time of the shots . Dale said he "was on channel 2” when the shooting occurred .
 The police radio on a motorcycle has two components, the receiver and the transmitter . There were no communications by motorcade officers on channel 1 during the motorcade or within minutes after the shooting .
 The receiver has two positions for operation, channels 1 and 2, which the cyclist chooses with the selector switch . The cyclist chooses the position of channel 1 or 2 with the switch .
 The “push-to-talk button ” would be stuck in the “on’s position . It was the ‘push to talk button “ that would be . stuck in . the "on" position . The "push to-talk" button would
 Courson agreed that McLain should have been on channel 2 like everyone else . Courson said it would have been impossible for McLain to have an open mike on channel 1. Courson: "If McLain was on channel two, and as he was supposed to be,
 Lumpkin was on the left side of Elm, Leon Gray was in the middle, and Steve Ellis on the right . Lumpkin and Gray were in the left and right of the box for the game .
 Lumpkin couldn’t remember the channel he was on, but he said that “I know that all of us in the escort were on the same channel, the motorcade channel,” he said . Lumpkin was on channel 2, which is the same as telling
 HSCA's 1979 rebuttal was published in 1993 as an appendix to Gary Savage’s JFK First Day Evidence . It was published by Gary Savage in 1993 . Had the HSC been privy to his insights, it might have saved itself a great deal of time, money
 When Bowles learned about the HSCA’s investigation of the police Dictabelt, he immediately contacted the investigator Jack Moriarty, whom he knew, and offered to help . Bowles offered to tell all he knew about the tapes and the interpretation of them .
 Bowles converted the tapes into transcript form for the Warren Commission . Bowles was Bowles who converted the transcripts into transcript forms for the commission .
 Bowles called Moriarty to find out why he wasn't receiving a subpoena to testify . Bowles didn't hear back from Moriarty for a few months before he heard back .
 Moriarty told Bowles, “Blakey has decided not to call you as a witness.” Bowles said . Moriarty said Bowles was not a witness in the case .
 None of the characteristics of a motorcycle escort are heard in the channel 1 recording . The recording does not appear to show motorcycle escort .
 The motorcycles accompanying the motorcade are known to have stopped periodically to maintain their position alongside motorcade vehicles . The motorcycles revved their engines in short, attention-gathering bursts to help move crowds back out of the street .
 The motorcade is moving at more than three times the known speed of the motorcade . Instead of a motorcade, there is the steady, uninterrupted beat of an engine moving at three times speed .
 Bowles found the recording is conspicuously absent of crowd noise . Crowd noise can clearly be heard “on at least ten channel 2 transmissions” emanating from the motorcade, he said . Bowles also found that crowd noise can be heard on channel 2 .
 It is difficult to imagine that the open microphone was so unreceptive to sound that it could not pick up any part of the sounds of the large, cheering crowd, which were amplified by the canyon-like effect of buildings around them on Main .
 HSCA acoustic experts only concerned themselves with the possible sounds of gunshots on the tape and never analyzed the motor sounds of the cycle . Bowles, who should know, pointed out that the experts only focused on the possible gunshots .
 The Investigations performance, over-head-74” cycle that McLain was riding is McLain’s bike . McLain: “I’m looking forward to a great ride.” McLain said .
 This fact alone, he said, “conclusively eliminated McLain as the suspect operator” of the open mike cycle . McLain’s arrest was the result of an FBI investigation into the use of an open microphone cycle .
 The HSCA offered a variety of what Bowles calls ‘foolish’ explanations, none of which hold up under scrutiny . The sound of sirens first appear approximately two minutes after the shooting, and then appear to rise and recede in intensity .
 McLain: "You don’t ‘forget’ or decide not to use your siren,” as the HSCA suggested was the case with McLain . McLain says he didn't forget to use his siren . He says he doesn't
 McLain would have had a 15-20-second head start on McLain, committee says . Because of traffic it would have been physically impossible for him to catch up within two minutes, let alone pass the cars in the motorcade .
 McLain was one of the first to arrive at the hospital, assisting Mrs. McLain . He could not have then fallen back (as the committee suggests to explain the sirens fading out) since he arrived at the scene .
 McLain says the two-wheeler sound and tone is more precise than the flathead engine . Bowles says McLain was allegedly catching up with the rest of the motorcade (which would have required) McLain's motorcade to catch up .
 The “siren episode” started at 12:33:01 on the channel 1 tape . It’s like listening to the difference between a new Lincoln and a Model-T” tBowles said .
 In a telephone interview and a letter to me, Bowles elaborated on the Doppler effect . Bowles: "Doppler Effect" is the result of a Doppling effect on the sound waves .
 It’s more than just a sound rising and then receding in intensity, which anyone could hear and which would not justify attributing the name of an individual to it . Anyone could hear the sound rising, receding and receding, anyone could .
 It refers to the “instant” when the change in sound occurs, Bowles says . Bowles: The sound is a "instant" when the sound of the sound occurs .
 At 12:33:01, channel 1 recorded the starting of low siren sounds, says Bowles .
 Bowles said, “It is impossible to ignore the Doppler effect which occurred at the time and place where the motorcade was, and where the open microphone had to be as well.” Bowles says . Bowles: “The open microphone also had to
 The HSCA acknowledged the Doppler effect at the correct time, but conveniently ignored it thereafter without an explanation why . It was only acknowledged the sound rising and receding in intensity, an acknowledgment that automatically would give rise to the effect .
 This was the only time and place where the Doppler effect could have and did happen . This is the only place where it could have happened .
 Bowles concluded that the open mike was most likely among a group of three-wheelers dispatched to a motor pool detail at the Trade Mart awaiting the president’s arrival .
 McLain's motorcycle carried the open microphone, Bowles said . Bowles added that to believe that McLain’s motorcycle carried an open microphone is to believe a truly incredible thing happened .
 He would have heard nothing that he had been trained, prepared and expecting to hear, he says . Chief Curry would have been instructed to conduct the conduct of the motorcade, he adds .
 The HSCA “carefully calculated their intended direction, then carefully worded their questions to elicit the desired answers” Bowles says . Bowles said the HSCa “came up with the answers’s intended direction’
 Unless it is impossible, the only truthful answer would be ‘yes’ was not asked to relate to probabilities . Unless it was wholly impossible, it would be 'yes' for the first time .
 McLain was carefully coached into giving answers which supported counsel’s preconceived positions, McLain said . McLain's answers were carefully chosen to support counsel's preconceived notions . He said McLain should not have been allowed to speak to the media .
 McLain was allowed to consider only that material which they had selected . By limiting the range of information available to him, they allowed McLain to consider the material he had chosen .
 The Dallas Police Department had a motorcycle with its engine on in the plaza, and with an open mike picking up the sounds from the tests for transmission back to the Dictabelt at the dispatcher’s office .
 HSCA acoustic experts used Dallas Police Department radios to conduct their tests . Police chief says he assumed that police had used the radios to do the tests .
 After this there are no voices for ten seconds and then you clearly hear the sound of gunshot, even the echo, on the tape . After this ten seconds there is no voice for 10 seconds before the sound is heard .
 This sequence is repeated on the tape several times, all followed by a clearly audible shot . This sequence was repeated several times . The tape was recorded in the early 1980s .
 HSCA's conclusion refutes the conclusion of a fourth shot in Dealey Plaza . What Bowles has in his possession is extremely powerful evidence that by itself refutes that .
 The HSCA used thirty-six microphones to pick up the sounds, not a police motorcycle with an open mike . Blakey reaffirmed that the police motorcycle was not a motorbike with a microphone .
 The HSCA used an open microphone on a Dallas police motorcycle, and a police Dictaphone and Dictabelt to record the sound . The Dallas police force recorded the sound of Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963 .
 We went there to scientifically measure sounds in Dealey Plaza from the firing of the rifle and pistol . We went to measure sounds from the sounds of the gun and pistol firing . We also measured sounds from Dealey plaza from the sound of a rifle firing .
 At 12:33:01 the open mike picked up the sounds of sirens on Industrial Boulevard approaching the open microphone . The open microphone picked up sirens approaching the microphone at 12:30:01 .
 The microphone is mounted in the middle of the crossbar that extends between the left and right handlebars . The microphone was mounted in same place, in the same place as the microphone .
 The engine is still about 18 to 20 inches below the mike, separated by the gas tank . The engine was still 18 to . 20 inches above the mire, separated from the gas .
 The weight of the evidence is lessened by the fact that it surfaced publicly so late, even though it was always supposedly available . Yes, but the weight of it is lessening than the fact it surfaced so late .
 In December 2005, Bowles casually mentioned to me that it was “Willie Price’s three-wheeler at the Trade Mart” that had the open mike . In my December 8,2005, telephone interview with Bowles, he casually mentioned that it .
 Price's name was mentioned in a matter-of-fact reference to him . Price had never heard of Price’s name before and was taken aback by the reference . Price, who supposedly could clear up the mystery of the open mike and in the process, by himself,
 Gary Savage’s book, JFK First Day Evidence, is published by Gary Bowles . Bowles' transcription of JFK JFK assassination is available in Gary Savage's book . The full transcript of JFK assassination transcripts is available on CNN.com .
 It was common knowledge in the traffic division that it was Willie’s cycle . Willie's cycle is common knowledge, but it's common knowledge that it's his cycle, police say .
 Bowles said he did tell HSCA investigator Jack Moriarty about Price, but had no way of knowing if Moriarty passed this information on to HSCC chief counsel Blakey . Bowles proceeded to tell me that he did not know who passed on the information to Moriarty
 Bowles had mentioned Price's name to Larry Sneed for his book, No More Silence, in a 1990 interview . Bowles told Sneed in a July 11, 1990, taped interview . He said Price's story was the first he'd mentioned Price to anyone outside of Moriarty
 Bowles sent me the transcription of the portion of the tape that dealt with this matter . He alludes to Price in response to Sneed’s statement that “obviously, you don’t believe the motorcycle was present in Dealey Plaza,” by saying
 Moriarty knows whose motorcycle it was, Bowles says he was referring to Moriarty . Bowles: "He [Bowles] knows his motorcycle [Moriarty] knows whose bike it was"
 There were several people who knew whose motorcycle had the stuck transmitter . The transmitter was stuck on the motorcycle .
 The main thing is, the man has had a heart attack, and his wife had a . heart attack. But the main thing . is that he has had the heart attack . The man has also suffered from a stroke, but his wife has survived .
 Sneed did not put the above portion of his interview with Bowles in his book . Sneed says the interview was not published in the book .
 He kept telling me he had “no proof” it was Price, despite my telling him more than once I knew he didn’t, that I only wanted to know if it was “common knowledge” It was Price. Price.
 The officer was so weak that it was clear to me he didn't want me to use his name in the book, and when I told him I wouldn’t, he was relieved . He was relieved when he was told he would not be allowed to publish his name .
 McLain: "No, it wasn’t Price. Price. I decided to call McLain to get his input on this issue and when I did, he said, “No. It wasn” Price. He said .
 When I got back from Washington, J C. C. and I tried to figure out who it was, we concluded it was Leslie Beilharz . Leslie was the author of the book, "Leslie BeilHarz," a book of sorts .
 Beilharz had only said his “might” have been . Bowles said he always knew that BeilHarz “was a possibility,” but that he still thought it was Price because Price had told him his mike was stuck that day .
 Price’s location at the Trade Mart in the motorpool area, per Bowles, “lines up perfectly with the Doppler effect,” he says . Beilharz's position on Industrial Boulevard right next to the trade Mart did not. Price”
 Beilharz said he was unable to verify that it was his whistling on the tape . Bowles played the tape over the phone and played him the tape to the phone . BeilHarz: Bowles called him to play the tape and he said he couldn't verify
 Former Dallas police officer Paul Bentley helped take Oswald into custody at the Texas Theater . Bentley was one of the men who helped capture Oswald at the theater .
 "I heard other names too,” he said, though he couldn’t recall these other names . However, he said he heard some other names, but couldn't recall these others .
 Professor Blakey says Bowles’s assertion that he told Moriarty about Willie Price having the open mike is no memory of Moriarty . Bowles said Bowles thought he knew the identity of the cyclist with the open microphone .
 Moriarty was a fine investigator, and if anything he always told me more than I needed to know, he told me . Moriarty always said more than he needed to tell me, he said .
 Blakey suggested I call his former chief deputy for the HSCA, Gary Cornwell . Cornwell is a former HSCPA chief deputy . Blakey said Cornwell was a "good friend" of the governor, who was in charge of the agency .
 Sheriff Bowles admits to having a failing memory at his age of seventy-seven . Sheriff says he's a good and honorable man, but admits to failing memory .
 Bowles admits that Price was embarrassed and didn't want to get involved . This, together with the ill health of Price and his wife, this, is why he never mentioned Price’s name in his 1979 essay or his 1990 tape-recorded conversation with Sneed .
 To believe the opposite I’d have to believe that Moriarty didn’t give Blakey Price’s name, which makes no sense, or that if he did, Blakey did not have his people contact Price, which would be a serious dereliction of duty
 Bowles is insistent he gave Moriarty Price’s name, saying he gave it to him because he and the committee were conducting a lawful investigation . Yet Bowles insists he gave Price Price's name to Moriarty .
 It is no honor to be identified as the officer who had the stuck mike on the day of the assassination . A U.S. congressional committee spent millions of dollars reinvestigating the assassination and concluded there was a conspiracy only because it believed there was an officer's mike in De
 If it was their mike that was stuck, and they weren't in Dealey Plaza, they wouldn’t be too eager or happy to acknowledge this . So perhaps most people, if it were their mikes that were stuck, would be happy to admit this .
 Former Dallas police officer Leslie Beilharz made the statement to me in January of 2006 . He said he was responding to a call from a former police officer who was involved in the shooting . The former officer's statement was made in a phone call to the former officer .
 Retired Dallas police officer retired in 1989 after thirty-five years . He worked for the Department of Defense for several years and then as a substitute high school teacher .
 In recent years right through through the present, he has worked four days a week as a security officer at a large Cadillac dealership in Dallas .
 He and his wife have been living in the same Dallas home for forty-seven years . They also have had the same telephone number for close to half a century .
 Beilharz told me that his assignment on the day of the assassination on his threewheeler cycle was to go to the Industrial off-ramp of the Stemmons Freeway near the Trade Mart and keep it closed to all traffic until the president was inside
 Presidential motorcade drives by the Trade Mart at a high rate of speed without stopping and going into the Mart as scheduled . Dallas patrol officer says he saw the presidential motorcade drive by the trade mart without stopping . He and Vernon Glasgow, the officer assigned to ride on the back of his
 He said the motorcade reached Parkland before he and Glasgow did, so he didn't see the president being wheeled into the hospital . He said he did not see the presidential motorcade arrive at Parkland .
 When his three-wheeler arrived at Parkland, he walked into the emergency room area and someone told him it looked like the president was dead . Someone told him that someone else said it was looking like it was the president .
 Beilharz: "When I called in ‘269 clear,’ at that moment I started hearing radio transmissions from the police dispatcher," he says . Then he says he calls in "269 clear," then he says, "At that moment, the dispatcher began to hear
 In addition to the point I made earlier, that having the stuck mike is nothing to be proud of, Beilharz’s credibility is further enhanced by the fact that he has never tried to profit from this in any way .
 For instance, he has only told three people the above story, and each time they called him .
 HSCA had completed its investigation in the late 1970s . Bowles asked him to come to his office to listen to police tapes after the investigation was complete .
 Bowles then had a Dallas Morning News reporter call him on the phone about it, and then he received my call some thirty-five years later . Bowles says he received a call some 30 years later from a reporter who asked him about it .
 Bowles added that if it’s not a short but the mike is sticking anyway, you also, of course, have to bring it to the shop . Bowles said that if you’ve got a short, you need to take it in the shop. Bow
 A very good argument could be made that it was Beilharz’s mike that was stuck open . (Beirharz's mike stuck open. CE 705, 17 H 396) Beirarz: "A very good . argument to be made
 There is much evidence that the stuck mike was on a three-wheeler like Beilharz was on . McLain was operating on a two-wheeled vehicle, not two-wheelers like McLain . There is evidence that McLain had been on the three-
 The motorcycle with the open, stuck mike was not in Dealey Plaza, but in a stationary location where the sirens of cars in the motorcade approached and then passed . Beilharz’s location would fit perfectly perfectly .
 Beilharz just happens to be the only Dallas motorcyclist that he, Bowles, and McLain apparently knew who whistled all the time while on his cycle . He was the only one of the three men in the team that knew him whistling .
 Beilharz’s mike may not have been the mike . But there is one piece of evidence that by itself might prove it was not BeilHarz's .
 Beilharz’s transmission [“269.269.5] is estimated to have been made by Beilhharz . Bowles, listening to the transmissions subsequent to this point on the channel 1 tape, estimated to me that BeilHarz called in
 “I am through with my second assignment”] can be heard on the tape from Parkland somewhere around 12:39 .
 The open, stuck mike had already been cleared for three minutes . Beilharz did not clear any stuck mikes at 12:39. But by this time, it had already cleared .
 The only possibility is that someone accidentally moved or jostled Beilharz’s three-wheeler . The mike could have cleared itself in the crowded, hectic situation in the hospital parking area .
 Willie Price's three-wheeler may have been the car that had the stuck mike . Beilharz said he hadn't heard of Price's car .
 He says he first heard about Willie’s mike by hearsay in the department back in 1963 and 1964 . When I asked him to try hard to recall, he said, “I believe I first heard . about it being Willie”
 Willie told me personally that it was his mike. And it was probably in 1978, around the time of the HSCA, he said . "Willie's mike" was probably the mike .
 Price told the officer it was his mike, but he said he couldn't give him the name of any other officer in the department who could personally attest to me that Price had said it was the mike . The officer said Price had told him that he had a microphone .
 Price had his cycle into the repair shop after the assassination for some type of repair, the officer assumed it was to fix his microphone . Bowles told me that one of the officers I spoke to, in particular, had told him that Price told him the stuck mike was his .
 An important issue only touched on earlier, although the mathematics behind acoustic theory and the formulas used by Dr. Dr. John Defterios was only briefly mentioned earlier .
 James Barger, Mark Weiss, and Ernest Aschkenasy to arrive at their conclusions are well over my head . It is obvious from their own testimony that for the acoustic evidence they developed to be valid, a motorcycle with an open microphone had to have been present at the precise location
 HSCA acoustic experts placed the motorcycles where the experts placed them . All of their conclusions stem from this locational premise . In other words, the evidence still cannot stand without verification of the motorcycles’ existence .
 HSCA chief counsel Blakey says the committee had the best evidence possible . The committee had photographic evidence that there was a motorcycle where the acoustic evidence had said it was, he says .
 From the very beginning it was obvious that the HSCA lacked the photographic support necessary to verify the work of its acoustic experts . Yet, from the very . beginning it . seemed that from the . beginning of the . process it was . obvious that . the . photographic support needed to
 In fact, the evidence that the HSCA ultimately relied on proves the experts were wrong . As you'll see, as you’ll see, the expert’s findings prove that they are wrong .
 As previously indicated, during his first public appearance before the HSCA on September 11, 1978, Dr. John Sutter made a public appearance . Dr. Sutter was a member of the National Medical Council .
 The search for photographic verification reportedly continued after Barger testified . The HSCA's primary focus was to reduce Barger's uncertainty about a fourth shot from the grassy knoll .
 Mark Weiss and Ernest Aschkenasy are behind the scenes in the latest episode of The Daily Mail’s new series, The Daily Sketch .
 Weiss and Aschkenasy’s calculations also assumed that Barger's placement of the motorcycle with the open microphone was correct . Barger himself conceded that point hadn’t yet been verified with films and photographs .
 He would have been more accurate if he had said that the acoustic evidence would be destroyed by such proof, he said . He would've said that such proof would not destroy acoustic evidence .
 The Hughes film sequence ends before McLain’s motorcycle gets much farther north on Houston than the crosswalk at Main and Houston . The question of McLain's exact position at the time of the shooting is still unresolved .
 Hughes film clearly shows that the presidential limousine had already turned the corner onto Elm before McLain started north on Houston . McLain would have had to make up the distance, by around 20 to 30 feet, that would have been around 30 .
 McLain would have no reason to concentrate on what car was “turning the corner,” and he was never asked . Hughes fdm indicates he would have had to have seen, not the dark blue presidential limousine .
 Barger said that before the cycle slowed down to a greatly reduced speed, it had only been traveling around 11 mph (2 HSCA 68), which would never have allowed it to pick up the 50 to 70 feet it would have had to in order to get where the HSC
 McLain didn't close the gap between his motorcycle and the president's car at all, which he would have had to do to validate Barger’s conclusion . McLain would have to do that to validate the conclusion, which Barger said was a mistake .
 Although Barger testified that McLain closed the gap, he offered no evidence, only speculation . McLain testified that Barger's testimony was "only speculation" McLain won't testify, but Barger says McLain "closhed"
 HSCA counsel carefully avoided asking McLain on the witness stand if he sped up on Houston . McLain would have had to have sped up to get to where the agency said he was, but counsel avoided this question .
 McLain testified to no such thing. But when we turn to that page we find that McLain . McLain's testimony is not what he testified to the Senate .
 The HSCA acknowledged it was “not able to evaluate’s photographs,” but noted in its final report that these photographs “supported’t” conclusion . At the very least the committee accepted Groden's word that the additional evidence was further proof
 Sprague says the film depicted McLain’s motorcycle approaching the corner of Elm and Houston well after the last shot, not at the time of the first shot, as Groden claimed . Sprague had first seen the film when he visited Dorman back in 1967 .
 Sprague says McLain couldn't have covered the distance necessary to verify the acoustic evidence in the 3.5-second period that Sprague estimated was available to him . Sprague was equally hard on the Hughes film, pointing out what the HSCA should have already known .
 In essence, no motorcycle was in a position to transmit the sounds of gunfire . The sound of gunfire was muffled by the sound of a motorcycle .
 Sprague wrote to U.S. Attorney General Benjamin R Civiletti requesting an opportunity to meet with him personally to discuss information he supplied to the HSCA . Sprague: "I called to their attention some important photographic evidence"
 This evidence proves that the acoustical analysis by the committee’s outside consultants at Bolt Beranek and Newman, and by Professors Aschkenasy and Weiss, is faulty . This evidence .
 I called this faulty analysis to the attention of the outside consultants, the committee’s staff, and the committee's members, before the hearings and during hearings, as well as during the hearings, I said .
 The release of the committee’s final report in July of 1979 offered nothing to counter the criticism on the acoustic evidence, sticking to the conclusions reached during the eleventh-hour hearings .
 Three members of the twelve-person HSCA panel vigorously dissented from the fourth-shot acoustic conclusion, contending that the evidence was insufficient . Three of the panel members said the evidence against the conclusion was insufficient.
 He disagreed with the fourth-shot conclusion and later wrote a fourth dissent to the HSCA’s acoustic conclusion, but it was submitted too late to be included in the report . However, he disagreed with that conclusion .
 Neither Blakey nor Chairman Stokes could recall if Burke voted . Neither could recall Burke if he voted .
 A former staff member of the HSCA told me for nonattribution that Burke showed modest interest in her duties . That would tend to go in the direction of her not showing up to vote, the former staffer says .
 Her apparent state of mind is that she was in favor of the conspiracy conclusion, I’m counting her, without assurance, as a vote for conspiracy based on the acoustic findings . But since her apparent state-of-mind is that . I'm counting her as a . vote
 The bottom line is that four of the twelve HSCA members dissented to the conclusion of conspiracy based on the acoustic findings, and a fifth dissented . Burke was present but didn’t vote in a roll call vote of the 1978 vote . In a roll-call vote
 The vote in favor of conspiracy was 5 to 2, Dodd and Edgar being the dissenters . Dodd, Edgar and Dodd were dissenters of the vote .
 The press jumped on the committee for embracing a ‘conspiracy’ on such flimsy evidence . The press said the committee embraced a “conspiracy by embracing a conspiracy’
 The Justice Department turned the HSCA’s acoustics report over to the FBI in December of 1979 for reevaluation . Little was accomplished during the next seven months .
 In July 1980, former HSCA chief counsel Robert Blakey, confident that the Justice Department’s reevaluation would validate the Justice Dept. work, complained that the federal government was re-evaluating its acoustic work .
 In reaching his conclusion of four shots, Blakey didn't put his own two and two together . Blakey said he didn't think he had two or two shots in four shots .
 Kennedy was hit only twice, both shots coming from the three shots fired by Oswald to Kennedy’s right rear . We know he firmly believes that Kennedy was shot only twice . Both shots were fired from Oswald's right rear, according to the book .
 Professor believes organized crime was behind the assassination, no one else else . We also know that organized crime is behind the murder, not one else .
 He believes the gunman who fired one shot at Kennedy from the grassy knoll had been employed by organized crime . Therefore, the gunman had to have had an organized crime background, he says .
 If Blakey is right about a fourth shot fired from the grassy knoll, this means organized crime employed Oswald to shoot at Kennedy . Organized crime also employed a rifleman to fire at Kennedy, Blakey says . The biggest murder in its history, organized crime's biggest murder
 He didn't hit any part of Kennedy’s body . He couldn’t even hit part of the presidential limousine .
 Dennis denied that investigators are stalling but admitted that they had not yet worked out a procedure for acoustic reevaluation . Dennis denies that department investigators were stalling, said they are working out a new procedure .
 Dennis said that if the evidence proved that more than one person was involved, the department was prepared to reopen the case . Dennis said the department is prepared to re-open the case if evidence proves that more people were involved in the crime .
 This extreme unlikelihood, completely apart from all the evidence, points irresistibly away from the HSCA’s second-gunman-on-the-grassy-knoll position . This extreme . unlikelihood . apart from . all the . evidence, the evidence points
 Critics say the Justice Department is stalling on the case . The Justice Department has been accused of stalling the case in the past .
 In 1980 letter to former HSCA chairman Louis Stokes, special counsel to the attorney general defended the Justice Department’s efforts .
 FBI, CIA, NSA were asked to help review acoustic evidence, but the CIA and NSA said they didn't have “specialized equipment or expert personnel” to help . The FBI, NSA, CIA and FBI were all asked to review the evidence .
 FBI report: HSCA experts failed to prove that sounds were shots or that they came from Dealey Plaza . FBI report concluded that the sounds did not come from the site . The FBI report concludes that the recordings were not of shots fired from the area .
 FBI investigators match sound of a gunshot fired in Greensboro, North Carolina, in 1979 with the impulse sounds on the 1963 Dallas police tapes thought to be a shot fired from the grassy knoll . FBI investigators found that using the same correlation method, they could match the recorded sound of
 FBI report points out that it's impossible to determine how Weiss and Aschkenasy arrived at the conclusion that the impulse sounds were the result of a gunshot blast and not some other sound . The FBI report pointed out that the FBI report was impossible .
 The FBI noted that scientific literature shows that all sounds produce echoes off hard surfaces . This is one of the ways the HSCA acoustic team said they had determined these were gunshots .
 Detecting a shock wave (the other way Weiss and Aschkenasy attempted to distinguish sounds) accurately is very difficult, even under highquality forensic conditions . The shock wave itself produces a set of delay echoes which combine and change many characteristics of the muzzle blast sound .
 The FBI's Technical Services Division concluded that the HSCA’s three acoustic experts were almost a joke . In sum, the FBI said that the findings of the experts were 'almost a joke' The FBI said the findings were based on the three experts' findings .
 Television cameras capture the moment, including the sounds of gunshots . Television cameras captured the moment of the shooting .
 The FBI failed to understand the methods that we used or the nature of the problem that was posed to us, the authors say . We find that the FBI did not understand either the methods or nature of our methods .
 CBA chairman Norman Ramsey began distributing copies of the HSCA acoustic report and FBI Technical Services Division report to members of the CBA for study .
 HSCA acousticians worked on the project for eight and a half months . The CBA would eventually take more than fifteen months to study all the existing reports and conduct its own independent investigation .
 Ramsey and other members of the CBA received a letter from a citizen . The letter proved to be central to their final report and devastating to their conclusion that there was a second gun in the Kennedy assassination .
 In the summer of 1979, Steve Barber, a twenty-year-old musician from Shelby, Ohio, who describes himself as a “progressive rock-jazz drummer,” picked up a copy of the July issue of the girlie magazine Gallery after learning that as part
 The excerpts included the segment on which the HSCA had based its conspiratorial finding . The excerpts were included in the report . The HSC found that the report was based on a segment of a segment . The report was published on CNN.com .
 Barber used a “beat-up turntable with a cheap Montgomery Ward Airline receiver,” he said . Barber transferred the recording to magnetic audiotape and began to study the sounds picked up by the open microphone . Barber believed there was a conspiracy in the assassination .
 He apparently had retained enough of his auditory capacity to make a startling discovery, hearing something that all of the experts had not . He made the discovery, but it was not clear what had happened .
 He discovered it from a cheap recording from a multigenerational recording . The discovery is remarkable, he says, but it's not the first time he has heard it .
 Barber heard a faint transmission that sounded like a portion of something that sheriff Bill Decker had said over channel 2 of the police radio shortly after the assassination . Barber heard the faint transmission at the point where the sound of gunfire was captured .
 Decker instructed the Dallas police radio dispatcher to “have Station Five move all men available out of my department back into the railroad yards there in an effort to try to determine just what and where it happened” (NAS-CBA DPD Tapes, C2,12:
 Barber assumed that the open microphone must have gotten close enough to a second police radio that was receiving broadcasts from channel 2 . Barber assumed it must have picked up part of Decker’s message and rebroadcast it over channel 1 . Barber assumes that the police radio must have rebroad
 This phenomenon occurs at many points throughout the Dallas police radio transmissions of November 22, 1963 . This phenomenon, known as cross talk, is quite common and, in fact, occurs in many points .
 The HSCA concluded that the tape recording contained the sounds of gunfire in Dealey Plaza . However, Barber noted that this particular instance of cross talk might prove to be the undoing of the conclusion .
 Sheriff Decker made the “hold everything secure” transmission approximately one minute after Steve Barber’s discovery of cross talk, per se, during the open microphone segment was nothing new . Barber pointed out that the complete recording of channel 2, over which Sheriff Decker was broadcasting, showed
 Barber concluded that if he was right about the identification and timing of the Decker cross talk, the impulse sounds identified by the HSCA acoustic experts as gunfire could not have been gunshots . Barber: The HSCa’s conclusion that there was a high probability that two gunmen had
 The CBA turned to the FBI to produce sound spectrograms of the Decker transmissions as heard over channels 1 and 2 of the Dallas police radio . The FBI’s Technical Services Division had investigators there use their exceptional sound analysis equipment .
 The HSCA found that Decker’s “hold everything secure” transmission on channel 2 was indeed picked up as cross talk on channel 1 . They found twenty-seven points of correlation over the course of the three-and-a-half-second transmission . The
 A spectrogram is a photograph of sound frequencies that plots the elapsed time of sounds along the horizontal axis, the frequency along the vertical axis, and the intensity of the frequency in shades of gray, with the darkest shades representing the loudest portions of the sound .
 Barger’s report to the HSCA erroneously said that Dallas police radio dispatchers for channels 1 and 2 used two different clocks that were synchronized with each other at the beginning of each month . Barger said that two different clock clocks were synchronized at the start of
 Police tapes “read out” the time “in full minutes only,” though estimates of the seconds into each minute could be made from the transmissions after each minute . Police tapes read out the time only in full minutes, but estimates of each minute can be made .
 FBI study: By the end of each month clocks could differ by as much as one minute . FBI study concluded that by the end each month the clocks could be different by up to a minute .
 HSCA’s ‘best estimate’ as to the time of the first shot in Dealey Plaza as indicated frc t n ms on the channel 2 clock was 12:30:12m., and on the . channel 1 clock, 1230:47 m
 It has to be noted that irrespective of the precise time of the shooting in Dealey Plaza, the CBA said that “the President received his mortal shot at least 30. seconds before the impulses” on the channel 1 tapes identified by Barger, Weiss, and Asch
 The channel 2 recorder operated intermittently and was supposed to stop after 4 seconds of silence . The channel 1 recorder ran continuously through the period in question . It ran intermittently throughout the time .
 The CBA said that this “missing time” had to be added to the “at least 30. seconds” for the channel 1 tape . So the CBA had to add the time to the tape for channel 1 .
 Analyzing the “missing time” on the channel 2 recorder around the time of the assassination, the CBA concluded that one minute was the approximate time after the shooting that the impulse sounds took place . The impulse sounds were heard after the assassination .
 CBA findings consistent with the conclusion that the stuck mike was not in Dealey Plaza . The CBA found the mike did not have to be in the area .
 Sirens are not heard for approximately two minutes after the impulses attributed by BRSW/WA to assassination shots, following which clear and unambiguous sounds from a group of sirens occur on channel 1 . For instance, the CBA said that “no siren sounds are heard
 The sirens seem to come from a group of at least 3 vehicles with the intensity of the sound first increasing and then decreasing . The siren's intensity first increases and then decreases .
 This is consistent with sirens heard at a stationary point if the presidential motorcade had passed close by . The motorcade is believed to have passed close to the White House .
 Simple common sense tells us that the open mike was not, as the HSCA concluded, in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination . Barger and his associates used mathematical calculations to make the decision .
 The CBA report said the omission of a “number of essential tests to confirm” their findings . This resulted, the report said, in the absence of “essential tests,” they said .
 Weiss and Aschkenasy omitted a basic test so basic that even I, a nonscientist, recognized that it had to be done . Even even I recognized that even he had to do the test .
 Scientists always try to test their hypotheses against known realities . Scientists try to find out if their hypothesis is true .
 This is so fundamental that it is even done in such scientifically superficial disciplines as polygraphy . This is even a scientifically superficial discipline like polygraphs, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 A polygraphy expert says polygraphers always ask ‘control questions’ that are unrelated to the matter the subject is being questioned about, but which the subject will almost assuredly lie about . Polygraphy experts say polygraphs always ask "control questions"
 In fact, sometimes the polygrapher will even tell the subject, when asking his name, to give a false name .
 The physiological response to the control question is then used as a basis for comparison with answers the subject gives to questions germane to the matter under investigation . The physiological responses are then used to compare with answers given to questions relevant to the investigation .
 The results of such an analysis,” the CBA said, could “not be considered reliable” unless the method had been “adequately tested on some other cases” CBA says . The results could not be “considered reliable’s�
 The CBA scientists released their final report on May 14, 1982, on the HSCA’s acoustic work . Proponents of the acoustic work were quick to react to the news .
 Blakey, though initially shaken by the scientists’ conclusion, ultimately thought their study was inadequate . Blakey: "I'm not sure what I think about the study, but I think it's inadequate"
 Four impulse sounds, whatever they were, could not have been gunshots fired at President Kennedy . But they did conclude that the four impulse sounds could not be gunshots fired .
 The HSCA’s legs had been cut out from under them . The acoustical tests were the basis for their conclusion of conspiracy . And since, as . Todd Vaughn says, “the acoustics tests were . the basis . for their conclusions of conspiracy�
 Not a single soul saw a gunman firing from the grassy knoll, nor was any physical evidence ever produced to suggest that shots had been fired from that location .
 Blakey’s claim that the HSCA acoustic evidence matched the Zapruder film “so well” is incorrect is incorrect . Blakey also incorrectly claimed that the evidence was consistent with the film, but it was not . The evidence is not consistent with Zapr
 Only the HSCA’s proposed first and last shots seem to fit the images captured on film . As we’ve shown in the section on the Zapruder film in the text, only the proposed first, last shots fit the film .
 There is no visual evidence on the Zapruder film of a bullet strike coinciding with the supposed third shot at Z295-296, the one allegedly fired from the grassy knoll .
 Blakey immediately sent a copy of the CBA Report by overnight mail to Barger . Blakey also sent an overnight mail of the report by overnight .
 The CBA Report must have hit Barger hard because he took more than eight months to respond to Blakey . Barger took the CBA report to the media for more than a year .
 Barger wrote, “Barber discovered a very weak spoken phrase on the DPD Dictabelt recording that is heard at about the time of the sound impulses we concluded were probably caused by the fourth shot,” he wrote .
 NAS Committee has shown to our satisfaction that this phrase has the same origin as the same phrase heard also on the Audograph recording . NAS Committee: The NAS Committee is satisfied that the phrase has been heard in this way .
 The common phrase is heard on Channel 2 about a minute after the assassination would appear to have taken place . It is heard about the moment the assassination took place .
 Barger did not want to let Blakey and the HSCA drown without at least holding on to one end of the rope they were grasping . Barger: "I'm not going to let them drown. I'm not sure what's going to happen."
 Barger told Blakey that the CBA "did not examine several items of evidence that corroborated our original findings" Barger also said that “further analysis is needed to decide whether the Barber hypothesis is correct,” and suggested several ways to test it . Barger
 George Burns and Gracie Allen sign off routine sign-off by 1940s radio comedians . They were not about to abandon the only scientific evidence they have ever found which allows them to argue that multiple gunmen fired on .
 Mack charged in his newly founded conspiracy newsletter, Coverups!, that one of the flaws in the CBA’s debunking of the HSCA acoustic evidence was the detection of “automatic gain control” within the Decker cross talk transmission . Mack: The CBA detected
 Automatic gain control is a name given to specialized circuitry built into most radio equipment since the 1940s . It allows a radio signal to automatically adjust the loud and soft sounds being received into a constant, consistent level .
 Mack says engineers familiar with the 1963 Motorola Sensicon radio system used by the Dallas police “emphatically denied’t that AGC was present in the circuitry’s circuitry, therefore, could not have produced the effect detected by the committee . Mack countered the CBA
 The presence of AGC indicated that the Dictabelts in evidence were copies, not originals, Mack says . Such copies could easily have been altered (accidentally or on purpose) to include the Decker cross talk .
 The channel 2 recording is time compressed, requiring anyone interested in faking cross talk on channel 1 to do much more than play the recording in the background . Of course, this explanation doesn't take into account the fact that the recording is compressed .
 The advertisement lists an “input attenuator’s” present in the recording system . The advertisement shows an ‘in-built’ microphone .
 The report, which picked up where the CBA left off on the issue of AGC, effectively eliminated the argument that the Decker cross talk was dubbed onto the recording after the fact .
 IBM team offered Mack an opportunity to present evidence in support of his claim . Mack failed to respond to the IBM team's request for evidence .
 Garwin wrote, “I told Gary Mack that I would be most interested in a written report or letter from experts at Motorola’s Motorola .”
 I told him also that I would be willing to test such a receiver if they found it for me . "I told him that he would be prepared to test it," he said of the receiver .
 The only means of alteration left for the critics to maintain the cross talk was a forgery is some form of editing . The original Dictabelt sounds might have been copied to magnetic audiotape, altered, then recorded back onto a new Dictaelt to disguise the alteration
 The audiotape can be restored by rejoining the two remaining halves with adhesive tape . Once the objectionable material is excised, it can be excised .
 The resulting taped splice can be ‘hidden’ from anyone physically examining the audiotape by simply making a copy of the recording and presenting the copy as if it were the original . The resulting splice is “hidden” from anyone .
 HSCA acousticians thought the sounds were gunshots . Yet, we know that couldn’t have happened because the Decker cross talk actually overlaps the impulse sounds the acoustician thought were gunshots.
 The only way to achieve this overlapping effect is by taking the channel 1 and 2 recorded transmissions, playing them back simultaneously, and re-recording them onto a third recording medium—a possibility the CBA conclusively ruled out .
 HSCA acoustic teams determined what was thought to be the sound of a “bell” on the channel 1 recording was actually an “electrical disturbance” recorded simultaneously on both channels 1 and 2 .
 This verified the relative speed and timing of the two channels, providing another means of synchronizing the two police channels independent of the Decker cross talk . The impulse sounds thought by the HSCA’s acoustic experts to be gunshots were recorded at least one minute after the assassination .
 Die-hard critics continued to argue the merits of the acoustic evidence in obscure conspiracy publications and Internet newsgroups .
 Author Gerald Posner writes that Dallas sheriff Jim Bowles “discovered the source of the unusual bell tone on the tape’s tape . Several years passed before a new author discovered the source, Posner says .
 The attack on the CBA’s finding came from a heavyweight, an expert on fruit flies . This time the attack came from an expert who is a specialist in fruit fly .
 Study validated HSCA’s original conclusion that four shots were fired at President Kennedy, one of which was fired from the grassy knoll . Study published in the British journal Science & Justice .
 The odds were now only 1 in 100,000 that the CBA was correct in concluding that the impulse sounds, described as being gunshots by the HSCA, were recorded one minute after the assassination .
 Thomas cannot be blithely ignored, despite his background . But in a poor parallel, just as a wise man can say something foolish and a foolish man something wise, Thomas can't be ignored .
 Thomas became interested in the Kennedy assassination after seeing Oliver Stone’s 1991 fictional epic JFK . Thomas believed that the shot from the grassy knoll (number three in the HSCA's sequence) was the one that killed JFK .
 The heart of Thomas' claim that the HSCA’s acoustic evidence was valid was valid, and the CBA was wrong, centers around an instance of cross talk that appears on the channel 1 recording several minutes after the shooting .
 The impulse sounds detected by HSCA acoustic experts correlate exactly with the time of the assassination . When this cross talk is used to synchronize the two channels, it shows, he says, that the impulse sounds are consistent with the assassination.
 He believed that the channel 2 recording represented a nearly continuous recording during the 3-minute interval following the assassination . That is demonstrably false . He said that the recording was nearly continuous .
 The new recording showed that the channel 2 recorder did not run continuously during the 3-minute period after the assassination . Thomas’s subsequent claim that the recorder was not running continuously was incorrect .
 One wonders how all of this escaped Thomas’s attention, since he obviously must have had a copy of the CBA Report . Thomas: “I’m not surprised. I’ll be surprised.”
 Thomas seems to have been given credit by the conspiracy community for the Bellah cross talk ‘discovery” to attack the CBA findings . Gary Mack, who started the whole Dictabelt analysis movement back in 1976, was way ahead of Thomas .
 Thomas, in his article, did not acknowledge Mack’s earlier discovery, but Mack said this was not intentional on Thomas’ part . Mack said it was not deliberate on Thomas' part to acknowledge Mack's discovery .
 Mack satisfied Thomas was ‘unaware’ of his earlier discovery at the time he wrote his article . Mack satisfied that Thomas was "unaware" of his previous discovery . Mack says Thomas was not aware of his discovery .
 Unlike his earlier pronouncement, Thomas’s retraction received no publicity . Thomas retracted his retraction, which garnered considerable national press .
 Even Blakey, who had trumpeted Thomas’s original report as corroborating Barger, Weiss, and Aschkenasy, never heard about it . In fact, his retraction was so unknown that even Blakey had never heard of it .
 Blakey was “stunned” when he learned of his son's death, he said, “Stunned,” and that he intended to call Thomas immediately . Neither did I until months later, and when I informed Blakey of it, he could
 My guess is that there was no connection between Blakey's presumed call to Thomas and a speech Thomas gave just eight days later . Thomas’s speech was detailed and the transcript of it doesn’t look like it was prepared at the last moment .
 In his presentation at the conference, Thomas seemed to have all but forgotten what he had said a year earlier . Thomas concluded that the CBA’s “reliance on a single instance of crosstalk [the Decker transmission on Channel 2 picked up on Channel 1]
 Thomas: "But that doesn’t mean that the hypothesis is correct, only that it is now plausible" Thomas: “That doesn't mean that that's correct, it only that the hypotheses are now plausible.” Thomas says .
 In November 23, 2002, speech at JFK Lancer Conference in Dallas, he came up with a second cross talk that he says confirms his position . Thomas: "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going to say yes"
 Thomas stated that “there are five . . simulcasts during the motorcycle (with the stuck open microphone) segment . Thomas said there were five simulcasts of the motorcycle segment .
 Fisher transmission “I’ll check it,” on channel 2, can be found as cross talk on channel 1 at a point nearly simultaneous with the purported sound of shots . Thomas believes that the Fisher transmission "I'll check it" can be heard on channel two .
 The acoustic shots would be in sync with the actual time of the assassination as the HSCA concluded . If Thomas is right, as he believes he is, then the acoustic shots are in sync .
 Steve Barber says he has auditory ability to hear and decipher sounds on the Dallas police tapes . Barber: "No one I know of has demonstrated the auditory ability of hearing and deciphering sounds" Barber responds to Thomas’s allegation that Fisher had cross talk .
 NAS-CBA needs to be wrong if the acoustic debate is to survive . Don Thomas, of course, needs to get wrong if he's wrong .
 Of the five simulcasts or crosstalk instances mentioned by Don Thomas, four of them occur after the assassination . Four of the five instances mentioned in the book are recorded after the Kennedy assassination .
 The first of the ^'/-assassination simulcasts is known as the “Decker crosstalk” which I discovered on channel 1 in September, 1980, and it occurred about a minute after the shooting .
 The others that follow were made within 2 to 3 minutes of the Decker transmission . Decker transmission was made within two to three minutes of Decker transmission.
 The Fisher transmission is the first of the five crosstalk instances mentioned by Thomas, though, in reality, it is not so . The so-called “crosstalking instance” in dispute—the Fisher transmission—is the first . Thomas says the Fisher transmission
 Fisher in the minute before the assassination, is being picked up by the open microphone that the acoustic experts, Bolt, Beranek and Newman, said recorded the gunshots . Fisher was shot in the moment before his assassination .
 This transmission is called “crosstalk” by both Thomas and James C Bowles, the communications supervisor for the Dallas Police Department at the time of the assassination . Thomas and Bowles are both men who worked for the police in Dallas .
 Thomas and Bowles believe the suspect transmission heard on channel 1 is identical to a known transmission made by Deputy Chief Fisher on channel 2 . This “crosstalk” ties channels 1 and 2 together just 2 seconds before the sounds identified as gunshots by BBN begin on channel
 Fisher did indeed say the words “I’ll check it” on channel 2,1 am extremely confident that these words were not picked up by the open microphone as crosstalk, and recorded into channel 1 .
 Gary said, “The ‘Alright, Jackson’ statement was identified to me by Mark Weiss,” Gary said in a letter to me, Gary said . Mark Weiss identified the statement to Gary as the statement .
 His conclusions came after the BBN report had been written, and was based on the original recording and the first generation tape copy . His conclusions were based on an original recording .
 Gary went on to say, “You’ve made several assumptions about the voice in your letter.” Gary said he was surprised by the reaction to the letter . Gary said, ‘You”ve made a lot of assumptions,’
 Gary says listening conclusions are almost useless when compared to scientific measurement . When they come from a 10th generation recording, they are useless .
 "The vast weight of the evidence is that the name is Jackson," Jackson says . "I’m not saying you’re wrong— I am saying that while you may be right," he says . Jackson: "I am not saying that."
 The transmission is accompanied by heterodyne tones, a scientific impossibility if the transmission were actually “crosstalk” as Thomas and Bowles believe . What I find most impressive is the fact that the transmissions are accompanied by hongodyne tones . The transmission
 A heterodyne tone is an audible beep-like sound that occurs when a police officer attempts a radio transmission while another police officer is already transmitting over the same frequency . The sound occurs when the officer attempts to transmit over the frequency of a police radio transmission .
 The officer who said what sounds like “Alright, Chaney” opened his microphone, a heterodyne tone was produced . The motorcycle with the open microphone was already transmitting sounds over channel 1 .
 The moment that officer stopped transmitting, the heterodyne tone stopped . The officer's voice was heard in the background of the recording .
 If one listens carefully to the transmission on channel 1 that Thomas and Bowles believe to be Deputy Chief Fisher, you will hear a heterodyne tone accompanying the transmission . The transmission is believed to be a signal from the police .
 This is indicative of two competing open microphones attempting to share the same frequency simultaneously . This is not “crosstalk” as Thomas and Bowles surmise . It's indicative of a competing open microphone sharing the same frequencies .
 If the transmission in question was “crosstalk” (i.e., one open microphone was picking up the sounds of a second radio turned to another channel) there would be no accompanying heterodyne tone because two microphones would not be competing for the same frequency .
 Only one microphone would be open, not two, if the suspect transmission was truly “crosstalk” Thomas and Bowles contend . Only one of the two microphones is open, they say . Thomas, Bowles say .
 If the “Fisher transmission” is not “crosstalk,” and I firmly believe the presence of heterodyne tones proves that it is not, then the ‘Fisher . transmission’ cannot be used to tie channels 1 and 2 together
 "I’ll check it” is not the complete transmission made by Fisher on channel 2 . In addition to this, Fisher's "I'll check it" is not a complete transmission . Fisher's full transmission may not be complete .
 Neither Bowles nor Thomas have accounted for the words “That’s alright” missing from the transmission . They refer to as the Fisher crosstalk on channel 1 .
 The Fisher transmission on channel 2 and the crosstalk on channel 1, which Thomas erroneously believes to be identical, are in fact two separate and distinct transmissions . In 2005 article published in the British ‘Scientist and Justice’ journal, authors Ralph Linsker,
 Historians and scholars have examined the documents released through the JFK Act, they offer no support for his position . Thomas should inform Mr Thomas that scholars and historians have examined these documents .
 Professor Blakey has acknowledged to me that because of the CBA’s findings, “I have less confidence in the acoustics conclusion of a fourth shot than I once did,” he says .
 A reasonable person could say, yes, the CBA conclusion of no acoustical evidence of a fourth shot is correct . The CBA concluded there is no evidence of the fourth shot, but that's not true .
 Computer animator and assassination researcher Dale Myers has created a computer-animated reconstruction of Dealey Plaza . Myers won an Emmy for graphic and artistic design in 2004 for his work .
 Gary Mack told me he does not know of any study in support of Thomas’s position . Gary Mack said he doesn’t know if there is any study that supports Thomas' position .
 Years of studies and counterstudies have left most uninformed Americans confused about the validity of the acoustic evidence in the Kennedy assassination . Though Mack himself agrees with Thomas, he said, “If there are any studies by others out there that agree with , I haven’t heard
 If Myers is correct, McLain is also not where even McLain thought he was, midway between Main and Elm on Houston .
 McLain and Myers agree on the critical point that McLain was nowhere near where the HSCA put him at the time of the assassination . Myers: McLain wasn't in the position he was in when the assassination occurred .
 In fact, you can see Betzner lowering his camera in the sprocket area of the Zapruder film . In succeeding frames, you see him lowering the camera in succeeding frames .
 In a letter to me, Blakey wrote that “putting aside the issue of proof (I can’t comment on computer reconstruction, as I have not seen the study to see if did it right)” Yet, according to the frame count, at least six
 "I said that if it could be shown that no motorcycle was there, it would falsify my position," he said . "If it was shown that there was no motorcycle there, I said that no bike was there," he added .
 Blakey knows that his acoustic experts built their whole case around Officer McLain . But Blakey says he knows that McLain is the key to the case .
 McLain is the only cyclist they specifically and expressly talked about (e.g., ‘Officer McLain’s motorcycle,” in Barger’�s testimony in 5 HSCA 650). McLain was the only Dallas police motorcyclist they took
 Dorman and Hughes films show no motorcyclist in front of McLain on Houston around this general time, and the closest cyclist to his rear was Jimmy Wayne Courson, who Blakey’s own HSCA Report says was “several car lengths” behind
 McLain could not have been the one with an open microphone on his motorcycle, nor could anyone else in the motorcade . Both amateur films prove that there were no other motorcycles at the location and time that the acoustic evidence demanded demanded .
 The HSCA said that neither the Hughes nor the Dorman footage “supported’s conclusion as to where McLain was . The committee read what it wrote in one of its own volumes, the Hughes film, the main film it relied on, clearly disproved its own
 The exact amount of time that elapsed, Myers said, is not known because Dorman stopped filming for a brief period during this sequence . Blakey, to his credit, would later candidly write in his book The Plot to Kill the President, “By this time we could not
 The only way he could have reached that point in five seconds would have been for him to suddenly increase his speed to 23.1818 mph . The driver's speed would have to reach that point within five seconds .
 McLain wouldn’t have had any reason to do this and there is no evidence he did . McLain would have had no reason to have done this, he says. McLain’s lawyer says .
 We had led by the evidence to date to suspect an event that we had come to want to prove . We had been led by evidence to . date to . suspect that the . event that led to the . incident that led us to suspect the event, we had to . come to
 The validity of the HSCA’s acoustic evidence collapses under the weight of its own requirements . In the final analysis, the validity of this evidence collapses .
 The HSCA presented no photographic or testimonial evidence that any police motorcycle with an open microphone was at the point on Houston Street where such a motorcycle would have had to be at the time of the assassination for its hypothesis to be possible .
 HSCA relied on police Dictabelt recording to conclude that a second gunman fired at the president . Police recording proves beyond all doubt that the impulse sounds committee members thought were gunfire were recorded at least one minute after Oswald shot Kennedy in the head .
 In addition, common sense tells us the acoustic evidence must be wrong since it is incompatible with the overwhelming evidence in this case that only three shots were fired in Dealey Plaza, and those three shots came from the sniper’s nest . In addition to common sense telling us the fourth
 Conspiracy theorists would have you believe it was a hoax . That, of course, is not what conspiracy theorists say .
 In the best of worlds, they would prefer that the question of conspiracy remain open . But they would like to see the question remain open, even if it were closed .
 Mack chastised Barber, writing, “There was a conspiracy— you know it and / know it.” Barber wrote .
 Someone is using it to conceal what really happened to President Kennedy, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Conspiracy theorists cling tenaciously to acoustic evidence of a fourth shot that exists only in their minds, not in reality . Conspiracy theorists should think about what they've done, in this instance, to their own already rickety credibility, by clinging tenaciously .
 If you can't rely on your own star witness, you’re in deep trouble, prosecutors say . As any prosecutor will tell you, if you can’t rely on their own star witnesses, you're in trouble .
 The HSCA’s acoustic evidence has gone beyond being rendered void and invalid, the HSCa has said . The evidence has been rendered void, invalid, and the evidence is invalid .
 In the process, the HSCA’s acoustic experts also embarrassed Robert Blakey and the majority of the members whom they misled, though I’m sure unintentionally unintentionally .
 Human nature being what it is, it’s entirely conceivable that in their possible zeal to become famous by discovering a conspiracy in the Kennedy assassination, they stretched here and there to come up with whatever mathematical computations they could find .
 Disraeli’s observation that there are three types of lies: lies, damned lies, and statistics . Science and mathematics are themselves precise and objective, but the way they are applied to a given set of circumstances can result in mischievous falsehoods .
 The HSCA’s finding of a fourth shot from the grassy knoll has been discredited . It has become an indelible stain on its legacy, an asterisk to its otherwise excellent reinvestigation of the assassination .
 Only those with a self-interest, the uninformed, and the fringe conspiracy community subscribe to the HSCA’s acoustic conclusion . The majority of the mainstream conspiracy community, though still strongly believing a shot or shots were fired from the grassy knoll, accept the reality
 A measure of the extent to which the Barger, Weiss, Weiss and Aschkenasy findings have been rejected is that in the London trial, where my opponent, Gerry Spence, used every argument and evidence he could find to raise a reasonable doubt of Oswald’s guilt
 A trial lawyer's credibility with a jury is important to his credibility with the jury . Other than the evidence, nothing is more important to a trial lawyer than his credibility . The jury must decide whether to convict him or not .
 Spence was not about to do something that he knew could only result in his looking foolish in the eyes of the jury . And Spence, one of the greatest trial lawyers of our time, was not going to do it .
 HSCA staff changed their past findings so they would be compatible with their later and final acoustic-led draft . That stain is darkened by the transparent effort to change the findings, which were changed in the past .
 In the December 13,1978, draft of their final report (at a time when Dr. Dr. John Sutter was in charge of the U.S. Army Air Force in the late '70s and '80s) The draft of the report was published in December 1978
 The game-playing by the HSCA staff to bolster the new conclusion of conspiracy extended elsewhere, though to a lesser extent . The game playing extended elsewhere in the investigation into the case .
 HSCA’s forensic pathology report, which of course would include the critique of the autopsy, would include critique of autopsy . With respect to the entire report, one of the members of the forensic pathology panel, Dr. Dr. John Sutter says he would like to see
 HSCA chief counsel G Robert Blakey told me that “all of the doctors had input.” Blakey said, “All of the doctor had input”
 The notions of a very poor autopsy and a complete lack of qualification by the surgeons who conducted it have been perpetuated by those who were in a far better position than Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 Michael Baden, the distinguished head of the HSCA’s forensic pathology panel, and his coauthor Judith Adler Hennessee, made a number of errors . Baden and Hennesse were both members of the panel of forensic pathology experts .
 Baden, one of the top forensic pathologists in the nation, is an extremely busy man, and if I were to wager, he coauthored this book on the run, leaving much of the detail to his coauthor, who is not a doctor . Baden is one
 On page 9, the authors write, “He knew he had never done one [an autopsy from a death by gunshot] like it before.” The authors say he knew he'd never done such an autopsy before .
 On page 10, the authors write, “Colonel Finck, it turned out, had never done an autopsy involving a gunshot wound, either.” The authors write that Finck had never had an autopsy .
 For almost a decade he had been in charge of reviewing the records of U.S. military personnel who had died of gunshot wounds . He had reviewed the records for nearly a decade before .
 Two people who were not professionally trained in what they were doing were watching each other . Two people not professional trained in . what they are doing were watched each other.
 Finck didn’t offer guidance because it never occurred to him that Humes needed any . Finck offered no guidance because he didn't think he needed any. Finck said Humes was going to be a good guy .
 Finck reviewed records of U.S. military personnel for two years, not a decade, authors claim . Finck had been reviewing records of United States military personnel in two years .
 Pierre A Finck was there to assist Humes in every specific request of his . Finck certainly did offer guidance and was there for Humes to ask for guidance .
 Finck is known to have directed the procedures in the last part of the autopsy . Finck directed the procedure in the final part of his autopsy .
 The only photographer authorized to take autopsy photos was John T Stringer Jr., the senior medical photographer at Bethesda . Stringer was authorized to photograph autopsy photos .
 Later testimony and affidavits show it actually took at least four hours to complete the autopsy . The autopsy was completed at the time of the death .
 Dr. Finck arrived shortly before the president’s body arrived at the Bethesda morgue . The president's body was taken to the morgue in Bethesda, Maryland .
 Humes spotted “a guy with a speed graphic camera in the building and didn’t feel like running after him,” so he went to the loading dock, where the president was to be brought in . He saw several military people milling around, and saw several
 General Wehle immediately dispatched someone to corral the photographer . The photo was taken during a visit to the German capital .
 While reviewing the autopsy report the morning of November 24, 1963, Dr. Dr. John Sutter reviewed the report . Dr. Sutter's autopsy report was published on November 25, 1963 .
 McDonnel concluded that there was no evidence that the X-rays had been altered in any way . He said there was 'no evidence' that the doctor had altered his X-ray results .
 Mantik says he took optical density readings from the area of the X-rays showing the 6.5-millimeter “fragment” in 1994 . The results of his readings suggest that cardboard was superimposed onto the film to create an object looking like a bullet fragment
 This Warren Commission and HSCA ballistic expert Larry Sturdivan and assassination researcher Dr. Dr. Robert H. Sturdivivan are co-authors of the Warren Commission . They discuss the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 Chad R Zimmerman have in later years analyzed the object seen in the X-rays . The object is believed to have been an object that was found in the 1950s .
 Sturdivan concluded it was not a bullet fragment but Zimmerman is not sure . Zimmerman is unsure whether the bullet fragment was from a bullet .
 The object has the same diameter as the ammunition used in Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano rifle and it was in the back of the skull . Mantik says this is consistent with a shot from the rear, where Oswald supposedly was located in the sniper's nest .
 The thought that they would risk getting caught doing this to implicate Oswald in a case in which he and his rifle were already overwhelmingly connected to the assassination is irrational on its face . It's irrational on the face, says the author of the book .
 The HSCA photographic panel likewise determined that the autopsy photographs had not been altered . The autopsy photographs were not altered by the autopsy panel .
 Zimmerman wrote that “Larry and I both believe that the 6. mm fragment on the frontal x-ray is real and was not added later, as Mantik posits .
 Larry nor I know what it is because it wasn’t . retrieved . Basically, Larry and I know neither of us knows what it's because it isn't . . . retrieved. Larry .
 "I feel that it is real because of the lack of film grid lines in the surrounding area, which, in my opinion, are an absolute must... in order for it to be a post-autopsy forgery," says author .
 Since it is not seen on the lateral x-rays, it is by definition an artifact . Since it isn't visible on the x-ray, it's an artifact. Since it's not visible, it can be an artifact, it could be a mistake .
 Mantik doesn't want us to believe the ‘fragment’ was superimposed on the X-rays after the Warren Commission had already concluded that Oswald was the lone gunman . Mantik says the “fragments’s” were superimposed after the
 Mantik says the forgery was accomplished ‘shortly after the autopsy,” which would be before the Warren Report came out, ten months after the assassination . Mantik: The forgery took place ‘after the autopsy’
 Many of the autopsy photographs, when combined in pairs, produce stereoscopic images . The autopsy photographs have not been altered, says the author .
 Stereoscopic images enable us to see a photographic scene in three dimensions, as opposed to the normal two-dimensional view we’re used to seeing in family snapshots . The images can be taken in 3D or 4D and can be viewed in different ways .
 A pair of stereo images (i.e., two separate photographs, taken from two slightly different vantage points) adds depth to our perception . That’s because a stereo image is taken from a different vantage point . A stereo image adds depth in the same way our two eyes,
 The ability to view an image stereoscopically allows the human eye to easily spot the differences between two photographs that make up the stereo pair . According to photographic expert and HSCA panel member Frank Scott, the ability .
 Any attempt to alter either image causes the altered portion of the image to appear to “float” or lie either in front of or behind the plane or “space” in which it should actually be lying .
 A detailed stereoscopic image is impossible to alter without detection, and therefore, any pair of images that can be viewed in this manner, without revealing the obvious signs of forgery, have to be authentic .
 The autopsy photographer who photographed the president’s body took two or more pictures, from approximately the same viewpoint, of each part of the body being photographed . Fortunately, the autopsy photographer was able to take the pictures from the same angle .
 Some of the slight differences in the position of the camera can be combined into stereoscopic pairs . Some of these, because of the difference in the camera's position, can be used to create stereoscopic images .
 Another member of the photographic panel, Calvin McCamy, testified that he agreed with Scott’s conclusions, adding that in his own analysis, he discovered two additional views of the president's body (the back wound and the throat wound) that could be seen stereoscopically .
 Two similar images, produced from the perspective of each eye, are assembled on a disk in such a way that when the disk is inserted into the viewer, the two images are combined into a single scene that exhibits depth .
 McCamy testified that on the issue of alteration of the photographs, he and his colleagues “considered the possibilities of various photographic techniques that could have been used in a train of events to produce these photographs”
 All of the president’s wounds, as depicted in the autopsy photographs, are exactly as they appeared the night of the autopsy . The photographs have not been “doctored,” faked, or altered in any way .
 This fact alone demolishes conspiracy theorists’ allegations that photographic fakery was used to conceal the plot to kill the president . This fact demolishes the . idea that photographic . fakery . was used in the . plot to hide the president's assassination .
 It also destroys another prime conspiracy belief—that eyewitness descriptions of the president’s wounds that were offered by the Parkland Hospital doctors (and later by some eyewitnesses to the autopsy) are proof that the autopsy photographs had been altered .
 If the autopsy photographs are genuine and unaltered, then eyewitness descriptions of the president’s wounds that contradict those photographs are not proof of alteration, as some critics claim, but nothing more than examples of understandable, mistaken recollections, or if not that .
 Conspiracy theorists tie themselves in knots trying to convince their converts not to give up the ship and go home . Yet conspiracy theorists continue to tie itself in knots . The U.S. has been in the grip of the Obama administration since 2001 .
 One critic, Harrison Edward Livingstone, simply closes his eyes and pretends the HSCA accomplished nothing . Livingstone proposes that the panel “overlooked various matters and was seriously flawed in its work .
 All of the key autopsy photographs that show the president’s wounds have been published in bootlegged form in a variety of conspiracy books .
 Lay witnesses at criminal and civil trials who have no photographic expertise at all routinely authenticate photographs under oath . Lay witnesses are often not experts in photography, but have no expertise .
 The bootlegged autopsy photographs are believed to be second-generation copies of the originals obtained by Robert Groden in 1978 . Groden was a photographic consultant for the HSCA in 1978, confirmed by Groden himself .
 Groden’s theft would have had to take place at the National Archives, where the autopsy photos were stored . Groden would have been able to steal the photos from the Archives .
 FBI investigated Groden and concluded Groden had stolen autopsy photos . HSCA official says he has “firsthand knowledge” of the FBI investigation .
 The family decided against getting involved in a criminal case over the matter . They also decided against bringing a civil action against Groden . Groden's family also decided not to bring a civil case against him .
 The HSCA did not authenticate the images . The images were taken at the request of the National Security Council .
 This accusation stems from a deceptive memorandum prepared by Doug Horne, the chief military analyst for the ARRB, and an avowed conspiracy theorist . Horne is a former member of the conspiracy conspiracy conspiracy theorists .
 Horne found a March 27, 1978, letter from HSCA chief counsel Robert Blakey to Secretary of Defense Harold Brown . It confirmed receipt of a navy camera from the Department of Defense on March 8,1978, that was possibly used .
 If the navy was correct in saying that the camera it provided ‘‘'was indeed the camera used at the autopsy” (the navy only said the camera was ‘believed to be” the autopsy camera) Then either, he says, all the autopsy photographs
 The HSCA staff was a bunch of criminals, but Dr. Dr. John Defterios says it's unlikely they were criminals . He says it was a good thing that the staff at the HSC was not criminals .
 Aguilar doesn’t explain why the HSCA staff, which clearly was trying to prove a conspiracy, would deliberately suppress evidence of a conspiracy . Aguilar says he doesn't know why the staff would suppress evidence .
 This second possibility is apparently meant to conjure up images of a mysterious, unknown photographer shooting a second set of autopsy photographs after the autopsy was completed . Stringer's autopsy photographs were then substituted for the official set of photographs taken by Stringer . The president's wounds were apparently concealed by
 We know through stereoscopic analysis that the photographs in evidence (even if they are substitute photographs of the autopsy taken by someone other than Stringer) are authentic and unaltered . The photographs are in evidence, even if they were taken by Stringer .
 We also know from the HSCA anthropologists and the odontologist that the skull is that of John F Kennedy . The skull is believed to be that of Kennedy, according to the anthropologists .
 What this all means is that whatever the photographs show must be the true condition of the president’s body at the time of the autopsy, the autopsy results must be true .
 The authentication of the existing photographic collection eliminates the possibility that any photographs that might have disappeared from the collection, either by removal or by substitution, could show anything other than what we now see .
 There was only one body and the wounds in that body either show that shots were fired from the front or they don’t . No matter how many photographs are substituted or removed, the wounds are still there . After all, there was just one body .
 Surprisingly, this obvious fact seems to have escaped the conspiracy theorists . Surprisingly, the obvious fact has escaped from conspiracy theorists.
 The navy says other lenses were also in use at the Medical Center during that time they have been replaced .
 A 50-millimeter lens would have been used to photograph an autopsy, the autopsy photographer testified . John Stringer said that a 50 millimeter lens was not normally used to take photos of an autopsy .
 Stringer testified, “We had a series of lenses that we could choose from,” including a 28-millimeter wide-angle lens . Stringer also testified, "We had to choose from," including a wide-angled lens .
 The Kennedy autopsy photographs were clearly taken with a normal lens setting . The wide-ranging depth of field (i.e., the relative sharpness of both foreground and background detail in the image) is uncharacteristic of a telephoto lens .
 The HSCA photographic panel’s findings were no doubt the basis for the panel's findings . Both of these factors are no doubt to be the basis .
 Horne’s memo says that the HSCA reported that the Department of Defense was unable to locate the camera and lens used at the autopsy . Horne: “The Department of Defence was . unable to find the camera” used at autopsy .
 It appears that the camera body located by the navy most likely was the one used at the autopsy . It further appears that it was used at an autopsy . The camera body was found by the Navy most likely to be that of the camera .
 Stringer was a medical photographer in Vietnam, where he took autopsy photos of many soldiers who had died from gunshot wounds . President Kennedy's autopsy was Stringer’s first murder autopsy, although in Vietnam he took photos .
 Stringer was the director of medical photography at the National Naval Medical Center at Bethesda . Stringer had taken photos of fifty to sixty non-homicide autopsies, including of people who had committed suicide by gunshot .
 He said he only saw his Kennedy autopsy photos once, a few years after the assassination, and they appeared very clear to him . He only saw them once, and said they looked very clear .
 Humes directed me to take the photos where he wanted to take a photo of . An autopsy photo is an autopsy photo . The photos were taken by Humes at the request of the public .
 The 6millimeter measurement refers to the “scalp,” not the skull, the autopsy report says . And, indeed, in the report, the 6millimeters refers to a 6millimetre measurement .
 The autopsy report says there was a “corresponding wound through the skull’s skull” The wound was right behind the wound to the scalp and of a similar size . There is no indication that the diameter of the skull wound was measured, the autopsy says .
 At Zapruder frame 312, Jackie Kennedy appears to be almost in front of JFK to his left front . If a bullet had been fired by Oswald from Kennedy’s right rear it would have had to have gone on to hit Mrs. Kennedy .
 Rice argues that the head shot did not come from Oswald at Kennedy’s right rear, but from some assassin to his left rear . Since we know it didn’t, this means, Rice argues, that this means that the shot came from Oswald's right rear . Rice
 Rice and Smith's contention cannot be dismissed out of hand, but several realities negate it . Rice, Smith and Smith have been in touch with each other for years .
 At frame 312, Kennedy’s head is turned somewhat to the left, and trajectory analyses by both the Warren Commission and the HSCA show that the entering bullet from behind, if proceeding on a relatively straight trajectory, would have exited right where we know it did .
 A bullet fired from Kennedy’s left rear, as posited by Rice, would be likely to enter the left rear of his head . Rice: We know the bullet entered the right rear of Kennedy's head, not the left . Rice says a bullet from Kennedy's left rear
 Three of the pathologists for the HSCA had already reviewed part of the autopsy record and evidence . Dr. Dr. John Sutter, a pathologist for the case, said he had reviewed the evidence .
 Dr. Wecht, who went to the archives himself in 1972 to look at the photos and X-rays, visited the archives in 1972 . Wecht: "I'm not going to be able to go back to see the photos, but I'm looking forward to seeing them again
 Spitz and Weston were already on record as agreeing with the conclusion of the Warren Report . Wecht was in disagreement with Wecht .
 A pair of hands is seen in the photograph holding a ruler alongside the wound, as if measuring its location . The photograph was taken in the aftermath of the attack .
 The HSCA forensic panel also noted that the stereoscopic viewing of a second series of photographs identified by Drs. Robert and Dr. Michael O'Neill . The panel also said that the viewing of the images was stereoscopic .
 The HSCA forensic panel reported that the anterior-posterior and right lateral X-ray views of the skull show a “sharp disruption” of the normal smooth contour . The external occipital protuberance, from which radiates a number of fracture lines
 Robertson said that from his examination of the autopsy X-rays he concluded that the autopsy surgeons and the HSCA were both correct, to a point . Robertson said in a statement to the House Committee on Government Operations (Conyers Committee) on November 17, 1993 .
 Robertson claimed Kennedy was killed when he was struck in the head by two bullets instead of one as previously reported . Robertson: There were indeed two wounds in the back of his head, the one the autopsy surgeons saw was an entrance wound .
 Robertson takes a position so patently erroneous that it's astonishing that a professional man such as Robertson would take a position such as this . Robertson would be astonishing that he would take such a position, he said .
 Robertson: Three autopsy surgeons conspired to conceal the second wound to the back of the president’s head . Robertson: To believe Robertson, one would have to believe that the three autopsy surgeons .
 One would also have to believe that all of the many other pathologists in later years who looked at the autopsy photos and X-rays either joined in the conspiracy or simply didn’t see the second wound .
 Only Robertson, no one else, saw two wounds to the back of the president’s head . Only Robertson saw the wounds, which he said were two wounds . Robertson: "No one else else" saw it. Only Robertson .
 Robertson also had no explanation for how a bullet entering the right front of the president’s skull could leave an exit wound that was small and circular, as opposed to larger and irregular . Robertson had no idea how the exit wound in the president's skull was circular .
 Autopsy surgeons did not actually see the wound, as the autopsy surgeons did, but they did not, as they did, actually see it . "I say that for two main reasons. Leaving aside that they didn't, as well as the . autopsy surgeons, I say that they
 Even if I assume the autopsy surgeons were utterly incompetent, they didn’t have to be skilled forensic patholoigsts to see, with their own eyes, an entrance wound which they all agree was “slightly above” the external occiptal protuberance .
 You or I or the local cabbie is as capable as the most skilled forensic pathologists in the world at looking at the distance between the bone and a hole in the head and estimating the distance .
 Three autopsy surgeons use the words “slightly above” to describe four inches . That the three autopsy surgeons would use the . words ‘slightly . above’ to describe the . four inches somehow doesn’t ring true to me .
 It may be that the location of the entrance wound was somewhere between where the autopsy surgeons and the later pathologists said it was . It may also be that it was between the autopsy surgeon and pathologists .
 How this would affect trajectory analyses, and be compatible with the minute missile fragments traversing on a line from back to front higher up on the head, is beyond my knowledge and expertise .
 A bullet traveling on a downward trajectory would be proceeding on a higher path, anatomically, through the president’s head . However, we mustn’t forget that since the president was inclined slightly forward at the time of the head shot, a bullet traveled on a
 Three autopsy pathologists had little to offer as to what the lesion in the cowlick area could be if not the entrance wound .
 HSCA and Clark Panel based their opinions not only on autopsy photographs but also on the autopsy Xrays .
 Although you would think this would have been the end of it, it wasn’t . The incident happened in the early hours of Saturday morning . It was not the first time this year that the police had been involved in the incident .
 Despite the overwhelming evidence that the autopsy report is in error with regard to the precise location of the entrance wound, Dr. Dr. Martin says the HSCA forensic panel (and the earlier Clark and Rockefeller panels) were correct in placing the wound about 4 inches above the external occip
 Humes says when it comes to locating the entrance wound in the back of the head, the accurate record is the autopsy report . Humes: "The accurate record" should be the autopsy, not the death certificate .
 JAMA article dispelled suggestion that Humes might have been misquoted in the article . Drs. Humes was quoted as a doctor in JAMA .
 Humes and Boswell wrote a joint letter to the editors of JAMA in 1992 stating, “The appearance and location of the President’s wounds were exactly as described in the original autopsy report .
 The report was prepared within 48 hours of the assassination . It was delivered to the White House physician early in the evening of November 24, 1963 .
 Humes had changed his mind before the HSCA, but “I’ve talked with him since then,” Humes says . Humes: "I've talked with [Humes] since then."
 Posner said pathologists told him they had erred, that the wound was indeed 10 centimeters higher than what they wrote in the 1963 autopsy report and reported to JAMA in 1992 . Posner: Pathologists said they erred in the report .
 Dr. Posner’s assertion has since been challenged by assassination researcher Dr. Dr. Michael J. Posners . Posner's assertion has been challenged .
 Boswell denied having a conversation with Posner in the spring of 1994 in which he denied having the subject conversation . Boswell was interviewed by Posner on the subject of an investigation into Posner .
 Posner said he would furnish them to the board if Humes and Boswell would agree to his release of his notes . Posner would furnish the board with his notes if they agreed to him to release them .
 The review board said that its “initial contact with Posner produced no results.” The board said it had contacted Posner to discuss the matter with him .
 When a person is interviewed for a book by an author, unless he expressly states otherwise, the person gives the author the right to quote him in the author’s book . The author can tell the person's story to the world and the author tells the world .
 To suggest that the person might not want the author to turn over the author’s own notes of the conversation to a third party seems illogical . To suggest, then, that the author might not . want the . author's own notes to be turned over to a . third
 There is a possibility that Posner never spoke to Dr. Posner, the author says . Because the notion is irrational is irrational on its face, there is the possibility that he never spoke with Posner .
 Humes: "The photographs [Black and White Nos., 16; Color Nos. and 43] I think create ambiguity ... much to my displeasure and dismay"
 Boswell and Finck have been adamant from the beginning that the entrance wound was low in the back of the head, never wavering on the record* (2 H 377, WCT).
 The autopsy report was incorrect, despite the three autopsy pathologists’ refusal to concede their error . The three pathologists are refusing to concede that their error was correct .
 It’s equally obvious from the record that the autopsy surgeons decided, in the end, to rely on the language they drafted in the original autopsy report and not second-guess their contemporaneous records . Second, it's equally obvious that the surgeons decided to rely upon the language
 James Humes testified that even though the X-rays showed thirty or forty tiny dustlike particle fragments, he and his two colleagues (Boswell and Finck) did not see any of them as they explored the brain .
 X-rays tend to magnify these minute fragments, so they were not too surprised they didn’t see them during the autopsy . Humes explained that they were surprised they weren't seen during autopsy .
 Autopsy pathologists could only speculate that the bullet exited somewhere within the margins of the large hole on the right side of the skull . Pathologists had no direct evidence of the exact exit point of the bullet .
 Pierre Finck noted in a 1965 memorandum that, aside from the large defect, no precise exit wound was identifiable during the initial examination of the skull . Finck: "No precise exit wounds were identifiable"
 Two additional fragments, making a total of five, were recovered from the scene of the shooting after the autopsy . Two more fragments were recovered after an autopsy .
 HSCA forensic pathology panel said that of the three fragments of the skull found inside the presidential limousine, the largest one, triangular in shape, contained “a portion of the right coronal suture,” the panel said .
 The “edge on the longest straight margin... meets a much sharper straight edge which represents an obvious fracture margin.” The edge of the edge meets the edge of a very sharp straight edge. The edge on the edge is the edge that represents a fracture margin . The edge is
 At the junction of these two margins is a semicircular defect, described in the autopsy report as showing outward beveling with small particles of radiopaque materials .
 The HSCA concluded that the main part of the bullet exited along the coronal suture line to the right front of the president’s head . Although the bullet fragmented upon striking bone in the president's head, the HSCa concluded that . The main part part of
 This would mean that a missile had made this wound from within the skull to the exterior . This would, to us, mean that the wound was caused by a missile . The wound is thought to have been caused by an explosion in the skull .
 Autopsy photos show the semicircular defect was half of a bullet wound with an exit beveling . The coronal suture is the juncture between the parietal and frontal bone . Michael Baden: "This caused most of the damage to the body"
 It is a seam or line approximately a third of the way back from the front of the skull that goes in a slightly irregular semicircle across the top and side of the head .
 The low point of the coronal suture is located about 2 inches straight in front of the top of each ear lobe . It is located in the middle of the ear lobe's ear lobes .
 The autopsy report doesn't mention whether pathologists attempted a reconstruction of the head using the three fragments they received late that night . Some critics have charged that because of the alleged incompetence of the autopsy surgeons, none was done .
 Humes strongly indicated to the Warren Commission in 1964 that a reconstruction was attempted . He said he and his fellow surgeons “found that the three pieces could be roughly put together to account for a portion of defect” to the right side of the president’s head .
 The largest fragment found of the president’s skull was along the coronal suture . It was one of three that lined up with the large defect to the right front of the skull . This large fragment of bone was beveled on its outer surface, rather than its inner
 Conspiracy theorists say the bullet entered the president's head not from the rear, as the evidence shows it did, but at the right side of his head . And let's not forget the commonsense observation that if in fact the bullet had first entered the . president’s head not
 That obviously was an exit defect, not an entrance wound, which would have been small and circular . "That obviously was ... not an entry defect," he said. "It obviously was a defect, ... not a circular defect," the doctor said .
 Cairns arranged to have color slides taken of the fragment in the hospital’s medical photography department .
 Admiral Burkley did receive another skull fragment on November 27 from Secret Service agent Robert I Bouck . Burkley noted the fragment had been “turned over to the Secret Service by David Burros.”
 Harper fragment was lost, two 35-millimeter color slides taken of it shortly after the assassination survived and were available for Dr. Dr. Harper . Two slides of Harper's assassination survived .
 Angel was not the “Burros fragment” but was the largest of the three bone fragments delivered to the autopsy room and x-rayed on Dr. Angel . Angel was found to be the largest .
 The fragment contained a small grayish discoloration suggesting lead had stained the bone . Cairns stated that the fragment contains a small grey discolation suggesting it was stained with lead .
 Dr. Cairns had an opportunity to look at the actual bone fragment, but there is no evidence that he examined it in anywhere near the depth he had examined it . The bone fragment is believed to have been the remains of a human skull .
 Angel studied the color slides of the fragment, nor was Cairns, a pathologist, like Angel, on skeletal remains . Angel studied color slides, nor did the pathologist who examined the remains .
 It should be noted that for years the conspiracy community has alleged that by the fragment being found ‘south” of where the president was shot, south meant “behind, in back of,” and if, indeed, the fragment came from the occipital area of
 Harper told the FBI he found the fragment “south” of where the president was shot . The normal inference would be he meant to the left, not behind, which would be more east than south . More importantly, perhaps, perhaps .
 William Harper was asked to mark on a map the location the fragment was found . The fragment was discovered in 1997 .
 This would seem to put to rest the allegation of the conspiracy community that the Harper fragment was found to the rear of where the president was shot . The fragment is believed to have been found in the back of the president's body .
 One side of the fragment, adjoining the exit bevel, was determined to be a portion of the coronal suture . The fragment was found on the surface of the asteroid .
 Angel and the HSCA forensic panel also took note of the semicircular defect, or notch, first spotted in autopsy photographs of the cranial cavity by Humes, Boswell, and Finck in 1967 . Angel: "Angel" and "HSCA" took note
 On January 20, 1967, Humes and Boswell returned to the National Archives to review the autopsy materials again . Dr. Boswell was the third autopsy pathologist, Dr. Dr. Humes .
 It was Finck’s first opportunity to see the autopsy photographs taken the night of the assassination . Finck: "It was the first time I had a chance to see these photos" Finck says the autopsy photos were his first chance at seeing autopsy photos .
 Forensic pathology panel concluded in 1978 that the cranial cavity photographs, in fact, depicted both wounds . HSCA forensic pathology panel ultimately concluded that the photographs were of both wounds - the entrance wound in the back of the head (i.e., in the cowlick area)
 The keys to the correct orientation of the images are the lip of a glass specimen jar on, and a drainage hole in, the autopsy table, which are both visible in the photographs and are located at the top .
 The photographer was standing at the head of the autopsy table, looking down into the cranial cavity, with the president lying on his back .
 All three outwardly beveled defects were portions of the same exit hole . In other words, all three were the same .
 Assassinologist Dale Myers believes that these gaps necessarily mean that there was more than one significant exit hole within the large defect to the right frontal area of the president’s head . Myers believes the gaps in the president's frontal area mean there were more holes in the head .
 Myers said there may very well have been two exit holes, but it would not be automatic . Myers said the exit would not have been automatic .
 A January 6, 1964, memo from Secret Service chief James J Rowley to Warren Commission general counsel J Lee Rankin would seem to contradict Purdy’s memo . Purdy's memo appears to contradict the Warren Commission memo .
 The missile that struck bone in the president’s head (even though not a fragmenting, dumdum bullet) would be a non sequitur to conclude that a gap has to be caused by an exiting, fragmented bullet .
 James J Humes] could easily have and most likely did fragment at least partially on impact, causing other small and insignificant exit points when and if the bullet fragments emerged from the president’s head .
 Whether or not the bullet that struck the president in the head fragmented before or after it exited his head doesn’t change the incontrovertible conclusion that only one bullet, fired from above and behind, struck him . The point has to be made .
 All we’re talking about here is what happened to that one bullet after it entered the president’s head . All we're talking about is whether the bullet hit the president .
 The only possible relevance of a second exit hole somewhere within the large defect to the right front part of the president’s head is that if it was a major defect, this would not alter presidential limousine on the night of the assassination . Secret Service special agent Morgan Dies
 How many fragments of bone were found, what was their size, and what was done with them is not known .
 Autopsy could not have been a part of the skull reconstructive effort by the autopsy team two nights earlier . But we do know they could not be a . part of a skull reconstruction effort .
 HSCA forensic pathology panel frustrated in its effort to pinpoint the exact location of the back wound . Pathologists used body landmarks that change with different body positions rather than fixed body landmarks .
 The HSCA did point out that the bullet missed the scapula and ribs . X-rays show the bullet did not hit the scarpula and the ribs . However, the bullet was not enough to hit the ribs or scapulas .
 The HSCA resorted to language not only unfit for a publication intended to be read by the public, but demonstrably in error . But in the process of articulating just where it was, it resorted to using language unfit for the public .
 The wound was not in the middle of the shoulder blade, nor the end of the right shoulder blade to the right . The HSCA’s own drawing shows that the wound was midway between the spine and the end .
 The entrance holes in the president’s coat and shirt were more than 2 inches lower in the back than the actual entrance wound in his body . A point that conspiracy theorists have raised over and over in their books is that the president's entrance holes were more .
 Like virtually all criticisms by Warren Commission critics and conspiracy theorists, it doesn’t “go anywhere,” to use a trial lawyer’s term . The Warren Commission didn't ‘go anywhere’ with the Warren Commission, a lawyer says .
 The discrepancy would only mean something if one were able to conclude that the president was shot twice in the back, and once below that where the holes in the shirt and shirt were . But the discrepancy only means something if we know where we know the entrance wound was, once where the entrance
 There is no evidence of a second entrance wound to the president’s back, says CNN.com . No evidence of any holes to the back of the president's coat and shirt other than one to the coat and one to shirt .
 There is a perfectly sensible explanation for the apparent discrepancy . In any event, there is no reason for the discrepancy in numbers .
 Kennedy had been waving to the crowd so much during the motorcade that his coat behind his neck remained elevated, or bunched up, from all the prior wavings, covering his back collar .
 The best examples of this are the Robert Croft photo (approximately frame 161) and James Altgens photo of Kennedy and Connally as the presidential limousine is proceeding north on Houston Street .
 In both photos, Kennedy is not waving, but his suit coat is still all bunched up from his prior waving . Kennedy's suit coat still bunches up from the prior waving photo .
 Connally did not wave during the motorcade, and his coat was not bunched up . Connally, on the other hand, did not waved during the parade .
 As a result, a good inch or so of the white collar on his shirt is clearly visible . A good inch of the collar on the shirt is visible .
 Even when the president wasn’t waving, every photo of him in the motorcade shows him with his right arm elevated, resting on the side of the car .
 Humes only referred to the coat in his answer, but he made it clear shortly thereafter that he meant to include the shirt . Humes made the remark in the interview .
 Some critics have suggested that the slits in Kennedy’s shirt and tie were caused by doctors cutting away his clothes upon his arrival at Parkland Hospital .
 The HSCA could find no evidence that the shirt collar or tie knot were cut during removal . The slitlike irregularity of the tears in the fabric were typical of an exiting bullet, they say .
 Croft photo is the best photo I have seen that clearly shows the bunching up of the president’s coat on his back . The panel concluded that the slitlike tear in the shirt and the nick in the tie knot were caused “beyond a med .”
 John Croft was authorized to use the photo for this book . Croft had a very clear photo of this image .
 Gary Aguilar, Cyril Wecht, and Rex Bradford take issue with several points in the FBI’s laboratory investigation of the president’�s coat and shirt .
 President's coat and shirt were delivered to FBI lab on November 23, 1963 . FBI special agent Orrin Bartlett delivered the president’s coat, shirt to the FBI lab in 1963 .
 If there is an earlier FBI lab report on this, I was unable to come up with it, and the HSCA gives no citation for its statement . If there was there is there is no evidence of an earlier lab report .
 The HSCA said it could not draw “any independent conclusions based on its own observations” of the fibers because of the “intervening handling of the clothing” in the previous decade and a half . They also interpreted the statement, made over fifteen years after
 Aguilar, Wecht, and Bradford don’t really say what their point is . All FBI agents, indeed all law, are not really saying what they're trying to say .
 Their purpose is to find any theoretically possible problem with the case they can and then proceed, without bothering to ask if their finding “goes anywhere,” to conclude that the theoretical problem either negates the Warren Commission evidence on this point or points to the existence of a conspiracy
 "This worthless nitpicking is so very typical of the conspiracy community," says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 A wound of exit in the lower neck that had been surgically repaired had been repaired . The incident occurred at Bethesda Naval Hospital .
 The autopsy finding as to the track of the bullet that entered the president’s back was buttressed by the HSCA forensic pathology panel in 1978 . The panel examined X-rays taken during the autopsy of the president .
 Parkland doctor says Parkland shooting victim's observation is questionable validity . Parkland school shooting victims say they were victims of a 'senseless massacre'
 We know from the autopsy X-rays and photographs that these doctors were wrong in placing the exit wound to the right rear of the president’s head . It's hard to believe that any medical doctor would confuse the occipital bone with the right part of the head .
 Nurse Doris M Nelson told the Globe, “It’s not true,” when shown the tracing . Nelson said the tracing was "not true"
 Robert Grossman for his alleged observation in Trauma Room One for the simple reason that there is no strong evidence he was actually inside the room . Grossman is accused of being in the room at the time of the alleged incident .
 Warren Commission counsel Arlen Specter didn’t have him testify before the Warren Commission, as he did with virtually all the other Parkland doctors who were present . If he was, and he saw all the things he claims to have seen, it’s curious why he
 Grossman never prepared any medical report of his observations that day . Grossman's medical observations were never made public, Grossman said in a statement .
 Neurosurgeon claims to have seen a lot, but all of his observations are consistent with the findings of the Warren Commission . He has coauthored in the medical journal Neurosurgery .
 "There is very persuasive evidence that the main medical findings of the Commission were correct. That itself is not disturbing, since there is persuasive evidence," the author says .
 First, he apparently kept them to himself for 18 years . The first time he spoke publicly on the matter was with Bradlee for the Boston Globe in 1981 .
 Kennedy was on his back throughout his time in Trauma Room One and was never turned over . Perry and Carrico, saw any wound to the back of Kennedy’s head . The most important reason is that Kennedy was not turned over during his stay in the hospital .
 In their Warren Commission testimony, the 15 doctors who were in Trauma Room One, attending to the president in one way or another, all referred at one time or another to other doctors . The Warren Commission testified that all of the doctors were present and what they were doing at the time
 Grossman's reference was not the type of reference that would inspire confidence in what Grossman had to say many years later . Grossman: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to live up to that kind of thing."
 Nowhere else does Grossman’s name appear in the testimony of the 15 Parkland doctors who testified before the Commission .
 Dr. Grossman claims to have done what he claims he did in 2003 article in Neurosurgery . But if Grossman did what he says he did, and was seen doing it by his colleagues, how is it possible he did it?
 Robert McClelland: One of the surgeons had “taken this loose piece of scalp, which is hanging back this way . and pulled the scalp forward to take a picture . Robert McClean says one of the autopsy surgeons took a picture of the scalp .
 Witnesses say there was no gunshot wound to the left side of the president’s head . Several witnesses in addition to Dr. George W. Bush, the president's autopsy surgeon, say they saw no wound in the head .
 Parkland doctors never turned the president’s body over (3 H 382, WCT Dr. Dr. Martin) Even though we know the Parkland doctor never turned his body over, the president's body was never turned over .
 Parkland doctor says he saw the rear of the president’s head . Parkland doctors say they saw the back of his head .
 Robert G Grossman told the ARRB in 1997 that he lifted the president’s head and observed not a large gaping hole but a small circular puncture wound in the occipital region . Grossman characterized the wound as an entry wound, approximately 2 centimeters in diameter .
 Five others provided testimony that is so contradictory to the known facts or to other statements they themselves made, that one questions whether their observations are even worthy of mention .
 Karnei says he saw the president being undressed on the autopsy table . Karneis says he had a ‘vague recollection’ of pants being removed from the president’s body .
 X-ray technician: Most of the destruction to the head was toward the occipital area . Jerrol Custer, a technician, said that most of the damage was in the head .
 When Sitzman said the president was “hit on the side of his face, common sense tells us that she would have no way of knowing where he was hit . She was only referring to where she saw the horrible wound, and she would not have known where she was hit
 They would only be referring to the result of the hit, what they saw, not whether the wound was an entrance or exit wound, which they would be in no position to determine . They would be referring only to the hit and what they see, not the wound .
 Conspiracy theorists seize on loose language as meaning that the shot came from the grassy knoll, not Kennedy’s rear . Yet intelligent people like conspiracy author David Wrone actually seize on this loose language .
 Radiologist Randy Robertson swears he can see what no other human can . He says he has no idea what he is capable of .
 The most comprehensive article yet written to support the position that the gaping exit wound was to the ‘back of JFK’s head’ is by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter says JFK's death was the back of his head .
 Paul Mandel, writing for Life magazine, was much worse . Mandel: "I'm not sorry for what I've done, but I'm sorry for it"
 Mandel says the Zapruder film shows the President turning his body far around to the right as he waves to someone in the crowd . He says the film shows that Oswald did all of the shooting from the rear of the president's throat .
 Kennedy did not do what Mandel said he did, and where Mandel came up with this distortion is unknown . Kennedy was not the president of the United States .
 It's hard to believe he made it up, since he would know the film would prove the falsity of his statement . The American public would not see the film for themselves until 1975 .
 The throat wound was a wound of entry and the bullet exited the large gaping wound to the right side of the president’s head . Paul C Peters did not see the wound before the tracheotomy, but the doctors in attendance said it was a throat wound .
 He said he ran his hands “up his back ... all the way up to his neck very briefly” but “felt nothing other than the blood and debris” He says he ran up to the neck of the victim but felt nothing more than the debris .
 Carrico said that standing in back of the gurney, he put both of his hands on the president’s right side, the left side, and the right side . He said both hands were placed under the president's back, a little above the waist .
 Even if his right hand had reached the president’s upper back wound, he would “very likely have passed over it,” he said . He added that even if he had reached it, he ‘very likely’d have passed it over .
 Marion Jenkins was asked whether any examination of the president’s back was made before the president expired, he responded in his Warren Commission testimony, “No, no.” Jenkins said in his testimony that no such examination was made .
 Dr. John K Lattimer wrote in his 1980 book, “Actually, the chief anesthesiologist, Dr. Dr. . John K. Lattim, wrote in 1980, that he was a patient of the patient .
 Jenkins, was aware of the hole in the back of Kennedy’s neck, because in the process of positioning and stabilizing his head and pushing up on his neck to straighten the airway for easier passage of the oxygen he was pumping in, his spread fingers had felt the
 "Its presence was completely overshadowed by the desperate efforts of resuscitation, and Dr. Dr. Michael Jackson's efforts to save his life was overshadowed by his own efforts .
 Parkland Hospital nurse Diana H Bowron reportedly told conspiracy author Harrison Edward Livingstone in 1993 that she saw the entrance wound in the president’s back while preparing the body for placement in the coffin .
 Crenshaw came out with his book containing the highly unlikely LBJ allegation, someone came out of the woodwork to support his story, and just as predictably it appeared to be a phony story . The author of the book, which was published last week, has been accused of being
 Some writers, who do not have enough initiative to do their research thoroughly, want to call it a pack of lies . Now we have a man who writes the facts as he witnessed them, and some writers . Some writers want to say it was lies .
 I refer to the review by Larry Sutherland, Dallas Morning News , June 28 th , of Dr. Larry Sutherland . Dr. Sutherland is a former Dallas resident and author of the book, "Dallas Morning News"
 There are still people who have not come forward yet, that could have helped Mr Sutherland get his facts straight had he bothered to check .
 Bartlett’s problem is that Sutherland may or may not have researched his story, unfortunately for her, David Perry, the debunker of assassination kooks, did . Bartlett, like hundreds before her and hundreds after, made up her story .
 Perry called Charles Jack Price, the administrator of Parkland Hospital at the time of the assassination, and Bartlett’s boss, to discuss the assassination . Perry called Price, who was in charge of the hospital, to say Bartlett was a good man . Price was the hospital
 Price told Perry that he did not believe that Lyndon Johnson called Parkland Hospital, as Crenshaw said in his book . Price personally told Perry this when he called him at the time of the book came out . Price told Price that he didn’t believe that he called Park
 Price said the switchboard staff reported to him, and told him there simply was no way a switchboard operator would get a call from the president of the United States and not tell everyone about it . Price said he was told the call was made by the president .
 Crenshaw felt it was inconceivable that a call from the president would be forwarded to a “junior resident” like Crenhaw . He also felt it would be inconceivable to send a call to the president to a junior resident .
 She reported receiving all types of other calls that apparently were much more important for her to take notice of . Yet she reported receiving other calls .
 Bartlett said LBJ simply wasn't important enough to pass muster for Bartlett’s report . But LBJ was important enough for the report, he said .
 Bartlett’s attempt to cover up is a weak effort to cover-up, he says . But this appears to be an embarrassingly weak effort on Bartlett's part, he adds .
 Her report included all types of crazy calls, like the one asking to hypnotize Oswald and the one claiming she could bring the dead president back to life . Her report also included calls from people who wanted to bring Oswald back alive .
 LBJ couldn’t make the cut to be mentioned by the very discriminating Ms. Johnson .
 "For a second I couldn't, you know, I was still thinking of Kennedy. And for a second, I couldn’t ... think of Kennedy," she says .
 JAMA editor George Lundberg and JAMA national correspondent Dennis L Breo interviewed autopsy surgeons James Humes and J Thornton Boswell for two days in a Florida hotel in April of 1992 .
 JAMA staff writer Dennis Breo wrote a ten-page article based on the interview and the presi . The third autopsy surgeon, Dr. Dr. John Sutter, was interviewed for JAMA .
 In autopsy surgeons’ autopsy descriptive sheet, surgeons placed entrance wound far enough down the president’s back so that it is actually a few inches below the exit wound in the throat . In the one of the back side the surgeons placed the entrance wound .
 To the unschooled mind, the bullet could not have been fired from up above, where Oswald allegedly was . Therefore, to the untrained mind, it could not be fired from the top of the building .
 Thornton Boswell, who said he prepared the diagram during the autopsy, would later say, “This was unfortunate. This was unfortunate," he said .
 The judge concedes that the dot he put for the entrance wound was too low . He said the notes he wrote on the drawing did locate the wound correctly .
 Humes told Dan Rather in 1967, “The outlines of the figure” on the autopsy descriptive sheet “are already prepared” Humes said in 1967 .
 Humes says precise measurements are inserted on margins of the autopsy descriptive sheet . Humes went on to say precise measurements were inserted on the margins of autopsy descriptive sheets .
 The HSCA referred to the drawings as “a crude representation used as a worksheet primarily to assist in the preparation of the report and was not necessarily an exact representation of the wound . The Warren Report , part II, June 26, 1967, 11, CBS Television Archives .
 The autopsy surgeons would have had no way of imagining that generations of conspiracy buffs would be scavenging endlessly for any discrepancy at all to attack the autopsy findings .
 The autopsy surgeons didn't make a sufficient effort to be precise, and the autopsy surgeons knew there were photos and X-rays of the president’s wounds to establish their exact location . Coupled with the fact that the surgeons didn’t make sufficient effort, they didn�
 HSCA’s response was typical in the conspiracy community . Articulating this reality gave rise to a response so typical in conspiracy community. ‘I’m not a conspiracy expert,’ he writes .
 In 7 HSCA 87, the forensic pathology panel wrote that upon examination of photographic enhancements of the autopsy photos of the entrance wound to the president’s back, “when the body is repositioned in the anatomic position (not the position at the moment of shooting
 It would seem to be that by straightening Kennedy’s body out into an anatomic position, not only does the bullet track go upward anatomically, but since the entrance wound is part of that track, it too is now abraded upward .
 HSCA forensic pathology panel members are so incoherent that they don’t lend themselves to repeating . Two members of the panel attempted to explain the language in 7 HSCAs 87 .
 HSCA pathologists didn't, of course, see the actual entrance wound, only photos of it . And on the issue of whether 7 is incorrect with respect to its “abraded upward” language, the pathologist didn’t .
 Humes did not see the wound, but the abrasion collar itself indicated that it was to him . Humes, however, did see the bullet, and it was traveling downward .
 Dr. Robert K Karnei Jr. was present at the autopsy, but his recollections have proved to be questionable . Dr. Karneei Jr.'s recollections of the autopsy have been questioned .
 A bullet truly going in an upward direction at the time it entered the president’s back could not have come from any of the buildings to his rear, even from the ground floor, which would still be above him . The assassin would have had to be lying flat on his back
 To the student of the assassination, or even the casual observer, the forward inclination of the president’s upper body looks awkward and unnatural, and hence, the thought enters the mind that this inclination is not accurate . The president's body was shot to death in 1968 .
 Dr. Gerry Spence raised the issue at the London trial of Dr. Gerald Spence . The prosecution’s rebuttal is restricted to responding with witnesses and evidence to matters raised by the defense .
 Just because a defense counsel doesn't raise an arguable weakness in a case, doesn't mean that one or more of the jurors will not . Spence may not have raised the issue because he knew I had a response to it, he says .
 A jury consists of twelve people with a collective human experience of over five hundred years . If just one of them sees a weakness in my case and talks about it in the jury room, then all twelve know about it . The knowledge of one is the knowledge of all twelve, the knowledge
 "I wanted to make sure that if any of the London jurors spotted the apparent weakness in my case and was discussing it back in the jury room, that they’d at least have something from me to rebut it," he said .
 Although I didn’t want to highlight the problem in my examination of Dr. Dr. John Defterios, I’m not sure if he’s a good candidate for the job .
 The president's upper body would be hunched forward at a slightly greater angle than the downward angle of the bullet . If we take the upper end, 18 degrees, as being accurate, since the angle of declination was around 17/2 degrees . The president’s upper body
 The president was not leaning forward, but rather was only hunched forward in the upper torso area . "So, in essence, the president was leaning forward," the president said .
 Artist's drawing of the path of the bullet through Kennedy’s neck could hardly have been more inaccurate in depicting the orientation of Kennedy's upper body and head at the times of the shots to the back and head .
 Law with Eaglesham, In the Eye of History ,296, was clearly way off . His drawings were clearly wrong .
 With respect to the shot that traversed Kennedy's throat, Rydberg’s drawing is wrong in that we know from the Zapruder film that we . We know that Kennedy's upper body and head were never in the straight-back, anatomic position that Ryd
 Earl Rose was a member of the HSCA’s forensic pathology panel at the time of the assassination . He says to a layperson, “lower neck and upper back” were two slightly different anatomic positions on the body .
 Where did the bullet to the back side of the president enter, the upper back or lower neck? I asked. Where did it enter? The president's lower neck or upper back .
 Specter said he was shown one picture of the back of a body which was represented to be the President, although it was not technically authenticated . In a 1966 interview by United States News & World Report, Specter described the image as a 'body'
 Francis O’Neill is not talking about fake photographs, as the conspiracy theorists claim . And we know that Francis O'Neill is talking about a photo of him in a photo .
 Sibert: "I don't have any recollection of it being that intact, as compared with these other pictures" Sibert says he doesn't remember autopsy photograph number 42 . Sibert said he doesn’t remember autopsy photo number 42 as intact .
 They intended to show the entrance wound to the upper right rear of Kennedy’s head . The entrance wound was intended to be shown to the front of the camera .
 Surgeons were looking for a way to get an unobstructed view of the entrance hole . Surgeons used the hole to photograph the entrance wound .
 The president was lying on his back on the autopsy table, and in this position several long, tattered, shreds of scalp (which had been blown loose from the right front top of the head by the exiting bullet) were still attached to the back portion of the skull . The
 In order for the entrance wound photograph to be taken, the autopsy surgeons lifted the president’s right shoulder from the autopsy table, and rolled him onto his left shoulder . In order to take the photo, the president was lifted onto the left shoulder of the president .
 The act of pulling the loose scalp forward across the top right of the head made the entrance wound visible . It also briefly covered the large exit defect on the right front side of the president’s head .
 The right front of the president’s head appears intact, except for a piece of loose skull attached to the right front . This is less bloody than almost all the other views of the head wound .
 There is no evidence at all that anything has been doctored, phonied, or fixed up as conspiracy theorists want so desperately to believe . There is also no evidence that anything was doctored or phonied up .
 Several key autopsy photographs are alleged to have been missing from autopsy photos . Another allegation is that several key autopsy photos are missing from the autopsy .
 Conspiracy theorists claim they were destroyed as part of the cover-up to keep the true nature of the president’s wounds from the American people from the public .
 Unlike the allegation that the surviving photographs and X-rays have been “doctored,” this one has the barest thread of truth to it . Unlike the allegations that the photos have been doctored, there is truth to the story .
 Stringer was asked why he would sign a statement that all the photographs were there, when in fact they weren’t, he offered no explanation . Stringer has no explanation for why he signed a statement saying the photos were there .
 Pierre Finck, who had been recalled from a tour of duty in Vietnam for the occasion, joined Humes and Boswell at the National Archives for a second review of the autopsy photographic inventory .
 Justice Department pushed to have three pathologists sign off on autopsy photographs . Justice Department was behind push to have photos taken of the three autopsy photos taken .
 There is this unfortunate reference in the Warren Commission report by Dr. Michael Warren . Dr. Warren said it was an unfortunate reference .
 The idea that some of the autopsy photographs had disappeared did not go away with the affidavits . The affidavits did not, however, go away .
 Of the two, Humes was particularly emphatic that one had been taken of the interior chest to document the bruise over the top of the right lung . Humes said that one of the two photographs had been of the inside chest .
 Humes’s recollection of a chest photograph (or photographs) being taken . Boswell and autopsy photographer John Stringer support Humes's recollection of the photograph . Humes' memory of the chest photograph .
 One of the two “missing’s views described by autopsy pathologists is not missing at all . The two views described as ‘missing” by pathologists are not missing, pathologists say .
 The autopsy pathologists changed the identification in 1967 when they noticed a portion of the exit wound in the foreground of these images . Correctly identified during the 1966 inventory, the identification was changed in 1967 .
 The camera was loaded with both black-and-white and color film, and multiple exposures were routinely made from each viewpoint .
 Two missing views could actually constitute four or more photographs . Therefore, two missing views may actually constitute more photographs than one .
 Bouck's probable mistake was in counting the images and not the number of sheets of film, both exposed and unexposed . Bouck’s probable mistake may have been counting sheets of images .
 Originally, the typed receipt listed eight Graphic View film holders with color film and six GraphicView film holders . Originally, it listed eight graphic View film holder with color and six graphic View holders with black-and-white film .
 These were changed to eleven and nine, respectively, by hand and initialed by Captain John H Stover . Captain Stover was captain of the ship .
 Five unexposed black-and-white negatives, also listed among the miscellaneous items, met the same fate of being loaded and unloaded without an exposure .
 The two unexposed color transparencies described under “miscellaneous items” might explain the discrepancies between the early listings and the current inventory, and the issue of “missing” photographs .
 Adding two film sheets to the current inventory would mean that the eleven film holders were loaded on both sides . It would square with the autopsy photographer’s recollection that all the film holders had been fully loaded .
 Humes testified what the two missing photographs depicted— the inward beveling of the entrance wound as seen from the inside of the skull . The interior of the chest showed the bruise over the top of the right lung, which corroborates the track of the bullet through the neck .
 The "missing" photographs can't show something different from all the many remaining photographs, which were authenticated by the HSCA in 1978 . Second, and perhaps most importantly, the “missing’s photographs can’t show .
 The suggestion that only two views were singled out for destruction makes no sense . The photographs and X-rays that were presumably left behind prove beyond any doubt that the president was shot from above and behind . The suggestion is not only that only one view was destroyed .
 There are several other tales of photographs allegedly taken during the autopsy that critics claim have since vanished . Even if these alleged missing photographs exist somewhere, they can’t possibly show something that contradicts what we already know about the president’s wounds .
 The autopsy photographs and X-rays that are available are authentic and unaltered . They depict the condition of President Kennedy’s body on the night of the autopsy .
 Any additional photographs or X-rays that might exist (or might have existed) can’t depict something else . So, any additional photographs of the discovery of the body can't be found .
 One hundred or one thousand sworn testimonies about missing photographs would not change this unshakable truth . The truth is that missing photographs are still missing photographs . One hundred and one hundred sworn testimonies will not change the truth .
 Spencer said Fox told her that he needed the film developed and a print made from each of the negatives, adding that they were autopsy pictures from Bethesda . Spencer said she shouldn't peruse them more than necessary .
 Spencer soon realized that the photographs were from President Kennedy’s autopsy, but were unlike any autopsy photographs she had seen in her previous duty at Pensacola, Florida . Spencer realized that she had never seen such photographs before .
 There was “no blood or cavities” or “matted hair” on the president’s head in these photos . Unlike the nine official autopsy photographs shown to her by ARRB counsel Jeremy Gunn, there was ‘no blood’ or ‘
 David Mantik makes much of the fact that Fox showed up with color negatives, rather than color transparencies, in the autopsy . Mantik points out that only color negatives were exposed at the autopsy at the time .
 Kennedy family representative Burke Marshall authorized the Boston Globe to pick a panel of experts to look at all fifty-two autopsy photographs, as well as the autopsy X-rays, stored at the National Archives . These color negatives are, of course, the internegatives created from slide or transparency
 All the experts disagreed with Groden’s position that there had been alterations to the photos, saying they could detect ‘no evidence” of this . Ben Bradlee Jr. of the Globe was present during the viewing and examination of the photographs .
 According to Spencer, the top of the head was not visible in any of the photos, and no damage was seen on the right side of his head . Spencer: "No damage was visible on the left side of the face"
 One photo, she said, showed a full length of the president’s body from a 45-degree high angle . One photo shows the president's body at an angle from the ground .
 None of the photos showed the scalp peeled back on the skull, Spencer said . Spencer said that none of the photographs showed the skull peeled back .
 Spencer said other than the wound to the back of the president’s head, she saw no other wound to his head . Spencer said that other than that wound, other wounds to the head were not apparent .
 When shown the official autopsy photographs in 1997 by ARRB counsel Jeremy Gunn, Spencer said that “there is no similarity” that the photos were far bloodier than the ones she remembered . Spencer said she remembered the autopsy photos in 1997 .
 Gunn said all of the official prints shown to her by Gunn had a Kodak watermark that was ‘smaller’ than that used at the NPC in 1963 . Gunn said the paper was not the paper used by the NPC at the time of the 1963 incident .
 Spencer’s testimony has raised the question in the conspiracy community of whether there was a second set of photographs . Conspiracy theorists presume this set of photos showed the ‘true’ nature of the president's wounds . The second set was squirreled away as part of the
 Photo experts agreed with Groden that there was an area at the back of the President’s head where the hair appears to be abnormally dark, but this must have been because the hair was washed before the photos were taken to make the wound visible .
 Spencer’s recollection of events was thirty-four years after the fact . For starters, keep in mind that Spencer's memory of events is thirty-three years after it happened .
 Her recollection is at odds with almost the entire official record . But more importantly, she says she doesn't know what happened to her daughter .
 The official autopsy photographs were processed, as Spencer remembered, at the NPC . The rest of the documentary record details a completely different and rather divergent series of events which, I think you’ll agree, is quite unlike Spencer's account .
 NPC did produce color negatives and prints that weekend, though he didn't recall if they processed any color transparencies . Madonia recalled that the NPC did make color negatives .
 Agent Fox and White House photographer Robert Knudsen returned to the NPC with the color internegatives, made during their first visit, and supervised the creation of the set of color prints .
 Fox thought that one or two sets had been made, while Knudsen reported that seven sets were made . Both internegatives and prints were delivered to Secret Service agent Robert Bouck .
 Spencer insisted that the film she developed for Fox must have been color-negative film because she recalled ( thirty-four years later) developing it in a “color negative C-22 process,” and an “internegative cannot be processed C- 22” Spencer insisted
 Spencer concluded that Fox was referring to in the memorandum must have been on a day different from the one she remembered . Spencer concluded Fox was talking about the day she was talking to .
 This could be a reference to Saundra Spencer and Carol Ann Bonito, who Spencer said assisted in developing the autopsy photographs .
 Knudsen recalled that James Fox, Vince Madonia, and another technician were present, but he couldn’t recall if the technician was Saundra Spencer . James Fox was also present .
 We know she’s wrong when she says the photographs she saw show a “blownout chunk” in the center of the back of the head . We know that she's wrong when . She says she saw a ‘blownout’ chunk’ in the
 Official autopsy photographs and X-rays conclusively depict the body of President Kennedy at the time of the autopsy and show none of what Spencer described .
 The documentary records of the event in question (although fuzzy in some areas) fit what we do know to be true better than anything Ms. O'Neill said . Further, the documentary records .
 Saundra Spencer doesn’t have the goods to prove her claims, CNN.com reports . She says she has a lot of questions to answer .
 Saundra Spencer's recollections of the photos she saw depicting the president’s head in a ‘pristine’ condition are possible . Spencer: A series of photographs were taken of the president's body lying in repose after the embalmers had done their rest
 The prime candidate for taking such photographs, if any, is Robert Knudsen, the White House photographer .
 The family also said Knudsen met Air Force One when it arrived back from Dallas on the day of the assassination and didn't come back home for three days .
 Knudsen’s family said he was extremely close to JFK and took his death very hard . It makes sense that he might have wanted to take photos of the president when Kennedy once again resembled the handsome, dynamic leader he once knew .
 The possibility of Knudsen taking a “second” set of photographs after the embalming process is remote and speculative at best . There is not one shred of documentary evidence to support such an event, nor, more importantly, has this supposed ‘second’ set
 Boswell has let it be known that he no longer wants the intrusion of this case on his private life . He's no longer at the only address I've ever gotten for him, and has moved .
 When asked if there had been any cleaning at all of the president’s hair and scalp, he allowed, “It looks like there might have been.” Humes said .
 When one recognizes this reality about Spencer’s testimony, one can only conclude that her recollections after thirty-four years were either very faulty, or correct but of absolutely no significance . Spencer's recollections were either correct, or incorrect, or not significant .
 Robert Knudsen’s statements add yet another tale of missing photographs to assassination lore . There is an entirely different aspect to the statements worthy of exploration .
 Others have offered similar statements about a photograph depicting probes sticking in the president’s body . Others have said the photograph is not true of the photograph .
 Dr. Robert F Karnei Jr. Jr. told the HSCA in 1977 (and the ARRB again in 1996) he recalled that “photographs were taken of a probe in the president’s body” while Dr. Dr. K. Karne
 In another account, the probe was captured in an X-ray, not a photograph . Another account says it was captured on an X, not in a photograph, in another account .
 Jim Snyder of CBS’s Washington bureau reported in 1967 that he was personally acquainted with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Jim Snyder .
 Although Humes eventually gave the interview, the X-ray was never mentioned, nor is it among the inventory of autopsy materials . Humes never gave an interview with CNN .
 Stringer’s assistant, Floyd Riebe, recalled that a probe was used by Dr. Stringer . Stringer's assistant said a probe used by Stringer was used in the case .
 Two of the four sources for this story have further sullied their credibility with other outlandish claims . Two of these sources have also made outlandish claims about their credibility .
 Joe O’Donnell told the ARRB that Knudsen showed him approximately 5X7 inch, black-and-white photographs taken at Kennedy’s autopsy . Some showed a grapefruit-size hole in the back of the head, and a %-inch hole in
 O’Donnell is hardly a credible witness, Fetzer says . Fetzer, Murder in Dealey Plaza, in Fetzer’s book, “The Medical Evidence Decoded,” in “Dealey Plaza Murder in the U.S.”
 O’Donnell claimed to have been at Andrews Air Force Base when the president’s body arrived, demanded to speak to Mrs. Obama . He also claimed to be at the scene of the president's body when he arrived at the base .
 Kennedy entering the navy ambulance and its subsequent departure, all without a hint of the presence of O’Donnell . Kennedy entered the ambulance and it was taken to hospital in the early hours of the morning .
 O’Donnell also claims he showed Mrs. Mrs. Rosie O'Donnell a picture of his wife . He also claims to have shown her a photo of him running for office .
 Kennedy was shown the graphic Zapruder film of her husband’s murder within a few weeks of the assassination . The film was released within weeks of Kennedy's assassination .
 O’Donnell told the ARRB that no one was present at the screening except him and Mrs. Mrs. O'Donnell . She said she and her husband attended the screening together .
 O’Donnell says Kennedy told him she didn't want to see the head shot sequence again . O'Donnell took that as an “order to alter the film” and removed the shot sequence .
 O’Donnell stated he knew it was wrong but he subsequently removed ten feet of the film from the film . O'Donnell said he removed 10 feet of film from his film . He said he knew he knew the film was wrong, but he later removed it .
 O’Donnell said he was sure he had projected and altered the original Zapruder film and that it was in a 16-millimeter format . O'Donnell: "I'm sure I had projected, altered and altered film"
 Kennedy told Kennedy that she scrambled over the trunk of the limousine to retrieve a part of the president’s head . Kennedy told him that she told him she scrambled to retrieve the president's head .
 Knudsen’s version of events has been tarnished as well as that of John F Kennedy . John F. Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Knudson: "It was a terrible mistake for the country, but it was not a mistake"
 Robert Knudsen told them sometime after the assassination that he alone had photographed the autopsy . As noted, they said that he told them that he had taken the autopsy photos .
 Knudsen said he witnessed and photographed probes inserted in the president’s body . The Secret Service took his film as soon as he had exposed it, he said . The president's body was covered in probes, he also said .
 The photographer at the autopsy, by all accounts, was John Stringer, not Robert Knudsen . For instance, Stringer was the photographer .
 Under those circumstances, the Secret Service could hardly have confiscated his film, the Knudsen family says . The Secret Service couldn’t have confiscated any film, since he wasn't allowed to film it, they say .
 The claim that Robert Knudsen appeared before government investigators in mid-1988 is equally false . In addition, the claim that he appeared before the government investigators was equally false is also false .
 The last hearings of the last official government investigation, the HSCA, was in December of 1978 (HSCA Report,19), ten years before Knudsen’s alleged appearance before the phantom government body .
 David claimed that the slides and prints showed a round, Yh to 3 /s-inch-diameter hole in the right front temporal area of the president’s head, just below the hairline, and that the 16millimeter film showed a gaping wound in the back
 John Stringer, who took the official autopsy photographs, told the ARRB in 1996 that he knew Bill Pitzer but that Pitzer wasn't at the autopsy . Pitzer was not at autopsy, according to Stringer .
 At first, Jerrol Custer, another 1992 Pittsburgh conspiracy conference attendee, recalled seeing a uniformed "chief" believed to be Pitzer, taking movies at the autopsy . Custer says he saw the uniformed “chief’s” taking movies during the autopsy
 Pitzer’s filming created “a few upset people from the gallery.” According to Custer, Custer .
 It could have been brought to my recollection that night that we had the get-together in Pittsburgh. I’m not sure if it was—It could have brought to that night . It could be brought to his recollection that .
 A naval corpsman's film was allegedly taken from his camera and exposed to light as he snapped pictures in the morgue . The film is said to have been taken from the camera in a morgue morgue in New York .
 Conspiracy theorists paint it as a blatant destruction of evidence . The truth surrounding the incident is far less exciting . Painted by conspiracy theorists, the truth surrounding it is far more exciting .
 First class corpsman, Robert W Rittmeyer, also assisted by bringing additional film to the morgue door when needed .
 The exposures were all very dark, the first being the brightest, and each subsequent exposure darker than the previous one, until after four or five exposures it was impossible to tell if there were any other images on the film . According to Groden, the exposures were very dark .
 Conspiracy theorists have charged that the “missing’s autopsy photographs are, in their minds, one more indication of a conspiracy in the assassination . For years conspiracy theorists have said the ‘missing” autopsy photographs were one of many indications of a possible conspiracy . The photographs were
 Photographs often somehow get lost or misplaced . But everyone (except conspiracy buffs) knows that no one other than ourselves and our immediate family have custody of our old photographs .
 Hundreds of people from various official investigative agencies examined and working with the photos throughout the years . "I find it completely predictable that one or more photographs ended up missing, misplaced, or expropriated"
 Autopsy photographs would very likely be coveted and the object of outright theft by many people . And we know that autopsy photographs would be coveted . We know that .
 Robert Groden, the chief photographic expert for conspiracy theorists, must have himself either directly stolen or made copies of some of the O J Simpson autopsy photographs . Groden was working as a consultant to the photographic panel of the HSCA while he was working on the O Simpson civil trial
 CIA and HSCA agree that Blahut, without authorization, had rummaged through files containing autopsy photos . There are conflicting reports as to what happened, but the CIA says it's not inconclusive . CIA: The CIA believes that the photos were taken without authorization .
 One report said he had gained access to a locked safe that contained the files . Another report said that he had not gained entry to the safe .
 Some HSCA employees found photos outside of where they were supposed to be and in a state of disarray . The photos were taken at the end of the day, but were later found in disarray by employees .
 One source told the Washington Post that it looked like “someone had just run out” of the room . One source said “Someone had just ran out’s room”
 The conspiracy community was screaming about missing photographs when their leading expert photographer was stealing or making unauthorized copies of some of the photographs . "The conspiracy community screamed about missing photos when their . expert photography was stolen or made unauthorized copies, some of those photographs were stolen or . made .
 There is little reason to place importance in these kinds of accounts of allegedly missing or altered photographs . As I said at the beginning, there is little importance in such reports .
 Photographs can’t possibly show something that contradicts what is depicted in the many photographs that do exist and are available .
 HSCA photographic experts unanimously agreed that the existing photographs were authentic and depicted the president’s body as it was on the night of the autopsy . More importantly, as I’ve stated frequently, the photographic experts agreed that .
 President Barack Obama was shot from above and behind, says CNN's John Sutter . The president was shot in the face, he says, by the White House . Sutter: "The photos prove beyond any doubt that the president was killed from behind and shot"
 Conspiracy theorists claim that any missing or altered photographs cannot show something else, as the conspiracy theorists claim .
 Conspiracy theorists often refer to the missing “draft notes” that Dr. Dr. John Sutter allegedly wrote . Dr. Sutter is believed to have been in a coma for over a decade .
 Humes burned in his fireplace in the early morning hours of November 24 after he handwrote a draft of the autopsy report . He burned in the fireplace after handwriting a draft report .
 Conspiracy books cite the burning of draft notes as evidence of some cover-up . Critics see this act as highly suspicious .
 Josiah Thompson writes, “It is unclear just what this earlier draft contained.” Thompson writes .
 With the state of art being what it was back in 1963, there is no way that such a clear enlargement could have been made from anything else but the negative .
 The controversy all started with some illchosen words by Humes in his testimony before the Warren Commission on March 16,1964 .
 Humes handwrote a first “draft” of the autopsy report in the privacy of his home in the early morning of Sunday, November 24 . Humes said he “revised” it and burned it in the fireplace of his recreation room .
 Humes did not explain the reason for burning the first draft or draft notes to the Warren Commission, nor did the Commission ask . Humes has not explained the reason .
 Humes brought this supposedly second handwritten draft to Bethesda Naval Hospital, where he met with Drs. Humes . Humes also brought the draft to the hospital where he was interviewed . The draft is said to have been handwritten by Humes and his wife .
 The three pathologists went over the language of that second draft and made minor corrections before submitting it to a typist . The typist prepared the final document .
 What was destroyed wasn't a first draft of the report at all, but original handwritten notes taken during the autopsy . He said that what was destroyed was a copy of the autopsy report .
 The “other notes” Humes refers to here almost assuredly refer to notes taken by Drs. Humes . Drs Humes' notes are likely to have been taken from the notes taken during the time of the time .
 Finck told the HSCA in 1978 that “the notes I took at the time of the autopsy were turned over to Dr. Finck’s notes . Finck said the notes he took were later turned over by the coroner . The autopsy was performed by Dr.
 Leonard D Saslaw, PhD, claimed in 1996 that in the week immediately after the assassination, while in an Armed Forces Institute of Pathology lunchroom, he overheard Dr. George W. Bush . Dr. Bush was assassinated in 1996 .
 Finck complained to two other officers with whom he was eating “that he had been unable to locate his handwritten notes that he had taken during the autopsy on President Kennedy’s body . Finck said he was “unable to locate” the notes he took during
 Finck said he looked for his notes after washing-up following the autopsy and could not find them anywhere . Finck elaborated to his companions . . . He said he had washed-up after the autopsy, and could no longer find his notes .
 He recounted that others who were present at the autopsy also had helped him search for his notes, to no avail . He further recounted that he had been unable to find his notes .
 Humes made it very clear that the materials he burned were draft notes prepared in the autopsy room . Not the draft of the report written at his home on the evening of November 23 and early morning hours of November 24 .
 When Humes told the Warren Commission that he “burned” a “draft of report’s report, he meant what he was saying . But conspiracy theorists respond with what they maintain is their own circumstantial evidence .
 In earlier testimony before the HSCA in 1977, Humes had elaborated on the reason for burning the notes . Boswell, Boswell and Humes were the subject of an investigation .
 He served as an escort officer for 20 to 30 foreign physicians who were being given a course of instruction in the U.S. He explained that not long before the assassination, he served as a medical escort officer .
 Abraham Lincoln's chair was on display at Henry Ford’s Greenfield Village in Dearborn, Michigan . Abraham Lincoln was sitting in the chair when he was assassinated in 1865 .
 The back of the chair was stained with a dark substance that many thought might be bloodstains . The chair was found to be stained with the dark substance .
 The foreign physicians were appalled that the American public would allow an object stained with their president’s blood to be put on public display .
 Humes destroyed the bloodstained notes from the Kennedy autopsy . Humes, too, was bothered by the display, and so to avoid the same type of thing happening .
 In a deposition before the ARRB in 1996, Humes reiterated his reason for burning his original autopsy notes . Humes said he burned his autopsy notes in 1996 .
 ARRB counsel Jeremy Gunn showed Humes some autopsy notes handwritten by a colleague . Dr. Humes' autopsy notes were handwritten by his colleague, Dr. Dr. James Humes .
 Humes responded that it was one thing to destroy notes “of my own making’s own making. Humes said he destroyed notes of his own making .
 I didn't, wouldn’t have the habit of destroying something someone else prepared. "I didn”t, wouldn't have to destroy something else prepared," he said .
 Humes had never testified before (i.e., in testimony before the Warren Commission and HSCA) that he had burned his original autopsy notes and his handwritten draft of the autopsy report . Humes said he burned his notes and draft of autopsy report before he testified .
 Common sense tells us that unless he was confused, he wouldn’t, over three decades later, contradict his earlier sworn testimony . So common sense .
 We know Humes did not destroy the handwritten draft of the autopsy report because it is a Warren Commission exhibit . Moreover, we know that Humes didn't destroy the draft .
 Humes' time available to make a comeback is highly unlikely . Yet this seems highly unlikely considering the time available for Humes .
 He slept a bit, then took his son to a religious function (his First Communion) before returning to Bethesda sometime between 10:30m. and noon .
 Perry reportedly met with Boswell and Finck in Dallas, Texas . Perry reportedly learned about the tracheotomy, and reportedly met Boswell, Finck .
 A draft of a draft of an autopsy report on the president of the United States would have to take several hours to complete .
 Critics have been aghast at Humes’s destroying his original notes, this is not an uncommon practice . Humes destroyed the original notes in an attempt to get his work published .
 For instance, at the time of the assassination and for years thereafter, it was the policy of the FBI that after dictating from the original notes and comparing the dictation with the notes, the notes were destroyed . For example, the FBI had a policy of not comparing the notes with
 The only likely thing that was different from what appeared in the final draft of the autopsy report was a reference to the mistaken belief that the bullet that struck the president’s back didn’t exit at the throat, but instead worked its way out of the wound during cardiac massage
 This erroneous conclusion was corrected the following morning when Humes telephoned Dr. Humes . As we know, this erroneous conclusion has been corrected .
 Perry's tracheotomy incision had obscured an exit wound in the throat . Perry made an incision to remove the exit wound from the throat, but it was obscured by the incision .
 The autopsy notes were burned in the first place, but it hardly denotes a conspiracy to cover up the true nature of the president’s wounds . This fact may have proved embarrassing (something that might partially explain why the autopsy note was burned)
 Conspiracy theorists claim that Humes burned his first draft of the autopsy report . Humes' first draft pointed away from Oswald as the killer . Conspiracy theorists say he burned the first draft .
 If Humes had done such a thing, this would make him a willing and conscious accessory after the fact to Kennedy’s murder, a very serious crime . Humes is accused of being a willing accessory to the murder of Kennedy .
 Conspiracy theorists, whose taste for conspiracy skews their thinking processes, are not stopping to realize the obvious . "The conspiracy theorists" don't stop from realizing the obvious, says CNN.com .
 Bouck added that he and Burkley drove the materials to the archives and transferred them to Mrs. Mrs. Bouck . Bouck said the materials were taken to archives and then transferred to her .
 Lincoln said in 1978 that she did not open any of the containers to see if the inventory of things she signed as having received from Dr. Lincoln was open . Lincoln said she didn't open any containers to check if they contained anything she signed from the doctor .
 In 1996, KenVrtacnik, a medical photographer at the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, claimed that he saw President Kennedy’s brain during the 1964-1965 period . The brain had been kept in a locked room at the National Museum of Health and Medicine .
 What was reportedly on display was one long section, tan in color, immersed in liquid, lying in a stainless steel tray inside a glass case .
 It was labeled “President Kennedy’s brain,” or words to that effect . Vrtacnik said it had wooden pegs through it marking the paths of the bullet .
 Mastrovito received a plastic or glass vial with a piece of Kennedy’s brain in it, he says . Kennedy's brain was found in a plastic vial in 1969 or 1970 . Mastrovio says he received the vial from Kennedy in '69 or '70
 The vial came from the AFIP lab, where it had been sent after the autopsy at Bethesda, Maryland . It was given to him by his supervisor, Walter Young, chief of the Intelligence Division . He was given the vial by Young, who was the chief Intelligence Division chief
 Mastrovito destroyed the vial and the contents in a machine that destroys food, he said . He destroyed the contents and put them into a machine to destroy food, the ARRB said . Mastrovittito said he destroyed it in the machine that destroyed food .
 Cyril Wecht viewed autopsy photos and X-rays of the president’s brain at the National Archives . Wecht, pursuant to permission granted by Kennedy family representative Burke Marshall, viewed the autopsy photographs .
 Photographs of the top of the brain disclosed a “sizable foreign object” that could be “a flattened bullet fragment,” he said . He said that photograph of top of brain revealed a ‘sizable object’
 Panel members noted that it was “an oblong area of blue discoloration” that was ‘within the bullet track” of the bullet that entered the rear of the president’s head . Panel members said it was virtually eliminated the likelihood of a second bullet
 Wecht concurs with the HSCA finding in 1978 that the sizable foreign object he saw back in 1972 at the archives turned out not to be a bullet or bullet fragment . Wecht told me, “I concur with the finding in . 1978 that in 1978 the H
 The examination of the president’s body on the night of the autopsy continued, Humes said, into ‘very early the next morning” After the autopsy surgeons stayed with three civilian embalmers for several hours to help embalm and dress the body .
 The casket was removed from the morgue at 3:45m. (which agrees with the embalmers’ reported 3:30m. end time) A USMC sergeant in charge of the Marine barracks security detail said the casket had been removed at 3.45
 James Humes testified before the ARRB on February 13, 1996, his recollection of when the brain examination took place was understandably fuzzy . Humes' recollection of the examination is understandably fuzzy.
 Finck said the supplementary brain examination took place on November 27 or 28, 1963 . Finck's recollection is that it took place one day from November 29, 1963, the day Finck says it happened .
 Humes and Boswell aren’t that far off at all from Finck’s date of November 29, 1963 . So actually, when it comes to recollecting the date of the brain examination, Humes, Boswell and Finck are not that far from
 It would be more damaging to have laboratory records and their fellow autopsy surgeon, Dr. Stringer . True, they’d still have to worry about contradicting them by saying it was earlier, Stringer says .
 Finck's date of November 29, though probably correct, is not necessarily so . Finck’s date of Nov. 29 is probably so. Finck is probably correct .
 Fetzer, Murder in Dealey Plaza, is embellishing here. But Horne is embellished here.
 Finck’s memorandum to General Blumberg in which he sets forth the November 29 date says his report is based on his “personal notes,” not a daily diary . Finck says his notes are based on personal notes, not a diary, not daily diary
 Lab technician Paul O’Connor’s incorrect statement that virtually the whole brain was “missing,” is demonstrably incorrect . Others have said that most of the right hemisphere was missing, others have said .
 The answer is that the president’s brain did not lose much brain matter . The answer to the question is that he lost a lot of brain matter, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Baden says he saw the photographs taken of the president's brain at the time of the autopsy . The HSCA’s medical illustrator, Ida Dox, drew a diagram of the brain viewed from the top .
 If you squash a tomato, some would look at it and loosely say that most of the tomato was missing, but actually it's still all there, only it’s mashed . If you squashed a tomato you would say it was missing most of it, but it was still
 Some people have said that a big part of the brain was missing . That’s the only explanation I can give you for how some people have . Some people say that part of their brain is missing . The only explanation is that they are missing, he says .
 If formalin fluid is more concentrated, then it will remove fluid from the brain and make the brain lighter than it was on removal from the cranium . If the fluid is concentrated, the brain will be lighter than on removal .
 If formalin fluid is less concentrated, then the brain can gain fluid by absorbing water from the formalin and getting slightly heavier . If the brain absorbs water from formalin, the brain gets lighter and heavier .
 Usually the brain is weighed before it is put in formalin . I don't know which was the case here, but usually the brain weighs .
 It is only assumption that President Kennedy’s brain weighed around 1,400 grams before the assassination .
 The average weight of the brain for someone the president’s age is 1,366 grams, and the range is from 1,069 to 1,605 grams . Average weight of brain for the president's age ranges from .
 Time plays tricks with one’s memory, according to the testimony of Dr. Dr. David Perry . And the average weight increase after formalin .
 J Thornton Boswell before the ARRB in 1996, thirty-three years after the autopsy . Boswell was found to have died at the hands of Boswell in 1996 .
 In apparent conflict with his own autopsy report, he told ARRB that “probably half of hemisphere was missing,” that is, about a quarter of the president’s brain, a considerable amount of missing brain .
 The latter technique results in less weight increase than the immersion technique . The immersion technique is also less effective than the other technique .
 Even a medical doctor who is not a pathologist can become confused about terms . Dr. Dr. John Defterios says pathologists are often confused about what they mean .
 Humes was asked, “Earlier in the deposition today, you made reference to a sectioning of the brain.” When asked, Humes replied, "Yes, yes, yes," he said yes .
 Mantik had the whole transcript of Humes’s testimony, and quoted liberally from it throughout . Mantik didn’t tell his readers just what Humes said in his testimony was .
 Humes responded, “Not at that time ,” but added, ‘We did take certain sections” later at the supplementary brain examination . Humes said he did not recall the incident at the time .
 Humes’s answer only pertained to when the “sectioning” took place . Indeed, Humes said only when the "sectioning" took place.
 Livingston is the person who claims that just hours after the assassination, when there was mass confusion and no one knew anything for sure about the trajectory or origin of fire, he reached Dr. Livingston . Livingston claims to have called Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. hours after his assassination .
 Livingston claims he told Humes this before Humes learned from Dr. Humes . Mind you, Livingston claims this is not true . Dr. Livingston claims to have said this to Humes before .
 Mr. Livingston said, “Well, this is ridiculous. This is ridiculous,” after reading parts of deposition .
 Livingston admitted that although the information he had was important, he never contacted the Warren Commission, HSCA, Clark Panel, or any other official investigation . When he finally did take action (in April-May 1992), he only wrote letters and met with known conspiracy theorists .
 This obviously had nothing to do with the ARRB’s very limited mandate to release assassination-related documents to the public . The ARRB's mandate is very limited to releasing assassination documents .
 Nigel Turner's series The Men Who Killed Kennedy has been seen by millions of people . Turner has influenced the conspiracy community with his work on the Kennedy assassination .
 Former army lieutenant colonel Dan Marvin, contacted the ARRB in 1966 with his fabricated story that a CIA officer asked him in 1965 to murder William Pitzer . The ARRB sent a copy of the Nigel Turner TV segment dealing with the Pitzer matter to Dr. Wray .
 David Vance, a former U.S. Special Forces officer Marvin Marvin implicated in the murder, was interviewed by David Vance . Vance is a former Special Forces member Marvin Marvin had implicated in his murder . Vance has been charged with Marvin's murder .
 Shaw’s postoperative report and subsequent interview by the Warren Commission do not mention any “significant undermining or abrasion” on either side of the wound . Shaw's post-operative report does not mention ‘significant undermining’ or ‘abrasion'
 The second and by far the most logical interpretation of the oval entrance wound is that the bullet was out of alignment with its trajectory just before striking the skin . The bullet was struck by a bullet that was not aligned with the trajectory of the bullet .
 In other words, it had begun to “yaw or ‘tumble” before striking the governor’s back, causing the elongated entrance wound . The governor's back was struck by the missile, which hit the back of his back .
 The only bone struck by the bullet, before it exited, was a relatively soft rib located near the exit point on the right side of Connally’s chest . The bullet hit the bone as it was about to exit .
 The exit wound to Kennedy’s throat was believed to be around a quarter of an inch in diameter . Just approximately two feet later, the entrance wound to Connally's back was over twice the size of the exit wound .
 The bullet struck sideways in relation to its flight path. literally causing the bullet to strike sideways . The bullet strike was caused by the bullet striking sideways in its path .
 The likely other intervening object would be the president's knotted tie, which we know the bullet passed through after exiting the president’s throat . The president's tie is likely to be the only object to the bullet's exit .
 The governor's coat, shirt, and trousers had been cleaned prior to their receipt at the FBI laboratory . Unlike the analysis performed on the president's clothing, the governor’s clothing was cleaned before it was analyzed .
 Flying bone fragments from the fifth rib ripped the pleural cavity (i.e., the lining of the chest cavity) open . The vast majority of rib fragments exited with the bullet below the right nipple . The most of the fragments exited from the bullet .
 The bullet did not pass through the thorax (the chest cavity) but was essentially “a chest wall” wound, passing along the edge of the chest cavity . Much of the inner chest damage was caused by the shower of rib fragments blown into the chest when the bullet struck
 Gregory easily concluded that the wound on the back of the wrist was the entrance wound based on several factors, including the fact that bits of dark Mohair cloth from Connally’s suit coat had been carried into the wound .
 Gregory had also noted the wound to be ‘ragged’ and concluded that the ragged appearance of the wound was characteristic of an entrance wound caused by an irregular-shaped bullet .
 The sharp edges of such a distorted bullet would produce the ragged edges of the entrance wound . It also would explain how bits of cloth from Connally’s suit coat were caught and dragged into the wound .
 Gregory also noted that the branch of the radial nerve that runs along the back of the hand was partially severed . In the same area, a tendon leading to the thumb was totally severed . Gregory also said that a branch of a radial nerve in the back was also severed .
 Dr. Shires testified that the fragment was 1 to 2 millimeters in diameter . Shires said it was 1-2 millimeters wide . The fragment was a fragment of a fragment that was found in a museum .
 X-rays showed the fragment to be irregular in shape, but roughly oval . Parkland radiologist Jack Reynolds examined the fragment on November 22 and wrote a supplementary report .
 Dr. Reynolds’s opinion that the fragment “was just under the skin and was not deep within the thigh in the femur bone,” as had been reported by Dr. Reiss. Reynolds . Reiss: The fragment ‘was not deep in the thigh
 Gregory, without taking cognizance of the merely glancing blow to the rib by the bullet, testified, “I think that to pass through the soft tissues of the soft tissue of the . soft tissues would certainly have decelerated the missile to some extent,” Gregory
 The car hit the governor and shattered a rib . It then decelerated further, but retained sufficient energy to smash a radius . The car then crashed into the governor .
 It escaped the forearm to penetrate at least at least the skin and fascia of the thigh, and I am not persuaded that this is very probable . Moreover, it escaped from the forearm and may have penetrated the skin, fascia and thigh, but this is not likely .
 There is a slight ambiguity about exactly what happened, although the Tippit family did get the money . There is also ambiguity about what happened to the family .
 Zapruder gave $25,000 to the Firemen’s and Policemen’�s Fund . He gave it to a suggestion for Mrs. Mrs. Robinson, Zapruders said in testimony before Warren Commission .
 Zapruder only suggested that the money be given to Mrs. Tippit . The implication is that he only suggested the money was given to her . The story goes back to the original version of this article .
 As to the number of photographers who were present in Dealey Plaza at the time of the shooting, another HSCA document (Reference Copy, JFK Collection, HSC) seems far more accurate . Another document seems more accurate.
 "The Babushka Lady" and five more photographers have been added to the Dealey Plaza photo set . The photo was originally published in the New York Times .
 Still photos were taken by Phillip Willis slides (transparencies, which were more popular in those days), Hugh W Betzner Jr. (blackand-white photos), Robert Croft , James Powell , Jim Towner , Wilma Bond , Mary Ann Moorman (black-
 He and his three sons were positioned on the west side of the Triple Underpass, hence, outside of Dealey Plaza . The father and three sons are located outside of the triple underpass . He was killed by the White House in 1968 .
 He took approximately ten seconds of fdm as the presidential motorcade was driving through and emerging from the underpass .
 In February of 1964 he told Kenneth Armstrong, editor of the Toronto magazine Liberty, that he was present in Dealey Plaza at the time of the shooting and had taken photos of the motorcade .
 Armstrong showed Armstrong a few photos, but they were of no consequence . Armstrong said Armstrong showed him photos of himself . Armstrong: "It's not a matter of whether or not it's important to know"
 He said he had another photo of two men in the sniper’s nest window, which he promised he would send to Armstrong .
 Similas also said that he interviewed and photographed Vice President Lyndon Johnson the day before the assassination . He spent one hour with Jack Ruby at Ruby’s club .
 Similas told Armstrong he sent him a photo in the mail, but Armstrong said he never received it . Armstrong said the photo was sent to him, but he never got it .
 By the time the Royal Canadian Mounted Police interviewed Similas on September 16, 1964, he realized that the authorities were taking his allegation seriously enough enough to investigate . He toned down his story, and he later apologized to the authorities .
 At the same time as I took the first picture I heard the first shot fired. At the time, I was taking a photo of the scene of the first shooting .
 Similas said it was the reporter who spotted the two men in the window in one of the photos . The two men were seen in a window window .
 Similas’s little fairy tale, we have proof that this isn’t so . But unfortunately, we’re not so. We have proof of this .
 The day after the assassination, Similas stopped by the Chicago office of the Associated Press and gave the negatives to the day news photo editor, Waldo Butler and Ray Jefferies . The negatives were taken in the aftermath of the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Jefferies said there would have been no remote possibility of discerning human forms in any of the windows of any building appearing in the background of the street scenes photographed by Similas .
 In the early morning hours of March 24, 1964, another Canadian got into the act, calling Dallas police headquarters and being put on the phone with Sergeant Patrick Dean . Sgt. Patrick Dean was the first Canadian to call police headquarters in Dallas .
 He turned out to be an alcoholic named Ralph Henry William Smele . He admitted making the call under the fictitious name Ralph Simpson . He was an alcoholic .
 He said he had never been to Dallas and had made the story up, and apologized . The mayor of Dallas, Texas, says he never visited Dallas .
 Marie Muchmore and Wilma Bond left work at the Justin McCarty Dress Manufacturers company early so they could watch the presidential motorcade . The two women left work early to watch the motorcade at their clothing company .
 Muchmore took some motion picture film of the motorcade with her 8-millimeter Keystone movie camera . Bond took some still photos with her 35-year-old camera . They were standing about 30 feet north of the northwest corner of Houston and Main .
 The two left their position and moved to the concrete wall on the south side of Elm Street . As the limousine turned from Houston onto Elm, they moved to a concrete wall .
 Bond told the FBI that because of the excitement she did not take photographs at the time of the shooting . Bond snapped nine post-assassination photographs that have become famous because they clearly depict the scene in the immediate wake of the attack . Bond said she didn't take photos at the
 Her photo number 6 is important in that it shows several spectators running toward the top of the grassy knoll . She also shows a crowd running to the top .
 Film from her camera was later developed, it turned out she definitely had, for about three seconds around and including the head shot at Muchmore frame 42 .
 First Lady on trunk of limousine . Secret Service agent Clint Hill attempting to climb aboard limo . Subsequent frames pick up the First Lady .
 Bronson took film and still photos of the presidential limousine proceeding down Main to Houston, and some film of it proceeding north on Houston .
 Bronson did not film most of the limousine's progress down Elm Street, but did pick up the president’s car at the precise time the shots were fired . Bronson picked up the limo at the time of the shooting .
 The Bell & Howell Director Series spring-wound camera retailed for about $200 . It was capable of shooting approximately seventy-three seconds of continuous film when fully wound .
 Jackson instructed that all rights to the historic film be purchased . Jackson saw the film and instructed all rights be purchased for the film .
 Lyndal Shaneyfelt testified that frames “171 through 434” were prepared, an obvious misstatement or typographical error . Lyndal testified she was prepared to testify in the case .
 The transcript of the Commission’s last executive session on September 18, 1964, is not at the National Archives and has never been located . The full transcript of that meeting is not in the National Archive and is never found .
 It is unknown if stenographic notes of the session were ever typed up . Indeed, it is not known if the stenographic note was ever typed .
 The only Warren Commission executive session transcript apparently has survived and that the National Archives has is one in which Warren opens the session by saying, “The Commission will be in order.” The only transcript of the September 18 session is that Warren opened the session with the words, �
 The six-page document only contains a summary of motions made and their disposition . But transcription of the words spoken at the session abruptly ends with these words, and from that point on, the document is only a summary .
 Conspiracy theorists have speculated that Warren ordered the destruction of the transcript or stenographer’s notes . It is difficult to see what he would have gained from that, though .
 No one has ever suggested that important matters were discussed at the session, the knowledge of which has been lost to history . Not even Russell has alleged, “We discussed a very important matter critical to the case”
 Russell’s two-page formal dissent has survived and it is known that his motion was denied . Russell's motion was also denied .
 The six-page document on the September 18,1964, executive session does not contain a reference to Russell’s motion, which it should have . The six page document does not include a reference .
 Gerald McKnight’s Breach of Trust is filled with one outrageous conclusion by the author . It contains extremely biased and selective discussion of the issues and has sloppy citations .
 Russell’s dissent shows how lacking in substance the basis for his conclusion was, Russell says . Russell's dissent shows that Russell's view of the case was lacking substance . Russell: ‘I’m not going to let it go. I’ll never let it
 President Kennedy and Governor Connally were struck by the same bullet . Kennedy was killed by a single bullet, Connally's widow says . Connally was killed in Texas State House in 1968 .
 "The expert testimony, based on measurements and surveys, including reenactment of the motortrip . . presents a persuasive case. The expert testimony . presented by the author of this article .
 If McKnight is correct, which he may be, this would be a very serious deception on Rankin’s part, one that is inconsistent with his sterling reputation and splendid handling of the case . Rankin's reputation as a general counsel is consistent with his reputation and handling of
 Russell essentially said there were too many things he had questions about, and because of these unanswered questions, he tended to believe there was a conspiracy . Russell: Because of these questions, instead of concluding he didn’t know what happened, he tends to believe a conspiracy.
 Russell asked if Russell had acted like a responsible public official, he would have learned the answers to his questions . Russell says Russell should have acted more like a public official .
 Russell had a little more common sense, that would have also helped . And if Russell had had a bit of common sense that would also helped, it would also have helped .
 Russell is the same person who on October 22, 1962, right in the middle of the Cuban missile crisis and the threat of an Armageddon-like nuclear war with Russia, actually urged war . Russell urged war rather than a peaceful resolution to the crisis .
 It has to be noted that six of the seven Commission members kept their regular jobs during the entire Warren Commission period .
 Chief Justice Earl Warren didn't stop performing his duties as chief justice . Senators Russell and John Sherman Cooper didn’t stop being United States senators and Chief Justice Warren .
 Only the 14 assistant counsels and J Lee Rankin, the general counsel, worked full-time . Only 14 of the 14 assistants and general counsels worked full time .
 It was the assistant counsels and Rankin, not the seven Commission members, who knew the most about the case . And realistically, it was the assistants counsels .
 Russell is the only one of the Commission members and assistant counsels who has directly stated a belief in a conspiracy . Russell is one of those who has said he believes in conspiracy, but not the others .
 To Russell, possession of nuclear weapons wasn’t a deterrent to war but a golden opportunity to blow up the planet . Russell: Possibility to blow-up the planet was the perfect opportunity to do so . Russell says nuclear weapons are not a deterrent but an opportunity to destroy the
 The January 13, 1964, supplementary report is itself internally inconsistent . So is the 1964, 1964 report, "Internal inconsistency"
 January 13 report merely repeats the essence of the December 9,1963, FBI report . FBI report did not concern itself with the autopsy of the victim .
 Oswald believed that Oswald fired all three bullets that were fired in Dealey Plaza . Yet he believed all three shots were fired by Oswald .
 Fuhrman believes that the whole bullet passing through Kennedy’s body went on to cause the small dent in the chrome strip on the top of the inside of the windshield . The dent is thought to have been caused by the bullet hitting Kennedy's body .
 A bullet traveling at about 1,800 feet per second upon exiting Kennedy’s throat would have “torn a hole in the chrome,” FBI firearms expert Robert Frazier testified . A whole bullet would have, not merely caused a small dent, but a whole bullet traveled at
 It was driven under escort to the White House garage at 22nd and M Streets, N.W., Washington, D.C., arriving at approximately 9:00m. The vehicle arrived at the garage at about 9:30am .
 Five FBI agents examined the car at 1:00 m.m. at the garage, including Robert A Frazier . Initially, it was examined by Secret Service agents, but a team of five FBI agents arrived . The “meticulous examination” of the car and its interior continued
 We did not tear out all of the rugs on the floor, for instance . However, we did tear out some of the floor-to-the-floor furniture .
 We examined the rugs carefully for holes, for bullet furrows, for fragments . We examined them carefully, for holes and fragments .
 With respect to the damage to the inside of the windshield and the dent inside the windshield chrome, this damage was very minimal, police say . The damage was "very minimal"
 There are indications that the damage to the chrome strip attributed to a fragment from the bullet that hit the president’s head, may have had nothing to do with the shooting .
 The crack in the windshield was caused by a fragment of the bullet that struck the president’s head, Frazier said . Two photographs taken by AP photographer James W Altgens show the crack .
 The first photograph, taken after the second shot had been fired, shows no damage to the windshield . The first photo was taken after a second shot was fired .
 The next photograph, taken just after the third shot, clearly shows the spider-like cracks in the windshield . Frazier attributed the cracks to a bullet fragment . Frazier said the cracks were caused by the bullet fragments .
 Some critics say the windshield was actually penetrated by a bullet fired by a second sniper . The windshield was only cracked by a small bullet fragment striking it from the inside . Despite the overwhelming evidence and testimony, the windshield only cracked .
 Richard Dudman, a reporter for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, is a former St. MoD reporter . He says he has been in the news for more than a decade .
 The St. Louis Post-Dispatch is published in the December 21, 1963, edition of the New Republic .
 The cup-shaped spot, that indicates a bullet had pierced the glass from the opposite side, was found . It was not clear on which side the bullet had hit the glass .
 In a 1987 interview, Ellis claimed the bullet hole was “just above the metal near the bottom of the glass” But photographs show a radial pattern of cracks high on the windshield, just left of the rearview mirror .
 The FBI’s Robert Frazier testified that the windshield was made of safety glass . Frazier: Two layers of glass separated by a thin layer of plastic that bonds them together .
 Frazier says the windshield “could only have been struck on the inside surface” from a bullet coming from the rear, Frazier says . Frazier: This was all evidence that the windshield could only be struck on inside surface .
 Report: When laminated glass is struck, the “glass opposite the side of impact is put into a state of tension which results in cracks in the glass opposite the . side of the impact . The report compares the beveling of bullet wounds on the inside of the skull to
 U.S. senator Arlen Specter was the architect of the single-bullet theory . Specter has done everything to encourage people to believe in the theory, he says .
 Specter came up with the single-bullet theory, but it made very little sense to me since the theory was so obvious that a child could author it . Specter: "From the first moment that . I heard that Specter had come up with . the theory, it
 Many lawyers on Commission staff of very high intellect, many of them graduating at the top of their law school classes . And here we were dealing with lawyers on the Commission staff, many are of high intellect .
 The bullet, fired from Kennedy’s right rear, would have had to go on and hit Connally for the simple reason it had nowhere else to go . The bullet passed through soft tissue in Kennedy's body on a straight line, and Connally was seated to the president�
 In the absence of any evidence to the contrary, I went along with it for the moment, intending to pursue the matter further if I found the time . But in the absence there was no evidence that the matter was wrong, he said .
 Norman Redlich's profile was published in the New York Times this week . Redlich has been a long-running critic of Redlich for decades . He says he saw something he had previously missed in his profile .
 This went in the direction of confirming my initial thoughts, but obviously I needed further confirmation . This went to confirm my initial thought, but I needed more confirmation .
 Specter did not answer my letter . Specter has received a good response to my letters during my writing of this book .
 Senate Judiciary Committee chairman is battling cancer . Senator says he is aware he is very busy with his duties as chairman of the Senate Judiciary committee .
 His legacy is that he was the author of the single-bullet theory . He knows that perhaps his most well-known legacy, one that will be a part of his obituary, is that . Most of all, I’m aware that he knows that .
 Specter was a member of the Warren Commission, not the nuts-and-bolts staff, so was not in the best posito know exactly the origin of something starting at the staff level . If he was the sole author of the single-bullet theory, surely he would
 If he wasn't the sole author, he may have made the decision that to say nothing would be better than to admit that he wasn’t the sole . Or state an untruth and take the risk I could prove it was so. On the other hand, if he
 Redlich: Unlike Specter, who is a politician, I've maintained quite a silence through the years . Redlich says Specter trumpeted his many achievements, but with justification trumpeted many achievements . He says he has maintained a silence .
 "Whatever I know about the assassination is in the report and that’s still the case. Whatever I know, it's in the . report," she says . "That's still the . case"
 I give the reader this prelude to the main reason why I called Redlich as an indication that this is someone of considerable substance and stature . Redlich is certainly not likely to distort the official record for his own self-aggrandizement .
 He says he doesn't want to get into a dispute with Specter over single-bullet theory . Specter is leading people to believe that it was he who came up with the theory .
 I’ve never felt the urge or desire to take issue with Arlen taking the credit. "I’m not sure if Arlen takes the credit," he said .
 Redlich, who by almost all accounts worked harder on the case than anyone else, was a team player only interested in doing his job well . His sense is that Redlich worked harder than everyone else . Redlich was the team player in the case, only interested only to do his
 As Specter’s superior, he was only too happy to let Specter run with the ball on this issue . Specter's superior, and having many other supervisory responsibilities, had many other responsibilities .
 Specter ran well, perhaps too well for the historical record . And as we’ve seen, Specter running well, maybe too well .
 If I have done a disservice to Specter in what I have written above, I apologize . I apologize to him .
 "I did give him an opportunity to respond to this issue, and he declined," she says . "But he declined to respond," she adds .
 President Obama has been criticized for comments he made in the past in which he may have inadvertently betrayed what happened . Obama has said he would draw attention to two remarks he has made in past that may have betrayed the truth .
 Specter advertises to everyone that he came up with the theory . Epstein asks no follow-up questions, but the phrase “more than anyone else” certainly is not completely compatible with the notion Specter came up .
 If he responds to what I have written in this book, he should address himself to the ‘more than anyone else’ language, which could open up a subjective can of worms .
 I should add that I could find no documentary evidence expressly dealing with this issue of authorship of the single-bullet theory, although what is out there is definitely not helpful to Specter .
 In addition to Redlich, Specter and Eisenberg, the three autopsy surgeons, six FBI agents, and Secret Service inspector Thomas Kelley attended the first conference . The first conference included, among others, six autopsy surgeons .
 Dr. Alfred Olivier is chief of the Wound Ballistics Branch of the Biophysics Division at Edgewood Arsenal, Maryland . Dr. Olivier is also the chief of a wound wound wound expert at the Maryland facility .
 Governor John Connally and his wife, J Lee Rankin, and Warren Commission member John J McCloy attended the conference . Charles Gregory and Robert Shaw from Parkland Hospital were also there .
 At each conference the Zapruder film and slides prepared by Life magazine were shown and analyzed in detail . The attendees struggled to determine just when each of the two shots hit Kennedy or Connally .
 If Governor Connally was in the path of the bullet it would have struck him and probably caused the wounds he sustained in his chest cavity . Connally's wounds were probably caused by the gunshot wound .
 A second memorandum Eisenberg wrote, on April 22 (this one of the April 21 conference), doesn’t indicate that anything substantive came out of the second meeting not dealt with in the first conference on April 14 . Connally said he was of the opinion that he had been hit
 Tests at Edgewood Arsenal proved that it could. But again, this was before the tests at the club proved it could .
 Connally could not have been hit in the back where he was “after frame 235” because he had turned his body to the right at that point and “would have presented a side view to the assassin rather than back view,” which would have been required for
 Specter said Connally could have received his back wound “up to 242”t . This has nothing to do with the single-bullet theory, Specter says .
 If Connally could have been hit as late as frame 242, virtually everyone agrees it would have had to have been from a second gunman . In fact, it goes precisely in the opposite direction, since it goes the opposite way .
 Redlich implies that by April 27, he and his colleagues had preliminarily concluded that Connally and Kennedy had been hit by the same bullet . The only other document I could find tangentially dealing with the issue of authorship is a letter from Redlich to Rankin on April 27
 As our investigation now stands, however, we have not shown that these events could possibly have occurred in the manner suggested above . We have not been able to determine if these events happened in the same way as suggested above.
 He said only he and Specter from the Warren Commission staff went to Dallas for the reenactment . He said as far as he could recall only two people from the commission staff went for the event .
 FBI firearms expert Robert Frazier simulated Oswald in the sniper’s nest during the reenactment . Frazier was the only person who expressed any doubt at all about the single-bullet theory .
 The reason for his hesitancy to jump on the single-bullet-theory bandwagon renders his position of no consequence . But the reason for this is not the same reason .
 Pathologists from the Warren Commission and HSCA said the bullet that entered Kennedy’s upper right back passed through soft tissue on a straight line through his body . This, of course, is true, but those who were in a position say the bullet entered Kennedy's upper right
 Frazier’s reservation about the single-bullet theory amounts to no reservation at all . Frazier: "I'm not sure what I really think of the single bullet theory" Frazier: The theory is true, and Frazier has no reservation .
 Connally made clear that any consideration of a single bullet hitting Kennedy was confined to a consideration of the path the bullet took through Kennedy’s body . Connally said that any hesitation was only confined to the fact that the bullet hit Kennedy was struck .
 He reached the same conclusion based on other evidence, testifying that if the bullet that passed through Kennedy’s body did not go on to hit Connally, “it would have struck somewhere else in the car, and it did not strike .
 An early allegation that a fourth bullet was recovered near a “manhole cover” on the south side of Elm Street has never been substantiated . The allegation was never substantiated.
 Jim Murray and William Allen were standing nearby when the incident happened . The photographers standing nearby began snapping pictures of the scene .
 The Hertz sign atop the Depository read 12:39 to 12:40m. in the Murray photographs . Several photographs were taken that show Walthers lighting a cigarette, bending down, and probing the turned-up sod with his hand .
 An unidentified plainclothesman with a raincoat over his arm approaches, bends down, and appears to examine the clump of grass with his left hand . Then, as Foster and Walthers look on, an unidentified man appears to be examining the grass .
 Wayne and Edna Hartman were witnesses in Dealey Plaza shooting . Wayne Hartman says he was shocked by the events in New York City . Edna says she was shocked to find out what happened . Wayne says, "It was a terrible thing to see"
 The Hartmans say they walked to the area right after the shooting when they saw a police officer and young boy looking at the turf . According to the Hartmans, they saw the officer and a young boy . The Hartman says the incident happened in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Photograph in the series shows the plainclothesman with his left hand in his pocket .
 The bottom line is that no bullet is visible in any of the Murray-Allen photographs . No bullet was visible in the photos, which were taken by the pair .
 Critics have interpreted these photos as proof that police recovered a ‘fourth bullet’ at the crime scene . Still, critics have interpreted the photographs as proof of a fourth bullet . Police have not recovered the bullet .
 theorists point to a curious sequence of subsequent press reports and eyewitness statements . Theory says the events occurred in a strange sequence of events . Theory points to a series of curious press reports .
 There can be no doubt that the “spot” referred to was the Elm Street sewer cover .
 Post-Dispatch reporter Richard Dudman says police found another bullet in grass where President Obama was hit . Police were examining the area at the side of the street where the President was hit, he says .
 Dudman’s report seems to fit with the events surrounding the investigation in the vicinity of the sewer cover, but somehow it just doesn’t have a ring of truth to it .
 Dudman’s report sounds more like hearsay than anything he heard firsthand . Dudman: Dudman's report is more like a report from a reporter .
 Dudman doesn't even give the name of his source . It should also be noted that Dudman didn't give the source of his report .
 Walther was asked directly if he had “found any spent bullet” at the subject location . Walther’s testimony before the Warren Commission: “Any spent bullet" was found at the location .
 There seems to be little question that a “bullet” may have struck the earth near a sewer cover . The speculation was voiced shortly after the shooting in Dealey Plaza, Dallas .
 The allegation surfaced again in December 1967 when New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison appeared on a Dallas television station . Garrison claimed the photos showed a “federal agent” picking up a .45 caliber bullet near the Kennedy assassination site .
 Garrison said the bullet proved that someone other than Oswald, who was firing 6.5-millimeter ammunition, was firing at the president . Garrison: The bullet proves that someone else than Oswald was firing . Garrison said it proved that Oswald was not Oswald .
 Walthers was shot and killed on January 10, 1969, while investigating a suspicious-person call . He was never asked if he knew the identity of the plainclothesman who appears in the Murray-Allen photographs . He never knew if he was the man in the photographs .
 Foster and Walthers were standing nearby when the man bent down . The photo shows a member of law enforcement and someone they knew . Foster says it's very clear from the photo that the man was law enforcement .
 Assistant Dallas district attorney Bill Alexander says, “I knew Buddy Walthers well.” Assistant DA Bill Alexander: ‘I knew him well. I knew him very well'
 Foster provided the most lucid account of what happened in 1987 interview with Larry Sneed . Foster was interviewed by Sneed for the first time .
 The bullet struck the concrete skirt by the manhole cover and knocked that clump of grass up . That’s when I found where the bullet had struck . The bullet hit the grass and knocked it up, the bullet hit a manhole .
 Sheriff's deputy says bullet came from the direction from which the bullet went . "We discussed the direction of the bullet," the deputy said .
 It struck the skirt near the manhole cover and then hit this person [a reference to eyewitness James Tague] who had stood by the column over on Commerce Street . The incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning in New York .
 He came by and had a cut on his face where the bullet had struck the column . The bullet hit the column and cut the man's face .
 You could see where it scraped across the concrete and the column where it struck the pedestrian . The pedestrian was struck by the vehicle in the middle of the road .
 Walthers couldn’t have been clearer that he found no bullet in the turf . Many conspiracy theorists to this day maintain he did . It appeared to have come from the northeast .
 Walthers told a considerable number of people, but Decker got him to lie and change his story . Walther's story was not true, but he changed his story, Decker says .
 On its face this is a preposterous story, with people as prominent as Sheriff Decker and Inspector Sawyer of the Dallas Police Department in a conspiracy to cover up the facts of the assassination .
 There is no corroboration of Tagg’s assertion, for which he offers no citations . Tagg offers no citation for his assertion .
 Both Craig and Sawyer testified before the Warren Commission, and neither indicated any knowledge of a fourth bullet being found . Both men said they were not aware of the discovery .
 Craig merely said that ten or twelve minutes after the shooting “Lemmy Lewis or Buddy Walthers” told him in Dealey Plaza “that one of the bullets had ricocheted off the south curb of Elm Street,” not that any bullet was found
 Sheriff Bill Decker would have had any chance to tell Walthers to say he hadn't found a bullet . And this was way before Sheriff Decker would have been able to tell him he'd found the bullet . This is way before the sheriff's office had a bullet found .
 Craig left the sheriff’s office, became a conspiracy theorist, and turned on Decker and everyone else in Dallas law enforcement . He never said one word, in 1971 self-published essay, “When They Kill a President,” about Walthers telling him he had
 In his essay, he mentions that he spoke to Walthers shortly after the shooting in Dealey Plaza . He also mentioned that he had every opportunity to do so .
 The caption says the man is Walthers, although since the face is not shown it could be the hand of he still-unidentified plainclothesman . Since the face not shown, the photo could be a picture of a man wearing a Walther .
 The object held by the hand in the photograph is far too large and thick for it to be a bullet, much less a part of any bullet . In any event, there are those in the conspiracy community who believe that the object is the fourth bullet .
 Photographer Jim Murray: "Something like a spiked heel had come out of the dirt and created a little mound of damp earth" "At the time I was photographing," Murray said .
 Police investigated claim that bullet struck concrete skirt surrounding sewer cover, but no bullet was found, police say . Police Chief Curry says police found no bullet struck the concrete skirt .
 None of this is evidence of a fourth bullet, only evidence of what may have happened to Oswald’s first missed shot or to a fragment of the bullet that struck the president in the head . None of the four bullets are found to have been shot by Oswald or a fragment from
 I believe he was not employed by any of these local or federal agencies . I received significant assistance from former representatives of the FBI, Secret Service, ATF, Dallas Police Department, and Dallas sheriff's office .
 Despite the oft-cited references to a bullet being recovered near the sewer cover, if a bullet were actually recovered, it is difficult to believe that no record would exist . The bullet was found near a sewer cover .
 The plaza was full of spectators at the time of the alleged discovery, the story was covered by numerous reporters . The actual event was captured on film by two photographers .
 The allegation makes no sense unless you believe Oswald had been chosen well in advance of the shooting to be the fall guy, critics say . Oswald was chosen to be Oswald's fall guy .
 Dallas Police Department was in on the conspiracy to murder Kennedy, an allegation for which there is no evidence . But for that to be true, you’d also have to believe that the Dallas police department was involved in the conspiracy .
 Police found out who the killers were and agreed to cover up the conspiracy for the killers, writes John Avlon . If the police were not involved in the conspiracy to murder Kennedy, then you’d have to believe they found out .
 I think most rational people will agree that things like this just don’t happen in the real world . It’s not the first time I’ve heard from such a person in the U.S. I think we’re not talking about it, but
 The entrance wound to Connally’s back was far more markedly ovoid, to the point of being described as “linear” by Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter described the wound as ‘linear’ and ‘ovoid’
 When the bullet exits the rifle barrel, the explosive gases propelling it from behind are now free to expand and move past the bullet . The explosive gases are propelling the bullet out of the barrel .
 This makes the bullet temporarily unstable, causing it to wobble slightly off center . The bullet wobbles slightly off the center .
 Fuhrman was a competent robbery-homicide detective for the LAPD but not a firearms expert on the force . He was not an expert on firearms on the LAPD .
 Ballistics expert: "There might have been some tumbling" to the bullet that struck Connally in the back . Shaw said he was “not a ballistics expert’s” in testimony before the Warren .
 In his analysis of the case, he concluded that the first shot Oswald fired was at Zapruder frame 206 . Then, without citing any support for his conclusion, goes on to say that this first shot “struck and ricocheted off the top of President Kennedy’
 Rosemary and her older sister, 14-year-old Linda Kay, had gone to Dealey Plaza to watch the motorcade with their parents . Rosemary's older sister Linda Kay was 14-years-old .
 Their father, Phillip L Willis, a retired air force major, had a camera and took several color slides of the presidential limousine .
 By Z200, about two and a quarter seconds after Z160, she comes to a complete stop . Z200 is about 2 and a half seconds longer than Z160 .
 The Zapruder film shows that at this same moment, Rosemary’s father is in the process of taking his famous photo . The photo is determined to have been taken around Z202 .
 Roberdeau isn't troubled by the fact that maybe the little girl just wanted to resume looking at the president passing by . The little girl wasn't looking at anything but the president was passing by, he says .
 Two Dallas police motorcyclists keep looking in the same direction as they previously were, not looking to the right front . Police say they're not troubled by the fact that several other people in the the same frames, including two Dallas police officers, keep looking .
 Roberdeau isn't troubled in the least by the fact that even the HSCA, who claimed a shot was fired from the grassy knoll, doesn’t agree with him . The incident occurred on the knoll in South Carolina .
 Liu, by omission, was being less than truthful in his article about Rosemary Willis’s recollections . Liu was probably true, though this is probably true . Willis's recollections of Willis were probably accurate, but Liu was not truthful .
 Liu told the HSCA that Rosemary said to him that “she recalls stopping because she saw the bullet hit Kennedy’s back , not because she heard the sound of the shot . Liu: Rosemary told him that she recalls stopping to see Kennedy's back . Liu
 Rosemary Willis’s earlier claim that she actually saw the bullet hit Kennedy in the back couldn’t possibly be true . Of course, she also said that she saw Kennedy's bullet hit the back .
 If he had gunned the accelerator at that time, an accurate shot by Oswald would have been much more difficult . Oswald's accurate shot would have made it more difficult for Oswald to get a shot .
 The limousine was only traveling around eleven miles per hour on a straight line with the barrel of the rifle and on a declining road, Kennedy, as Lutz said, was already essentially a stationary target . Lutz: Even before slowing, even before slowing down, the limous
 Author Gerald Posner theorizes that the bullet was “fragmented against a tree branch,” not the pavement . The copper jacket was separated from the lead core by the branch, he says .
 The lead core, he believes, remained on a straight line in its flight and struck the Main Street curb near Tague over five hundred feet away, sending a chip of concrete into Tague’s cheek .
 The probability is very high that it was a bullet fragment that hit the curb near Tague . It is not known if the fragment was from a bullet that struck the curb .
 The fact that no copper was present (the Mannlicher-Carcano bullets were copper-jacketed) strongly suggests that a fragment from the lead core of a bullet struck the curb . No copper was found in the Mannicher-carcano bullets .
 The second shot can at least be eliminated as the possible source of the mark on the curb since this bullet was recovered at Parkland Hospital . Contrary to the Commission’s conclusion, the second shot was recovered from a bullet recovered at the hospital .
 The curb mark was caused by a fragment from either the first or third shots fired in Dealey Plaza . That means that the curb mark is caused by the fragment from a fragment . The curb marks were caused by either a fragment or a fragment of a bullet fragment .
 Tague speculates that a possible reason for Hoover’s cover-up was that the FBI was saying only three shots were fired, and, per Tague, the curb shot might go in the direction of four shots and a conspiracy, which the FBI did not want to find
 FBI originally said it couldn’t find the very small mark, which is not surprising at all, in a letter from Hoover to J Lee Rankin, general counsel for the Warren Commission, which Tague himself cites . Lead and traces of antimony were found at the point of
 The piece of curbing that was cut out by the FBI on August 5,1964, to be transported to the FBI lab for analysis, is now at the National Archives . He says it had been “patched by a mortar-like substance” before it went back to
 No one knows for sure how the Warren Commission first learned of the curb shot . Assistant United States attorney in Dallas, Martha Jo Stroud, had learned about it from photographer Tom Dillard . Stroud wrote Rankin on June 9, 1964 .
 On June 11, Assistant Counsel Arlen Specter sent a memo to Rankin requesting that Tague be deposed by the Commission .
 Before and after the Warren Commission learned of the curb shot, its belief was always that only three shots were fired . But he gives us no evidence to support this, and the fact remains that it remains that .
 Olson and Turner base a good deal of their thesis on the testimony of Phillip L Willis . Willis took a number of color slides of the motorcade that day with his 35-millimeter camera . Willis was the photographer who took the slides .
 Willis believed to be the first shot that hit the president . Willis believed the slide was taken simultaneously with the shot that struck the president, which he believed was the first . Willis said the slide in which the shot was taken was the fifth .
 Olson and Turner realized that // Willis was right about snapping slide number 5 at the sound of the first shot, then there must have been a second gunman . Kennedy was still hidden from Oswald’s view by an oak tree at the time of Z202, and therefore presumably .
 Willis, himself, can be seen lowering his camera on frames after Z140, indicating that he had just taken slide number 4 . Willis is seen lowering the camera on frame Z140 to take slide number Z140 .
 Kennedy was indeed taken at the time of the first shot . Kennedy began her head turn when the shot was fired . Kennedy was taken in the moment of the shooting .
 The authors of the 1977 article felt that the bullet that grazed the transverse process caused “some degree of trauma capable of creating a lesion of his spinal cord’s spinal cord . The same radiopaque anomalies were noted by Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 Russell H Morgan of the 1968 Clark Panel thought they might represent metal fragments left behind by the bullet . Russell H . Morgan thought they were metal fragments from the bullet left behind .
 Thorburn’s article described a patient who was admitted unconscious to a Manchester, England, hospital on June 5, 1886 . The patient had a fractured dislocation between the fifth and sixth cervical vertebrae . Thorburn's article described the patient's injury .
 Thorburn wrote that “all the muscles of arms were paralyzed with the exception of the biceps... the consequence being that the elbows were flexed, the shoulder abducted and rotated outwards, and the hands and arms the position indicated” on the illustration in the original Thorburn
 The Thorburn position is similar to that of the president’s posture in Z226-236, Dr. Dr. David Frum says . Dr. Frum compares the fixed, locked nature of Thorburn's position to the president's posture in the president .
 Thorburn illustration shows the person’s forearms are flexed upward, not toward each other as they are with Kennedy . Thorburn: Kennedy's two hands are almost touching each other .
 Lattimer made a slide and film presentation of his Thorburn argument to the HSCA in 1978 . But his expertise is as a urologist, not as a forensic pathologist . Michael Baden said he has the greatest respect for his work .
 Lattimer saw two tiny radiopaque splinters of bone near the tip of the transverse process of the sixth cervical vertebra on the right side of the president’s neck .
 Baden said he believed there were thirteen autopsy X-rays of Kennedy’s neck that his forensic panel examined . Baden: “We did see Dr. Kennedy,” and “we did see him’
 Lattimer’s two pinhead-sized radiopaque specks were artifacts, not bone splinters or metal fragments . They were artifacts not in the body but from other causes, such as dirt getting onto the X-ray plate during the developing process .
 Baden said there are an endless variety of ways people respond to being struck by a bullet . Baden: One should not jump to the conclusion that the president was exhibiting the Thorburn position simply because of the similarity between that position and Kennedy's .
 Dr. Baden said the bullet did not touch any part of the president’s spinal cord . Baden: The bullet didn’t touch any parts of the spinal cord, Baden says .
 Failure Analysis Associates president Dr. Dr. Michael O'Mara says Oswald’s trial was a mock trial in San Francisco in 1992 . O’Mara: Oswald's trial was the result of a botched assassination attempt .
 If the bullet had gone on to hit any substantial part of the president’s spinal cord, the argument could be made that the injury to the spinal cord may have neutralized or anesthetized the nerves in the cord to the extent that the later shot to the head could
 Absent this rationale for the head snap to the rear, one is left with the ‘jet effect’ argument, which is not as persuasive since the outward explosion to the right front of the president’s skull would cause the head to be propelled more to the left than to
 The possibdities stated here, of course, give hope to conspiracy theorists who are certain the head snap was caused by a shot from the president’s right front, not from his rear, as the Warren Commission concluded .
 A bullet weighing a third of an ounce (the weight of the bullet hitting the president) would be incapable of causing the president’s head to be propelled backward 8 inches, as we know was the case . However, as pointed out in the text, a bullet weighing one ounce
 The defense argued that the single-bullet theory is not a robust basis for such a conclusion . It was this splitting-of-the-hairs analysis by the defense, involving just three frames, that was the basis of the defense argument .
 Robert Piziali, the prosecution’s expert witness at the ABA mock trial, believed that Kennedy and Connally were struck by the same bullet . Pizialsi makes an interesting observation as to why he believes Kennedy’re reaction to being hit was an involuntary
 There are those who believe Governor Connally was Oswald's target that fateful day, not President Kennedy . Connally is believed to be Connally's target, not the president .
 Oswald’s dreams of grandeur and his immersion in the fortunes of Marxism on a national and international scale, a state governor would be small potatoes to him . But obviously, with . Oswald's dreams of . grandeur, he would rather be a . state governor than a state
 Governor Connally scoffed at the suggestion that Oswald had been after him that day . Connally was asked, within days after the assassination, about the speculation that Oswald was behind him .
 If he wanted to, he could have done so countless times in Dallas and elsewhere in Texas . He could've done so many times, including in Dallas, Texas . If you wanted, you could have .
 "I had been campaigning all over Texas ... for 11 months this year riding in parades, horseback, open cars, on street corners, with no security whatever," he said .
 Oswald may have hated Connally, blaming him for his ‘undesirable” discharge from the Marine Corps Reserve, has no merit . Additionally, the argument that Oswald may hate Connally is not merit . Connally was a Marine Reserve officer who was discharged from the Marines Reserve
 Oswald wrote Connally, then secretary of the navy, in 1962, seeking to have his undesirable discharge changed to honorary . Oswald's request was turned over to Connally’s successor, but he received a letter back saying that Connally was no longer .
 Marina believed to have given birth to the notion that maybe her husband had been out to kill Connally, not Kennedy . Marina herself believed to be the source of the theory .
 His best shot at Connally would have been when the presidential limousine was proceeding northbound on Houston . Connally's best shot was to shoot Connally when he was traveling on Houston, Texas .
 Even Marina later acknowledged she was wrong about her Connally opinion when some Secret Service agents pointed out to her that by the time of the fatal head shot to Kennedy, Kennedy had already been wounded and was leaning toward his wife .
 Warren Commission counsel never asked him the obvious question of when that was . But Warren Commission Counsel never asked that question: When that was?
 Frazier asked if Connally was in the right position at frames 235,240,249, and 255, for all of which he said he was not . Frazier said Connally's position was not in the correct position .
 The Z200-206 possibility was completely speculative with no evidence to support it . But the possibility was speculative and there is no evidence of it .
 The first observation, dubbed the “hat flip, was originally mentioned in a 1966 Newsweek article challenging Governor Connally’s claim in Life magazine that he wasn’t hit by the same bullet that struck Kennedy .
 Although perceptive and valid, the observation lay dormant for the next fifteen years . The observation was perceptive, valid, and the observation was ignored for 15 years .
 Oswald had passed out Fair Play for Cuba leaflets in front of the International Trade Mart in New Orleans in the summer of 1963 . Photographer Johann Rush spotted the same thing while looking at a videotaped copy of the Zapruder film at a TV station in Mississippi .
 By comparing color slides of the Zapruder film with “amorphous blobs” on the rolling tape, he says, “at least two-hundred times,” he concluded that for a brief moment, between frames Z226 and Z228, Connally
 The “hat flip” came to the attention of the national scientific community in 1992 . However, it wasn’t until February 1992 that it was first brought to attention by scientists .
 Rush met Dr. Michael West, a dentist who was also the medical examiner in Hattiesburg, Mississippi, and a conspiracy theorist before he met Rush . Dr. West and Rush made a presentation they had been working on for three years to a group of forensic scientists .
 Michael Baden speaks at the national convention of the American Academy of Forensic Scientists in New Orleans . Baden is a member of the Forensic Science Association .
 The digitized version of the Zapruder film shows Connally holding his hat with his right hand well after frame 225, when the HSCA concluded Connally was hit . However, it also should be noted, as conspiracy theorists have pointed out, that Connally holds his hat
 Connally’s right wrist would automatically cause him to release his grip on his hat, Baden said . Baden explained that it was “presumptive to believe that any injury to Connally's right wrist . Connally would release his hat if he suffered an injury
 He recalled, as an example, the murder of mobster Carmine Galante in a Brooklyn restaurant in 1979, where he was shot more than thirty times all over his body and died instantly, yet still had his cigar lodged in his mouth .
 Connally’s “radius was shattered, the other bone in his forearm, the ulna, was intact, stabilizing his wrist and hand . Larry Sturdivan, an expert on wound ballistics, says in his book, The JFK Myths, that although Conn
 All the tendons, muscles, and motor nerves that powered his fingers and thumb were also undamaged on May 25,1991, more than a half year before the New Orleans presentation .
 West’s findings, and I too had a difficult time making out any hat flip . West: ‘I don’t think I’ve seen a hat flip.’
 The smashing of the radius disabled the rotation of his forearm, a loss he never completely regained . The smashed radius disabled his rotation of the forearm, which he never fully regained .
 Governor Connally is hit to be at Z222-224, just as he reemerges from behind the Stemmons sign, but not for the specific reason given . A bulging of the right lapel of the governor’s suit coat may pinpoint the moment .
 The so-called lapel bulge or flip has taken its place next to the hat flip in assassination lore . Initially noticed in April 1975 by Robert P Smith of Pittsburgh .
 Dr. Smith brought his finding to the attention of one of his associates, Dr. Dr. Martin Smith . Smith brought the finding to his associates' attention of Dr. Scott Smith .
 Cyril H Wecht telephoned Robert Olsen, a staff member of the Rockefeller Commission looking into illegal CIA activities within the United States . Olsen was looking into allegations that the CIA was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy . Wecht called Olsen, who was looking at the CIA's
 He described a ‘dramatic’ distortion of Connally’s suit coat as the exiting bullet passed through it . Connally's suit coat was distorted by the exit bullet .
 In frame 224, the right lapel, in one-eighteenth of a second, has bulged out and is covering much of the white area of his shirt . We know Kennedy had been in the process of raising his elbows up high in response to being struck by a bullet .
 Anti-conspiracy theorists argue that this is proof that Connally was struck at Z224, around the same time Kennedy is seen reacting to being shot, thereby conclusively proving the single-bullet theory . Anti-Conspiracy theorists say Connally's death is proof of the single
 The only problem is that the “lapel flip” label is not accurate in its implications . The label is misleading, but it's important to know the implications of the label .
 It has been considered to be accurate because the photo of the front of Connally’s suit coat shown in the Warren Commission volumes is a poor copy and doesn’t show where the bullet actually exited his coat . The photo has been seen as accurate because it doesn't show
 The bullet hole in Connally's suit coat is not on the right lapel, or even close to the left lapel . Connally was shot in the head by President George W. Bush in 1968 .
 The corresponding hole to Connally’s shirt was measured to be 27. centimeters below the shoulder seam, and again, 15. centimeters to the right of the midline . Connally's shirt measured 27. centimetres below the seam and 15. centimeters below the mid
 The exit hole being in the right lapel never did make any sense since we know the bullet exited from the governor’s body right below his right nipple . Indeed, the exit hole was in the left lapel, nowhere near the right side of the governor's body .
 The bullet exiting Governor Connally’s body beneath his right nipple around this very time may have caused the sudden change and bulge in his right lapel . However, the lapel flip cannot be used to argue that the bullet exited around Z224, since we know it didn
 Connally’s lapel bulge was caused by something else, such as a gust of wind . But even here, we have to allow for the possibility that Connally's lapel .
 The wind was very gusty in Dealey Plaza at the time of the shooting . The likelihood that it caused the lapel bulge in that particular eighteenth of a second, is extremely remote .
 Dr. John K Lattimer and three colleagues, Angus Laidlaw, Paul Heneghan, and Eric J Haubner, attempted to verify Dr. Lattim and three others . Dr. Henegan and Angus Haidlaw were the first to try to verify
 Robert Piziali’s findings by duplicating the shooting in Dallas as closely as possible . He duplicates the Dallas shooting in which he says the gunman was killed .
 A white dress shirt, necktie, and tropical worsted jacket were placed over the rib cage to simulate the clothing the governor wore that day . The rib cage was placed in place of the governor's clothing .
 An array of arm bones, encased in simulated forearms, was arranged in front of the right lapel of the ‘governor’ to simulate Connally’s arm . The entire mock-up was backed up with a bullet trap, where the test bullets were
 Experimenters fired Western Cartridge Company 6.5-millimeter ammunition through an identical model Mannlicher-Carcano rifle . The experimenters fired the ammunition through a different model of rifle .
 A video camera and a highspeed 35-millimeter motion picture camera captured the results . The results were captured by a high-speed 35 millimeter motion motion camera .
 Lattimer knew from previous experiments that the test bullet would almost certainly “tumble” after passing through the simulated neck (just as the bullet did during the assassination) at about the point where he was actually hit . The test bullet passed through the mock-up of the
 As the bullet tumbled and plowed into one of the ribs, removing 4. centimeters (1 3 /4 inches) was destroyed during the actual assassination . It exited at a point compatible with the exit wound in Connally’s right chest .
 The flying fragments of rib and soft tissue, which were blown out by the tumbling bullet, ripped a large ragged hole in both the shirt and the jacket, just as Oswald’s bullet had done in Dealey Plaza . Oswald's bullet tore a large hole in his shirt
 The test bullet then struck one of the forearms arrayed in front of the jacket, and was finally stopped by the bullet trap just beyond . It then struck another forearm, before being stopped by a trap .
 Lattimer and his associates discovered that the suit coat bulged out about six inches in one-tenth of a second . The suit coat snapped back shortly thereafter .
 Without the tumble caused by the bullet’s passage through the simulated neck, there was no billowing of the jacket . The bullet's passage through a simulated neck caused the jacket to tumble .
 It's difficult to imagine why Connally would reverse his three-decade-old position that he and Kennedy were hit by separate bullets . A few months earlier, Connally wrote a letter in which he clearly and unequivocally stated he was not hit by the bullet that hit Kennedy .
 The Warren Commission entertained the ‘possibility’ that the second shot was the head shot and the third shot missed the limousine . However, the Warren Commission, knowing that one of the three shots fired by Oswald missed the presidential limouine, entertained the possibility that the
 Chad R Zimmerman, a Boulder, Colorado, doctor of chiropractic, elaborated on the neuromuscular reaction of Kennedy .
 When the brain is so rapidly disrupted, chemically mediated neuronal synapses occur on a grand scale, producing rapid, but short-duration contractions of skeletal muscle tissue . This is when a brain is disrupted, the muscle muscle tissue contracts rapidly .
 The result is movement in the direction of the contraction of the stronger muscles . This is the result of the movement in which the muscles are contracting .
 In most cases, back and neck extension occur because of a strength predominance of those muscles . Back and neck extensions occur due to strength of the muscles, not strength predominately .
 Quadriceps are more powerful than the hamstrings, so the quadriceps would win the contraction battle . The net result would be knee extension and hip flexion .
 Gluteal muscles are stronger than quads, so the hip joint would extend . However, the gluteal muscle is stronger than the quads . The hip joint in the hip would extend if the muscles were stronger .
 This so-called jet effect was first enunciated in 1969 by William H Hanson in his book The Shooting of John F Kennedy: One Assassin, Three Shots, Three Hits—No Misses . It was most prominently advocated in 1976 by Nobel Prize-winning physicist Luis W Alvarez .
 Alvarez was assigned the job of measuring the explosive energy of the atomic bombs dropped on Japan and was on the plane that followed the one that dropped the A-bomb on Hiroshima on August 6, 1945 . Alvarez saw that the critics were treating the problem as though it was a problem . Alvarez
 He was not in the air three days later when a second A-bomb was dropped on Nagasaki . He survived the bombing but was killed by a second bomb .
 A test gauge dropped prior to the bombing of Nagasaki was dropped by the U.S. in 1945 . The test gauge was attached to a letter attached to the letter dropped by Nagasaki .
 Three masses, the bullet, the head, and the spray of brain matter seen at Z313 . But he knew that any analysis had to involve three masses and the bullet .
 We see the rocket going directly upward into the sky even though the fuel the rocket ejected is going downward in the opposite direction . The fuel was ejected from the rocket, but the fuel was going downward .
 Alvarez conducted test shootings in June of 1969 on the Edgewood Arsenal . Alvarez conducted (with the help of colleague Sharon Buckingham and assassinologist Paul Hoch) filmed test shootings .
 He says a “jet engine forces a very large mass of gas rearward at very high velocity.” He says it forces a ‘very large mass’ of gas to rearward .
 A shot from the sniper’s nest (where all the evidence shows the shot to the head came from) could be expected to push President's head not only forward but to the left .
 The president’s head was already to the left at the time of the snap to the rear . So in addition to the jet-effect principle set forth above, the president was already on the move .
 At frame 312, the HSCA determined that “Kennedy was turned partially away from Zapruder approximately 25° past the 90°, or profile, direction’s direction . ‘Kennedy’ was turned ‘partially away from’ from Zap
 Kennedy’s head following impact at Z313 is seen going not only backward but also to the left . It would appear that the combination of factors that existed (Kennedy's head already tilted 25 degrees) and the expulsion of blood, tissue, and bone to the president’
 The president’s head going to the rear and to the left is completely consistent with the head shot coming from the grassy knoll to the president's right front . But to the conspiracy theorists, the president went rear and left .
 Almost invariably, the melons, upon being struck with a bullet, were driven not in the direction the projectile was traveling, but counterintuitively in the opposite direction . That is, that is, back toward the gun, the law of physics .
 The jet-effect principle, accompanied by “nearly impenetrable mathematical formulas,” is still one that I am not completely comfortable with . I sense that the rocket-recoil analogy may involve factors different from the Kennedy case that are beyond my knowledge of physics
 Some tests other than those conducted by Alvarez had a converse result . David Mantik has pointed out that some tests other tests had the same result .
 In 1964, filmed tests were conducted for the Warren Commission at the Aberdeen Proving Ground’s Vulnerability Laboratory in Aberdeen, Maryland, in which a Mannlicher-Carcano rifle was fired at ten skulls filled with gelatin tissue simulant . The tests were carried out for the
 In all cases, the skull was pushed forward in the direction of the bullet . In all the skulls were pushed to the right side of the head .
 Conspiracy theorists have offered up their own ‘evidence’ that the fatal head shot came from the front . Conspiracy theorists say it was the front of the shooter's head shot .
 But what they have come up with is not really persuasive evidence, it's not persuasive evidence . It's not the evidence the government has produced, it says .
 Jackie Kennedy can be seen getting up from her seat and crawling backward on the trunk of the limousine . She can also be seen crawling backward from the trunk .
 Secret Service agent Clint Hill, who climbed on the car from the rear, grabbed the First Lady, testified that “it appeared to me” that Mrs. First Lady was in trouble . Hill: “It appeared to . me’
 He says he never mentioned seeing anything like brain matter or part of a skull behind the president . However, he added, “But I cannot say there was” anything, and he said there was nothing .
 The First Lady herself testified that “there were pictures later on of me climbing out the back.” She testified that she climbed out of the back .
 Conspiracy theorists allege a portion of Kennedy's skull was flying backward . Kennedy would seek to grasp part of her husband’s skull flying, as the conspiracy theorists allege .
 It should be noted that although the First Lady could never have acknowledged this, it may not be true . Many believe that her attempted exit from the rear of the limousine was simply a mechanical and unthinking instinct on her part to remove herself from the line of fire .
 If she had been thinking rationally at the moment, diving on the floor of the limousine would have been much more efficacious if her intent was to protect herself . Between this possibility and the one that she was trying to recapture a flying piece of skull, the former makes
 With respect to the pieces of Kennedy’s skull found on Elm Street, imprecise and inadequate questioning by Warren Commission counsel has precluded us from perhaps learning just where at least one of the pieces was found . We will not be able to learn where one of Kennedy's skull
 Conspiracy theorists have used essentially the same argument for a large chunk of the president’s brain . Dallas County deputy constable Seymour Weitzman testified that several minutes after the shoot .
 Parkland doctor Marion Jenkins, on a San Francisco television special on the assassination on November 18, 1988, said that in Trauma Room One Jacqueline was “carrying her hands like this , and at one other time—I can’t tell you how many times she
 Jenkins told JAMA in 1992 that it was “a large chunk of her husband’s brain tissue.” Jenkins said in 1992 it was a “large chunk of his brain tissue”
 Jenkins’s story is certainly possible, but it's curious in that only he, of all the doctors and nurses in the room, told such a story, and that the story first surfaced in 1988, a quarter of a century later .
 She is more likely to have gotten it when she was sitting next to him in the presidential limousine . She was cradling his head in her arms .
 John Connally testified that “after the third shot she said, ‘They have killed my husband.” The former governor testified that his wife was killed by a single shot . JohnConnally testified in his testimony that the shooting was the third .
 Weitzman said the piece was found by the designer . Further imprecise questioning didn’t pinpoint where it was found . The piece was discovered by the artist himself, apparently .
 The approximate location of the limousine in which it was found, which would be some evidence of whether it flew off the president’s head in front of or behind where it was at the time of Z313, was never established .
 The skull could have been kicked from its original landing location . Even if it had been, the location would not be conclusive evidence of the direction in which it flew off .
 The second piece of the president’s skull (which has become known as the “Harper fragment”) was found the following day by a young college student, William “Billy” Harper .
 The argument that the location of the fragment is evidence the shot came from the president’s right side is not overly persuasive in that it is not automatic that a bullet entering the right side of the president's head (which grassy knoll adherents believe) did not go on to
 The theorists say, "a shot from the front" is a sign of the future . The theory is that this is a shot from front .
 The high-contrast photo of Zapruder frame 313, per a 1976 Itek Corporation study, showed that large particles of brain matter were all to the front, establishing the shot as coming from the rear . The study was published in 1976 .
 The wind carried the particles of blood and gray matter backward onto Martin and Hargis . Clearly, the wind could be expected to carry the particles .
 There was no exit wound to the left side of the president’s head that could explain the blood and tissue ending up on Martin and Hargis . No exit wound from the president's head could explain how the tissue ended up on the men .
 The Harper fragment and brain matter ending up to the president’s left is completely consistent with their being driven there by the force and direction of the bullet entering the back of the head . The president's right rear and proceeding in a right-to-left direction is consistent with the
 "All of the physical evidence shows the bullet came from the sniper’s nest. Moreover, all of the . physical evidence . shows the . bullet was fired from a sniper's nest, police say .
 Itek Corporation enhanced the photo and had its scientists examine it closely . The explosion from the bullet impact radiates matter in all directions, company says .
 Conspiracy theorists say the “law of physics’s” requires that an object hit by a projectile has to be pushed in the same direction the projectile is traveling is not one that they should be citing in this case, since it is self-defeating .
 When theorists say Kennedy’s head was propelled backward and to the left by the shot from their gunman on the grassy knoll, it is not clear at all from the subsequent Zapruder frames just how much, if at all, his head was pushed back .
 "What's very clear is that his head moved very dramatically to the rear. What is very clear ... is that he is moving very dramatically," he said . "What was very clear was that he was moving very rapidly," he added .
 The big problem for the conspiracists is that if the head shot was fired, as they claim, from the grassy knoll, since the president’s head should have been pushed much more to the left than to the rear . Using their law of physics theory, the president
 Another piece was found in the footwell in front of the backseat of the presidential limousine . Another piece of the president's car was also found in a footwell .
 His conclusion was that there would be “a very slight movement” of Kennedy’s head toward the front as a result of being struck from the rear .
 This erroneous belief appears to be the centerpiece of Josiah Thompson’s conclusion that more than one gunman fired at Kennedy and hence the existence of a conspiracy . Thompson: More than one person shot at Kennedy, therefore, should be responsible for conspiracy .
 Thompson goes on to say that the shot from the front (which was fired a fraction of a second later) reversed the direction in which the president’s head was being propelled, and knocked it back 8V2 inches . Thompson says the shot knocked the president's head back 8
 At frame 227, the highlights of the windshield of the car are all drawn out into rather pronounced streaks . Cronkite studied the frames of the Zapruder film published in Life magazine .
 In the frame ahead of the highlights are individual dots, individual dots . And you see that in the frame is individual dots. And you can also see individual dots in the picture ahead .
 The line of direction of Mr Zapruder’s camera in frame 227 is the result of a violent incident . The line-in-the-line of the camera was in the direction of Zapruders' camera .
 Zapruder film might contain a record of the number of shots fired . Alvarez right, the film may contain a number of the shots fired in the film . Alvarez says the film could contain a list of the most recent shots fired during the attack .
 Alvarez’s “revelation” was the subject of an experiment to test its validity . The experiment was conducted by the CBS staff at the request of Alvarez .
 Two volunteer cameramen were instructed to “hold cameras as steady as possible, and keep filming no matter what happens” Their reaction to shots being fired above them “was obvious,” they found .
 Alvarez later wrote an in-depth exposition of his theory in the September 1976 American Journal of Physics . Alvarez wrote in an interview with The Warren Report .
 He found five blurs, which he called ‘streaks’ in the film, and was sensible enough to observe this did not mean five shots . He found the blurs and called them “streaks,” which he said were “Streaks”
 Alvarez saw almost equal streaks between Z330 and Z334 . Alvarez saw an almost equal train of streaks immediately thereafter . Alvarez also saw a streak of streaks in Z330-334 .
 Two years before Alvarez, Warren Commission critic Harold Weisberg had noticed the same blurring as Alvarez did . Lesser streaks were two years before, but had not been quite as explicit .
 William Hartmann, senior scientist at the Planetary Science Institute in Tucson, Arizona, and Frank Scott of the Perkin-Elmer Corporation conducted a separate blur analysis of the Zapruder film at the committee’s request .
 This time, all of the Zapruder frames were analyzed, and hence, Dr. Bob Greene analyzed them . This time he analyzed all the frames .
 Hartmann found a blur at Z158—159, and Mr Scott one at the time when other evidence shows the first shot was fired . Hartmann and Scott were at the same time in the early hours of the shooting .
 The experiment proves that a gunshot will normally cause a cameraman’s neuromuscular system to go into . The experiment was conducted by Dr. Dr. John Defterios of the U.S.
 Zapruder would have reacted to the three gunshots that day would have almost assuredly caused a startled reaction . The three gunshots were a blur on his film, hence the blur .
 Although a gunshot will produce a blur, a blur does not necessarily have to be caused by a gunshot . The absence of a blur is very strong circumstantial evidence of the absence of the gunshot .
 A cough, an unintentional nudge, a gust of wind, movement of Zapruder’s feet could also cause a blur . Any number of other things, such as a cough, wind or movement, also cause blur .
 Zapruder himself testified before the Warren Commission that his images weren’t very clear for the simple reason that his camera movements were magnified by the telephoto lens setting he was using . The Warren Commission found that Zapruders' images were not very clear .
 The emotional reaction of what one sees through the viewfinder could also easily cause a startled reaction . Further, the emotional reaction could also be caused by what one looks through the camera .
 Alvarez, Hartmann, Scott detected blurs in Zapruder film around the time of the head shot at Z313, and around Z330-334, a second later, when he was fully absorbing the horrific sight of the president’s head exploding in front of him .
 "It was an awful thing and I loved the president, and to see that happen before my eyes," she says . "His head just opened up and shot down like a dog"
 There is no known way to distinguish a blur or jiggle caused by an involuntary reaction from one caused by, for instance, a voluntary pan/search movement . Analysis can never be conclusive on the number or timing of the shots fired in Dealey Plaza .
 On November 27, 1963, just four days after the assassination, three FBI firearms experts examined Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano rifle and his revolver to determine if they were the murder weapons . They tested Oswald's rifle mostly to determine the speed and accuracy with which it could
 Frazier said each of the men fired three shots at close stationary targets . Frazier said one fired in 9 seconds, another in 7 seconds, and he in 6 seconds . Frazier testified before the Warren Commission .
 He says he alone fired two series of three shots at a short-range target with the primary purpose being to determine the speed with which the rifle could be fired and the secondary purpose was accuracy . He got the rounds off in 4. and 4.2 seconds .
 Frazier said he could have compensated for if he had wanted to by firing low and to the left, but didn’t . Frazier fired six shots high and right of the aiming point . This was because of a defective scope .
 In one three-shot burst, bullets landed within a two-inch circle, indicating accuracy . However, the important thing is that in one burst, the bullets land within two inches of the circle .
 On the four targets, the three bullets landed high and to the right of the aiming point . The three bullets hit within a threeto five-inch circle of the target .
 The accuracy of the accuracy with which one can fire two shots within 1.66 seconds is not clear at all . On the more interesting question, the HSCA Report, upon scrutiny, does not seem clear .
 Another expert hit one of three targets, with the time between two shots being 1.2 seconds . Time between two hits is 1.3 seconds .
 Oswald had more time than 1.66 seconds to fire his first and second shots . The single-bullet theory has been proved by all the evidence, including the fact Oswald had time to fire .
 It has to be noted that the HSCA got caught up in the 1.66-second requirement because of Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter says he's not surprised by the requirement .
 The acoustics specialist who analyzed the Dallas police Dictabelt recording of sounds and transmissions around the time of the shooting convinced the majority of the committee that there was only 1.66 seconds between the first two “impulse patterns” on the recording . The committee also
 Oswald had to have fired the first two shots, one of which missed, in 1.66 seconds . Unless there was a second gunman, Oswald would have had to fire the first shot in the first 2 seconds .
 The farther away from the muzzle you get, the less a consideration this is . The farther you get the muzzle is the less likely to be a consideration .
 Oswald did not address himself to the issue as to which sight enabled one to fire more quickly, his emphasis seemed to be on accuracy . However, a master sergeant in charge of marksmanship training at the Marine Corps school in Quantico, Virginia, told the Warren Commission that if Oswald had
 The testimony didn't address the issue of whether *HSCA chief counsel Robert Blakey, who was present with his chief deputy, Gary Cornwell, at the test firing at Lorton, reported in a March 22,1979, letter to “All Committee Members”
 Cornwell fired the rifle twice in 1.2 seconds and I fired it twice within 1.3 seconds . Cornwell says he fired the gun twice in just 1.5 seconds .
 In both cases, the second shot missed, but was close to the silhouette . The second shot misses, but is close to a silhouette .
 He said he couldn't imagine how it would inhibit or interfere with Oswald’s use of the scope . Oswald used the scope to carry out the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 In testimony before the Warren Commission, Marguerite Oswald said that she and her son Robert were left-handed, and also, “Lee was left handed.” Lee Oswald was left .
 Robert Oswald, who said he himself wrote left-handed but did everything else righthanded, said, “Mother was wrong,” on Lee . Lee's mother said he was left handed, but he wrote left handed . Robert Oswald said he did everything he wrote righth
 Oswald’s Carcano “has a right-handed action” - meaning the bolt action is on the right side of the weapon . Also, as with all military rifles, the Carcano has a right hand-activated bolt action .
 A left-hander could certainly learn to fire a right-handed bolt-action rifle with a fair amount of speed . However, it is much more natural and easier for a left-handed person to do so .
 Assassination researcher Jerome B Agel has a dramatically different viewpoint . Agel says the assassination researcher has a very different view of the assassination .
 Eventually, the weapon came to be owned by Crescent Firearms, which sold it to Klein’s Sporting Goods . The weapon is now owned by Klein's Sporting Goods, which sells it to a sports store .
 He gave her $10,000 up front with the balance of $35,000 to be paid if he got clear title to the weapons . He also gave her a $35k up front payment to get clear title .
 The FBI had seized the Carcano and revolver right after the assassination and refused to relinquish possession of them to King . The FBI claimed the weapons had been forfeited to the U.S. by virtue of their having been purchased in violation of the Federal Firearms Act .
 The Carcano and the revolver were designated as protected items by the U.S. attorney general . The United States acquired formal title to the weapons on November 1, 1966 .
 Mussolini ordered all arms factories to manufacture the MannlicherCarcano rifle, according to a letter from J Edgar Hoover to the Warren Commission of April 22, 1964 . William Suchur, the owner of International Firearms Company of Montreal, informed the FBI on March 12, 1964, that
 No other Mannlicher-Carcano with a serial number of C2766 has ever surfaced, although one without a prefix did . No other car has ever been found .
 The company was sold to a firm in St. Albans, Vermont, in July 1962 . It was then sold to Chicago's Aldens in July 1961 .
 The weapon's history beyond this point was not determined by the FBI because Alden’s records were not available . Alden's records are not available, so the FBI has not determined its history beyond that point .
 Witness volunteered that rifle tests were conducted at the Aberdeen Proving Ground . Earlier, witness, on his own, volunteered that the tests were held there .
 Oswald’s Carcano was found in Aberdeen, Maryland . It is believed to have been used in tests with the Carcano . The Carcano is located in Aberdeen .
 It’s unlikely they took place in 1963, since not too much time was left in 1963 . The first formal meeting of the Warren Commission staff didn't take place until January 20, 1964 .
 We don’t even know the full names of the riflemen who participated in the tests, Eisenberg not asking Simmons who they were .
 The Warren Commission elicited all the information about the case any reasonable person could ever hope for, and then some . But one way or another, through their own in-depth questioning and more precise FBI reports, they elicited some of the information .
 Even the lawyers on the Commission staff who had trial experience, like Joe Ball and Albert Jenner, often found it difficult to ask the automatic preliminary questions of time and place . For the researcher the researcher has to be secured from other sources .
 The witness had the common sense to volunteer information without being asked . For example, the witness had to volunteer the information .
 The feasibility of anyone, including Oswald, firing with the requisite accuracy within a given period of time caused a flap prior to the trial in London . Oswald was found to be able to fire with the required accuracy .
 Oswald test firing on film with audio . Monty Lutz test fires on film . Lutz is a firearms expert . He says he can duplicate what Oswald did .
 On June 13,1986, in Fond du Lac, Wisconsin, he fired at stationary targets located fifty-seven, seventy-two, and eighty-seven yards from him . In one series of shots, and with the clock starting to run with the first shot, he hit all
 On two of the series, he was able to squeeze off the second round in only 1.2 seconds after the first shot, though he missed the target . The series is a two-game series of golf events .
 A few weeks before the trial, the producer, Mark Redhead, called to say that his people had found a military range in Wales where they could substantially approximate the Dealey Plaza firing conditions . Redhead wanted Lutz to duplicate what Oswald did on film for the jury .
 I agreed it would be, but I told him I was against it, and the reason was obvious . "I told him he would be," he said, "and the reason for that was obvious," he added .
 Redhead says he already had a film of Lutz beating Oswald’s time which I intended to present to the jury . Besides, I told Redhead, I already had . Lutz beat Oswald's time, he said .
 Redhead wasn’t too happy with this, wanting Lutz to do it ‘again” while being filmed by his people . Lutz wanted to do the stunt again, but Redhead was not happy .
 Redhead says union in England wouldn't permit him to show his film at trial because it was filmed in Wisconsin with nonunion people . When Redhead saw Lutz’s film he didn’t think it was of sufficient quality to show to the jury anyway, and he
 If he couldn’t duplicate what Oswald did, the defense would obviously call him to so testify .
 I was confident my cross-examination of the defense expert would neutralize whatever advantage the defense intended to gain by the failure . The defense expert failed to answer questions about the failure of his testimony . The jury failed to reach a verdict of guilty verdicts in a federal court .
 If the defense expert succeeded, the defense just as obviously would not call him as a witness, and I agreed not to call him either . And I told Redhead that if he succeeded, he would not be called a witness either .
 Oswald’s marksmanship and timing in Wales for the London jury . He was persistent and wanted Lutz to try to duplicate Oswald's marksmanship in Wales . Oswald's timing and marksmanship was the key to the jury's success .
 Lutz was eager to let London Weekend Television film his effort in Wales, being very confident he could repeat his Wisconsin expertise . In the interim Lutz had been talking to Lutz and he was keen to film his efforts .
 I was opposed to the British test and it was my professional advice and opinion that he not do it . I told Lutz I would not refuse to let him do it, but in all deference to his marksmanship ability, I was against it .
 Lutz testified before the London jury about the test he took in Wisconsin and the results, without the accompanying film . I did, however, have Lutz testify before a London jury .
 When Oswald fired for the record in the Marines, the four positions were standing, kneeling, sitting, and prone . Oswald's firing record was set for the first time in the Marine Corps .
 Oswald was in a sitting position when he shot for record in the Marines, where the rifle is between the legs and each elbow is locked in snugly by the knees . Such a position would not quite be the same as the sitting position Oswald used to use in .
 Oswald was seated on the carton Frazier was on, while he was waiting for the motorcade to come by it would seem that one of the places he almost undoubtedly would have lighted on was a carton of books to the left rear of three cartons at the window .
 The angle of declination of the bullet that struck the president in the back was scientifically determined to be around 20 degrees . It is curious how much higher estimates of the angle of decline were made .
 FBI agents James Sibert and Francis O’Neill, who were present at the autopsy, wrote that Dr. Dr. John Sutter’s autopsy was incomplete . Dr. Sutter was found to be dead at the scene .
 On December 5, 1963, the Secret Service conducted its own inquiry in Dealy Plaza into the trajectory of the bullets that struck Kennedy . A man and woman in a limousine simulating the president simulates the president and his wife . A motion picture camera in the sniper’
 The Secret Service analyzed the Zapruder film, various still photographs, statements of witnesses, interviews with the Parkland doctors, and the clinical and autopsy records . It also analyzed the film, still photographs and statements from witnesses .
 Both bullets struck the president were fired from a position to the rear of and above the president, the Secret Service says .
 Canning points out that “we know that he has not turned sharply to his right.” The photo doesn’t actually show the president’s right shoulder, Canning says .
 The key information here is the way in which he is seen to hunch forward, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Willis photo shows not only that the president’s head is turned rather sharply to his right by Z202, but also that his shoulders had not turned much . Willis photo was taken by the president at the start of his term in Washington .
 A still photograph taken by Hugh Betzner Jr. from a position behind and to the left of the limousine, fixes the relative positions of the two men . The photograph was taken from behind and left of a limo .
 Governor Connally is not visible in the picture, apparently hidden by the right shoulder of a spectator who stepped in front of him just as he snapped the shutter . The picture appears to show the governor's face being taken by a spectator .
 The relationship of the parts of the limousine that are visible from Betzner's perspective makes it possible to determine the governor's position relative to the president, who is seen sitting in the backseat .
 The photographic panel, in a sketch, drew a straight line from Betzner’s camera position, across the edge of the handhold on the left rear corner of the trunk, past the tip of the president's left shoulder, to the right edge .
 JFK Exhibit F-136, 2 HSCA 182, upper left photo . Governor is not seen in the photograph . It is clear that he must be seated to the left and the president to the right .
 Two stereophotogrammetric studies (which involved viewing pairs of Zapruder frames in a stereoscopic viewer to produce a single three-dimensional image) confirmed Kennedy was seated close to the right inside surface of the car while Connally was seated well within the car .
 Thomas Canning's team fixed the distance from the exit wound in the president’s throat to the entrance wound in Governor's back at approximately twenty-four inches . Based on these studies, the distance between the president's throat and the governor's back wound was approximately 24 inches .
 The slope over that distance was determined to be 22 degrees below true horizontal . The slope is 22 degrees lower than true horizontal.
 There is no consistency in the estimates of the degree of the declination of the bullet entering Connally’s back . Connally was hit by a bullet in the back .
 HSCA forensic pathology panel chief Dr. Dr. John S. Connally met with Governor Connally in 1978 . Connally was governor of Texas in 1978 when he was in office .
 This 45-degree angle of declination of the bullet entering Connally’s body is consistent with Dr. Dr. Connally . Dr. John Sutter says the bullet entered Connally's body at 45 degrees of the angle .
 WCT Lt. Finck’s estimate of the angle of declination of the bullet entering Kennedy's back (2 H 380) is based on the angle that the bullet struck Kennedy . The bullet was struck by Kennedy's bullet in the back .
 Governor Connally’s appearance before the Warren Commission was interrupted by Dr. Dr. Connally . Connally was governor of Texas during his time in office .
 WCT Gov. Robert Shaw measured the angle of declination between the governor’s entrance and exit wounds and concluded that the bullet proceeded through the governor's chest on a downward angle of 25 degrees (4 H 137) Gov. Shaw was shot in the head by a bullet that
 Thomas Canning’s conclusions unequivocally put him in the single-bullet, no-conspiracy camp . Canning: ‘I’m not going to believe in any conspiracy theories.’ Canning concluded that the U.S. government was involved in the
 Canning couldn't possibly be saying that his conclusion about the single-bullet theory was actually wrong . He necessarily must have been referring to the HSCA’s acoustic conclusion of a grassy knoll shot, which his work didn’t include .
 Canning’s letter to Blakey was dated January 5, 1978, which was before the HSCA acoustic tests were conducted in the summer of 1978 . The 1978 date on the letter is wrong, an example of people commonly still using the previous year's date on letters written
 The postmark on the envelope of Canning’s January 5 letter is stamped January 6, 1979, and a “JFK Routing Slip” for the letter (Routing Slip 014258) is dated January 13, 1979 . Canning's letter is dated
 Canning's team apparently failed to accurately position the president’s head before calculating a firing source . Dale Myers, a computer animator and student of the assassination, points out . Myers: Canning team apparently didn't accurately position president's head . Myers says Canning’
 The panel chose the photograph which they felt best matched Zapruder frame 312 . The panel then chose the photo which they said best matched the original .
 Canning: “interpretation of features is certainly one of the major sources of potential error,” in calculating a trajectory . Canning explained that interpreting features is “certainly one” of the potential error .
 He did not specifically address the differences in pitch between Z312 and the panel’s calibration photograph . However, he did not address the issue of the obvious differences between the two .
 Myers and Dodd are correct. It is readily apparent, even to the casual viewer, that they are correct . It's readily apparent even to a casual viewer that Myers is correct .
 Any new trajectory based on a more precise orientation of Z312 would most probably easily fall within the very large margin of error for the head wound trajectory set forth by Canning in his calculations .
 As technology has continued to evolve, computers have been brought to bear on the concepts of the single-bullet theory .
 For instance, investigators used a computer model to illustrate how a bullet might have passed through Kennedy and Connally . Investigators for the 1988 PBS television program Nova used a model to show the impact .
 Their efforts made no attempt to match up their computer model to known photographs of the shooting .
 The American Bar Association hired Failure Analysis Associates to create computer animations of the shooting for a mock trial at its annual convention in San Francisco in 1992 . Failure Analysis assists failure Analysis Associates .
 The FAA computer experts used the Zapruder film to fix the positions of Kennedy and Connally but only in the key frames of the film . The FAA used the film's key frames to fix Kennedy's positions of Connally and Kennedy's .
 Neither the Nova nor the FAA computer studies attempted to create an animated computer model that matched the entire filmed record as captured by Abraham Zapruder’s camera .
 Myers based his three-dimensional computer models on the historic record to ensure accuracy . Myers' computer models are based on historical data .
 A survey map and calibration photographs were used to build a model of Dealey Plaza, Elm Street, and its surrounding structures . A model of Elm Street was also built of a survey map .
 The original blueprint of the modified 1961 Lincoln convertible in which the president was riding designed by the Hess & Eisenhardt Company of Cincinnati, Ohio, served as a guide .
 Clay busts of both President Kennedy and Governor Connally were sculpted from photographs and converted into computer models . The busts were created from photos and models of the two presidents .
 Myers concludes that Kennedy and Connally were struck by the same bullet . The result of Myers’s efforts is a remarkably compelling view of the assassination of President Kennedy .
 The Warren Commission's published sequence of Zapruder’s frames was taken from color slides of the original film and was furnished to the Commission by Life magazine . Life magazine furnished the Commission with the color slides .
 So-called missing frames were included in all copies of the film made before the original at Life magazine was damaged, including the Commission’s own intact copy, which it made from a Secret Service first-generation copy .
 First and later-generation copies could not have quite the clarity of the original frames that were accidentally destroyed at Life.com . However, by definition, these firstand later-genuine copies of the originals could not be as clear .
 In addition to the four missing frames, there are two additional missing frames that Life officials never mentioned . Life magazine eventually accounted for four of the missing frames in 1967 .
 Two other alteration theorists, Mike Pincher and Roy Schaeffer, claim to have found a discrepancy in the blinking pattern of the limousine's frontmounted emergency lights .
 The emergency lights were controlled by an electronic circuit and should have blinked once every 0.41 second (the equivalent of about seven Zapruder frames) They were determined by measuring the blinking pattern in the Robert Hughes film, an amateur film showing the presidential limousine .
 Unlike Zapruder film, no tests were ever performed to determine the frame rate of the camera Hughes was using that day .
 Without the frame rate, it is impossible to calculate the timing of the pattern . The timing of this pattern is dependent on frame rate .
 Hughes film shows that the blinking pattern is not evenly spaced, as Pincher and Schaeffer contend . Second, the Hughes film is not the same as Hughes film . The blinking pattern in the film is shown to be uneven .
 Hughes film shows the left-side light on for seven frames, while the rightside light stays on for ten frames . The Hughes film was released in November 2013 .
 It is nearly impossible to obtain, for comparison purposes, an accurate blinking pattern from the Zapruder film . Third, it is impossible to get an accurate, accurate blinking patterns from the film .
 Unlike the Hughes film, Zapruder film depicts the limousine in bright sunlight and at an ever-increasing angle to the camera, which makes it nearly impossible to tell (especially in the later portions of the film) whether the emergency lights are on or off .
 An examination of the earliest portion of the Zapruder film, when the blinking pattern is more easily discernible, only confirms the pattern observed in the Hughes film . That would mean that no alteration had been performed on the film, as Pincher and Schaeffer claim . Even
 Many of the frames are composites, combinations of two or more images made to appear as one . Other alterationists contend that a great many frames are composite .
 Between frames Z193 and Z194 the camera moves left, which, according to critics, should produce a blur but doesn’t . The camera should have moved left, but it doesn't do so, critics say .
 Between frames Z194 and Z195 the motorcade occupants appear clearly, even though both the background and the foreground are blurry in Z195 . Z195 is Z194 .
 Both frames contain blurred backgrounds and foregrounds, more so in Z195 . Z195 is Z195, with a blurred background and foregrounded backgrounds .
 The reason is because Zapruder pans left in Z193-194, then reverses direction, panning right in Z194198. The reason for the reversal is because of the reverse direction of the camera .
 The Stemmons sign is blurred in Z212 but the masonry wall holes in the background are quite well defined . Z212 is Z212 and Z212 includes the Stemmon sign .
 The unpublished 1974 manuscript by Fred Newcomb and Perry Adams, “Murder from Within,” contains interviews by the authors with witnesses . The majority of the witnesses thought the limousine had stopped, the authors say .
 Witnesses who said that the limousine “slowed” are the ones who are correct in their recollection . As indicated in an earlier endnote, this is the case .
 Another leading alterationist, Harrison Edward Livingstone, agrees with Lifton . Livingstone is quite knowledgeable about the film and goes beyond Lifton in his analysis .
 The Zapruder film has not had anything added to it or removed from it apart from the splices that everyone knows about, he says . Livingstone and Lifton say the hypothesis is ludicrous on its face .
 Burgess tells of the enormous complexity, and ultimate futility, of such an endeavor . Burgess tells the story of the struggle to find the truth of the universe . Burgess: "It's not easy to find a solution to the problem of finding the truth"
 He writes, “Any attempted modification would necessitate the enlargement of the film to 35 mm (to maintain clarity) and reduce changes in color saturation and balance, contrast, and grain,” he writes .
 The conspirators would have to begin by rear-projecting each frame onto the back of an animator’s drawing table and tracing each successive frame of Kennedy onto a piece of paper .
 These drawings would then be transferred to animation cels and painted . Animation cels would be used to create animation animations . These drawings were then transferred to animations cels to be painted .
 Area around the painted wound on each cel would then be painted black . The area around the wound would then paint black instead of white .
 Another set of cels would then be copied, but with the wound painted black and the rest of the cel clear . The wound would be painted black, but the other part of the cels were clear .
 Zapruder film enlargement would be run through an optical printer with film 2 on top in correct frame register, producing film 3 . Next the film was run through the optical printer to produce film 3 and film 4 .
 Film 3 would then be rewound and film 1 (the wound surrounded by black) would be run through the printer exposing fdm 3 again . Film 1 (wound) would then run through printer exposing film 3 again exposing fDM 3 again. Film 1 would then rew
 Black does not expose the film, the surrounding black of film 1 wouldn’t expose the already exposed Zapruder film . If the copying of the cels was done exactly and the job was done properly on a high quality optical printer, the painted wound would fit right into the
 He then goes on to discuss ‘the problem of registration,” keeping each frame in the same relative position . He then discusses ‘registration’ of frames .
 He writes that “it was easy ... to describe the process of rotoscoping and optical printing, but it would have been impossible for anyone to maintain perfect registration of the wound on the head .
 Without perfect registration the wound would move around on the head, as if it weren’t attached . The wound should be registered properly and registered properly .
 The animated wound would have to move back and forth and up and down in perfect synchronization with Kennedy’s head . The wound would also have to shift with changes in depth and angle .
 This is impossible since even a half a grain’s shift would cut the animated wound free of Kennedy's head and make it look like some grotesque free-floating balloon . Even a small grain of grain would make the wound look like a free floating balloon .
 Part of the flap in front actually flops about in reaction to the violence of Kennedy’s head movements .
 A necessary line told by the buffs to sell their snake oil is that the techniques for performing these alterations have been around for years . The technique for these alterations has been used for years, experts say .
 The Great Train Robbery, King Kong and Mary Poppins use cutting-edge traveling mattes to combine animated characters with live-action footage . They cite a scene from a 1903 silent classic in which a locomotive appears to be bearing down on the audience .
 matte lines and film registration errors give away these efforts, both being examples of problems with early special effects .
 Matte lines were the result of a slight mismatch between the matte (which masked out a portion of the image) and the image replacing the “hole’s” left by the matte .
 These matte lines can be seen surrounding the portion of the image that had been altered . The lines appeared as black, and sometimes blue lines .
 Motion picture film film contains sprocket holes that run alongside the edge of the film . Motion picture films contain a sprocket hole in the middle of the screen .
 A gear in the camera uses these holes to grab and advance the film as each frame is exposed . The holes in these holes are used by the camera to capture and advance film .
 The microscopic differences between the size of the sprocket holes and the teeth on the gear that moves the film through the camera cause small slippages in the film as each frame is advanced .
 Two pieces of film that are run through the same camera will not line up, or “register,” exactly the same, frame to frame . This is necessary in any special effects technique utilizing a traveling matte . These differences become apparent when two pieces of camera are locked together .
 The result of these registration errors is that the added or altered portions of the image appear to move around in relation to the rest of the scene . The result is that these images appear to be moving around in the way of others .
 This problem was eventually reduced for large-format films by adding a second set of sprocket holes opposite the existing set and/or increasing the number of sprockets . This helped prevent the film from slipping .
 Small-format films are unable to accommodate additional sprocket holes because of the films’ original size . Small format films cannot be expanded to accommodate more holes in the sprocket hole holes .
 The reality is that even today, it is highly doubtful that any of the most modern technological advances available in film and photography could do what the buffs said was done over four decades ago .
 Not even the conspiracy theorists who hold to the alteration theory agree on a time frame .
 Harrison E Livingstone says the nephew of Zapruder’s partner, Erwin Schwartz, told him that Life never got the original until November 27 . This would be a defiance of all the evidence showing that Life magazine came into possession of the original film on November 23, the
 Pincher and Schaeffer allege that these documents are evidence that the CIA secretly altered and copied the Zapruder film . They say the documents are proof that the film was copied by the CIA .
 Zapruder film was sent to the NPIC because it was known it had state-of-the-art enlarging equipment, which Kodak did not have, Horne says . Horne: The film was delivered to the National Institute of Color in Chicago in 1963 .
 In 1975, the Rockefeller Commission asked the CIA for documents pertaining to the NPIC analysis of the Zapruder film, including those establishing when it took place, but the CIA couldn’t locate any document or documents to nail this down . The Rockefeller Commission, which was investigating CIA
 The commission contacted Captain Pierre Sands, who received the film from the Secret Service, in May of 1975, twenty-two years before the ARRB inquiry, he couldn’t recall . Sands, a Captain of the Service, said he couldn't recall the events .
 At one point McMahon told Horne that he started work on the film around 1:00 in the morning . He said he was sure was the original, but then corrected himself and said it was more like 8:00 m. m.
 The NPIC work and analysis was done “1 or 2 days” after the assassination, he said .
 McMahon’s thirty-four-year-old recollection that he was dealing with the original and his remembering the details of the delivery of the film are very questionable, particularly since he acknowledged that he had various health-related memory problems . McMahon admitted that he has various health related memory
 ARRB fellow conspiracist Doug Horne says he was told that if he pursued the matter he would lose his job . Horne wanted to learn whether the Zapruder film had ever been to Hawkeyeworks, he says .
 The CIA succeeded in having the “classified term” Hawkeyeworks deleted from the ARRB report . Horne also told Lifton that the CIA succeeded to have the term “Hawkeyeworks’s” deleted .
 Hunter said he believes the majority of the NPIC notes analyzing the Zapruder film were created during a second session by others . Hunter added that it was his belief that most of the notes analyzed by others were created by others after he and McMahon analyzed the film .
 Hunter and McMahon reviewed the NPIC handwritten working notes on the original briefing boards . Only one of the six pages of working notes contained their handwriting .
 The 18 frames-per-second rate was first printed in the December 6 edition of Life . The November 29 edition of the magazine had no reference to the rate .
 "No evidence has ever emerged to dispute this fact. Over the course of well over forty years, no evidence of this fact has ever been found."
 Pincher and Schaeffer weren’t just wrong on whether the NPIC had the capability of altering the Zapruder film . They were wrong on the film's accuracy, but they were wrong .
 Their reconstruction of when the Zapruder film was altered ignores the known whereabouts of the original film and the three copies made in Dallas during the late afternoon and evening of November 22, 1963 .
 The Secret Service delivered the Zapruder film to the NPIC on the night of the assassination . Though we don't know when the film was delivered, we do know it was not on that night . The film was not delivered that night on the date of the shooting .
 The original Zapruder film was delivered to the NPIC in Washington, D.C., “not long after 10:00m.” on the night of the assassination . But as indicated, according to Pincher and Schaeffer, it was delivered “
 Zapruder continued to hold the original film in Dallas . He even released two copies to the head of the Dallas Secret Service office, Forrest Sorrels .
 One of the copies was forwarded to Secret Service chief James Rowley in Washington, D.C., and was likely delivered to the NPIC by Secret Service agent Bill Smith .
 The original Zapruder film could not have been in Washington, D.C., at around 10:00m. on the evening of the assassination, as the alternationists claim . Pincher and Schaeffer are not only out of the ball game with their theory,
 The master or original Zapruder film never left the physical possession of the film until some time after 9:00m. in his office, on Saturday, November 23, 1963, the day after the assassination . As set forth in the main text, the master or . original Zap
 Zapruder had agreed to meet at his office with Richard Stolley, the representative of Life magazine, which was seeking to purchase the exclusive rights to the film . Life magazine had been trying to buy exclusive rights for the film, which Zapruders shot in New York .
 Zapruder signed a contract to sell the print rights to the film to Life for $50,000 . Life was in competition with Life for the rights .
 In an article in Esquire magazine in 1973, Stolley wrote that after Zapruder signed the contract, “I picked up the original of the film and the one remaining copy and sneaked out a back door of the building"
 The original film was immediately flown to Life's Chicago headquarters, where selected frames of the film were to be included in its revamped November 29 issue .
 The Secret Service called up Dallas TV station KRLD on the afternoon of November 25, 1963, and asked if they had a projector to show a 16 mm. color print of the Zapruder film . However, an authority on the film says that the Secret Service asked for a
 Dan Rather was in the studio at the time and viewed the film in the company of studio people and the Secret Service . The Secret Service was also in the audience .
 The alterationists say Zapruder's film was altered by the alterationists . Wrone writes that it would have been a three-hour flight to Washington from the film's location .
 Robert Hughes had his film developed on Monday, November 25, and voluntarily took it to the Dallas FBI office on November 26 . Most of the alteration theorists claim the conspirators had done all their dirty alteration work to the Zapruder film at a CIA lab in Washington, D.C
 Marie Muchmore brought her film, at that point undeveloped, to the Dallas office of the UPI on November 25 . Wrone makes a point of how diligent Zapruder was in ensuring that no one altered or made an unauthorized copy of his original film .
 Zapruder and his partner at his dress company, Erwin Schwartz, watched the technicians as they did their work . The film was shot in New York City, New York, in June .
 Mark Bell brought his film down to a camera store on Main Street to have it developed . The next week Bell brought it down to be developed .
 Bell is unsure how or when Life magazine first found out about his film . A 1967 Life article indicated Bell brought his film to Dallas Life correspondent Patsy Swank . Bell is currently unsure of how he got the story .
 Weigman, Couch, Underwood, and Darnell were immediately taken back to their stations and recorded for posterity by being shown that afternoon on their respective media outlets .
 Zapruder's original 8-millimeter film could be rephotographed without including the original film’s sprocket-hole area . But this explanation would require an unlikely event—the magnification of each frame of the film to a size large enough .
 Zapruder’s camera captures imagery in the sprocket-hole area, which was never intended to be seen or projected . You’ll recall that Zapruders’ camera captures images in the area, never meant to be projected .
 Any attempt to use Zapruder's camera to rephotograph a forgery would also result in the sprocket-hole area being exposed to forged imagery . The conspirators’ enlargement and alteration would have to carefully exclude the original film’s sprocket hole area .
 Trask’s magnificent 1994 book, Pictures of the Pain, was the result of ten years of meticulous research on the photographic history of the assassination . How much of the original film's tiny image area (an area just 0.192 X 0.145 inch) could be used
 The book is an invaluable reference that has been widely relied upon by the assassination research community . It is an absolutely invaluable reference . The book has been used in many assassination research communities .
 Enlarging this fraction of the original image to fill the width of forged 8-millimeter film would result in film grain that was more than 30 percent larger than normal . The final image sequence wouldn't match the optics of Zapruder’s camera .
 A copy of the Zapruder film was delivered to the center either on the evening of the assassination or shortly thereafter . There is no evidence that any alteration took place at the center .
 Their literature on the alteration of the Zapruder film is conspicuously silent on this point . Their growing assassination literature on this issue remains silent .
 They don't even allege that any of these films were altered at the NPIC, or even that they were brought there . They don’t even allege they were altered, or that the films were brought to the site .
 The alterationists don’t even talk about any alteration ever being done anywhere to these other films . Indeed, nearly all of the alterationists are not even talking about any alterations ever made to these films .
 Lifton had written in numbing detail about the complexities of altering the Zapruder film and where it was altered . Lifton doesn't go on to write one paragraph, one sentence, or even one word about the forgers actually coming into possession of all or any one of these
 The document reprinted in the Warren Commission volumes that was seized from Oswald’s room on Beckley Street pursuant to a search warrant on the afternoon of the assassination (Potts Exhibit A2,21 H 142), is not, as the Dallas Police Department listed it , Oswald's birth
 Oswald's birth on October 18, 1939, had been recorded in book 207, folio 1321 of the recorder’s office on October 25, 1939 . It is merely a certification by Henry Lanauge, the deputy recorder .
 Whether or not this document is the one Marguerite was referring to when she would later write that her son Lee had taken “his birth certificate” with him to Russia is not known .
 In October of 1961, the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service made an effort to locate Oswald’s birth certificate and was unable to do so . The U.S. Immigration and Nationalization Service tried to locate the birth certificate .
 A declaration by Harvey Oswald, one of Lee’s paternal uncles, dated October 25, 1939, attested to by Naomi Drake, the deputy registrar, that Lee was born on October 18,1939, at French Hospital . Such a declaration is allowed in lieu of
 Armstrong, a committed conspiracy theorist, writes ominously that “a birth certificate for Lee Harvey Oswald has never been made public,” the implication being that if it exists, the unnamed conspirators are suppressing it because the certificate itself holds some kind of a key to the assassination .
 Pic was not aware of this and whether it played a part in the divorce is not known . Whether Pic was aware of the story is true or if it was true, it is unknown .
 One of the myths about Oswald is that before the assassination he only went and was known by the name Lee Oswald, and only became known to the world as Lee Harvey Oswald after the assassination . The myth is that Oswald only went to the White House and became known as Lee Oswald .
 Fred Huff, the owner of the Congress Street property, said she had rental records for Marguerite dating from November 10, 1940, but she said she could have moved into Huff’s house earlier since her records prior to that date had been destroyed .
 Clem Sehrt worked at his father’s bakery when one of his customers was the Claverie family . The bakery was one of the family's customers .
 Sehrt worked as an associate, lawyer, and financial adviser to a New Orleans banking executive named Louis J Russell . Russell was a friend of New Orleans mobster Carlos Marcello . Russell, in turn, was a close friend of Marcella, according to the HSC
 In his testimony before the Warren Commission in 1964, the unmistakable inference is that he only knew Oswald in California . In 1964, he testified that he had known Oswald in the U.S.
 Oswald allegedly had a liaison with an effeminate boy in Formosa . He also frequented the Queen Bee Bar in Japan, and may have developed intelligence contacts in Japan . Oswald may have had intelligence contacts with Japanese intelligence officials .
 Oswald allegedly saw Oswald in the company of a stunning Eurasian girl in Japan . Oswald is believed to have been killed in Japan in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Japanese man who allegedly traveled to the Soviet Union along the same route Oswald later took) by saying that his superiors had told him only to answer the questions asked . Oswald said he had been told by superiors to only answer questions .
 Donovan lost credibility he seemed to have early on, his statement to Epstein and the HSCA about Oswald and the U-2 cannot be given any weight . Since Donovan lost his credibility, he has lost any credibility he seems to have .
 Conspiracy theorists have made such a major issue out of Oswald’s presumed knowledge of the U-2 . It has to be pointed out that the existence of the plane was no secret .
 Anyone who happened to be near any one of the bases from which it operated would have been able to see it land and take off . Anyone with a close-up view of the aircraft would be able to hear it take off from the base .
 At one base at Giebelstadt in West Germany, pilots often noticed a long, black limousine parked at the end of a runway . As far as the Soviets knew about it, pilots had often noticed it, at one base .
 A simple license plate check revealed that the car was registered to an embassy of an Eastern Bloc country . It was registered with the embassy of that country . The car is registered with an embassy in the country .
 For the Soviets, the problem was not finding out that such a plane existed, or even its capabilities . Instead, it was finding out about the plane's capabilities . The plane was a Soviet spy plane that could be capable of carrying a nuclear missile .
 Francis Gary Powers and his fellow U-2 pilots assumed that Soviet intelligence already knew how many of the planes the U.S. had . Powers and fellow U.2 pilots were flying the distinctive plane out of Turkey . Powers says he assumed Soviet intelligence had already known how many U-
 The investigation included a reenactment of the shooting . All wounds on Schrand’s body were parallel to the vertical axis of his body, report says .
 The position of the powder burns indicated that Schrand’s left arm was in a lowered attitude, with the weapon between it and the left side of his body . Also, the position of . the . powder burns... indicated that . Schrand's left . arm was . in
 It was deduced that for anyone to have shot Schrand would have necessitated his lying flat on the concrete parking area . As a result, Schrand was found to have been shot in the head .
 On 15 May 1964, a ‘drop test’ was conducted at Ordnance School, MCS, Quantico, Va., using three Winchester Model 12 riot-type shotguns . The test was carried out by three Winchester rifles .
 The guns were dropped in a vertical position , cocked and with the safety off, from a height of 24 inches to a concrete deck . The guns had to be dropped from a . vertical position .
 The most vivid account of the incident was told to author Edward Epstein by James R "Bud" Persons, who was on guard duty that night at another hangar, an empty one .
 Persons heard bloodcurdling screams from Schrand’s post a scant fifty yards away . The officer-of-the-day passed on his routine check of the guard post, Persons heard the screams .
 He found Schrand lying in a pool of blood on the concrete, about six feet from his riot gun . Schrand was found lying six feet away from the gun, police say .
 A scattering of Christmas candy appeared to have been blown from Schrand’s shirt pocket . Schrand appeared to be blowing Christmas candy out of his pocket .
 Donald Camarata, who had been with Oswald and Schrand since Jacksonville, said he heard a rumor that Oswald had been in some way responsible for the death of Martin Schrand . The rumor was heard en route back to the United States or subsequent to my return, he said .
 The rumor that Oswald might have somehow been involved in the shooting seems based on two notions, that some of his comrades in arms found him a peculiar and not too likable character, and that he allegedly was also on guard duty that night . Given the penalties for leaving one’s
 Epstein interviewed nine officers and enlisted men who were at Cubi Point that night . Epstein was unable to find any evidence of Oswald’s involvement in the shooting .
 Oswald first sought medical attention on September 10 for burning sensation during urination, but may have said September 10 . Oswald's medical records may have been illegible because of one nearly illegible entry in Oswald’s medical records .
 Oswald first saw someone at Atsugi about his problem on September 10, according to typed records . However, typed records clearly say September 16, although it's possible Oswald first spoke to someone about it . Oswald was found dead on September 16 .
 Oswald was at sea on September 16,1958, and unless there were several outlying dispensaries on his ship, AKA 105, and Oswald was helicoptered back to Atsugi to have a smear taken, none of which makes sense . The doctor’s testimony was incorrect
 Second Lieutenant Hubert B Cherrie, the squadron duty officer that night, gave a different version of the scene . The incident occurred in 1961 .
 Schrand was pronounced dead on arrival at the hospital . He called an ambulance but Schrand died on arrival in hospital .
 Corporate of the Guard Ronald L Rowe was with Cherrie in the jeep, and he told investigators that when he and Cherrie arrived, Schrand was unconscious and did not move . He groaned about two or three times .
 When Rowe examined the weapon Schrand was carrying at the time, it had one discharged shell in the chamber . Rowe examined Schrand's weapon and found it had a discharged shell .
 Oswald’s military records indicate that he “had not spent substantial time, if any, in Taiwan,” HSCA Report, page 220, says . Except for his “3 Vi month period of service in the Phillipines, he had always remained at A
 Oswald’s medical records for his treatment of gonorrhea show him receiving treatment from September 10, 1958, through November 3, 1958 . His medical chart would follow him and entries on the chart could have been made on Taiwan as well as at Atsugi .
 Oswald himself said he was in “Formosa” in an interview with a UPI reporter on November 14, 1959 . Oswald said in a statement to UPI that he had been in Formosa in 1959 .
 A zany conspiracy theorist, John Armstrong, has come up with his own solution to the problem the HSCA has raised .
 Armstrong maintains that there were two Oswalds involved in this apparent discrepancy, each of whom looked almost exactly like the other, and with almost identical names—Lee Harvey Oswald and Harvey Oswald . Unbelievably, Armstrong claims that each Oswald was almost identical to the other .
 The real Oswald, Lee Oswald, remained back in Atsugi in a rear guard unit, and his impersonator, Harvey Oswald, per Armstrong, was sent to Taiwan . The real Lee Oswald remained in a security guard unit .
 Snyder testified before the HSCA that after discontinuing his brief employment with the CIA in March of 1950, he had no further contact with the agency other than a letter he wrote to the agency in 1970 or 1971 inquiring about working for the agency on a contractual basis .
 Two other Americans had recently defected to the Soviet Union . Nicholas Petrulli of Long Island, Long Island and Robert Webster of Cleveland, Ohio, defected .
 Petrulli had no Communistic sympathies or ideological leanings toward the Soviet Union . He had no grievances against the United States .
 He was simply an American laborer who was on a $965 tour of Western Europe and the Soviet Union . He decided to stay in Russia when he felt the country presented a good opportunity for gainful employment .
 He renounced his U.S. citizenship at the United States embassy in Moscow, Russia . He actually formally renounces his citizenship .
 While in Russia he acquired a girlfriend, the hostess at a hotel suspected of being a KGB agent, and told her he wished to divorce his wife and return to Russia to marry her .
 Webster tried to defect from the Soviet Union in order to help them make the Rand spray gun . The Soviets tried to discourage him from defecting but when he convinced them they accepted his application for Soviet citizenship, they actually accepted him .
 The Department of Justice told the HSCA that there would have been serious obstacles to such a prosecution . The Justice Department said there would be serious obstacles .
 Former President Barack Obama offered to the FBI, but denied to FBI that he had ever made such an offer . That statement was contradicted by his denial to FBI .
 The Government cannot establish a prima facie case solely on a defendant’s unsupported confession . In the prosecution of a criminal case, the prosecution cannot establish an unsupported confession.
 The Government must introduce substantial independent evidence which would tend to establish the trustworthiness of the defendant’s statement .
 The Warren Report said that the CIA also received a copy of the October 31, 1959, cable . The citation the report gives for this (CE 2752, 26 H 131) does not say the CIA received this cable .
 This dispatch was sent out by Richard Snyder to the State Department in Washington, D.C., on November 2 . This dispatch is a much fuller recitation of the events of October 31 than the short October 31 cable .
 She may not have referred to her encounter with Oswald in his hotel room on October 31 because it was not a real interview, but the circumstantial evidence is overwhelming that she did, in fact, talk to Oswald very briefly .
 Oswald’s diary entry of October 31: After sending another reporter away that day, “a half hour later another reporter Miss Mosby comes.” Oswald says that after sending away another reporter . Oswald's diary entry: "Miss Mosby came. She was a reporter
 Oswald told a UPI reporter in his hotel room that he was defecting for “purely political reasons” (CE 833, 17 H 789), which would have had to be what he told Mosby . UPI filed a story that same day saying that Oswald
 Mosby’s version of the chronology of events, which she gave to an HSCA staff member nineteen years later, is almost assuredly incorrect . Mosby gave an account of the events to a staff member, but her account is almost certainly incorrect .
 When they told her about a young American who wanted to renounce his U.S. citizenship, she claims she searched the Moscow hotels frequented by foreigners and located Oswald . She claims she found Oswald in a Moscow hotel where he was found .
 She said she only interviewed him once (she didn’t say when) and only saw him on one later occasion at a Moscow theater but did not speak to him . She also said she saw him at a theater but didn't say when .
 Mosby's statement to the HSCA is in direct conflict with Oswald’s contemporaneous notes, and her colleague Korengold's affidavit to the Warren Commission back in 1964 . Even conflicts with the date she filed her story on her interview with Oswald, November 14, 1959
 None of this information was, however, suggestive in any way of a clandestine relationship . None of the information is suggestive of any clandestine relationship, the author says .
 These were preserved by the State Department and included in the Warren Commission’s volumes of evidence . The State Department preserved the evidence and included it in Warren Commission's transcripts .
 Oswald had “no information identifiable with Oswald other than a service fingerprint card” taken upon his entry into the Marine Corps. The card was taken upon Oswald’s entry into his Marine Corps . Oswald died in November .
 On November 2, the FBI learned that there was no “derogatory information ... in the files concerning Oswald’s . A quick check with the Office of Naval Intelligence that same date revealed they had no record of Oswald .
 Oswald’s name was placed on a “stop,” a sort of warning flag, in the FBI's Identification Division . Oswald would alert the bureau if he tried to reenter the United States under a different identity . Oswald was killed in September of the July 4,
 Committee members find satisfactory answers to these questions, while keeping open the possibility that they had not seen everything . Committee members found satisfactory answers, while maintaining that they hadn't seen everything in the film .
 Conspiracy theorists have assumed that this was May Day 1960 (May 1.1960) , the very day Powers was brought down . Dennis Ofstein, one of Lee’s coworkers at the Jaggers-Chiles-Stovall photographic laboratory in Dallas in the fall of 1962,
 Of course, Francis Gary Powers was not in Moscow at the time of the parade .
 He was still near where he was shot down, hundreds of miles away at Sverdlovsk, Russia . He was flown to Moscow, a three-hour-plus flight, later that day .
 Summers finds it curious that Oswald doesn’t mention the U-2 incident in his Historic Diary . Of the three Mays Days he spent in Russia, only the one of May 1, 1960, is accounted for in his diary .
 He did not know Oswald well, only as a fellow employee for a few months, and was reporting a conversation that was over a year old . Oswald was reporting the conversation to a reporter who was reporting it to Oswald .
 He might have misspoken in his testimony or misremembered what Oswald said . Oswald might have misinformed him, as he so often did with people . He might also have misspentoken in testimony .
 Oswald had told Ofstein that his wife was White Russian, but he only met Marina in Belorussia, she was not from there . Ofstein reported that Oswald had said that Oswald told him that Marina was a White Russian .
 Oswald's second May Day (May 1.1961) in the Soviet Union was the day after his wedding night in Minsk . Oswald’s wedding night was the night after he was married .
 Marina recalled that the day after their wedding she and Lee tried to take a shortcut through Minsk’s Stalina Square, blocked off for the parade, on their way to visit a pair of her old friends . Marina recalled how the couple tried to walk through the square blocked
 Her Uncle Ilya was on duty there in the square, in full uniform, he would not let the young couple through . The young couple were stopped by Ilya's uniformed police officer .
 By Lee’s third May Day in the USSR in 1962, Powers had already been exchanged for Soviet spy Colonel Rudolph Abel and was no longer in the Soviet Union . Powers was exchanged for Colonel Abel in 1962 .
 Conspiracy theorists have settled on May Day 1960 as the likely date of an otherwise unreported trip to Moscow by Oswald . Oswald's visit to Moscow in 1960 is believed to have taken place on May 1, 1960 .
 Until recently, the only evidence against this theory was Oswald’s diary entry of May 1, 1960, that he was in Minsk on May Day 1960 . The theorists have dismissed the whole entry as fiction written long after the fact to disguise the presumed Moscow trip .
 Oswald went to Moscow on May Day of 1960 . Oswald was in Moscow that May Day . Oswald had no other record of Oswald going to Moscow that day .
 The elaborate show trial in Moscow’s immense Hall of Columns, which started on August 17 and ended on August 19, was televised in its entirety . Almost everyone in the Soviet Union at that time did . The trial in which Power was convicted and sentenced to ten years in prison
 Powers addressed the court in English in his own defense, with a Soviet interpreter for the court and the public . Powers spoke in English with the Soviet interpreter . Powers addressed his defense in English .
 There is no mention of this fact in Oswald's diary or, as far as we know, the KGB files . None of Oswald’s friends or coworkers have ever reported that he was absent from Minsk at that time, nor did any of the handful of people who knew him
 Some conspiracy theorists see someone who “looks like” Oswald in the audience at the trial . It is bizarre to imagine that an agent on a highly secret trip to Moscow would present himself in a place where he would be photographed, filmed, and televised to a worldwide audience .
 The story is just one of the many will-o’-the-wisps conjured up by the conspiracy-minded from the inevitable curiosities of the historical record . The story of the assassination of George W. Bush is one of many .
 Marina Oswald testified before the HSCA that she did not recall whether or not Lee Harvey Oswald had ever even spoken to her about the Powers incident . Apart from the fact that this conjecture has not a speck of evidence to support it, it should be mentioned .
 If Lee would later admit attempting to murder Walker to Marina, we can assume he would have boasted of having a hand in the shooting down of the U-2, and if he had, surely Marina would have remembered this . Lee would have very proudly boasted of his hand in shooting down
 The letter was forwarded to the United States State Department, which took no action on the matter . The State Department did not take action by the time it was needed .
 As the wife of an American citizen, Marina was legally entitled to a nonquota immigrant visa . Marina was able to apply for a non-quota visa to enter the country .
 U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service found a way to keep Oswald from coming back to America . State Department ruled that Oswald had not expatriated himself and renewed his American passport, he was free to do so .
 The INS invoked a section of the Immigration and Naturalization Act, which it normally waived, that prohibited the issuance of immigrant visas to those in countries which have unduly delayed accepting the return of persons sought to be deported from the United States . The INS decided to invoke a section .
 On February 28,1962, the San Antonio office approved the petition, but inexplicably in the “Remarks” section of its letter to Oswald in Minsk, which he received on March 15, there is no reference to the nonwaiver . Pursuant to
 The words “Enclosed is your marriage certificate submitted to support the visa petitions” were typed in . Instead of the words ‘Enclosed’ is “your marriage certificate” instead of “enclosed” it was “Your marriage certificate .
 The INS was not going to allow Marina in the country, and the petition itself, which was not sent back to Oswald, presumably contained the non-waiver of sanctions language in it . Nevertheless, the reality is that the INS was .
 On March 27,1962, Michel Cieplinski, the acting administrator in the Department of State, wrote a letter to Raymond F Farrell, the INS commissioner, seeking a reversal .
 If Mrs. Oswald is not issued a visa by the Embassy, the Soviet Government will be in a position to claim that it has done all it can to prevent the separation of the family by issuing her a visa .
 Mrs. Oswald was allowed to leave with her husband and child, but this country was preventing her from leaving, it was said . She was denied the required exit permission by the U.S. government .
 Oswald attempted to have his Marine Corps undesirable discharge set aside June 18, 1962 . Oswald was in the Marine Corps during the Second World War . Oswald had been discharged from the Marines in 1962 .
 His application was to have his undesirable discharge set aside so he could “remain a member of the U.S.M.C.R.”—that is, of course, remain a reserve . What is curious about his brief is a statement near the very end
 He said he would like to include a request for the recommedation for reenlistment regarless of the finding’s of the Board .
 Oswald tried to reenlist for active duty in the Marines, it came out of the blue, in that there is nothing else in the record to indicate he ever wanted to do so . Oswald is a Marine veteran who served in World War II .
 One allegation that Oswald was being watched appeared in The Minority of One in 1964 . Oswald was accused of being being watched by Oswald's family .
 Gary E Taylor, a member of the Russian emigre community, told the Warren Commission on March 25, 1964, that he thought either Oswald or Oswald and Marina may have lived at the “Coz-I-Eight” apartments at “1404 North Beckley
 Oswald may have stayed at the Cozi-Eight during the period in question, but it is unlikely . Oswald is unlikely to have stayed there during that period .
 Taylor thought he once went looking for the Oswalds somewhere along N Beckley, Dallas, Dallas . Taylor said he had no knowledge of a place of residence for Oswald for the period mentioned above .
 Most importantly, the resident manager of the Cozi-Eight apartments at the time, Mrs. Mrs. Bazzi, was the owner of the apartment complex .
 FBI interviews of Mrs. Johnny Perez, and the owner of the apartments, Sam Morris, said Oswald never lived there . Johnny Perez and Sam Morris told FBI the apartments belonged to Oswald .
 Conspiracy theorists have made much of the fact that Jaggers-Chiles-Stovall did some classified work for the Department of Defense involving the making of maps .
 All such work was carried out in a separate department of the company by personnel who had security clearances . Oswald had no access to that department or material used or produced there .
 Dennis Ofstein told the Warren Commission that Oswald had once asked him if he knew anything about microdot printing . Ofstein said Oswald asked him about “microdot” printing . Microdot printing is a means of reducing type or photographs to a very small form .
 Oswald told Oswald told him spies sometime sent messages and pictures under a postage stamp . Oswald said spies often sent messages under the stamp .
 Ofstein told Ofstein he knew nothing about this, and didn't know whether Oswald had read about this or acquired knowledge of it some other way . Ofstein said he didn’t know if Oswald had knowledge of this or how it happened .
 Oswald’s teacher, Gladys Yoakum, told the FBI that the school had a policy of dropping students after four absences . Oswald was dropped on April 8, 1963, the last class he attended was on March 28, 1963 . Oswald's teacher said he was dropped
 Oswald's personal hygiene was consistent throughout his life, from witness after witness, of his always appearing neat and clean . Apart from a brief period in New Orleans, when he was getting dirty while working at the coffee company and lost interest in his personal hygiene, the record is consistent .
 Oswald’s political manifesto is printed out on nine pages of lined paper . This document, seemingly Oswald's political manifesto, was printed out in Oswald's home .
 There were also several additional pages on which he tried to sketch out, more in outline form, the principles of a new form of government .
 That the right of free enterprize and collective entryprize be gauranteed . That is the right to free entry prize and collective enter prize .
 B That Fasism be abolished . C That nationilizism be excluded from every-day life. B that Fasism should be abolished. C That is not the case for nationalism .
 E the right of the free, uninhibated action of religious insistutions of any type or denomination to freely function G Univeral Sufferage for all persons over 18 years of age .
 Freedom of desimanation [dissemination of opions through press] through press or declaration or speech . Freedom of speech is freedom of expression .
 I that the desemanation of war propaganda be forbidden as well as the manufactor of weapons of mass destruction be forbidden . I also want to ban the production of weapons that could be used to make mass destruction .
 K nationalization or communinizing of private enterprize be forbidden . Nationalization of private entryprize or collective prize will not be permitted .
 That combining of separate collective or private enterprizes into single collective units be considered as communistic . M. M. combined of separate . or private entries into single . units could be considered communistic.
 N That no taxes be levied against indivuals . O That heavy grauated taxes of from 30% to 90% be leveled against surplus profit gains . N That . heavy grauation taxes of between 30% and 90% should be leveled . against surplus profits .
 Marina’s memory as to the sequence of some of the events surrounding the Walker shooting are understandably foggy, and I have gone with what she told her biographer, Priscilla McMillan, if for no other reason that she would have had more time, with McM
 Buchanan’s book is riddled with factual errors, including the allegation that Walker’�s phone number and name were in Oswald’re notebook . The allegation seems to be one of them, and it is one of many errors .
 As expected, conspiracy theorists have had fun with the Walker shooting . Just as predictably, there was fodder for their ruminations .
 The first suspect in the Walker shooting was a drifter named William Duff whom Walker had befriended . Duff called Walker a "batman," an officer’s servant . Duff was the first suspect .
 He allegedly told the daughter of an anonymous lady who called a secretary in Walker’s office that he had been in on the shooting of Walker . He was not living with Walker on April 10, 1963 .
 Two days before the shooting, Robert Alan Surrey, a printing salesman and associate of the general, drove to his house about eight-thirty or nine in the evening . Surrey was just a couple of hours before Walker returned to Dallas from Operation Midnight Ride . Surrey, an associate of Walker
 Surrey also noticed a dark-colored Ford sedan, brown or maroon, without license plates, parked in the alley .
 Surrey followed the men into downtown Dallas . Surrey says the men got in the car and drove off, but Surrey followed them into downtown . Surrey: "When they got into the car, they got in, they drove off"
 Surrey gave up the tail after an odd turn, which suggested they had spotted him and were doubling back . Eventually they made a turn, suggesting they were trying to double back, and Surrey gave it up . Surrey was eventually forced to abandon the chase .
 Walker reported the incident to Walker the next morning, but nothing came of it . Walker reported it to the police, but there was no license number to trace . Walker was not charged .
 Oswald took photos of the back of Walker’s house showing a lightcolored car parked there . Area where the rear license plate would normally be mounted had been torn out of the print .
 The hole in the photograph is not confined to the small license plate area . The hole is not only in the small plate area, but also in the license plate .
 It is a very large hole, encompassing almost one-third of the rear trunk area . The hole is the largest hole in the trunk area of the vehicle .
 It is likely that the hole was accidentally torn out by someone, perhaps even Oswald . The hole in the hole is likely to have been torn out, perhaps by Oswald .
 Marina, who might have been expected to notice a hole in the middle of the photograph, testified that she had not seen any hole in it when Lee showed it to her . Marina testified that Lee showed the photo to her, but she didn't see any hole .
 She testified that the photograph was not there when the FBI showed her the photograph months after the killing of the president . On the other hand, she also testified that it also wasn't there when she was shown the photograph .
 Oswald himself made the hole to prevent identification of the car, presumably because it belonged to a supposed accomplice . The issue can never be resolved, but it has been suggested that Oswald made it himself .
 It makes no sense that a conspirator planning to assassinate General Walker would have parked his car directly behind Walker’s house in broad daylight . Oswald's supposed co-conspirator, Oswald, would have included it in one of his surveillance photographs if he had .
 Conspiracy theorists have constructed a case that Oswald must have worked with accomplices . From this meager collection of facts, conspiracy theorists have built a case for accomplices to work with .
 Even author Albert Newman does not believe that Oswald had accomplices in the Kennedy shooting . He thinks he did in the Walker shooting .
 Two of the cars in the church parking lot were driven, per Newman, by lookouts . One of them also served as the getaway car, Newman says .
 The car in the photograph identified as Charles Klihr’s also belonged to one of the accomplices, per Newman . Newman: The car was in the photo belonged to a car owned by one of his accomplices .
 Oswald, per Newman, may have met one or more of these accomplices six months earlier, in October 1962, when he was supposed to be at the YMCA but wasn't . Newman implies that he was staying with one of the accomplices who lived in Oak Cliff .
 Newman bolsters his accomplice theory with another observation that bus service from Walker’s neighborhood was thin or nonexistent at that hour of the night . Newman says it was at least two hours after the shooting before Oswald turned up at Neely Street .
 No one saw the brown or maroon Ford or the car identified as Klihr’s on the night of the shooting . No one has seen the brown, maroon or brown Ford or car on that night .
 Neither of the two men in the church parking lot in the parking lot, who were described by Coleman in great detail, clearly resembled Oswald . The two men were described as men who were seen in the lot .
 Both apparently were drivers and we know Oswald didn't drive. Moreover, both apparently were apparently drivers .
 No one reported seeing Oswald with anyone whom one could even postulate as being an accomplice, either in October 1962, in April 1963, or any time in between . Sightings of Oswald became as common after the assassination as sightings of Elvis have been for years . No one ever reported
 The only virtue of Newman’s theory is that there is no way to prove it wrong . Newman: “There are no ways to prove that it is wrong.” Newman: "There is no proof of anything wrong"
 As a theory it remains considerably less plausible than the account of the incident Lee himself told Marina, and it requires a much different Lee Oswald than the one we know from the story of his life .
 Lee worked at JaggersChiles-Stovall for months without being able to establish even a casual relationship with any of his coworkers apart from Ofstein . Lee couldn't even bring himself to eat lunch with Ofstein or accept a ride home in Ofstein’s car .
 He did not say in the dirt, and he may have buried it under some leaves in the field . He may have hidden it under leaves in a field .
 In any event, even if he did bury it in the dirt, it's a non sequitur to conclude that he would have been incapable of disassembling the weapon thereafter and cleaning it .
 George said that Lee ‘shriveled’ at his joke and didn’t say anything, but he had a peculiar smile on his face . George knew at the time that the remark had an effect on Lee (9 H 249), although this may be the clarity
 It would be remarkable if George had really noticed the profound effect his remark had on Lee and then neither said nor did nor apparently thought anything more about it . Also, it would have been remarkable if he had noticed that Lee had a profound effect .
 Jeanne told the Warren Commission that the night before Easter was the first time she had been to the Oswalds’ apartment . Jeanne said she had never been to Oswalds' apartment before Easter .
 The main reason she believes this is, she says, “the rifle was not in the apartment on April 13.” She says the main reason is that the rifle wasn't in the home on that day was not found .
 Three days after Walker attempt would be Saturday, April 13, the day before Easter . Walker's first attempt would take place three days after April 13 .
 Oswald's brother Robert brought the Nixon incident to the attention of the authorities . Oswald’s own brother Robert was the man who brought it to the authorities' attention .
 After the assassination Marina became very close to James Martin, who served as her financial adviser, and she lived with him and his wife for awhile .
 Marina confided to Martin about the Nixon incident, and on a visit to Martin’s house by Robert Oswald on January 13, 1964, Martin told Robert what Marina had told him .
 Marina confirmed to Robert what she had told Martin . Robert was driving Marina to the cemetery to visit Lee’s grave .
 Robert turned over his diary, containing the reference, to the FBI on February 18, 1964 . Robert brought it to the attention of his lawyer, and on the advice of his . lawyer, turned over the diary to the . FBI .
 He also told the FBI the information in an interview on February 19, 1964, and retold the story to the Warren Commission on February 21, 1964 .
 Conspiracy theorists have questioned this date because of a passing remark made by Lillian Murret that “Lee had come to my house on a Monday” that implied a gap of four days between his arrival in New Orleans on April 25 and his arrival at the Murrets’ house
 Murret was talking about another event at the time . Warren Commission counsel had no reason to question her apparent slip of the tongue that Oswald arrived on a Monday .
 Oswald had already visited the Louisiana Division of Employment Security office on the previous Friday, wearing a suit and tie . He would not have had until he unpacked his bags at the Murrets . Oswald had visited the state's employment security office on that Monday, April 29 .
 Dutz Murret drove Lee back to the bus station on the evening of the day he arrived to help him recover his luggage from storage . Lillian Murret testified that he had no adequate clothes until Dutz drove him back to a bus station .
 Warren Commission counsel played around with three addresses in his questioning of Mrs. Mrs. Warren . Warren Commission Counsel played around three addresses .
 Jesse Garner was the manager, with her husband, of the apartments on Magazine, and though establishing that the Garners lived at 4911 Magazine, he couldn’t manage to ask her where the Oswalds lived . The FBI introduced yet another address, 4909, saying the Garn
 The Oswalds lived in the front apartment, and Mrs. Oswald lived in front of the other apartment . Neighbors could see Lee inside reading is that the Oswalds were in front . The inference from the fact that neighbors could see him inside is that Mrs. Lee was inside .
 By the time Marina testified before the Warren Commission, she had grown to dislike Ruth . Marina testified that she grew to dislike her mother-in-law Ruth .
 When she told the Warren Commission, “I did not like her too well” , she was referring to when she was living with Ruth . She was referring, from the context of her testimony, to when Ruth was living .
 Marina says Ruth was doing for her at that time . But the circumstantial evidence of all Ruth did for her is circumstantially contradictory . The main thing Marina cites for not liking Ruth (Ruth, per Marina, wanted attention and publicity after the assassination) had not yet happened
 Douglas Jones, the owner of the company, told the FBI that although he could not be sure the man who ordered the printing of the handbills was not Oswald, he did not think it was Oswald .
 He thought the man was a “husky type person” on the order of a laborer . The man was described as a ‘husky-type person’ on the orders of a Laborer .
 The likelihood is that the original letter notifying Oswald of the board’s decision had a date on it that didn’t come through in the copy in the Warren Commission volumes . It is not known if the original version of the letter was accurate .
 There are some conflicts with respect to the dates that the New Orleans FBI contacted Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy Kennedy III .
 Hosty gave the date of June 17 in his testimony before the Warren Commission . Garner: There is no indication Hosty was reading the date from an official FBI document in front of him .
 If he learned about Oswald’s presence in New Orleans on June 17 or earlier from some other source, his report does not mention this . The report doesn't mention that .
 Hosty testified that it wasn't until “early August’s August that he received a verification from the New Orleans FBI office that Oswald was living in New Orleans . Hosty says it wasn’t until ‘early August' that he got a verification of Oswald�
 Oswald moved in on May 9, and Marina Marina moved in a few days later . This would put the FBI visit to Mrs. Oswald's home on the FBI's radar .
 Hosty says he was contacted by the FBI office in New Orleans in June . Garner was found around June 10, close to the time Hosty was contacted . Garner is believed to be a suspect in the case, Hosty said .
 Hosty only says he was informed by the FBI office in New Orleans that Oswald was apparently living in the city, not where he was living . Hosty says he only says that Oswald lived in the New Orleans area, not exactly where .
 New Orleans FBI agent Milton Kaack’s report says he didn’t speak to Mrs. Michelle Obama . Yet he says he did not speak to her .
 Kaack’s official FBI report, which is specific as to the date, is specific . Absent any other evidence, one would normally have to go with Kaack's official report, and assume that Mrs. Kaack is dead .
 Garner, trying to recall, fifteen years later, when the FBI first came to her door, was simply off by about two months . Garner: "The FBI came to my door 15 years ago, and I don't know why it happened"
 Kaack has a conflict on dates involving Kaack that throws into question the accuracy of his report with respect to dates . But there’s another conflict that threw into question his report .
 Murret told the Warren Commission that Lee and Marina came to the Murrets’ home to visit on Labor Day . The next day or the day following that, two FBI agents came to her door asking if the Oswalds lived there . When she told them they didn’t
 She told them and they returned the next day to tell her that “a lady with a station wagon was there,” whereupon Mrs. Mrs. told them . The next day they returned and they told her that a lady from a country club was there .
 Kaack’s FBI report stating that he visited Mrs. Mrs. Kaack was incorrect . Kaack's FBI report was incorrect, he says, but he says he visited her .
 The conflict in the above dates would appear to be irreconcilable at this point in time . The only thing that is certain about the mess is that the contradictions in the dates do not seem to have any relevance or consequence to the story of the case .
 Martello thought there might be some tie-in between Oswald’s FPCC group and Reissman . Martello recalled that FPCC literature was found in the 1000 block of Pine Street, which was near the residence of ReISSman at 1121 Pine .
 Martello felt from Oswald’s reaction that there was possibly a connection between Oswald and Reissman . Oswald never gave him a direct answer, but Martello said he felt there was possible a connection .
 FBI report: Ruth Paine introduced Oswald to Dr. Oswald two days after the assassination . Paine was in New Orleans when Oswald was killed, FBI report says .
 The source is given as John Rice, the special agent in charge of the FBI office in New Orleans . The FBI is giving details of the investigation .
 It’s not clear how Rice came into possession of this information, but the day after the assassination, Mrs. Rice said, “I’m not sure how’ve been able to get this information .
 Oswald’s aunt, Lillian Murret, recalls his telling her that he had gone to the home of a Tulane professor of languages at Tulane to show slides . There is no indication what course Professor Reissman taught, but his aunt recalls his story .
 Harold Gordon Alderman, a Tulane student, said that in the summer of 1963, a fellow student, Hugh Murray, mentioned to him that he had picked up an FPCC leaflet being handed out on campus .
 After the assassination, Alderman offered to furnish the leaflet to the FBI, but agents told him they already had the handbill . Alderman called the New Orleans FBI office after the assassination to furnish it with .
 Bruneau described as a “big-time gambler” by New Orleans Crime Commission director Aaron Kohn . Bruneau was an associate of New Orleans mobster Nofio Pecora . He told the HSCA that he had known Dutz Murret for many
 Bruneau, who went on to become president of the World Boxing Association, said that on the subject occasion, one of the women in the Murret family called him to get Oswald paroled .
 He had never heard of Oswald before, and called someone—he can't remember who—who had parole power . He called someone, he can’t remember who, who has parole power, to get parole .
 He said “all elected officers and judges’s had parole power,” other public officials did too . Although he said all elected officers, judges and judges have parole power .
 HSCA investigation found that no one, not even the FBI, had interviewed him about it prior to the investigation . He made that one call and never heard about the matter anymore, he said .
 Oswald applied in New Orleans for his Mexican tourist card on September 17, 1963 . Oswald applied for the card on the very same day that he applied for it . Oswald was the person who got the tourist card immediately preceding his was someone with CIA connections .
 Number 24084 was issued to William G Gaudet, a New Orleans editor of a weekly newsletter, Latin American Report .
 Gaudet’s name was mysteriously missing from a list of people who got their Mexican tourist cards that same day in New Orleans . The buffs also discovered that he was missing from the list of those who got the cards .
 Gaudet observed Oswald at the New Orleans Trade Mart, but he did not know him and did not travel to Mexico at the same time as Oswald . Oswald left on September 19, 1963, a week before Oswald did . Oswald was killed in Mexico City, Mexico, but Gaud
 The unwitting Warren Commission simply published that incomplete list, a list it did not prepare . Gaudet’s name was added to the incomplete list . The Warren Commission did not even prepare the list .
 The Warren Commission did not expunge Gaudet’s name from the records, as some conspiracy theorists have alleged . Some conspiracy theorists say the Warren Commission expunged the name of the man who died in the Holocaust .
 The fact of his being issued a fifteen-day tourist card in New Orleans on September 17, 1963, was preserved for posterity in Warren Commission document number 75, pages 573, 588, and 652, declassified by the FBI in 1975 .
 Gaudet was interviewed by two conspiracy theorists, Bernard Fensterwald and Allan Stone, in 1975 . He strongly implied this was not so when he said, “Well, I mentioned to my wife.”
 If readers have a lot of time on their hands to throw away, I would recommend Fensterwald and Stone’s interview of Gaudet .
 Almost the entire, dreadful sixty-two-page interview is replete with the most obvious of foundationless speculation by Gaudet . Almost the whole of the interview, it's a terrible, dreadful interview . The worst part of it is that the interview is that it's based on
 Oswald appeared to be ‘a miserable creature” and “a nut,” he tells interviewers . Although he never personally met Oswald, he found it “inconceivable” Oswald could have pulled off the assassination . Oswald was a ‘miserable
 Anti-Castro Cubans in New Orleans had the greatest respect for CIA agent E Howard Hunt, Gaudet says . He says Hunt probably asked Hunt what had happened in connection with a conspiracy to kill Kennedy . “I’m sure Hunt knows who was involved”
 There is some confusion as to the number of the bus that took Oswald to Laredo . The Continental Trailways bus was used to transport Oswald .
 Mirabel was surprised that the card seemed very new, and that Oswald carried such a document . Mirabel said she was surprised Oswald had such a card .
 Mirabel had been a Communist for some years at that point, but it was not the custom for Cuban party members to carry identification . Mirabel himself had been Communist .
 Nechiporenko’s presence and role in the Oswald affair became known only on March 25,1992, when accompanied by a Hollywood agent, Brian Litman, he held a press conference in Moscow shortly before the publication of his book on the affair .
 Three other former KGB colonels attended the press conference, all planning to write their memoirs . Litman is represented by Litman and all plan to write memoirs.
 The Warren Commission covered the entire Oswald Cuban-Russian consulate issue in less than one and a half pages . The sequence of Oswald's visits to the Cuban and Soviet consulates is understandably fuzzy .
 Oswald did go to the Russian embassy the following day, Saturday, Saturday . It’s possible that the inclusion of the Cuban embassy in the Warren Report was merely loose writing .
 By Friday afternoon, all the ingredients or factors necessary to have the subject heated confrontation with Oswald already existed, and it is likely it took place at that time, not the following day . It is likely that the confrontation took place Friday afternoon .
 A much briefer reference to de Barreiro in CE 2121,24 H 586 is possibly incorrect, not just because of its brevity, but because it quotes her as saying she saw Oswald three or four times, but that he only ate there once .
 "O Lee" left on the 8:30m. departure time slot for the last leg of the flight . O Lee’s final flight was scheduled to take in from 8:15m.
 The name “OSWLD” was made by the baggage handler, Lucio Lopez Medina . It was the opinion of the ticket salesman and the dispatcher .
 Alvarado was certain that the individual designated on the list as ‘OSWLD’ did not purchase a ticket and did not travel on the 1:00m. bus . But Alvarados was quite certain that he was not traveling on the bus .
 A search of the company’s records in Monterrey failed to locate a ticket stub that was not otherwise accounted for in connection with that trip . Indeed, no ticket number was recorded for “OSWLD,” and no ticket numbers were recorded for "OSW
 All that appears for seat number 12 is the name “Chihuahuenses,” for the ticket agency . The agency, Agencia deViajesTransportes Chihuahuense, that sold Oswald his ticket, is the agency that sold the ticket .
 Oswald saw these two movies his first weekend at the Paine residence . So apparently, Oswald saw them first weekend . Oswald saw the two movies .
 Rachel was born October 20, and October 12 and 13 fit Marina's recollection much more, of course, than October 19 .
 Loken’s research did not show Suddenly was shown in Dallas at the time We Were Strangers was, or at any other time between early October and the day of the assassination .
 Last-minute substitutions are frequently made in TV showings, he said . However, he pointed out that last-minute changes are often made in showings .
 Oswald could have seen Suddenly on a more remote TV station in Austin or Texarkana that Ruth Paine’s TV set picked up . Paine's TV set could have picked up on a remote TV set in Texas .
 The only showing of Suddenly on Dallas TV the agency could find during the general time in question was on February 26, 1963, at 10:30m. on Channel 11 .
 Oswald came out to Irving with Wesley Frazier that Friday evening, November 8 . It is not absolutely certain that Oswald came to Irving, Texas, with Frazier .
 Ruth Hyde Paine recalls Oswald “writing something [his letter to the Russian embassy in Washington, D.C.] on the early morning of Saturday” November 9 (3 H 41) Paine . Oswald had spent the previous night there, which would suggest that he had spent
 Oswald didn't get the job, per Marina, and if Marina was correct, we can assume Oswald somehow found transportation out to Irving afterward on that Saturday, November 9 . Oswald was traveling to Irving, Texas, on November 9, 1963 .
 The empty space before ”2” was undoubtedly filled by the number ”1” on the original, as page vii of volume 16 says . The empty . space before the . number ‘2’ was undoubtedly . filled by ‘1’ on
 Oswald wrote a letter to the Soviet embassy on November 2,1963, or on any other day in November . Oswald is believed to have been the only person known to have written such a letter . Oswald's letter is the only other known letter to be written by Oswald .
 Oswald usually stayed in his room and didn’t socialize, but on Wednesday evening, Oswald appeared in the living room during the evening newscast . Oswald was one of the tenants at 1026 North Beckley, a tenant said .
 Oswald came out of his room, stood behind the couch, staring intently at the television set . Oswald came from his room to stare at the TV set as he sat on the couch .
 Jerry [Duncan, employed at the service station across the street, had come over to socialize with Slough, and had previously met Oswald . Jerry kept trying to introduce me to Oswald, and frankly couldn’t get his attention .
 Marina’s memory had faded to the point that in describing, in broken English, she said, “Well, I think maybe I try my best to remember.” Fourteen years after her Warren Commission testimony, Marina's memory has faded . Marina: "Well,
 "I think that prior to that maybe we had disagreement or argument about something like him hiding ... his real name from the landlady," she says . "Maybe we had argument over that," she adds .
 Lee did love Marina, in his way, and we’ve seen he professed love for her while he was alive . Lee and Marina truly loved each other, it is probable Lee did . Lee's love for Marina is shown to be genuine .
 In a 1988 interview with Ladies’ Home Journal, Marina said, “In behavior, he was capable of acting like a wild dog.” Marina also said that in behavior, she was “capable of acting . like a . wild dog’
 Marina has given conflicting and ambiguous answers through the years to the question of whether she loved Lee, but her statement to the Ladies’ Home Journal seems to be the clearest and most heartfelt .
 Marina: "Whenever Lee was hurt, I felt physical pain for him" Marina: “Whenever Lee hurt,” she said, “I felt physical pains for him.” Marina said .
 With Kenneth [the man she married, divorced, but continued to live with], "I don’t feel that way. With Kenneth," she said . "With Kenneth, she said, I don't think that way."
 Warren Commission overlooked putting the American Rifleman advertisement in its volumes . The Warren Commission overlooks putting the advertisement in their volumes .
 Conspiracy theorist Sylvia Meagher points out that the advertisement was for a $12.88 Carcano that was 36 inches long, weighed 5 pounds, and had a catalog number C20-T750 . Meagher says the $19.95 Carcano was sent to Oswald was 40 Vs
 Oswald’s Carcano rifle had an adjustable sling that was found on his Carcano . There is some ambiguity about the accuracy of the sling . Oswald's Carcano was found to be a prototype of the American Civil War . Oswald was killed in August 1918 .
 If Shaneyfelt is correct, this indicates that Oswald went from one homemade sling, at the time of the photos, to another one before the assassination . Oswald's sling may have been made from a homemade sling .
 If this is true, it would mean that Oswald had not, as Frazier believed, put together a homemade sling for his rifle . Oswald's sling would mean he had not made it himself, Frazier believed .
 An error crept into the text of an HSCA volume, like others, may have crept into it . But my guess is that this was an error, like many others, that crept in the text .
 Frazier was the FBI's point man for the FBI on this issue in 1963 and 1964, and was the one who ordered the replica . Frazier also ordered a replica of the original . Frazier was also the FBI point man on the issue in 1964 and 1963 .
 For the HSCA to say Frazier didn't know what he was talking about, it makes little sense . Others at the FBI found the sling that came from the seller of the replica to be almost identical to Oswald’s . The sling came from a replica of Oswald's,
 The telescopic sight had been sold to Klein’s Sporting Goods by Martin B Retting, the owner of Retting Gun Shop in Culver City, California .
 The Warren Commission's firearms experts did not accept the stamping as proof of the rifle’s caliber . They chambered a 6.5millimeter round and checked it for fit, then made a sulfur cast of the inside of the barrel . It is not known if Oswald
 In this manner, they determined that the rifle barrel was indeed a 6.5-millimeter caliber . The barrel was the equivalent of an American .25 caliber barrel .
 The evidence amassed by FBI agents tended to support Marina’s second account . Marina's account was published in the New York Times' September 4th edition of The Washington Post .
 The Communist newspapers Oswald is holding were dated March 11 and March 24 (the Worker) The FBI learned they were mailed on March 7 and 21, respectively, by second-class mail .
 Robert knew the camera well, his brother having left it with him in Fort Worth before he left for Russia in 1959 . He regaining possession of it when he returned to America in 1962 .
 Oswald’s camera has been surrounded by confusion over where he got it and whether it was even a camera . But the ownership of another camera of Oswald's has been a mystery for years .
 Dallas detective Guy F Rose seized a “sea bag” of Oswald’s that contained, among other items, a small German-made Minox camera . The camera was used as a ‘spy camera’ by both the Allies and the Axis in the Second
 Rose described it as about the size of “a half-pack of cigarettes,” and he said it was loaded with film . Rose described the gun as a “half- pack of cigarettes”
 Former FBI agent Warren de Brueys delivered all of Oswald’s personal belongings to FBI in Washington, D.C., in 1978 . Oswald's belongings were turned over to the FBI by Dallas Police Department . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 The item the Dallas Police Department turned over to the FBI “should be listed as a Minox light meter,” not a camera, an FBI memo says .
 I had one myself, and in fact it’s about fifteen inches from me on my desk right now. I’m not afraid of it. I had a one myself. It was about 15 inches from my desk .
 A small German-made camera was not that uncommon, and was not—as conspiracy theorists would want us to believe—only used by those in intelligence work . The camera was made in Germany and sold in the United States .
 Oswald’s Minox camera reportedly obtained from Mrs. Lee Oswald . Serial number of the Minox has been erroneously thought to be the serial number of Oswald's Minox . The serial number has not been found .
 No one has nailed down the facts with respect to the Minox camera issue . It was a camera that was owned by civilians as well as those in intelligence work . There's no evidence that Oswald was ever employed by any U.S. or foreign intelligence agency .
 Instead of disposing of the little camera, the evil conspirators who murdered Kennedy put it in the archives . They hope that the Armstrongs of the world won't be able to find the information they’re seeking from it .
 Several of the publications furnished the Commission with the prints they had used, or described their retouching efforts in correspondence to the Commission .
 Except for admitted retouching, the pictures were identical to the original . Except for the admitted retoucheding of the pictures, the images were identical .
 Conspiracy theorist Jack White noticed that the alleged assassination rifle looked different in many of the photographs taken of it that weekend . White was a former Fort Worth advertising executive and graphic artist with an intense interest in photographic evidence .
 The HSCA photographic panel realized at the outset that many critics, like Jack White, had failed to take into account the effects of perspective when an object is photographed . The panel realized that many Warren Commission critics had not taken into account .
 HSCA photographic expert Cecil Kirk discovered yet another first-generation print just a few days before he testified to the panel . The panel pointed out that when a camera lens projects an image of our three-dimensional world onto a two-dimensional sheet of him negative, the result can make
 First-generation print from the original negative identified with a rubber stamp as the Dallas Police Department photograph that Captain Fritz showed Oswald . Captain Fritz thought it was a second-generation copy of a copy .
 "We know they are equal distance apart," says the author . "They verge and join at the horizon, when in reality we know they remain a distance apart"
 Someone laying a ruler on the resulting twodimensional photograph, as Jack White did, is going to get different measurements depending on the angle of the rifle to the camera . The photo was taken by White White in New York City .
 The panel undertook extensive ‘tilt’ studies using photogrammetrical mathematics, which allowed them to compute and compare the true dimensions of ten distinctive features on the Mannlicher-Carcano for any given degree of tilt .
 White was invited to testify before the HSCA in 1978 and detail his work for committee members . White was one of the leading conspiracy proponents of the theory that the backyard photographs were fakes .
 Two other experts had made public statements attesting to the “fakery” of the backyard photos . White: “It is fairly obvious . . that they were made to implicate”
 Pickard, appeared in a Canadian Broadcasting Company segment of The Fifth Estate . Pickard denounced the backyard photos as fakes . He said the photos were fake .
 Marina did the normal thing in taking several photos of her husband holding the Carcano . Marina took several photos with her husband, including a few of her photos of him holding the car .
 White was clearly out of his depth, though he was a hero to his fellow conspiracy theorists . White is a hero for conspiracy theorists, but he's clearly not a hero .
 Calvin S McCamy, chairman of the photographic standards management board of the American National Standards Institute, and Sergeant Cecil W Kirk, head of the Metropolitan Police Department’s photographic services unit, speak out .
 The experts were easily able to determine that the first two prints, the ones found in Mrs. Smith, were found in her home, were prints found in the home . The prints were those of the prints that were found on the victim's body .
 All the other prints, all slightly to substantially larger, were printed manually using an enlarger . The other prints were printed using enlargers .
 HSCA experts were certain that the backyard photographs were taken with Oswald’s Imperial Reflex camera to the exclusion of all other cameras . Marina Oswald testified that she took the photos with Oswald's Imperial Reflex .
 The twenty-member panel compared test photographs taken with the subject Oswald camera against the backyard photographs . They found unique scratches and imperfections, known as frame edge markings, identical to both .
 Frame edge markings were identical to test negatives shot in Oswald’s camera . The frame edge markings are identical to those shot in the test negatives .
 Photographic experts also used the principles of photogrammetry to resolve the question of fakery . Photographers used the principle of photography to solve the problem .
 A vanishing-point analysis of the backyard photographs proved, without question, that the photographs are not composites, as critics claimed . Panel member Calvin McCamy testified that a vanishing point analysis proved without question the photographs were not composite .
 The vanishing point in a photograph is the point at which parallel lines appear to converge . McCamy explained that the vanishing point is a point where parallel lines converge .
 In the case of the backyard photographs, the shadows cast by objects in the scene were used to determine the vanishing point . The vanishing point was determined by the shadows of objects in a scene .
 McCamy applied this technique to the backyard photographs . He discovered that all of the shadow lines did, indeed, intersect at the same vanishing point .
 If any part of the photo had contained a portion of another superimposed photo taken when the sun or other source of light was at a slightly different position, the shadow lines would not have converged at the same point .
 The shadow under Oswald’s nose does not change position even though the head is tilted differently in each photo . One aspect of the photos that has troubled critics is the fact that the shadow under the nose .
 The panel asked the Rochester Institute of Technology to create an exhibit that would make it clear to anyone as to how that can happen . The vanishing-point analysis correctly accounted for that .
 When the head was vertical and facing directly toward the camera, the nose shadow pointed directly downward toward the centerline of the lips . The nose shadow can be seen when the head is vertical or facing directly to the camera .
 When the head was tilted only slightly to the left, the shadow moved quite noticeably, pointing toward the left side of the mouth . The shadow moved very noticeably when the head tilted to the right or left .
 When the head was rotated slightly toward its right, the shadow swung back and once again pointed directly toward the centerline of the lips . However, when the head, while still tilted to the left, was turned slightly toward the right .
 The shadow still pointed directly toward the center of the lips . Without moving the head further, the photographers then moved the camera slightly to the left, just enough to compensate for the earlier rotation .
 A simple demonstration of the effect seen in the backyard photographs is one a high schooler could duplicate out in the yard on a sunny day . It was a very simple demonstration .
 There was nothing whatsoever unusual about the shadow under Oswald’s nose, says historian . Oswald's shadow was not unusual, he says . Oswald was the only person to have seen a shadow under his nose .
 The photographic panel tackled a claim that a faint line visible on one of the photographs (133A) betrayed the point at which Oswald's head had been superimposed onto someone else’s body and chin . The panel also tackled the claim that the faint line on the photograph (133
 The committee’s photographic experts examined the first-generation prints under magnification . While it seems absurd that anyone would join a head to a chin instead of following some natural line in the photograph, they examined the images .
 First, it was apparent that the line was more visible in secondand third-generation prints than in first-gen prints, owing to a buildup in contrast .
 As contrast builds in successive copies, the light areas grow lighter, the dark areas darker . The contrast builds as contrast builds on successive copies .
 The line proved not to be photographic at all . It was much finer and more continuous than the photograph’s grain would have allowed . Second, the line proved to be more continuous .
 It loops down from the ear, crossed the chin, looped down again, and then back up to the ear . It loops around the chin and forms a continuous loop . It looped from ear to chin, crossed chin, and again to ear .
 The panel determined that the “line” was, in fact, the edge of a water spot . It was caused by a fine deposit of minerals left on the negative . The panel ruled that the line was actually a line .
 Other such lines were discernible all over the photo, including on the shirt and on the butt of the rifle .
 What looks like the lower edge of Oswald’s chin is simply where the shadow cast by the sun begins . Oswald's lower edge is simply the shadow of the sun .
 The lower part of the chin, with the cleft, is in such heavy shadow that it is virtually invisible . It is in the shadow of the lower area of the face, which is almost completely invisible .
 Both the negative and the prints were scanned into a computer and digitized, which allowed the images to be seen with artificially enhanced contrast . The images were analyzed with regard to the structure of the grain .
 No significant variations, as would be expected from composite photos, were found .
 Prints of varying density made from the single recovered negative revealed a great deal of detail in the shadows that had been invisible before, including individual leaves of the bushes and their shadows . Even the detail on a newspaper lying on the ground was revealed .
 Severely underexposed prints made by the panel revealed detail in the highlights that had been washed out in normally exposed prints . The panel was created by a panel of experts in the U.S.
 An unexpected dividend of the backyard photographs came with the camera moving slightly from shot to shot . The panel found the camera had been moved slightly between shot and shot .
 The panel determined this fact by comparing the distance between a foreground fence post and background fence pickets, as well as a background door, seen in each photo .
 Marina Oswald testified that the photos had been taken with a handheld camera . This indicated that the three backgrounds were not identical, as some critics have claimed .
 Stereoscopic photos can be viewed as a stereoscopic pair, giving a powerful illusion of three dimensions . Further, and more significant, it allowed any two of the photos to be viewed together .
 Any retouching of either photo would have revealed itself by destroying the illusion of depth in that area of the photograph, says McCamy . This in itself, asserted McCamy, was an insurmountable argument against fakery .
 If the background had merely been rephotographed, as Jack White and other critics charged, the image would look no different under stereo viewing than it did to the naked eye, quite two-dimensional . The background would have been re-photographed .
 In stereo it was possible to see that a bush in the background had very few leaves . In stereo, the perception of depth made it easy to distinguish the real leaves from their own shadows behind them .
 In its final report, the HSCA photographic panel went well beyond what critics had even considered on the issue of fake photos . The panel's final report went beyond what the critics had considered .
 The panel discovered shadows visible in the photographs could be used to determine the sequence in which the photos were taken . For instance, shadows visible from the photographs can be used in the sequence of photos .
 Three linear shadows cast by telephone or power lines lying outside the visible area of the images fell across a post in the background .
 As the sun moves across the sky, the three parallel shadows moved across the knot, clearly indicating that the shots were actually taken in reverse order to their exhibit numbers . Presumably there could have been other photos taken in between (Marina’s testimony doesn’t make clear how
 In the second photo the person held the camera more steadily, but cut Oswald’s feet off at the bottom of the frame . In the other photo, the person holds the camera steady, but the person cuts Oswald's feet off .
 The panel also noted “several practical considerations” that reinforced its conclusion that there was no fakery in the backyard photographs .
 Panel: FBI established Oswald would have had both newspapers seen in photographs by March 27 or 28 . Panel says FBI established that Oswald had both of the newspapers by that time . Panel: Oswald would've had both papers seen in the photographs by that date by March 28 or 29 .
 On April 5, Oswald autographed the print George and Jeanne de Mohrenschildt found among their belongings . He was fired from the photo lab where he worked and where he had access to a darkroom .
 The panel determined that the film used to produce the print, as well as the print itself, was probably developed and processed by an amateur . The panel also determined the film was likely developed by an amateur .
 The time period within which the fakes would have to have been created was unthinkably short, around ten days . Oswald signed a fake photo of himself, even if the photos were sophisticated and clever fakes .
 Counterfeiters would have had to have gotten access to Oswald’s rifle, his pistol, his newspapers, and the backyard within this short period of time . The panel considered to be “unlikely”—a grand understatement .
 At the time the HSCA examined the de Mohrenschildt print, additional handwritten notations had been added to the back of the photo . At the . time the photo was taken, additional notations were added .
 Some of the letters were formed in a way uncharacteristic for her, she said . But, on second thought, she realized that some of them were formed uncharacteristically for her .
 She said it seemed to be more like something from a foreigner unfamiliar with Russian might have written . In fact, she said, it was more like a Russian novel .
 Joseph R McNally, one of the committee’s three handwriting experts, confirmed that impression . Joseph R. McNally said he was impressed by the handwriting of the president .
 McNally thought the person who wrote over it was probably not really conversant with the Cyrillic alphabet . McNally said he thought it was a mistake to write over .
 "The overwriting was also slow, hesitant, very uncertain, almost certainly tracing," says the author .
 One of the two experts Groden was apparently referring to, Malcolm Thompson, later recanted his position . Thompson later said he agreed with the conclusion of the HSCA’s photographic panel .
 Pickard admitted he made no scientific analysis of the photographs before offering his position of fakery . Pickard, admitted that he did not analyze the photographs in advance .
 David Lifton is accused of supplying plaintiffs with derogatory information against Groden . Lifton was a spectator in the courtroom and accused of providing the plaintiffs derogatory information . The sideshow involved another prominent assassination conspiracy figure, Lifton .
 Marina told the FBI that although she saw the rifle in her home in Dallas and New Orleans, to her best recollection she never saw Lee cleaning the rifle or holding it in her presence in New Orleans . On December 16, 1963, Marina said she saw Lee's rifle in both Dallas and
 She said Oswald stayed home when he was not working in New Orleans . She said she didn’t think Oswald ever went out and practiced firing the rifle . Oswald didn't think he went out to fire the rifle because he stayed home .
 When he did go out, she did not see him take the rifle . He did not have any ammunition for the rifle in either New Orleans or Dallas and never spoke of buying any .
 Marina: "I cannot describe that in greater detail. I cannot describe it more fully" Marina says she was shocked by her husband's actions in the wake of his arrest .
 "Lee would sit there with the rifle and open and close the bolt and clean it," says author . "I can only say that Lee would ... sit there and clean the rifle," he says .
 "I don’t know exactly how he practiced, because I was in the house, I was busy. I don't know exactly ... how he practised," he said. "I was busy," he added .
 The open end of the folded bag was on top, the open end facing the west and almost touching an iron pipe, one of two pipes adjacent to the south wall .
 The pin and spring would not be on the exterior of the weapon and, hence, would not leave oil residue on the interior of the paper bag . The spring would also be placed on the outside of the gun and not on the inside of the bag .
 The FBI only says that as of the date of the report, August 20, 1964 , the weapon was well-oiled . The FBI says that in 1964, the weapon had been well-armed and well-working .
 FBI report referred to the “present” well-oiled condition of the weapon . FBI report refers to ‘present’ well-Oiled’ condition of weapon .
 The Army test-fired the weapon forty-seven times at some time before March 31, 1964, the date Ronald Simmons, chief of the Weapons Evaluation Branch of the Department of the Army, testified .
 Two nearly identically worded FBI documents, found by a researcher at the National Archives, offer opposite conclusions on the source of the paper Oswald allegedly used to construct the bag . White reported that two nearly identical FBI documents offer two opposite conclusions .
 Paper samples obtained from Depository shipping area on November 22 were found to have the same observable characteristics as the brown paper bag recovered from the sixth-floor sniper’s nest . One version of this article stated that paper samples obtained in the shipping area had the same .
 Warren Commission general counsel J Lee Rankin asked FBI Director J Edgar Hoover to settle the two ostensibly contradictory FBI reports . In a March 12, 1964, letter, Rankin wrote to Hoover asking for a resolution of the reports .
 The samples obtained by the FBI in December did not match the characteristics of the paper bag found on the day of the shooting . Consequently, the samples obtained in December were not matched with the characteristics found on that day . The samples were obtained in the December case, FBI says .
 The second report, dated January 13, 1964, related to samples taken from the Depository on November 22, the day of the assassination . The report was dated January 12, 1964 .
 Paper bag found on sixth floor could have been made from materials available at the Depository . Hoover noted that the paper bag did not contain any watermarks or other significant, unique, identifying features .
 FBI agents procured samples of packing tape from Klein’s Sporting Goods in Chicago for comparison purposes . FBI agents looked at the possibility that the paper bag had been shipped with the rifle .
 The Depository exhausted a roll of paper around every four working days a month (4 H 96; CE 1965, 23 H 816; but see WR, 136, which says every three working days) Since samples taken from the Depository shipping room on the day of the assassination matched
 In 1996, conspiracy authors Ray and Mary La Fontaine congratulated themselves on their discovery of photographs of curtain rods found in 1993 among newly released files of the Dallas police . The curtain rods were found among files of Dallas police files .
 The La Fontaines asked Day to compare the clearest print visible in the photo with a photo of Oswald’s right thumbprint . The print did not appear to belong to Oswald, but Day could not conclusively rule out Oswald .
 The authors then reportedly had three other fingerprint experts from other cities examine the print, with equally inconclusive results . The authors reportedly tried to find a fingerprint expert in the same city .
 Paine was questioned at her home by the Commission’s assistant counsel Albert Jenner in the presence of Secret Service agent John J Howlett on the night of March 23,1964 . Paine is believed to have been a member of the Royal Family .
 Paine took Jenner and Howlett into her garage, where she pointed out two curtain rods that she had in storage and which she had testified about the previous week . Jenner, Howlett and Paine were in the audience at Paine's home .
 The La Fontaines never mentioned the fact that the “report signed by Carl Day” was a follow-up to this meeting with Mrs. LaFontaines .
 The curtain rods were returned to Howlett on March 26,1964 .
 The submission form appears to show the specimens arriving on the morning of March 15,1964—an impossibility under the circumstances . The remainder of the information relates precisely to the events surrounding the curtain rods recovered from Mrs. Smith's home .
 Linnie Mae Randle first saw Oswald with the package from her kitchen window . Randle described the package as a “heavy brown bag, heavier than a grocery bag” that was “more bulky” toward the bottom than it was on the top .
 The bag found in the Depository was actually 38 inches in length, while the 40 1 /5-inch rifle, disassembled, measured 34 4 /s inches . She also thought the bag might have been about 27 to 28 inches long .
 Randle recalled that the bag she saw Oswald with was around the same width . When shown the bag found beneath the sixth-floor window, Randle said it was the size of the bag Oswald was carrying .
 He showed agents of the FBI how much space on the backseat of his car the package occupied, and they measured the length at 27 inches . The package was found in the back seat of the car .
 Oswald's package might have been an inch or two narrower than the dimensions of the actual bag found on the sixth floor . He also thought Oswald’s package may have been smaller than the size of the real bag .
 The bag “could have been the sack or package” he saw in Oswald’s possession but he did not feel he was “in a position to definitely state” it was . However, he added that the bag ‘could have’ been the bag
 The Warren Commission concluded Frazier and Randle probably erred in their recollections of the length of the bag . The two had done so, and it was understandable the two had erred .
 Frazier and his sister were the only two people who saw Oswald with the package . Neither Frazier nor his sister suspected that Oswald's package was of any significance .
 Frazier caught only a glimpse of the package on the backseat as he got behind the wheel of his car . Frazier caught the package while he was driving .
 Oswald's hand, arm, and shoulder were obscured by the package as he carried it . Oswald carried the package during the walk, which was partly obscured by his hand and shoulder .
 Oswald carried the bag with one end tucked up under his right armpit and the opposite end, presumably the butt of the rifle, cradled in his right hand . Oswald's statements have focused on his statements that Oswald carried a bag with the other end tucked under his armp
 Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano couldn’t possibly have been carried in this manner . As they point out, they say it was carried in the manner of Oswald's .
 Even when disassembled, the rifle was nearly 35 inches long, the Warren Commission conceded (apparently in view of Oswald’s height) that “the disassembled rifle was too long to be carried”
 Frazier's statements that the rifle was tucked under Oswald's armpit is hardly as definitive as critics claim . Yet, Frazier’s statements that Oswald’�s . rifle was . tucked under the armpits are hardly definitive as the critics say .
 Frazier’s description of how Oswald carried the rifle was consistent in all of his statements to investigators to investigators . It was clearly inferable from his Warren Commission testimony that this was only an assumption on his part .
 Frazier told the Warren Commission that “I couldn’t see much of the bag from him walking in front of me. Just as importantly, Frazier said he didn't see the bag’s contents . Frazier says he couldn't see much from the bag .
 We don't know, for sure, how Oswald was carrying the rifle in front of his body, which Frazier could not see . So we don’t even know how Oswald carried the rifle .
 We may never know the precise way Oswald carried the package into the Depository Building that morning . We are assured by all of the evidence that he did so, including the fact that curtain rods were not in the bag .
 As the Warren Commission concluded in 1964, all of this hard, physical evidence overwhelmingly outweighs Frazier’s tentative memory and description . The Warren Commission concludes in 1964 that all of Frazier's memory and descriptions were accurate .
 Frazier and his sister gave a description of the bag they found in the sniper’s nest . The bag matched the description of a bag found in a sniper's nest, Frazier and sister said .
 Michael Paine saw the blanket that enveloped the rifle several times on the garage floor of the Paines’ home . The blanket was found in the garage of the home of the painters .
 He had the impression it contained some type of camping equipment . He even moved it and had it moved it .
 We don’t know if at this point in time Oswald had disassembled his rifle . Oswald's rifle was found in the trunk of his trunk .
 The sniper's gun was found in the sniper's nest, but it wasn't wrapped in a brown paper bag . The bag was found inside the sniper’s nest, police say .
 Warren Commission counsel asked Paine to indicate on a desktop an estimate of the length of the package he had guessed was about thirty inches long . Paine indicated the length was about 30 inches long, the length Paine said was measured by Warren Commission Counsel .
 Michael's friend, Raymond Krystinik, estimated with his hands, the length of the bag that Paine had indicated with hands around four months earlier . Day subsequently took five days .
 Warren Commission counsel said Krystinik’s hands were spread approximately 27 inches apart . Warren Commission Counsel said that Krystins' hands were between 27 and 27 inches .
 Oswald’s prints on his rifle must have been ‘fresh’ because it is unlikely that they would have lasted very long on the trigger housing's smooth, oily, metal surface . There is a difference of opinion among experts as to whether the age of fingerprints can be determined
 Latona’s opinion of the age of a print cannot be based on its appearance, Latona says . Latona: In Latona's opinion, the age can be based upon its appearance .
 The agent thought that Day must have found the palm print after the rifle was returned to Dallas on November 24, because if Day saw it before, as he claimed, the agent was envisioning Hoover going into orbit . Hoover “going into orbit” when he found out the FBI
 After Day explained what happened, he felt it got the FBI off the hook . After explaining what happened to Day, he said he felt the FBI was off the loose .
 Critics charge that the palm print was created by carrying the rifle to the morgue and wrapping Oswald’s dead hand around the rifle barrel . Oswald's dead hand was wrapped around the barrel of the rifle .
 Oliver Stone included a scene in his movie JFK that depicts just such an event . The scene was shown in JFK .
 Richard Harrison Jr. says his father had told him everything about his participation in the investigation of Kennedy’s murder . Harrison's son, Richard Harrison, Jr., a Dallas lawyer, says he has never been told about the allegations .
 When I finally found Williams, he told me he had never met Mack, the story was not true . Williams had never gone to the funeral home where Oswald was, he said . Williams said he never went to Oswald's funeral home .
 When I called Mack back with this information, he said he must have been wrong about the name, J Doyle Williams, but he said some FBI agent definitely told him this . Mack said he didn't know who it was if it wasn't Williams .
 Police often go to the morgue to get a fingerprint or palm print exemplar from a dead person . Mack says it's common for police to go to morgue for a fingerprint .
 A decedent's skin was peeled off his palm to bring it back to his office . The skin was removed from the palm of a deceased person to bring back to their office .
 Gun or knife (or club, bottle, etc.) out to the morgue . But they don’t take the gun or knife out to a morgue. It's not a gun .
 The whole purpose of going to the morgue is to get a fingerprint or palm print exemplar to see if it matches up with the latent they already have on the gun or knife . They have a latent fingerprint or . palm print on the . gun or . knife and the whole purpose
 "There would be no conceivable reason to take the gun or knife out to the morgue other than to frame the dead man by putting his prints on it," he says . The man's prints would be placed on the gun and knife .
 Mack said it was over twenty years ago but it was his best recollection . The agent said they took the Carcano to the morgue . Mack said the incident happened over 20 years ago . The Carcano was taken to a morgue at the time .
 Oswald, as we know, was shot by Jack Ruby at around 11:20m. on Sunday, November 24, 1963 . Oswald was declared dead at Parkland Hospital that afternoon at 1:07m. Oswald was pronounced dead at 1.07m .
 After autopsy at Parkland Hospital, his body was released from Parkland to be transported to Miller Funeral Home in Fort Worth . It remained throughout the night and next day until its burial at a Fort Worth cemetery around 4:00m. on Monday, November 25 .
 The FBI took possession of Oswald’s Carcano rifle at 11:45m. on Friday, November 22, 1963 . Oswald's rifle was taken by the FBI at the time of the shooting .
 It was then flown back east to the FBI lab that night, and examined at the lab on Saturday morning, November 23 .
 FBI probably took Oswald's prints at Miller Funeral Home on the morning of November 25, 1963 . No FBI report indicates it, but FBI probably did, in fact, take Oswald’s prints at the funeral home .
 It appears the FBI itself did not have its own set of Oswald’s prints, and during this period immediately following the assassination, it is well known that each of the various law enforcement agencies was trying to shift blame for the assassination away from itself .
 fingerprint cards are reproduced in the Warren Commission volumes on Oswald, indicating prints were taken of him on November 25, 1963, after he died . No block on the cards indicates where they were taken, but no block indicates where .
 Funeral director at Miller Funeral Home says FBI took Oswald's prints at the morgue . Paul Groody says he was there at the time of the July 29, 1980, shooting .
 I was not in the room at the time, but I had to clean up his fingers after they got through fingerprinting him . "I'm not sure what happened to him, but he had to be fingerprinted," he said .
 "They put black gook on his fingers, and they get it off, so they it up to me to clean his fingers off," says the father-of-one .
 Groody said the fingerprinting took about half an hour and took place between when he completed the embalming at 1:30m. and 5:00 in the morning of November 25 .
 FBI agents apparently took Oswald’s prints, Groody says . Groody: FBI agents took Oswald's prints . The prints were taken from Oswald's book, which was published in 1963 .
 Oliver Stone, of course, never gave his audience any of the above information . Oliver Stone never said anything to his audience .
 Oswald’s palm print on the rifle was planted by law enforcement . Oswald's palm print was planted in Oswald's rifle . Oswald was killed in the June 4, 1918, assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Lifton's theory about the Kennedy assassination is a joke, but I have virtually laughed at his theory . Lifton has been accused of lying about the JFK assassination .
 Lifton is perhaps the most meticulous researcher in the conspiracy community, says Lifton . Lifton has been a prolific researcher for the past decade . He says he has found Lifton to be a meticulous researcher .
 It's the totally unbelievable inferences he has drawn from his research that I have attacked. It’s the totally unfettered inferences that he has ... attacked. He said: ‘I have attacked his 'unbelievable inferences’
 Oswald’s prints were not taken to the funeral home . Oswald's Carcano was not brought to his funeral home, the author says . Oswald was killed in the September 4, 1917, assassination .
 Oswald's Carcano may have gone to the morgue that day, not at night, but later in the morning . Other FBI agents may also have gone there without Oswald’s Carcano with them .
 Many members of the local and national press were there when the two agents arrived . He added that many of them were there at the time .
 He asked about the size of the crime-lab kit he had seen one of the agents carry in .
 No way on earth could anyone have put a rifle or disassembled rifle into that little bag or kit . No way anyone could have put such a weapon in the bag .
 Madland said the sole purpose of going to the morgue was to take photos of Oswald’s left wrist where he cut himself during his suicide attempt in Moscow . Madland: "The only purpose of the trip was to photograph Oswald's left wrist" Madland went to the
 We know from Oswald’s autopsy report that he had a “transverse one and three-quarter inch slightly raised white scar on the volar aspect of the left wrist” that the medical examiner, Dr. Dr. Oswald, wrote . We know that Oswald had a
 Oswald’s prints “may have been taken” but he didn’t think so, Madland says . Madland: Oswald‘s prints may have been . taken’ but he says Oswald”s prints were not taken, he says .
 Jennings told me Oswald’s prints “probably were taken” but he couldn’t remember for sure for sure . Jennings said he was sure the prints were taken, but he said he could not be sure if they were .
 We don’t know if Groody and Mosely were talking about the same FBI agents . Groody may have forgotten the time of day when the agents were at the morgue .
 Stone: There is absolutely no evidence to support what Oliver Stone showed his audience . Stone showed a man, presumably an FBI agent, putting Oswald’s palm print on his rifle at the morgue .
 Dallas deputy sheriff Luke Mooney, who discovered the shells, suggested in 1964 that Captain Fritz had picked the shells up before crime-lab personnel arrived . Even though Craig’s version of events doesn’t add up to planted evidence, Dallas sheriff says Captain Fritz picked up the
 Captain Fritz, a thirty-year veteran and highly regarded leader of the Homicide and Robbery Bureau, would be foolish enough to move evidence at a crime scene, in full view of everyone, before photographs had been taken .
 I doubt Fritz would have even done that before photographs were taken of the crime scene, but even if he did that we can assume he put the shell back in the same place he had picked it up from . The shell was found on the scene of the murder of Fritz's wife,
 In later years, WFAA-TV cameraman Tom Alyea, who was trapped inside the Depository when police sealed it, made a similar claim .
 Fritz picked up all three shells and held them in his hand while Alyea filmed them . Alyea said that Fritz picked them up and held the shells for a minute . Fritz then picked up the shells and took them to the ground . Fritz was filmed by Alyea and Alyea .
 Much of Alyea’s film was broadcast unedited over WFAA-TV the weekend of the assassination . But this part of the fdm Alyea claims he shot has never surfaced .
 The disturbance of a crime scene before the crime-lab people arrive is unfortunately almost as common as bad debt . In any event if he in fact saw Fritz pick up the shells it probably was after the crime scene photos had been taken .
 In the Manson murder case, the first officer arriving at the murder scene saw horn-rimmed glasses near two trunks in the living room of actress Sharon Tate, one of the victims . The glasses were found in the home of Sharon Tate .
 The glasses somehow ended up on top of a desk . By the time the police arrived, the glasses had been found, they had fallen out of control . The glasses were later found on a desk in Los Angeles .
 Two pieces of gun grip, first seen near the entryway, ended up under a chair in the living room . Police say they found the gun grip in the home .
 Los Angeles Police Department report: "They were apparently kicked under the chair by one of the original officers on the scene" Police say they were kicked under a chair by an original officer .
 Young, uniformed officers are virtually always the first members of a police department to arrive at the scene of a crime scene . Not by very experienced plainclothes detectives or their superiors, like Captain Fritz .
 Dallas police photographer: "They hadn't found anything" yet . He says he was on sixth floor when he arrived on the sixth floor of the building . The Dallas police officer says he is still searching the scene .
 Conspiracy author Noel Twyman lifted the allegation of planted shells to new levels in his 1997 book Bloody Treason . He argued that only two empty shells were found, not three, proving that at least one bullet had been fired from somewhere other than the sniper’s nest .
 Twyman pointed to a Dallas police document published in the Warren Commission volumes which listed a number of items that were turned over to the FBI laboratory on the night of November 22 . He said the document was published in Dallas police documents .
 Twyman acknowledged that he originally intended to ignore the handwritten change since it might be explained by a simple correction of an “honest mistake” but changed his mind when another researcher discovered more “evidence” allegedly supporting his theory . The change might have been explained by
 The evidence had been “buried and suppressed in the National Archives under the guise of national security,” says Twyman . The evidence consisted of two negatives (along with eight prints) showing only two 6.5-millimeter shell casings .
 The negatives and photographs were stuffed into an envelope and signed by FBI special agent J Doyle Williams . They were apparently taken by the bureau as part of the documentation of the evidence that was submitted to them by the Dallas police .
 This is a favorite theme of conspiracy theorists—documents and photographs “buried” in the National Archives or in the Warren Commission’s twenty-six volumes of hearings and exhibits . Twyman also noted that the FBI lab report on the shells, returned to This
 If we’re to believe the theorists, it apparently never crossed the minds of the alleged conspirators who killed Kennedy to simply get rid of the evidence that could convict them . The theorists say it never crossed their minds to simply kill Kennedy .
 Unlike nearly all ordinary conspirators, Kennedy’s killers intentionally and knowingly left evidence behind in the archives and the Warren Commission volumes that could expose them . Only the conspiracists are smart and industrious enough to uncover the evidence that only they can uncover .
 Oswald’s wallet, identification, and notebook were retained by Captain Fritz, who was in charge of the investigation at this point . The third shell was retained by Fritz, "to be used for comparison tests"
 Fritz kept the shell in his desk drawer until the early morning hours of November 27, when it was turned over to FBI agent James P Hosty Jr. Fritz kept it in the drawer until he turned it over to Hosty .
 According to Twyman, the Warren Commission published photographic proof of the cover-up . The Warren Commission, in its absent-mindedness, published photographic evidence, he says . According to the author, this is proof that had been glossed over by conspiracy theorists .
 Two Dallas police photos taken of spent hulls lying in sniper's nest on November 22 . Both photos are multigenerational prints of two Dallas police photographs taken .
 The conspirators, you see, had attempted to conceal the fact that there were only two empty cartridge cases or shells and one live round of ammunition . They had darkened the area around the live round, shell “A,” to make it look like a third shell .
 Both the authentic photo and the forged photo slipped through to the Commission, he writes .
 In Twyman’s fuzzy, multigenerational version of the police photograph, it looked like a bullet sticking out of the end of the empty cartridge case . In the fuzzy version of this photo, the bullet looked like it had been sticking out .
 In the end, Twyman’s “powerful and persuasive” proof of fabricated and planted evidence is nothing more than proof of his poor research on this issue . By and large I found him to be a better researcher than most conspiracy authors and theorists .
 Two original prints of this negative were made from this negative, numbered 91001/390 and 91 -001/355 . New negatives were made of these two prints from these two negatives .
 Studebaker doesn’t say counsel is wrong, only answering, “We have probably got one down there I can get you that is a lot better print than that’s possible,” he says . Studebakers: “I can get one down
 Warren Commission critic and author Josiah Thompson focused in on one of the three shells, one that had a dent on its mouth . Thompson made another allegation suggesting there was something phony about the three cartridge cases left behind in the sniper’s nest .
 Thompson points out that one of these marks was identified as having come from the magazine follower (the magazine follower) There is a slight possible discrepancy that I am unable to resolve . Thompson says one of the marks is from the follower .
 Studebaker’s photo being from the top looking down, and Dillard’‘s photos from the bottom looking up. One explanation may be that the angles of the subject photos are completely different .
 All three empty cartridges showed evidence that they had been loaded into and extracted from the chamber of a weapon more than once, the letter says . Yet this same letter makes clear that all three empty . cartridges showed . evidence that . they had . been loaded . into and out of the chamber
 Thompson's suggestion that the dented shell hadn’t been fired in or ejected from Oswald’s rifle ignores an incontrovertible fact, he says . Thompson: The shell was fired in, ejected from the rifle, but it was fired out of the rifle .
 All three cartridge cases were proved to have been fired in Oswald’s rifle to the exclusion of all other rifles in the world . Oswald's rifle was the only one of the world's most .
 Oswald’s Carcano was made by Oswald's rifle, the letter said . The letter said that marks from the magazine follower and chamber on one of the cartridge cases were produced by the rifle . The magazine follower marks on a second cartridge case were also produced by Oswald .
 The impressions on the firing pin are left on the primer, located on the base of the cartridge case, when the pin strikes the primer . The impressions are left in the primer on the gun's firing pin .
 When the trigger is pulled and the firing pin strikes the primer, this ignites the mixture, which in turn ignites a propellant powder in the cartridge . The firing pin hits the primer and the mixture ignites when the gun is pulled .
 The extreme gas pressure of the powder pushes the bullet through the barrel and at the same time pushes the cartridge case rearward against the bolt face . The bolt face impressions on the base of the case are as individual and unique as a fingerprint .
 Only one cartridge case had bolt face markings on it that could definitely connect it to the bolt of Oswald’s Carcano . But seizing on the fact that only one of the other two cartridge cases did not come from Oswald's rifle is a non sequitur .
 Thompson is one of the most substantive and objective minds ever produced by the conspiracy community . He knows that several markings other than those from the bolt face of a rifle can prove that an empty cartridge is connected to a subject rifle .
 Three empty cartridges found on the sixth floor were not fired in Oswald’s Carcano, says Hoover . Hoover's letter only addressed itself specifically to the Commission's request, which was to “determine if had been loaded into and extractedfrom rifle more than once ”
 Hoover’s letter and Frazier's testimony are not conflict between them . Hoover's letter was written by Frazier and Hoover's testimony . Frazier testified against Hoover in a federal court hearing .
 A cartridge fired in a weapon, by definition, has to extract and eject its case from the weapon . And to repeat, a . definition, a cartridge fired . in a . weapon,  has to eject and extract the case from a weapon .
 Three shells found beneath the sixthfloor window were fired in and extracted from Oswald’s Carcano rifle . The totality of evidence (including the fact that the vast majority of witnesses in Dealey Plaza heard three shots being fired) shows that the shells were fired from Oswald's Carcano
 It apparently did not occur to Thompson that the cartridge might have been dented while being ejected from the rifle . Thompson apparently didn't seem to realize that the bullet might have dented .
 Panel of specialists and scientists said that “the four smaller fragments of organic material were determined on microscopic examination to consist of human skin and tissue, but it was not possible to establish the precise body area of origin .
 Blood traces that must have been on it were removed by someone early on at the Dallas crime lab or elsewhere as a matter of course . My only guess is that the blood traces were removed from it early on .
 In all the evidence bullets I handled in court in murder cases during my prosecutorial career, none had any visible blood on them . None of the bullets in the murder cases were bloody, says former prosecutor .
 Only reference in the Warren Commission volumes to this issue was in the questioning of FBI firearms expert Robert Frazier by Commission counsel Melvin Eisenberg .
 Two additional FBI experts in the field of firearms identification, Cortlandt Cunningham and Charles L Killion, analyzed all the bullet evidence in this case . The case is the result of an ongoing investigation by the FBI .
 Frazier and Nicol did not testify before the Warren Commission . Their findings were the same as those of Frazier and N. Nicol .
 The judge proceeded to exclude the Carcano from evidence . The prosecution had built its case around the weapon, the prosecution felt it had no other credible case against Oswald . Neither side ever made a final argument .
 Tomlinson said he found a gurney (a stretcher on wheels) in the elevator at the time of the attack . He testified before the Warren Commission in 1964 .
 He pulled it out and pushed it against the south wall, opposite the elevator doors, next to another gurney that was already blocking the entrance to a men’s restroom .
 At about 1:20m., after several trips on the elevator, Tomlinson came down in the elevator from the second floor and noticed that the stretcher blocking the restroom door had been pushed out into the narrow corridor . The stretcher was pushed out by someone who had used the
 To keep the hallway clear, Tomlinson stepped off the elevator and pushed the stretcher back against the wall . The stretcher was placed on a stretcher in the hallway .
 He walked over and saw a bullet lying between the pad and the rim on the top of the stretcher . The bullet was lying in the pad between the rim and the pad on top of a stretcher.
 The second agent reportedly remained stationed outside the elevator on the emergency-room level .
 Pool recognized Darrell C Tomlinson, whom he knew, operating the elevator . Pool recognized him as a man in the elevator at the end of the night . Pool was able to get back to the elevator after the incident .
 Pool said that there was only one stretcher outside the elevator and that only one trip was made up in the elevator prior to the discovery of the bullet . Pool said the bullet was found in an elevator elevator .
 Pool heard an object fall, bent over to pick it up, and discovered a bullet . Pool judged the bullet to be 6 millimeters in diameter, bronze, long, pointed, and smooth . Pool heard a bullet fall and found it in a stretcher .
 Pool was reportedly within ten feet when Pool discovered the bullet . A Secret Service agent was reportedly in the area at the time of the discovery . Pool was shot in the head with a bullet, Pool said .
 Pool gave the bullet to Tomlinson, asking him not to mention his name to anyone . Pool then gave him the bullet and asked him to keep his name from talking to anyone else .
 The bullet was discovered on or near a stretcher whose origin remains a little vague . In both cases, the bullet was found near the victim's head . The origin of the bullet is not clear .
 Pool never explained why he waited 14 years to come forward . Pool never said why he didn't come forward until now . Pool has never been charged with sexual assault .
 Pool’s name doesn’t appear in any Secret Service report . Pool was a ‘Secret Service agent’ who worked for the Secret Service .
 Wright says he was unable to get an FBI or Secret Service agent interested enough to take a look at the spent slug . Wright returned to the elevator vestibule, picked up the bullet, and put it in his pocket .
 The two large fragments for the Warren Commission had no trouble tying them to Oswald’s rifle . To back this up he cites the 1952 book Modern Criminal Investigation (Lane, Rush to Judgment ,424 footnote 70)
 Pool recalled only one trip being made in the elevator prior to discovering the bullet . That trip involved taking a Secret Service agent to the second or third floor, Pool said .
 Pool claimed he discovered the bullet ten feet from a Secret Service agent, yet he says Tomlinson had to go “around the corner” to find someone to give it to . Pool also claimed he found the bullet 10 feet away from the agent . Pool claimed Pool discovered the
 Alfred G Olivier, Sturdivan’s superior, conducted the tests at the Edgewood Arsenal in 1964, did not go into the matter of the decreasing velocity of the bullet as it traversed Connally’�s body . Olivier did with respect to Kennedy’
 The exit velocity from the simulation of Kennedy’s body averaged 1,772 to 1,798 feet per second, depending on the substance through which the bullets passed . Exact velocity of the simulation was 1,800 feet persecond .
 In 1964, at the request of the Warren Commission, an extensive series of tests were conducted by the U.S. Army Chemical Research and Development Laboratories at Edgewood Arsenal .
 Kennedy and Connally were shot in the head by a single bullet, according to a report . The report concluded that it was probable that one bullet caused all the injuries .
 The bullet that was fired through the carcass of a goat broke one rib of the goat in simulation of Connally’s rib injury . It was “flattened” a little more than the bullet that actually hit Connally .
 This is the first thing that happens when a bullet begins to deform . Larry Sturdivan explained to the HSCA that this is what happens to a bullet . The bullet deformity is caused by a bullet hitting a bullet in a bullet hole .
 The side and front of the damaged test skull was damaged in the test skull . Drs. J. E. Smith and his colleagues say the damage was so severe that the skull was not damaged .
 Gunman Monty Lutz fired a 6.5-millimeter Mannlicher-Carcano Western Cartridge bullet through a block of gelatin with a three-quarter-inch block of plywood behind the gelatin .
 The recovered bullet, with little damage to it, was shown to the jury in London . The bullet was recovered from the scene of the shooting .
 Eric Nelson’s Creative Differences production company in Studio City, California, on a project funded by the Discovery Channel . An Adelaide, Australia, company called Anatomical Surrogate Technologies to conduct the experiment .
 The company constructed surrogate torsos with the same builds as Kennedy and Connally . They sat them in the same way they were sitting, per the Zapruder film, at frame 223 .
 The actual bullet only glanced off one of Connally’s ribs, but the test bullet struck and broke two of his surrogate ribs . The bullet traveled sideways at the time it broke both ribs, traveling sideways .
 The bullet slowed down to the point where after hitting Connally's surrogate wrist it only had enough energy to bounce off the governor’s surrogate thigh, with no penetration at all .
 Adelaide ballistics expert: "One rifle with one shot, striking the back of Kennedy up in the shoulder there, easily, comfortably was capable of the seven individual wounds" of Kennedy and Connally .
 Letter from Dr. Chad Zimmerman to author dated April 30, 2005, unnumberedll .
 The Commission's conclusion that the bullet had come from the governor’s stretcher was based more on common sense than established fact . The Commission concluded the bullet came from a bullet that hit the governor's stretcher .
 His best recollection was that it was on the stretcher that was already in the corridor outside the elevator, not the Connally stretcher he took off the elevator . He says he took it off Connally's stretcher, but it was already on a stretcher .
 We know that the stretcher Tomlinson pulled from the elevator was the one used by Connally . The stretcher was used in Connally's death .
 Two stretchers wheeled out to the limousine . Upon arrival at the hospital, two stretchers were wheeled into the limo .
 The bullet was fired in Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano rifle to the exclusion of all other weapons . Critics complained that no one could say for sure how the bullet ended up on a stretcher at Parkland Hospital .
 Author Josiah Thompson wrote in his 1967 book Six Seconds in Dallas that the bullet was “very likely found on a stretcher used for a cut and bleeding twoand-one-half-year-old child’s . Ronald Fuller, who was admitted to Parkland�
 Fuller was treated briefly on a stretcher in a hallway near the nurses’ station before being carried into Major Medicine for further attention . Fuller was bleeding profusely from a fall and was carried into the hospital .
 Whether Fuller’s bloodied stretcher was rolled 30 feet into the elevator corridor, where Tomlinson might have encountered it, is unknown .
 Thompson doesn't address the issue of why a 6.5millimeter Mannlicher-Carcano bullet would have any conceivable reason for ending up on the stretcher of an infant . The bullet was the exact type used to kill Kennedy and injure Connally . Thompson doesn’t
 Thompson doesn't ask himself why any kind of bullet would end up on the child’s stretcher when the child wasn’t shot . Thompson wants us to believe that the sophisticated framers of Oswald goofed on a rather mundane duty, planting the bullet on the wrong stret
 The whole issue of what stretcher the bullet was found on, Connally's or some unknown person’s, is a giant nonissue . The bullet was discovered on a stretcher Connally was on .
 We know that the bullet was fired from Oswald’s Carcano rifle, and we know it wasn’t found on Kennedy’S stretcher . We know it had to have been found on Connally's stretcher, so it must have been Connally’
 It was found on Connally’s stretcher is one of the few points in the Kennedy assassination that virtually everyone agrees on . Even most conspiracy theorists (with a shaky dissent from Josiah Thompson), agree on .
 The anti-conspiracy theorists believe the bullet ended up on Connally’s stretcher after striking him . The conspiracy theorists claim it was planted on the stretcher by the conspirators who killed Kennedy .
 In November 1973, Nichols, who was doing research at the National Archives, ran across Hoover’s letter, describing the inconclusive results of the 1964 neutron activation analysis test, and forwarded it to Guinn .
 Two scientists filed a Freedom of Information Act request in an attempt to get the numerical data behind the FBI’s tests . The two scientists then filed a FOIA request to get more information .
 The following year, the Supreme Court upheld a lower court’s decision that denied Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was denied access to the U.S. hospital .
 Dr. Nichols received seventy pages of FBI special agent John Gallagher’s raw data under the Freedom of Information Act . Eventually, he turned the notes over to Dr. John Gallagher .
 Nichols had tested them by firing them in his own Mannlicher-Carcano rifle . He painstakingly assembled over the course of three hundred hours from the parts of thirty other rifles . Nichols had built the perfect instrument for testing the optimum firing characteristics .
 The rifle was stolen from Nichols’s office in 1977 and was never recovered . Valued at over $25,000, it was stolen in 1977 . It was never found .
 One unsuitable specimen was what was left of the lead residue that had been on a section of curbstone cut away from Dealey Plaza which was thought to have been struck by a bullet fragment .
 The FBI scraped the section to get a sample for its spectrographic analysis . The FBI had scraped a section of the section for its analysis .
 Guinn felt that any further scraping would have produced a sample composed mostly of cement . Guinn said there was little hope of identifying a particular bullet .
 The container had once held particles scraped from the inside surface of the limousine windshield, where a bullet fragment had struck . The container was once held some very tiny particles scraping from the windshield .
 The specimen was apparently used up during the FBI’s earlier spectrographic analysis . The specimen had apparently been used up .
 One was a sample of the unfired bullet found in the chamber of Oswald’s rifle . The bullet was found in a chamber of the chamber . Oswald's rifle was found to have been fired .
 Parts per million antimony and silver are within the normal ranges for Mannlicher-Carcano ammunition .
 The other one was the mutilated bullet that had been fired at General Edwin Walker in April 1963, over seven months before the assassination of the president . The other was the bullet that was fired at Gen. Edwin Walker .
 Only two distinct bullets were found in the bullet that hit the victim, Dr. Dr. Michael Lister says . After he had seen from his own results that only two separate bullets were in evidence, he decided to take the bullet .
 Vincent Guinn took another look at the 1964 neutron activation analysis results obtained by FBI agent John Gallagher . Guinn looked at the results of the analysis of neutron activation tests .
 Guinn discovered that they were not as erratic as he had originally thought . Guinn was able to find out that they had not been as erratic in the past .
 Gallagher had been comparing apples with oranges, mixing a wide variety of test conditions together to draw his conclusion instead of focusing on one set of conditions . Gallagher mixed a variety of conditions to draw out his conclusion . Gallagher: "It's not just comparing apples and oranges, it's comparing apples
 When Guinn separated the data by test conditions, the 1964 results fell into the same two distinct bullet groups that Guinn had discovered in 1977 . Guinn: 1964 results fall into same two separate bullet groups .
 Gallagher had gotten the same results as Guinn, but simply hadn’t interpreted them correctly . Gallagher: ‘I’m not going to be surprised by the results,’ he said . Gallagher said the results were the same, but Gallagher had interpreted them incorrectly .
 FBI reported results of its tests as inconclusive due to the wide variety of absolute values obtained each time a sample was tested, Guinn said . Guinn: FBI reported the results of the tests as "inconclusive"
 Guinn: “I wish I could put a number on it, as we often can do, that is, calculate a probability, but we really don’t have the background information to make a numerical calculation in this case.”
 Mannlicher-Carcano bullets have wide composition differences from bullet to bullet lead . Mannlicer-carcano bullets do not find wide variation in composition within individual individual bullets .
 At the London trial, it was obvious that Guinn was just being professionally cautious in testifying on the record only that it was highly improbable or even very unlikely that the Connally wrist fragments came from a bullet other than the stretcher bullet .
 In private conversations, he indicated to me he had no doubt at all that the three fragments came from the stretcher bullet . The three fragments are believed to have been found in the bullet .
 Guinn: There is always a “measurement uncertainty . . and you can’t tell whether real numbers are a little higher or a little lower than that . Guinn went on to explain that there is always an uncertainty .
 NAA ties the tiny fragments from JFK’s brain ... to the large fragment found in the front seat . Since ballistics shows that the front-seat fragment came from Oswald's rifle, the fragment originated in the depository behind Kennedy .
 From the NAA evidence alone, it was now possible to state, with a high degree of probability, that the so-called pristine bullet, the “magic” bullet, had indeed been the bullet that smashed into Governor Connally’s wrist . More significantly, from
 For years, NAA conclusions matching a crime scene bullet with a bullet independently connected to a defendant have been based on the premise that each batch of bullet lead is unique in the concentration of its trace elements .
 If there was a ‘match’ between the crime scene bullet and the bullet independently connected to the defendant, the bullet must have come from the same source and been manufactured at the same time and place . And, therefore, if there is a “match” between the
 If true, the assumption is that when the defendant purchased the bullet that has been independently connected to him, he most likely also purchased, at the same time, the crime scene bullet . It is believed that the bullet was purchased independently of the defendant .
 Emerging empirical evidence seems to support the premise that the premise may not be true, at least not anymore . Guinn in the Kennedy assassination may not even be true anymore .
 The group says bullets from different sources can share trace elements in nearly identical amounts . The group said, as well as the earlier studies, the study found .
 Agents located only two gun shops that sold 6.5-millimeter Mannlicher-Carcano ammunition in Dallas-Irving, Texas, area .
 Oswald's gun shop owners had no recollection of having sold ammunition to Oswald . However, neither gun shop owner had any recollection of selling the ammunition .
 We are not dealing with a situation in the Kennedy case, where the crime scene bullet differs markedly from the bullet connected to the defendant . In that case, we could say they did not have a common origin . We are also dealing with situations where the bullets are not connected to each other
 The stretcher bullet was fired from Oswald’s rifle to the exclusion of all other weapons, Guinn says . Even if the new findings were to render NAA's conclusions invalid, we do know that the stretcher Bullet was fired .
 A Rahn and Larry M Sturdivan wrote a two-part article on NAA that was published in 2004 and is excellent except for one fact . NAA is not a government agency .
 Four chemists, Erik Randich and his colleagues, published in 2002 in Forensic Science International . They remarkably ignored the findings of the metallurgical study by the four .
 Gary Aguilar says that Rahn and Sturdivan could ignore Randich's results and still get their article published in a distinguished scientific journal . Aguilar: Different standards are applied if one is defending the official version of JFK’s death than are applied when one questions it .
 Aguilar: "An observation like this from someone of Aguilar’s stature cannot be automatically dismissed" Aguilar's comments are not automatically dismissed .
 Oswald was at the sniper’s nest window and it was his Carcano rifle that fired the only bullets that hit Kennedy . The evidence is consistent with all the other evidence showing Oswald was in the sniper's nest window .
 Guinn’s separate NAA conclusions are likely to be accurate, he says . This other, independent evidence necessarily increases the likelihood that Guinn's conclusions are accurate .
 Eric Randich and Patrick M Grant acknowledged the above reality in a 2006 article attacking Dr. Randich . Dr. Grant was attacked by Randich for his anti-Semitic views .
 NAA analysis of bullet fragments could be wrong, authors say . NAA: "Stand-alone primary evidence" could be independent of NAA's findings .
 The examination was in the very early stages of NAA when it had not yet been fully developed as a science . Guinn was only part of a team, the examination was conducted in the 1970s when it was in its early stages .
 Randich and Grant, in this JFS article of July 2006, set out to show that the obvious grouping is illusory and that this means that the wrist injury and/or the fatal head wound could have been caused by other bullets . Randich: "This means that this
 Randich and Grant would solemnly declare that since you could not tell the bank robbers apart, it could have been any two people that robbed the bank . Randich: Since you couldn't tell them apart, you could have seen any two bank robbers .
 It's the chance that the lead from a third source could match as well as the other members of the group . Obviously, it isn't how close the two groups of recovered bullet evidence are to each other that matters .
 Randich and Grant ignore the range of antimony content in the population of bullets available to a potential shooter in the early 1960s . For this comparison, one must characterize the range . Randich, Grant and Grant choose to ignore the point .
 The antimony levels in the recovered evidence was far outside the level found in natural lead ores, indicating that the ‘soft’ lead cores inserted into those bullets contained a small quantity of leftover hardened lead . On the other hand, the antimony found in those bullets was far
 Any bullets containing lead from natural ores would have had much smaller quantities of antimony . Any bullets contained lead would have been made with antimony instead of lead .
 The FBI conducted about 2,500 NAA tests for local, state, federal, and even foreign investigations . In 2005, the FBI announced that it would stop conducting the tests in light of criticism of how the results were interpreted in court .
 Critics cling to the belief that the stretcher bullet was planted . Dr. Randich and his coauthors published an article in Forensic Science International in 2002 . Critics have argued that the bullet fragments were removed by the doctor .
 Connally's wrist was operated by Dr. Charles Gregory during his surgery on Connally’s wrist . Dr. Gregory said Connally suffered from complications from his wrist surgery .
 Dr. Vincent Guinn conducted his NAA test on the stretcher . The bullet was planted in Connally’s operating room, or at some later substituted with fragments .
 As you’ll soon see, it would have been virtually impossible to accomplish . Not only is this all a tad too much to believe, but, as you'll soon see it, it's impossible to believe .
 Legally speaking, the actual number of fragments removed from Connally’s body is infused with enough confusion that a responsible court of law might have some difficulty allowing the fragments into evidence .
 The Warren Commission did not nail the issue down, and acknowledged there is “some confusion” from near zero to a few thousand ppm . The select committee seemed to stay away from this one the way the devil stays away from holy water .
 The recovered samples were all in the high range of antimony concentration . This prompted him to state that the recovered samples all were from the same lot, not only from that lot, but for any of the four lots .
 Earlier NAA tests conducted by the FBI showed results virtually identical to Guinn’s . The FBI conducted the tests not disclosed to the Warren Commission .
 The combined weight of the fragments removed from Connally’s body, coupled with the weight of those still inside, adds up to more than the 2 grains missing from the stretcher bullet . The issue, of course, is whether the combined weight added up to the missing grains .
 It is an article of faith among almost all conspiracy theorists that it does add up to more and hence, the Connally wrist fragments did not come from the stretcher bullet, supporting the thesis that it must have been planted . Connally's wrist fragments are believed to have come from a
 Authors, writers, and expert witnesses have been very imprecise in dealing with this problem . Authors and experts have not been able to accurately describe what happened .
 A reconstruction of weights based upon the fragments removed by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . He goes on to say, “A reconstruction . of weights . based upon . fragments removed from the fragments .
 He cites testimony of Dr. Dr. John Sutter from the Warren Commission and the HSCA as his source for this . But he doesn’t cite Warren Commission as a source of this, citing instead the testimony from Dr. Sutter .
 Robert Piziali at the American Bar Association’s mock trial in San Francisco in 1992 . The trial was held at a mock trial at the San Francisco law school .
 There’s no evidence in the Warren Commission volumes that any were removed from any part of his body other than his wrist . There's no evidence that any of the . parts of . his body were removed .
 Dr. Gregory, who performed the surgery on Connally’s wrist, is dead, and the record he left behind to answer this question is contradictory . Gregory is dead . He left behind a record to answer the question: Why did he do it?
 FBI special agent J Doyle Williams reported the following day, after interviews with Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was interviewed by the FBI, but was later found dead .
 Cyril Wecht came to the same conclusion in 1978 after reviewing the FBI reports and the notes of the attending physicians . Cyril H Wecht (Cyril H. Wecht) came to a similar conclusion .
 X-rays indicated the possibility of a small fragment of metal embedded in the left thigh, no surgery was performed to remove it . Gregory told the HSCA staff that although X-ray indicated the . possibility of the possible . possible injury, no operation was performed .
 Dr. Gregory’s recollection of removing only two fragments conflicts, of course, with Dr. Greg . Dr. John Sutter says he removed two fragments from his book .
 The likelihood is that Gregory removed three fragments on November 22, 1963, and five months later in his testimony he forgot the exact number . Gregory removed the fragments five months after he removed them .
 His use of the words “I thought I had retrieved two of them” is compatible with this inference . The words are compatible with the inference that he thought he'd retrieved two .
 Gregory’s testimony of removing two metal fragments could be the result of a simple transposition of fact . Gregory said he only recalled removing two pieces of metal fragments . Gregory's testimony could be a result of an error in fact .
 Gregory simply substituted the number of bone fragments for the amount of metallic fragments he removed . Gregory replaced the bone fragments with the metallic fragments .
 "It's noteworthy that whether he removed two or three or more fragments, Dr. John Sutter removed the fragments," Dr. Sutter says .
 Gregory testified that “they were lead colored, silvery, of that color.” Gregory testified . Gregory testified ‘they were silvery and lead-colored’
 The only part of the stretcher bullet that is missing is the soft lead core protruding from the base of the bullet . The relevance of this, of course, is that we know that we . know that the only part . is that the soft . lead core is missing .
 The HSCA virtually ignored the entire Connally bullet fragment issue . And as indicated, with the exception of NAA, the NAA .
 The committee did say that of the “four lead-like fragments . . . The largest fragment weighed 0.3 grains . The committee says the largest fragment was 0.5 grains .
 A fourth bullet fragment from Connally’s wrist that was lost, we know that its weight was infinitesimal, and would not have any effect on the answer to the question of whether the bullet fragments removed from and remaining in Connally's body exceed in weight the 2
 There is a dissent on this issue of weight, but it does not come from a weighty source . There is no doubt that there is weighty weight in the U.S. politics .
 Audrey Bell, a nurse at Parkland Hospital, has become a conspiracy star of sorts . Bell has addressed pro-conspiracy conventions like the 1991 Dallas Conference on the Assassination of President Kennedy .
 She has become a leading authority for the proposition that the combined weight of the Connally fragments exceeds the weight lost from the stretcher bullet . Conspiracy books frequently quote her telling Anthony Summers in 1978 that “the smallest was the size of the striking end of a match and the largest at
 Gerald Posner writes in Case Closed that Dr. Connally’s bullet fragments did not weigh more than the 2 grains lost from the stretcher bullet . He says the base of the bullet from which lead was lost is not shown in conspiracy books .
 The problem is that at the time she allegedly saw the fragments in 1963 she could not have known about the controversy that would eventually develop, and therefore wouldn't have had any reason to pay any attention to the size of the fragments .
 Fifteen years later she recalls everything very vividly, including the damage to the base of the stretcher bullet . She has become an expert on weights and measurements .
 As indicated earlier, a clear chain of custody or possession of the fragments has never been established . The fragments have never been found .
 The situation is thrown into even greater confusion by what the participants told the FBI in interviews conducted on the day after the assassination . The FBI interviewed participants in interviews on the morning of the shooting .
 Gregory told him he removed a small fragment of metal (singular, not plural) from the governor’s right arm and turned it over to Nurse Audrey Bell . Gregory said he removed the metal fragment from his arm and gave it to Bell .
 Nurse Bell quotes her as telling him that Dr. Williams meant ‘right wrist” when he wrote “right arm” in a follow-up interview the same day . We can assume Williams meant .
 Gregory turned the small metal fragment over to her, and pursuant to instructions from the governor’s office, she in turn gave the fragment to Texas state trooper Bob Nolan, who told Williams that same day that he turned it over to Captain Will Fritz at approximately 7:50m.
 In view of the fact that when the participants themselves are talking (e.g., Dr. Charles Gregory, Audrey Bell, and Bobby Nolan on November 22,1963; see also 7 HSCA 156) Dr. Gregory and Audrey Bell were talking when they were talking .
 The most reasonable conclusion is that when Williams wrote his report, he erroneously wrote “right arm” for right wrist, not “fragment” Williams wrote . Williams wrote not only ‘right arm, but ‘fragments’ for fragments .
 Oswald could not have been convicted in a court of law because the “chain of custody “ of the evidence against him was not strong enough to make the evidence admissible . An argument frequently heard in the conspiracy community is that Oswald's conviction was not admissible in law .
 Conspiracy conspiracists would want to know if Oswald killed Kennedy, not whether he could get off on a legal technicality . The first observation I have to make is that I would think conspiracists like Marrs would primarily want to find out if Oswald shot Kennedy .
 There is no problem with the chain of custody of much of the physical evidence against Oswald, the author says . Oswald's rifle and two large bullet fragments were found in the presidential limousine, he says .
 Exclusion of evidence at a trial because chain of custody is weak is rare . Exclusion is rare, certainly the exception rather than the rule, he says .
 Despite the less-than-thanclear chain of possession, all of the fragments ended up where they were supposed to end up, says CNN.com .
 One may say I am picking and choosing when I cite Bell to support my position, but attack her credibility when her position contravenes mine . Bell is the author of a new book, "Citizen of the World"
 The charge would be without merit since we are comparing two very different types of things . But the charge is without merit, he says, since it's a very different type of thing .
 Bell not only is no authority on weights and measurements, but also did no such calculations . No expertise is needed to know the name of the hospital envelope she put the bullet fragments in, an envelope she probably frequently used and hence was very familiar with .
 There are approximately 35,000 words in the English language . Moreover, there are approximately 35,000 English words in an English language.
 It defies statistical improbability to conclude that the container the Warren Commission and HSCA claim contains the Connally bullet fragments just coincidentally has the very same name as the envelope Bell said she put the bullet fragments in . Bell used three words, and in a particular sequence,
 "We cannot be categorical in our answer, but the available evidence strongly suggests they did not," says CNN.com.com .
 Each fragment is no more than a half millimeter in thickness . The fragments are varying from five-tenths of a millimeter to two millimeters in diameter .
 He told the Warren Commission that “the examination of the wrist both by X-ray and at the time of surgery showed some fragments of metal that make it difficult to believe that the same missile could have caused these two wounds.”
 Gregory estimates they would be weighed in micrograms, a unit of weight equal to one-millionth of a gram, a gram equaling 15,432 grains . Gregory said, “I would estimate that [the] small amount of weight [would] be very small amount
 Removing them could have caused adverse consequences, he said . But removing them, he added, could have led to adverse consequences in the process .
 Only one other bullet fragment was found in Connally’s body that was not removed . Connally was found with a bullet fragment in his body .
 Dr. John K Lattimer, a urologist with an interest in firearms that dates back to his service as a firearms range officer during World War II, secured a bullet just like the stretcher bullet .
 Doctors “compressed sideways in a special vise until its configuration was as close as possible to that of bullet 399’s bullet 399.” The doctors said they had to make the shape of the bullet in a vise in order to get it to fit .
 This required great force because of the high structural density of these bullets, but it did cause the softer lead from the center of the bullet to be extruded from the open rear of the encompassing jacket,” the author says .
 The sliced-off lead weighed 2. grains, three-tenths of a grain less than the 2.2 grains estimated to be missing from the base of the stretcher bullet . The sliced off lead weighed just 2.5 grains .
 Lattimer was able to slice the extruded lead into forty-one small fragments . Perhaps more importantly, the lead was sliced into small pieces .
 During World War II he served in England, Normandy, and Germany as a medical surgeon dealing with all types of war wounds . He was chief of urology or chief of surgery at several U.S Army general hospitals .
 Dr. Lattimer’s interest in firearms and forensic pathology grew, he became a close friend of Dr. Dr. James Moore . Dr. Moore became a friend of the doctor and author of the book, "Fiction"
 Through the years, no person or group has conducted as many ballistic and scientific studies relating to the assassination as Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Dr. King's assassination .
 In 1972, Burke Marshall, a Kennedy family representative, spoke to Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was a pioneer in the field of medicine . He is now a doctor who has worked for the Kennedy family .
 First private, nongovernmental doctor to review previously restricted autopsy photos . Lattimer reviewed previously restricted photos and X-rays at the National Archives .
 Three bullet fragments believed to have been removed from Connally’s wrist, plus a fourth fragment that the HSCA said was too small to weigh . Several “flakes” of metal fragments still inside Connally's wrist were estimated to weigh less than a postage stamp
 Connally's bullet fragments were taken for tests by the FBI of the bullet fragments removed from Connally’s wrist . To this we should add the weight of the samples taken for . tests by . the FBI .
 Samples are invariably extremely small, and here we are dealing with the source themselves being small, so the combined weight of these samples must have been in the low tenths of a grain . Samples of this type of material are extremely small .
 It would appear that the combined weight of all of the above would not even come close to weighing, much less exceeding the 2 grains missing from the stretcher bullet .
 The FBI said it would be in favor of exhuming the body to recover the fragments if the Connally family consented . That same day the FBI (the same FBI that many critics charge is part of the conspiracy and cover-up) said they would exhume the body .
 Conspiracy theorists would develop a new set of suspicious circumstances and discrepancies surrounding the exhumation of the body and the testing and weighing of the fragments .
 A bullet fragment and a mutilated slug, which critics have touted as evidence of a second rifle, were subjected to analysis in 1978 . The slug and fragment were found to be fragments of a rifle fragment .
 The fragment had been found in 1967 by a roofer working on top of the Massey Roofing Company building in the 1200 block of Elm Street . It was found eight blocks from Dealey Plaza .
 The roofer gave it to his attorney, Bill Mason, ten years later, in April 1977 . The HSCA gave the roofer's lawyer the document to his son, who gave it back to the HSC a decade later .
 The HSCA firearms panel determined that it was a jacketed, soft-point .30 caliber bullet . The bullet was probably manufactured by Remington-Peters .
 Richard Harold “Dick’s” Lester, a Dallas nighttime security guard with a seventh-grade education, called the Dallas FBI office . Lester claimed that two years earlier, while using a metal detector in the area of the assassination, he discovered what he believed to be a
 On December 1, two Dallas FBI special agents interviewed Lester Lester . Lester was interviewed by FBI agents on December 1 .
 He showed them the slug and said he had found it on the railroad overpass directly above the south side of Commerce Street between the narrow roadway and the fence .
 His only explanation for waiting two years to call them was that a KRLD radio talk show on the assassination in the late evening of November 22, 1976, had caused him to call . Dr. Dr. George S. Eisenhower was assassinated in the assassination of President Richard Nixon on November
 Lester turned the slug, heavily mutilated, over to the agents . They sent it to the FBI lab in Washington, D.C., for analysis . Lester turned it over to them .
 On July 28, 1977, a National Archives technician delivered two of the test fired bullets from Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano rifle to the FBI lab . On July 29, 1977 a technician delivered the bullets to the National Archives . Oswald's rifle was the Mannlicer
 Special Agent Robert W Sibert of the Firearms Identification Unit found that the Lester slug was, indeed, not only a 6.5-millimeter bullet, but like those fired from the Carcano, it came from a bore with four grooves .
 The slug was a “jacketed soft point” bullet, not the “full metal jacket” military-type bullet used in the assassination . But the slug was not a full metal jacket, but a jacketed hollow point .
 The Lester bullet, though the same caliber, was different from the assassination bullets . Therefore, the Lester bullet was different to the assassination bullet . Lester bullet is a different caliber .
 The widths of the land and groove impressions vary by approximately Vioo inch . The individual microscopic marks on the Lester slug did not match up with those on the two testfired bullets .
 Conspiracy theorists say Jack Ruby planted the bullet on Connally’s stretcher . The allegation is preposterous, but it is not the only one .
 The first thing it presupposes is that someone planted it on Connally’s stretcher. Connally's stretcher was placed on the stretcher, the author says .
 The second thing it presupposes is that Ruby was a part of a conspiracy to murder Kennedy, and pursuant to that conspiracy he planted the bullet on Connally’s stretcher to frame Oswald for the murder . Ruby was part of the conspiracy to kill Kennedy, the author says .
 Ruby was not part of any conspiracy to murder Kennedy, but the notion that he was out to have Kennedy murdered is just too silly to even talk about . Ruby is not the only person involved in a conspiracy to kill Kennedy, and there is no evidence of a murder plot .
 The allegation is not entitled to any discussion, but for the readers who want to know more about it, the allegation is built almost exclusively on the statement of Seth Kantor, a Scripps-Howard reporter who knew Ruby from Kantor’s days with the Dallas Times Herald
 Jack Ruby tugged on the back of his jacket out at Parkland and extended his hand when Kantor turned around . Kantor told the Warren Commission that sometime just before or after acting White House press secretary Malcom Kilduff announced to the media the president had died (1:
 Jack Ruby, the town gadabout, would have been just like Jack Ruby to have gone to Parkland . Jack Ruby would have gone on to be a hero in Parkland, says CNN's John Sutter . Parkland is a small town in the heart of the country .
 Ruby "knew that whether he spent a long time in prison or not might depend on whether he shot Oswald on the spur of the moment or whether there was premeditation" Ruby's prosecutor, Bill Alexander, told author Gerald Posner that Ruby knew he could face a long prison
 Ruby visited Parkland... hanging out at the jail over the weekend, might be natural for a fellow like Ruby . Visiting Parkland might be a natural for Ruby .
 Hanging out at the jail where Oswald was, which could be used to argue premeditation, cannot comfortably be lumped together with going to Parkland, where Kennedy was . The jail is where Oswald spent time in jail, but it's not a good idea to say that .
 Even assuming the earlier time of 1:30, it would have been impossible for Ruby to get to Parkland when Kantor said he saw him there . Kantor says he saw Ruby at the time of the shooting at Parkland .
 We can assume that traffic was heavy, perhaps even clogged at that time . And we can assume the traffic was also clogged, perhaps clogged .
 At the London trial, Kantor again recalled the incident taking place before the press conference . At a legal speed and in normal traffic—again, probably not the case that day—the trip to the Carousel from Parkland was also 3.5 miles (and would have taken ten
 Kantor: "I just don't know, I just don’t know,” Kantor says . “I just just don,’s the only way he legitimately could have.” He says he doesn't know .
 Only other person who claims to have seen Ruby at Parkland, Wilma May Tice, has little credibility . Wilma Tice is the only other person to say he saw Ruby at the school .
 Ruby and Kantor attended “another important event,” the Oswald press conference early Saturday morning in the assembly room of the Dallas Police Department . The Commission pointed out that Ruby, Kantor and Oswald attended another important event Saturday morning .
 Ruby’s rabbi, Hillel E Silverman, was “surprised” to hear of Kantor's claim that Ruby was at Parkland, he said . Silverman said he was surprised to hear Kantor say Ruby was there .
 Silverman was at the Trade Mart waiting for the Kennedy luncheon and speech when he learned the president had been shot . Silverman says he was waiting to attend the luncheon when he heard the news .
 Eva Ruby Grant contacted the FBI and told agents that on the day Mrs. Grant died, she had been attacked . He immediately left for Parkland Hospital, where he went to see her .
 Tice called her and asked if she could come to visit her, which she proceeded to do for four hours . Tice said she wanted to spend four hours with Tice .
 Eva Tice ran away from her husband because he had threatened her, Tice said . Tice told Eva that when she and her husband went to pick up their children at a theater, where they had been while she was testifying, she ran away .
 Tice was “balmy,” but said she had fairly accurately described the clothing her brother was wearing that day . Tice said she was ‘balmy’ but that she was fairly accurately describing her brother’s clothing .
 Tice and her husband told the FBI that Eva and her sister Eileen Kaminsky came to their home on April 30, 1964 . Tice's husband and his wife said the two women were at their home at the time .
 Eva never mentioned her alleged visit with the Tices to the FBI and Mrs. Tice never mentioned the alleged visit . The FBI never found out about Eva's alleged visit to the Tice .
 Tice never mentioned her alleged visit to Eva’s residence, so it is not known who is telling the truth . Tice was never mentioned in the interview .
 Tice declined to say how she contacted Ruby’s sisters or how they knew to contact her, she declined to answer the question . Tice said she was not sure how she reached Ruby's sisters .
 The reason for Ruby’s going to Parkland Hospital is most plausibly set forth in your analysis—to get quick firsthand information on what to do about his nightclubs after the shooting of the President . Ruby's visit is most likely to be to get quick information about what to
 Griffin said traffic conditions were such as to have made it possible for Ruby to return to the Carousel Club before 1:45m.,” at which time he told his employee, Andrew Armstrong, about his decision to close his clubs . Griffin said that “traffic conditions were
 Domingo Benavides was never shown at a later point the shells he found to see if he could identify them . He never showed the shells again . The shells were never identified .
 Warren Commission critics and conspiracy theorists have had a field day with the four shells . The chain of custody or possession for the shells is so often a problem in criminal cases .
 Summers’s or Hill's radio transmissions had no real basis for their radio transmissions . But it turns out there was no basis for any of the radio transmissions.
 Summers's source for his transmission was Ted Callaway, who was too far away from Oswald’s weapon to clearly see it . Callaway was basing his conclusion that it was an automatic on the fact that the “motion” of Oswald's hands as he carried the
 A machine gun does not require a separate squeeze of the trigger for each shot fired . A semiautomatic is partly automatic in that it ejects the cartridge case of a fired shot and self-loads a new cartridge into the chamber . A truly automatic weapon, like a machine gun
 As long as the finger of the firer continues to depress the trigger, the weapon spits out bullets until it is empty . The weapon is capable of firing until the fingers of the trigger are empty .
 Summers's and Hill’s transmissions were simply routine errors, and the whole issue is much to do about nothing . Clearly, Summers and Hill's transmissions were routine errors . The whole issue of nothing to do with nothing.
 Three witnesses who saw Oswald at the Tippit murder scene say Oswald had a revolver . We know it was a revolver, and the weapon in his possession was revolver, not a semiautomatic . Oswald's murder was a murder of a man who was killed by Oswald .
 On its own, a semiautomatic automatically ejects the shell from the chamber of the gun to the ground the moment the bullet is fired . The shell ejects from the gun's chamber the moment it is fired, the gun ejects it back to the floor .
 The shell remains in the chamber of the cylinder of the firearm until the firer manually removes it by operating a lever extracting the shell from the chamber, and an ejector rod releases the shell to his hands or the ground . Revolvers do not, with the shell remaining in the
 Oswald removed shells from his weapon himself, witnesses say . Witnesses say Oswald removed the shells from the weapon himself . Oswald was killed in August 1918 .
 Domingo Benavides testified he saw Oswald “throw the shells” to the ground . Oswald was shot in the head by Oswald in the early hours of October 1, 1917 .
 For that to have happened with a semiautomatic, Oswald would have had to catch the ejecting shells in the air like a frisbee and throw them on to the ground . For that, the gunman would have to catch them in air and then throw them onto the
 Pardon the play on words, but all of this automatically means the gun was not an automatic . It automatically means that the gun wasn't an automatic.
 It should be added that it is extremely rare for law enforcement to find revolver shells at the scene of a killing .
 After the killer does his business, he immediately leaves and hopes no one saw him . The killer hopes to see no one see him and hopes he doesn't see him .
 Oswald removed the shells from his six-cylinder revolver because he wanted to reload for whatever lie ahead . Oswald removed shells from the revolver because of his desire to reload . Oswald was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 Oswald may have fired five shots at Tippit and missed once, even though he was firing at close range . Oswald fired at least four rounds, at the time of his arrest six live car* We know four bullets hit . Oswald may very well have fired at five shots, but
 Only two of the four shells recovered from the Tippit murder scene were Western-Winchester . Only one Western cartridge case was not recovered, meaning that one Western case may not have been found .
 Two RemingtonPeters shells were recovered from the Tippit murder scene . Only one Remington-Peters bullet was recovered . This alone would not add up to five shots being fired, but since only one of the slugs found in Tippits body was a Remington
 Oswald fired five times at Tippit, one Remington-Peters bullet was not recovered . If the former bullet is not recovered, this would mean that Oswald shot five times . Oswald was killed by a single bullet fired at the scene of the shooting .
 Ted Callaway, a former marine, testified at the London trial that he “heard what sounded like five pistol shots,” although other witnesses heard two to four shots . Callaway testified that he heard five shots, but other witnesses said only two or four shots were fired .
 Benavides gave the shells to a patrolman he turned over to, Joe Poe . The patrolman gave them to, showed them to Sergeant Gerald Hill when Hill arrived at the scene .
 Hill told Poe to put his mark on shells and turn them over to the crime lab . Hill told him to turn shells over to crime lab.
 Poe was asked to identify the subject two shells when he testified before the Warren Commission in April 1964 . The problem arose when he was asked for identification of the subject shells . Poe was a member of the Navy's Air Force Command in the 1960s .
 Poe later said he believed he had put his initials on the shells but just wasn't certain . Poe said he "couldn’t make them out” from looking at them now .
 Author Henry Hurt interviewed Poe in 1984 and Poe told him he was certain he had marked the shells . Despite the fact he could not find his identifying mark on them, Poe felt certain the shells the Warren Commission showed him were the ones he had taken into evidence at the crime scene .
 Poe felt the reason he couldn’t find his marks was that there were so many other marks on the hulls that they had obscured his . Poe felt that the other marks were obscured by other marks .
 There is an evidence bag that is marked with the offense number along with your initials . There is also a bag marked with an offense number .
 The evidence goes to the crime lab where it is checked and returned to the bag and kept there until trial . The evidence is kept in the bag until the trial .
 It is absolutely routine in law enforcement to mark physical evidence for chain-of-custody purposes, police say . It's a routine practice in the U.S.
 Sergeant Hill marked all six of the live cartridges from different manufacturers . Sergeant Hill later marked all of the cartridges on the course .
 Three of the six live cartridges found in Oswald’s revolver were Western .38 Specials, three Remington-Peters . The same manufacturers of the shells found at the murder scene were the same manufacturers .
 The Poe issue will never be resolved, but such unresolvable points are common in the investigation of a complex, multifaceted murder investigation . Poe issue won't be resolved but it's common in a complex murder investigation, police say .
 Oswald's wallet, per Hosty, was Oswald’s, containing his real ID and the false ID of Alek Hidell . Hosty says the wallet contained his real identification and the fake ID of Hidell. Hosty: The wallet was Oswald's .
 Hosty says Westbrook never indicated where he found the wallet and never showed it to him . Hosty said the wallet was found in Westbrook's wallet . Author Dale Myers interviewed Barrett in 1996, who said Westbrook never showed the wallet to Myers .
 He had every reason to assume, by by Westbrook’s questions, that the wallet had been found at the Tippit murder scene and that it contained the two names in it . The wallet is believed to contain two names .
 Oswald’s name would have been all over Dallas police radio by 1:25m, when several Dallas police officers had already arrived at the murder scene . Oswald's wallet with Oswald's identification in it was found at the Tippit's murder scene, police say .
 Oswald’s wallet, or any wallet, was never found at the Tippit murder scene . Barrett said no one other than Barrett ever mentioned Oswald's wallet . Barrett was the only person to mention the wallet .
 The only item mentioned by anyone as being found near Tippit’s body was his service revolver .
 Every civilian and police witness who questioned Myers said they saw no wallet at the murder scene . Myers: Every witness said they did not see a wallet .
 Ted Callaway: "I’ll tell you one thing, there was no billfold at that scene. That's what happened to me. That’s why I’m not sure what happened."
 Sergeant "Bud" Owens is seen holding Tippit's service revolver in his left hand and a man's leather wallet in his right . Myers tracked down some silent WFAA-TV film footage .
 Owens is holding the wallet open and showing it to Captain George Doughty, the two officers appear to be inspecting the inside part of the wallet that contains photos and identification . Not only that, they also appear to inspect the inside of Owens' wallet .
 Myers, through his dogged research, proved unequivocally that a wallet was found at the murder scene . Myers: "Despite what everyone said, and what anyone would have believed, Myers found a wallet"
 Dallas WFAA-TV cameraman Ron Reiland narrates the silent footage for his viewers . He said it was Tippit’s wallet .
 Several officers went to Methodist Hospital, where Tippit’s body was brought into the emergency ward, and they could have brought Tippits’ wallet from the murder scene to either there or Parkland .
 Tippit’s personal property was inventoried, at 3:25m. There was plenty of time to do so before the inventoried .
 Tippit's wallet was added to his personal effects, but no statement or documentary evidence that it was added . The wallet would not be strong evidence that such an event never took place .
 Joe Poe and Leonard Jez, two of the first officers to arrive at the scene, didn't see the shooting . Joe Poe didn't know the shooter's identity, nor did other first responders . Police say he was shot by a single gunshot wound .
 Tippit’s killer left his calling card at the murder scene . Dallas Police Captains Westbrook and Doughty and Sergeant Hill would suppress and keep secret the fact that he had left a calling card .
 If Oswald’s wallet had been found at the murder scene, it is inconceivable that nowhere in the testimony or the reports of Westbrook, Hill, Doughty, Poe, and so on, would they bother to mention this fact . Oswald's wallet was found in the wallet at
 Barrett worked criminal intelligence for the FBI, so it was perfectly natural for Westbrook to ask him if he had ever heard of Oswald or Hidell . Myers recognizes the “possibility” that Barrett is “mistaken” and asked Barrett these questions later at Dallas police headquarters
 One could argue that if Westbrook asked the questions about Oswald and Hidell that Barrett clearly recalls, Barrett assumed the Dallas authorities already had this information so there was no need to refer to it in his report .
 Oswald's wallet was found at the murder scene of Oswald's murder . Barrett didn't make sure his information found its way into some FBI report and came to the attention of the Warren Commission . It also wouldn’t explain why Barrett became aware that no one was mentioning Oswald’
 Barrett retired from the FBI in 1978 with an unblemished record . He says Westbrook asked him about Oswald and Hidell at the Tippit murder scene . The first time he had told anyone about it was when Hosty told Hosty in 1995 .
 Oswald's guilt for Tippit’s murder wasn’t really “an issue” that was being seriously questioned by anyone at the time, he says . When asked why he hadn't brought his information to the attention of the Warren Commission, he responded that Oswald
 Barrett is right to the extent that the Warren Commission was not having any difficulty at all proving that Oswald killed Tippit . Barrett probably wouldn't have been aware of conspiracy theorists who were writing in the alternative press questioning Oswald’s guilt .
 If Oswald’s wallet was found at the Tippit murder scene, Barrett has a reasonable explanation for how it ended up on the street . Barrett says Oswald's wallet was Oswald's, but not Oswald's .
 None of this, however, conclusively solves the mystery of just whose wallet it was .
 Reiland says police informed him at the scene that it was Tippit’s wallet . If I had to wager, I’d conclude it was the wallet . Reiland: The reason Reiland stated, on WFAA film, is that the police had
 Dallas police and detectives, several of whom were Tippit's friends, kept from the world that his killer’s wallet was found near his body . Quite apart from Barrett, it makes no sense to me that the Dallas police would keep from the public that the killer's wallet
 Not one single witness testified to seeing Oswald in the Altgens' photograph .
 Altgens’s photo is Depository employee Billy Lovelady, who did bear a striking resemblance to Oswald . The person in the photo is not Oswald .
 Conspiracy theorists still hung on to the argument, even though Oswald himself puts himself elsewhere at the time of the shooting . Oswald himself, the man they want to defend at all costs, puts himself inside the first-floor lunchroom .
 In other words, a better way to identify someone is by the clothing he is wearing, not his face . A better way of identifying someone is to be identified by clothing, not face, is by clothing .
 A March 9, 1964, letter from J Edgar Hoover to Warren Commission counsel J Lee Rankin states that Lovelady was photographed by the FBI at Dallas, Texas, in February .
 Lovelady advised that on the day of the assassination of President John F Kennedy, November 22, 1963, he was standing in the doorway of the entrance to the TSBD where he is employed .
 Captain Fritz’s handwritten notes taken at the very time of the interview, he wrote, “at Apt. changed shirt + tr. change .” Captain Fritz wrote that he had changed his shirt at the time of interview .
 The HSCA said Robert Groden photographically enhanced the Altgens photo and the Bell, Martin, and Hughes frames, all showing Lovelady on the day of the assassination . Groden compared the shirt shown in the photo with a photo he took of him in 1977 wearing
 FBI report: She then asked if shirt had a ragged elbow . FBI report says she asked if it had a "ragged elbow" FBI report of the December 4,1963, interview was published in January .
 A hole was found in the right elbow of the shirt, she quickly stated, ‘Yes, yes.’ Upon further examination, she observed a hole in the shirt . She quickly stated that she had found the hole .
 Warren Report said that Bledsoe indicated that the hole she saw was on Oswald’s “right” elbow, but there is no indication in the FBI report, written before her testimony, that she mentioned the right elbow to the agents before being shown the shirt .
 We know that McWatters and Jones paid virtually no attention to Oswald, but Bledsoe very definitely did . We know, however, that BledSOe did .
 Oswald was wearing the same shirt at the time of his arrest as he was wearing in the sniper’s nest . We know he killed Kennedy with the Carcano, and tufts of several, fresh cotton fibers were found in a crevice of the butt of the rifle .
 Oswald was wearing the same shirt in the morning as he was wearing at the time of his arrest . The Warren Commission concluded, largely because of this, that Oswald's shirt was the same as the time he was arrested . Oswald was found to have been wearing the shirt he was in the
 Conspiracy author Sylvia Meagher claimed that this conversation raises a “very serious doubt about Oswald’s prior knowledge of the motorcade route,” and that there can be only two possible explanations for the question to James Jarman .
 Oswald wanted only to confirm the exact route of the motorcade . Perhaps Oswald wanted to confirm only the exact way of the route . Oswald's motorcade was one of the most famous motorcalls in the world .
 Dougherty, being somewhat mentally retarded, doesn’t have too much credibility . Dougherty has a history of being mentally retarded .
 Charles Givens said he went up to the sixth floor to get his cigarettes around 11:45 a.m. on June 3, 1964, FBI interview . He said he was going to get cigarettes when he was killed .
 He wouldn't have even gotten back to the sixth floor to get his cigarettes until around 11:50-11:55m. or so . So he wouldn’t have gotten back there until around that time . He would have been able to get back there around 11.50
 Conspiracy theorist Sylvia Meagher tells her readers that in an affidavit given by Givens on the afternoon of the assassination, he makes no mention of ever returning to the sixth floor at 11:45 or 11:55m., or at any other time . Meagher: In affidavit given
 This is misleading since the subject affidavit was extremely brief, and hence cannot be relied upon, as Meagher so eagerly wanted to do, to mean that whatever was not in the affidavit never happened . Meagher's affidavit is extremely brief and therefore can't be relied on, he says .
 Long before Givens was allegedly persuaded, by money or intimidation, to tell the Warren Commission he saw Oswald by the sniper’s nest window, he had told two Dallas detectives the same thing . But this totally ignores the fact that long before he told the Commission, Giv
 Meagher implicitly accuses Revill of improperly inducing Givens’s Warren Commission testimony . Meagher: It's difficult to imagine that Revill would admit to his belief in his own story if Revill had actually been involved in persuading him to do so .
 She goes on to wonder how Oswald, or any other solitary assassin, could have done all this work and still found time to assemble the rifle, arrange a gun rest, and so on .
 The citation she gives for all her assertions doesn’t support any one of them . The citation for all of her assertions is not supported by any of the facts .
 No specific number of cartons is given by the Warren Commission on page 249 . Only two cartons are mentioned as weighing in excess of fifty pounds .
 Most of the cartons in the sniper’s nest had previously been moved into that vicinity by employees to clear an area for laying a new flooring on the west end of the sixth floor .
 The palm print was less than three days old, the man said . He was only willing to testify with certainty that the palm print is less than 3 days old . He said it was only a few days old when it was found .
 Jarman filled orders just like Oswald, who would have Oswald correct an order . Why Jarman, who filled orders like Oswald would, can't be discerned . Jarman's orders were filled by Oswald .
 This device supposedly could determine whether a person was lying from alterations in his voice patterns . It was developed in the 1980s and 1990s . The device was designed to detect if a person is lying from changes in voice patterns.
 The theory is that under stress, the vocal muscles tighten, causing a diminution of vibrations in the voice called microtremors . Under stress, vocal muscles are tightened, causing the vibrations to be reduced .
 We don't need a PSE or any other type of instrument to tell us that Oswald told one lie after another during his interrogation by the police. We don’t need a . PSE, any other . type of . instrument to prove that Oswald lied after another lies,
 We know he lied when he said it wasn’t he holding the rifle in the backyard photo and that he had never owned a rifle . We know that .
 The polygraph has achieved a considerable degree of respectability in the law enforcement community, the PSE has not . Further, as opposed to the polygraph, it has not. The PSE is not. Further, it is not a polygraph .
 Some police departments still use it today, but its primary value is for suspects who think it works and are told it caught them lying . The machine is still being used by some police departments today .
 PSE’s lie detection rate is at “chance levels, the same as guessing.” Horvath says that PSE's lie detection rates are at ‘chance levels’ and ‘guidibility’ PSE says it is “the
 The validity of all lie detector conclusions depends, in large part, on the competence and credibility of the operator of the test . Everyone, even O’Toole, agrees that the validity of a lie detector conclusion depends on the accuracy of the lie detector operator .
 O’Toole, an avowed conspiracy theorist, has none, at least in the Kennedy assassination . He has never been involved in the JFK assassination .
 O’Toole tells readers that testimony from Earlene Roberts indicated “neither furtiveness nor haste ” on Oswald’s part when he returned to his room after the assassination . He says the testimony from Roberts indicated that Oswald was “furtiveness�
 Arnold Rowland and his wife appear in amateur films taken by Robert Hughes, Orville Nix, Elsie Dorman, and Marie Muchmore . Rowland's wife appears in four amateur films and a still photograph by Wilma Bond .
 Rowland’s recollection is right on the money on this point . As it turns out, Rowland's recollection is correct .
 Arnold Rowland and his wife, Barbara, testified that she was watching activities surrounding a man having an epileptic seizure when Arnold first told her about see466 ENDNOTES ing the man with a gun, which was around 12:15m.
 A few minutes prior to Carolyn Walther’s alleged observation, Charles Bronson was focusing his camera for about eight seconds (from his position standing on a pedestal near the southwest corner of Main and Houston) on the ambulance picking up the epileptic north of him on Houston .
 The entire twenty-two-man photographic panel didn’t review it . Consequently, the entire . 22-man photography panel didn't review it.
 Eleven photographic and digital image processing experts analyzed “several frames” of the original 8-millimeter film . They did not view the film itself in order “to avoid any possibility of damage”
 HSCA panel recommended that the Department of Justice subject the film to further analysis . Because the film was of “superior quality compared to the Hughes film” panel said it was “of superior quality” compared to Hughes film .
 Richard Trask asked his Massachusetts congressman, Nicholas Mavroules, to pursue the matter . He wrote back on March 4, 1988, that he had been told by Assistant Attorney General John Bolton that since the HSCA’s sole basis for a conspiracy had been disproved
 As indicated earlier, Robert Groden, the conspiracy photographer who seems to be able to see things no one else does, analyzed the Bronson film .
 Walthers said that the second man was standing in the same window as the man with the gun, not in the second pair of windows, ten or twelve feet away, as suggested by the Hughes film . The man with a gun was not standing ten or 12 feet away as suggested
 Itek Corporation studied the Hughes film in 1976 using digital enhancement techniques to determine whether the film showed anyone in the southeasternmost sixth-floor window . The film was used to study Hughes film .
 Hughes film depicts the sixth floor only during the few seconds preceding the assassination . The suggestion that the film supports Walthers is demonstrably false is demonstrable false .
 Photographs of the subject southeasternmost window on the sixth floor of the Depository Building were enhanced by the HSCA but “no human forms were present” in the window . Photographs were taken by Tom Dillard and James Powell .
 The HSCA photographic panel concluded that “boxes were moved into the window between the Dillard and Powell” photos . However, the panel said boxes were moved in the window .
 Toney “Ruby” Henderson, did not even claim to see anything of any significance . Toney "Ruby’s" Henderson said he did not think he saw anything of significance .
 She did not know what floor she saw the two men on, but didn't recall seeing anyone on any floor above them . She said she didn’t remember seeing anyone else on the floor above .
 Henderson said she got the impression that the two men were workers in the building who were looking out the window in anticipation of the motorcade . Henderson: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure it's not a surprise"
 Only a conspiracy theorist could possibly draw any serious conspiratorial inferences from the statement of Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy Kennedy .
 The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald used the back staircase to get down to the second floor, not a freight elevator . The two freight elevators, which would have provided the only other means of descent, were not available .
 Conspiracy theorists see Victoria Adams’s testimony as evidence that Oswald couldn’t have used the stairs to get to the second floor . Adams would have seen or heard him, and therefore therefore couldn't have been the assassin . Conspiracy theorists say Adams's testimony is proof Oswald couldn't
 One conspiracy critic argued that the affidavits Shelley and Lovelady gave on the afternoon of November 22 don’t mention the excursion into the railroad yards described in their later statements . However, one conspiracy critic, Sylvia Meagher, argued that their statements support Adams’s
 Adams could not have been on the first floor when Adams got there if he had quickly descended the stairs . That alone would eat up at least a minute or more, meaning he could not be there at the time .
 Adams didn’t come down the back stairs immediately after the shooting, as she claimed . The two earliest such reports were made over channel 2, one at 12.39 and the other at 12:40m— nine to ten minutes after shooting .
 Meagher doesn't mention the testimony of Eddie Piper, who told the Commission that he was standing near the back elevators when Truly and Baker ran over . Piper unsuccessfully tried to call one of the elevators down, and dashed up the stairs, Meagher says .
 Piper stated that “nobody’s came down the stairs before Truly and Baker went up, which Adams and Styles would have done if they had come down immediately . Piper: “Nobody’d come down the stairway before they went up.”
 Harold Weisberg, a former OSS agent and U.S. Senate investigator turned chicken farmer, is the architect of what has become known in assassination circles as “Oswald’s alibi” He penned and self-published his critique of the Warren Commission
 Roffman managed to perform the opposite feat in his own analysis . Ironically, he managed to do it in the opposite .
 Roffman charged that the Commission was fudging with regard to the reconstructed timings of Baker and Truly . He sought to reduce their time, thereby making it less likely that Oswald, if he had been on the sixth floor, could have gotten down to the second-floor lunchroom
 Roffman offered still frames from a news film shot by WFAA-TV cameraman Malcolm O Couch as evidence that Baker actually entered the Depository earlier than the Commission estimated . The still frames were taken from the film by O Couch .
 Still frames show Baker’s motorcycle parked at Elm Street curb just 10 seconds after the last shot . Roffman concludes that Baker was already at the entrance to the Depository by then . The Commission calculated Baker was at least 5 seconds longer than the time it was calculated .
 Commissioner Allen Dulles wanted to know from what time the reconstruction commenced . Dulles: "It's not clear what happened to the reconstruction of the Forties"
 Assistant Counsel David Belin interjected, “The first shot,” the implication being that he was correcting Baker . The implication was that he had been correcting Baker, but he was not correct .
 Roffman may be correct that the Commission erred in comparing Oswald's and Baker's movements against two different start times . But the other assumptions in his calculations more than make up for the difference, he says .
 Roffman’s suggestion that Baker may have been entering the Depository just 10 seconds after the last shot is wrong . The Commission's reenacted timing of 15 seconds is wrong, he says . Baker was entering the depository 10 seconds before the shooting, he adds .
 Roffman based his claim on several still frames of the Couch film that showed Baker’s motorcycle parked at the Elm Street curb . Baker's motorcycle was seen at the curb at the end of the film .
 Roffman guessed that the film was made about “ten seconds after the last shot” and that Baker must have been entering the Depository by then . As indicated, he guessed that Baker was entering the depository at the time of the shooting .
 Baker is still sixty-two feet away from entering the front door, which realistically would have taken him an additional 13 seconds or so to cover at the pace depicted in the Couch film . Even then, he is still fifty-two-feet away from the door, but it would have
 The rest of Roffman's calculations regarding Baker’s actions are mostly a matter of semantics, he says .
 No one can really be sure of the precise timing of all of the actions that Baker and Truly took between the Depository and the time Baker arrived in the lunchroom .
 The Warren Commission was right to propose a range of times in which Baker might have arrived on the second floor . Baker's death would have been a good thing for the nation, but he died in 2008 .
 Events depicted in the Couch footage can be related, within a second or so, to the same events photographed by Dave Wiegman, another motorcade cameraman . Baker's and Oswald’s movements are timed from the same point, i.e., the time of the last
 Roffman sought to collapse the time it took Baker to get up to the second floor after the shots, making it impossible for Oswald to have already been there when Baker arrived there . He worked diligently to expand the time Oswald would have spent in the lunchroom .
 Roffman conjures up an additional “15 to 20 seconds,” which he says the assassin would have needed to hide the rifle near the back staircase . He says the shooter would have had to hide his rifle in the staircase .
 He points to a number of crime scene photographs, as well as the testimony of several police officers who were present when the rifle was found, in his bid to convince readers that the assassin spent significant time concealing the rifle .
 Roffman’s claim that concealing the rifle in such a manner required considerable effort is not well taken . The crime scene photographs support police testimony that the rifle was well hidden .
 Deputy Boone and Weitzman testified under oath before the Warren Commission . But three years earlier, while testifying under oath, they described a different scene .
 Boone told the Commission that after the Carcano was discovered, “some of the other officers came over to look at it.” Boone said . Boone: "Some of the officers were looking at it when it was discovered"
 Weitzman’s remarks obviously refer to an isolated close-up photograph of the area surrounding the rifle . The Commission's counsel didn't specifically clear up what he meant by these comments .
 Roffman’s contention that hiding the rifle added 15 to 20 seconds to the time it would have taken Oswald to get down to the second-floor lunchroom is incorrect . Oswald had been in the lunchroom at the time of the shooting .
 Roffman calculates that it would have taken the sixth-floor gunman “at least a minute and 35 seconds” to reach the secondfloor lunchroom . Oswald would have arrived in the lunchroom at least five to eleven seconds after Baker reached the second floor, assuming Baker arrived
 Roffman’s calculations are not supported by the known facts, nor by commonsense inferences from those facts . Unfortunately for conspiracy theorists, conspiracy theorists are not, as we have seen, supported .
 Roffman invokes angles, pathways, and lines of sight to ultimately conclude that when Baker initially caught a glimpse of Oswald moving away from him as Oswald walked through the vestibule into the lunchroom . Baker could only see, from his position looking through the small window of the
 Oswald could have been in this area of the vestibule visible to Baker, Roffman argues . But, he says, the “only way” Oswald could be in that area is if he entered through “the southernmost door,” a door “
 Oswald had to know from the words de Mohrenschildt used and the joking way he asked the question that he wasn’t in any danger or situation of crisis . Oswald would have known from the very words he used, and the way he was joking .
 Oswald’s shock that de Mohrenschildt apparently knew that he had tried to kill Walker, believing that his wife, Marina, must have told him . Oswald's response to the question was wholly attributed to his shock . Oswald thought that Marina had told him that he tried to
 Cabdriver William Whaley’s memory at the time he testified before the Warren Commission as to what took place at the cabstand was almost assuredly off base, and considerably so . Whaley has to throw into serious question the accuracy of his memory of what actually took place just
 Oswald got off the bus on Main Street between Poydras and Lamar streets . Whaley was parked in front of the Greyhound bus depot on Lamar on Lamar . Oswald was the driver of the bus .
 Oswald would have had to take a left on Lamar and walk two short blocks on Lamar past Main and then Commerce to the stand on the right side of Lamar near Jackson . To get to the cabstand, Oswald would've had to walk two blocks past Commerce and Commerce .
 Oswald had to walk south on Lamar to get to Whaley's cab . Whaley’s cab was facing south on . Lamar . Oswald walked south on the street to get there .
 Unless Whaley was seated in his cab with his head turned completely around looking to his rear, or for some reason was looking in his rearview mirror even though he was parked, there's simply no way he could have seen Oswald approach his cab .
 Whaley’s testimony is inconsistent with all the other evidence, prosecutors say . But the reality is that Whaley's testimony is consistent with the evidence, they say .
 To the naked eye, the wall seems mostly decorative and is not “retaining” anything . The wall is not "retaining" anything. It is not a wall that will be visible to the public .
 Gary Mack believes he has determined the origin of the term grassy knoll . Gary Mack says he has found out the origins of grassy knoll . He says he believes the term originated from the grass on grass .
 Don Michael, owner and manager of WRAJ-AM radio in Anna, Illinois, saved all the UPI radio dispatches on the day of the assassination . He filed them away, eventually loaning them to the Sixth Floor Museum, where they have been on display since 1989 .
 Mack's study to determine who coined the phrase grassy knoll found no evidence that anyone else used the phrase before Don Michael says Smith did . Mack: Smith used it before anyone else did .
 HSCA Report, 81, was published before the Warren Commission’s . The Warren Commission was published in the same year as the second shot .
 The statement in the HSCA Report that the photograph took place “at the time of the first shot” is incorrect, and most likely is merely loose writing . One thing we know is that the statement that the . Altgens’s . photograph was “
 In his “Master List of Assassination Witnesses” , Josiah Thompson lists some witnesses as having testified they thought the shots came from the grassy knoll . Some witnesses are not clearly in the category of witnesses who thought the knoll came from . They are not in the
 HSCA recorded acoustical analysis in Dealey Plaza on August 20, 1978 . Two experts recorded their impressions of the origin of shots fired .
 McFadden was right 93 percent of the time, and Wightman was right 82 percent . Green found that McFadden is right 93% of the times . Green also found McFadden had been right in the past 93% times .
 Both expert witnesses were ready for the shots, so there was no surprise that might confuse their auditory perceptions . However, as opposed to the Dealey Plaza witnesses, both expert witnesses are ready for shots .
 The Grassy Knoll, a book with the same title as the article, was published in Minority of One magazine . The book was later republished into a book, with the title "The Grass Knoll"
 Feldman notes that almost all of the Dallas County deputy sheriffs thought the shots came from the railroad yards behind the stockade fence on top of the grassy knoll . Feldman says the shots were fired from the rail yard behind the fence .
 Dallas sheriff's office is located in the Dallas County Criminal Courts Building at Houston and Main . Deputies were not close to the shooting, most standing on Main Street .
 In his calculations of numbers, he doesn’t even bother to mention Secret Service agents like John D Ready, George W Hickey Jr. , Jerry D Kivett, Warren W Taylor and Hurchel Jacks . All of whom said they thought the shots came from the �
 The famous AP photograph shows some of the agents looking to their right rear . In fact, the famous photograph was taken by James Altgens .
 It's hard to take Feldman too seriously when he so clearly permits his bias toward conspiracy, rather than his objectivity, to govern his analysis . Feldman: "It’s not easy to take too seriously"
 Dallas deputy sheriff A1 Maddox said, “When you came out of the jail on the Houston Street side [of the Dallas Criminal Courts Building], you’d hear jets coming over sometimes in the afternoon.”
 You'd be looking in one direction to see the jets, and they would come over from a different direction . You’d be looking at one direction, and the jets would be coming from another direction .
 You couldn’t tell which way because of the reverberation of the sounds . The reverberation was so loud that you could not tell which direction .
 Some in the conspiracy community have referred to the “man” as the ‘Black Dog Man” because they feel the figure in the image resembled, from the waist up, a black dog sitting on its haunches .
 Willis photo doesn't indicate location of his assassin . Willis photo would be more open to view than a picket fence assassin, not behind it .
 Shooting victim's attempt to escape or run away after the shooting would be seen by everyone . He was shot in the head by a police officer, police say . The suspect is believed to have tried to flee the scene .
 The "Head in the Bush" man is seen in several Zapruder frames and allegedly seen holding a rifle in frame 413 . And then there is the “Head in Bush” man visible in several of the frames .
 The gun-like object appears in front of leaves in the bush . Three men are seen standing on the steps leading up to the pergola .
 Emmett Joseph Hudson, a park department employee of the city of Dallas, has been identified . The one in the middle, in the light-colored clothing, was identified as Emmet Joseph Hudson . Hudson is a park employee of Dallas .
 Hudson said he did not know the men on his left and right but he recalled that one of them stated he “worked somewhere on Industrial Boulevard” in Dallas . Hudson said one of the men said he worked somewhere on industrial Boulevard in Dallas, Texas .
 The two blacks have never been identified, speculation has been that one of them was the Black Dog Man . This would seem to preclude either of the two blacks, who were on a nearby bench, from being the Black dog Man .
 We conclude that the head in the bush is not the same as that of the person visible in Willis #5 . We conclude . The head is in a bush, not the head of the bush, is the head seen in Willis .
 The panel concluded that “color measurements showed no fleshtones consistent with other fleshtones” in the Nix frames . “enhanced images” of the frames “revealed no ... evidence to support a man and rifle in the pattern in question”
 The elevated object visible on the photographs was determined to be some 20 feet beyond these shadows in a parking lot . It was determined that the elevated object was 20 feet from these shadows .
 A rifleman at this location would have had to fire the fatal shot from 9 feet above the ground to clear existing horizontal obstructions . The fatal shot would have to be fired from a height of 9 feet .
 President Kennedy's line of sight and line of fire to President Kennedy could have existed only for less than Vso second before the fatal round because of permanent vertical obstructions .
 The grassy knoll gunman did not drive away in a car parked in the lot . Unless one or more members of the Dallas sheriff’s office, or some other county employee, was a part of the alleged conspiracy to kill Kennedy .
 Gossett rented out spaces for three dollars a month to deputy sheriffs who worked in Dallas County Criminal Courts Building on Main and Houston .
 There was only one entrance to the lot, which also served as the exit, and an iron bar, with a chain and lock on it, ran across the entrance-exit .
 Only people who had access to lot were those who rented spaces in it, each had a key to the lot . Only those renting spaces in lot were allowed access .
 The absence of cartridge cases from a rifle would only be circumstantial evidence that no rifle was used if there had been more than one shot from the grassy knoll .
 If only one shot was fired, no cartridge case would automatically be ejected from the rifle . The ejection of the case only taking place if the firer pulled the bolt to the rear for the firing of a second shot .
 The absence of a cartridge case from a rifle also presupposes that a grassy knoll killer would have used a rifle, as opposed to a revolver, which does not automatically eject its shells onto the ground . A revolver, however, does not eject shells into the ground.
 The distances from the grassy knoll to Kennedy for the first and second shots that struck him are around fifty-eight and thirty-five yards, respectively . As indicated in the main text, the distances are around 50 yards .
 Cyril Wecht: "There had to be a second gunman shooting from the grassy knoll area" Wecht writes in his 1994 book, Cause of Death, that there had been a second shooter . Wecht says there was no second gunman in the shooting .
 This seems unlikely, and either Smith had a faulty recollection or the investigator, in the report he transcribed ten days after the interview, said Smith told him something he actually didn’t . The investigator transcribed Smith’s interview and transcribed the transcript .
 If the man had told Smith he was Secret Service, Smith wouldn’t have had any reason for not telling the Warren Commission this in 1964, he would have had no reason not to tell it .
 He told the Commission he only ‘believed’ the man was Secret Service . Instead, he said he only believed the man to be a Secret Service agent .
 Former Secret Service agent James "Mike" Howard told author Gus Russo in 1993, it only has the ring of loose talk . Although I would like to believe Howard told Russo, Howard's comments only have the ring . Howard: "Mike, Mike, Mike" Howard was a Secret Service
 Sheriff's deputies placed two deputies on a grassy knoll near the Fort Worth airport . He says coincidentally there was a knoll on the way to the airport and deputies were placed there .
 Russo writes that Howard was told by the now-deceased Sorrels that he had “placed security people in all the obvious areas’s” areas .
 Robert E Jones testified before the HSCA that he prepared an After Action Report on the assignment of his men to the Secret Service on the day of the assassination . Jones testified that he believed that it included reports filed by military intelligence agents who performed the liaison function with the .
 Oswald's After Action Report would have been maintained in Oswald’s Department of Defense file . Oswald would have kept his report in the Defense Department file, he said .
 By checking the name Hidell he found the name Lee Harvey Oswald . Hidell had either been arrested or come to their attention,” the author says .
 Jones was able to contact the FBI offices in Dallas and San Antonio as early as 3:15 on the afternoon of the assassination . He furnished them with information from Army Intelligence files in New Orleans, San Antonio, and Corpus Christi concerning Oswald .
 Government officials always feel it is incumbent upon them to live up to two well-earned reputations . But government officials feel they must live up with their reputation .
 One reason is that they are bureaucratic automatons whose bloodless daily activities do not admit exceptions to their rules . Another reason is they are bureaucrats who do not allow exceptions in their daily life .
 Law enforcement, even though normally innocent, insist on acting guilty so that conspiracy theorists will have more fodder for their charges . And two, as with law enforcement, they insist to act guilty so conspiracy theorists can have fodder for more fodder .
 Los Angeles Police Department destroyed evidence after a period of time that should have been preserved . Memphis Police Department in its investigation of the assassination of Martin Luther King destroyed evidence that should be preserved .
 Ed Hoffman didn't see what he first said he saw, but apparently he wasn’t even where he assured the FBI he was . Hoffman was found not where he said he was, but where he told the FBI that he was was .
 Mack said that since Brown would have had a “clear view of Hoffman,” he interviewed Brown around this time and Brown told him that he was “sure” there was no one standing where Hoffman claims to have been .
 Earle Brown’s testimony, and his own father and brother don’t believe, make his story unworthy of any belief . The following is merely academic, since the testimony and Hoffman's completely changing stories .
 If Hoffman was where he said he was, the testimony of Dallas deputy sheriff Eugene Boone would not negate Hoffman's story . Some anticonspiracy theorists believe that Boone's testimony would negate Hoffman’s story . But if Hoffman was there he would be in the same place as he said
 Even if the railroad cars were there, they would have been southeast of where Hoffman said he was . Hoffman said they would not have been anywhere near his line of sight to the top of the grassy knoll area to the east .
 Anti-conspiracy theorists have alleged that Hoffman's view of the area behind the picket fence would not have blocked the area . An Old Charter billboard just west of the underpass on the north side of Elm Street was not blocked, they say .
 She repeated what she had told the sheriff’s department, that when she saw the man running right after the shooting, she immediately “ran across the street” and pursued him . She repeated the same thing she had said to the sheriff's department .
 She may have run across the street, but she didn't do it when she said she did, police say . She didn’t do it, though at some later point she may have ran across .
 Listen to what she told conspiracy author Jim Marrs twenty-five years later for his 1989 book . Listen to Marrs' interview with conspiracy author James Marrs in 1989 .
 Newsman Featherston, the newsman, has disappeared from her version of the story . Featherston has not been seen in the past two weeks .
 'Oh, no Fm not. One of them said, ‘You’re coming with us,’ and I replied ‘No Fm. Not.’ One of the players said, 'You're coming with them,” she said .
 "I was hustled past the front of the Depository. But then the other guy put a grip on my shoulder and they began hustling me past the . But then, the other man put a . grip on his shoulder, he said, "They began hustled me past
 Jim Featherston confirmed that it was he who brought Hill and Moorman to the Courthouse pressroom .
 Jesse Price is a favorite of conspiracy theorists, though a much lesser one, is Jesse Price . Jesse Price was the subject of numerous conspiracy theories, though not the top of the list . Price is the son of Jesse Price, who was killed in 2008 .
 Price doesn’t quite fall comfortably into the cuckoo bird category, all of whose members are a little funny or say funny things . Price doesn't quite fit comfortably into that category, but he's a funny guy .
 Price gave a statement to the Dallas County Sheriff’s Department that he was watching the motorcade pass through Dealey Plaza . Price said he was standing on the roof of the Union Terminal Annex Building in Dallas .
 The passenger cars were parked behind the picket fence on both sides of the railroad spur or siding . Several people, including police officers, ran toward this area, including several people who ran toward it .
 Price said the man he saw was wearing a “white dress shirt, no tie and khaki colored trousers [clearly not the man Jean Hill saw] Price said he had something in his hand . Price said it was clear that Hill was not the same man he thought she saw
 Price did not say where the man was running from . In Price’s original statement, Price said he didn’t say where he was running .
 There are some serious problems with Price’s observations, none of which the conspiracy theorists are troubled by . Price's observations are not the first time conspiracy theorists have been troubled by.
 Dallas police officer Joe E Murphy, who confirmed seeing the pickup truck where Mercer said it was, was one of three officers stationed, since ten o’clock that morning, on the Stemmons Freeway overpass .
 The FBI report of an interview with Murphy on December 9, 1963, in which it is said that Murphy was on “the Triple Underpass on Elm Street” is in error . The report of Murphy's 1963 interview with the FBI is incorrect .
 Summers said he saw a gun under the overcoat of a man in a suit . Summers says he and others ran up to the top of the grassy knoll at Dealey Plaza moments after the shooting . Summers: "We were stopped by a man who had an overcoat over
 Jim Featherston of the Dallas Times Herald somehow managed to make a copy of the story .
 By the following day, Moorman’s photo was appearing in papers throughout the country . By the next day, the photo had been appearing in newspapers across the country.
 The Secret Service and the FBI returned Moorman’s two Polaroid photos to her . The Warren Commission never published either of the two stills in its volumes .
 Moorman loaned her two photos to the HSCA’s photographic panel for examination . The second photo, the assassination one, was published in three of its volumes . The first one had no evidentiary value .
 I should add that the two aforementioned Moorman photos are the only ones she took that day that are known to the general assassination research community . The two photos are only ones known to be taken that day .
 Mary Moorman told Gary Mack she took two other photos that day on Elm, one each of police officers she knew . Gary Mack knows Moorman well, and Moorman says she took the photos . Moorman said she also took photos of two other police officers on Elm .
 A presidential assassin not only would not try to prevent others from seeing as much of his body behind the fence, but even more importantly, would shoot at the president while he is holding the rifle in the air without availing himself of support .
 Gary Mack’s response to the findings is that “any study of the Badge Man image using a man of ‘average size’ is flawed, he says . Gary Mack: Any study using an average size is flawed .
 If Badge Man was only slightly over five feet tall, since the fence itself is five feet in height, his eyes would be at the same level or most likely lower than the fence, making it impossible for him to have fired at Kennedy .
 Badge Man never rested the rifle on top of the fence, but held it in his hands . Mack’s own position that Badge Man held the rifle in his own hands is incorrect .
 No photographs of the assassination scene show a ‘Coke’ bottle on the wall, Mack wrote . A bottle appears in some post-assassination pictures, but the shape does not suggest it was the distinctive Coca-Cola bottle shape .
 Computer enhancement studies show no straight or solid soft drink bottle lines above the top of the wall .
 Gary Mack and Jack White feel that there is support for their Badge Man theory . Lee Bowers, the signal operator in the railroad tower, testified that he saw two men behind the stockade fence before the shooting .
 Bowers said he saw two sets of two men in the general area of the grassy knoll . Bowers: Two sets of men were seen in the area, but no one was hurt .
 The first two men he mentioned were dressed, he said, in civilian clothing, not in police uniforms . Bowers said the two men were about “ten or fifteen feet” from each other and were standing near the “mouth of the underpass”
 One of the two men was still there when police came up the grassy knoll to search the area, he said . He said he "could not say” if the second man was there .
 Bowers never saw these two men carrying anything that attracted his attention, such as a rifle, such a rifle . There’s no reason to believe they weren’t just spectators to the motorcade .
 One of the suspects was a parking lot attendant who operates in the parking lot there . One of them was an attendant that operates the lot there.
 His description of the location was brief, and there was no elaboration . He described the location of the incident .
 Bowers isn't even sure if he saw one or two men, and he knew who one of them was . However, Bowers says he's not sure if there were two men in the crowd .
 If they were in the area behind the fence where he said he saw “something out of the ordinary,” it seems hard to imagine he wouldn’t have said, which he never did, that he saw them in the precise area where he saw something unusual .
 Gary Mack says that “ Arnold told his story about two police officers to Nigel Turner, but Turner’s editing makes it seem that he was talking about only one officer,” Mack says . Gary Mack: “Arnold said that he told two officers, but
 Turner admitted to me before the show first aired in 1988 that Arnold’s story was a little hard to follow on television and the editing he had done was simply to make it clearer . Turner said he edited the show to make Arnold's story clearer .
 Mack said Arnold told him that “the cop with the gun was the second cop who approached him and that it was the first man who kicked him.” Mack said that Arnold said that the cop with a gun approached him . Arnold told Mack that Arnold was kicked by the first
 Still photos by Wilma Bond, Cecil Stoughton, Frank Cancellare, Harry Cabluck, and James Towner, show no man on the ground near the fence being assaulted by a police officer .
 The Marie Muchmore film taken at the time of the head shot shows no Gordon Arnold figure where Arnold claims to have been . The head shot was taken in the same time as the photo taken by Muchmore .
 Mack wrote that “Arnold told me in 1982 that he was wearing his tan Army uniform in Dealey Plaza.” But Mack told me that Arnold told me he was in the Army uniform .
 The problem with Mack’s position is that we know from all the evidence and “The Grassy Knoll” section of this book that no bullet was fired from the grassy knoll . The problem is that Mack's view is that the bullet was not fired from
 Arnold and his story have no credibility, as discussed in the text, the story being ridiculous on its face . Arnold's story has no credibility and the story is ridiculous on the face .
 Photographic evidence alone shows he was not on the grassy knoll . So even if he was on the knoll, this fact in no way proves Mack’s Badge Man theory .
 If true, this would mean that Texas senator Ralph Yarborough may have seen Arnold drop to the ground at the time of the third shot . Yarborough’s car was far enough down Elm to see Arnold .
 Arnold made no distinction between first shot that came from behind and first shot fired . Arnold was clearly indicating he dropped to the ground when the first shot was fired . Hurt interviewed Arnold for Hurt's 1982 book .
 He said that while on the ground “a second shot was fired” over where he was . He said he was hit by a second round of gunfire .
 He gave no indication that he heard any shots before or after these two shots . He said he did not hear any of the shots fired .
 Gary Mack said that in the Moorman photo “there is a light blob very close to where the Badge Man was , and we weren’t sure what it was, but gradually, as details started coming out with Jack’s photo work, we realized this image was
 When Earl Golz’s photographer, Jay Godwin, asked Arnold in August of 1978 to position himself, for a photograph, where he claimed to be on the grassy knoll on the day of the assassination, he appears to have positioned himself at the southeast corner of the
 The angle from where Moorman was when she took her photo to either where she says Arnold was, or where he positioned himself for the photograph, precludes him from being the light blob .
 To have been in the right position he would have had to be at least ten or so feet to the east on the steps in order to be the light blob on the line of sight .
 The Dallas Morning News archives didn't have a print or negative in its archives . Even Godwin couldn't find a print of the photo in his garage .
 The Dallas Morning News print appeared on August 27, 1978, page 4A, a part of a Golz article that included his interview of Arnold Arnold .
 Mack, in placing Arnold to the left of Badge Man (to the left, not Badge Man’s), makes it even less likely, not more, that he was the light blob . But Mack says Arnold is less likely to have been Badge Man's .
 In the 1988 British film The Men Who Killed Kennedy, the images of the top of the knoll area in the Moorman photo were not intelligible to anyone, including the members of the HSCA photographic panel . In a blowup of Gary Mack’s copy of the
 In a 2000 interview of Mack, I made an offer to him, which I said I would “put in writing,” that if he sent me a print of the subject part of the Moorman photo he had as well as the blown-up version of it that appeared
 He added that he himself had already sent a copy of the photo to two of the twenty-two panelists and they were impressed by it .
 Roger Craig was aware that his “light green” in his book manuscript conflicted with his ‘it looked white’ in his testimony before the Warren Commission, he claimed that he had said “green” and the Warren . Commission altered his testimony to “white
 In a phone conversation with Mack, he went into more detail on the identity of the experts who saw the subject photo . Mack: On November 22, the very day of the assas, the experts saw the photo .
 Mack said Davidhazy told him he couldn't see anything in the photo, but he spent little time analyzing the photo . Mack said he was told he couldn’t see anything, but the photo was taken in a different way .
 Another photographic expert (but again, not on the HSCA panel) had a look at the photo . Larry Maver of the Hughes Danbury Optical Systems Corporation. Larry Maver .
 The only HSCA photographic panel member that Mack sent the photo to was Robert Selzer . Selzer also told Mack that the image “might be a person”
 Baker told me that on Friday evening, when Craig was in his office, the lowered blinds were open, not closed as they are in the photo . Everyone in the outer office, including Craig, was able to see Captain Fritz, Oswald, and others inside Fritz’s office
 He doesn’t know when this photo was taken, but believes it was probably the next day, Saturday, though he has no idea why Craig would have come back then .
 Craig himself, in many statements, has never said he came back again after Friday evening . Craig himself has said he never came back after Friday night .
 Oswald's shirt was removed from his T-shirt . Dallas police removed the shirt Oswald was wearing over the shirt so they could check for fiber matchups . Oswald had been wearing the shirt for more than a week .
 One possibility is that the man in the photo might not be Craig Craig . Craig is the author of a new book called "Craig"
 Dallas sheriff Jim Bowles showed the photo to “a dozen or so 1960s deputies’s deputies,” Bowles said . The photo was taken in the 1960s, Bowles says .
 Conspiracy theorists and Warren Commission critics distort the record of the case, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: As with every other area of case, the Warren Commission has distorted the record .
 Edward J Epstein, while a graduate student at Cornell, wrote his master’s thesis on the inner workings of the Warren Commission, which ended up as his 1966 book, Inquest . For example, Epstein wrote Inquest while he was a student . Epstein's book Inquest is
 When we go to the author’s citation for this assertion, he only lists four witnesses . But when we went to the citation, the author lists only four witnesses to the assertion .
 Mr Epstein’s account is even more flawed, says Mr Epstein . And when we look at the testimony of the four witnesses he cites he cites, we find even more problems in Mr Epstein's account .
 Epstein has the wrong location for where his witness saw smoke . Epstein suggests the source of the smoke was not, as Epstein suggests to his readers, from a rifle being fired .
 Austin Miller was one of Epstein’s witnesses, along with his friend Royce Skelton . Miller was on the Triple Overpass at the time of the alleged murder of Epstein .
 The citation Epstein gives his readers for Miller’s testimony about seeing smoke is wrong . Epstein gives readers a citation Epstein gave for Miller's testimony that Miller saw smoke, but it's wrong .
 Miller told the Dallas County Sheriff’s Department that he saw smoke or steam coming from a group of trees north of Elm off the railroad tracks . Miller did tell the police that he thought the smoke was steam coming out of the trees .
 Miller was referring to the westernmost area of the grassy knoll right near the Triple Underpass and railroad tracks, not the easternmost part of the knoll just west of the corner of the picket fence . Miller’s reference to the smoke or steam coming from �
 The steam pipe was nowhere near the corner of the picket fence, the area where smoke was supposedly seen . Gary Mack, the Sixth Floor Museum curator, told me that “the steam pipe’s nowhere near’�s corner .
 Royce Skelton was standing on top of the railroad overpass directly above Elm Street . Epstein forgot to cite Royce’s testimony, and that Epstein forgot it, he says .
 Skelton said he did see smoke in Dealey Plaza, but not coming from the grassy knoll area . Skelpton said he saw smoke in the area, but did not see smoke coming from a grass-covered knoll .
 Law Quarterly Review's Goodhart interviewed Epstein and asked him to submit any statement he was going to attribute to me . Epstein’s book has been published by Epstein, who has been accused of sexual misconduct .
 Epstein is one of the most objective and perceptive of all Warren Commission critics . Epstein has contributed considerably to the legitimate literature on the assassination, he says .
 There is one other person who claimed he saw a puff of smoke in the area of the grassy knoll . His allegation, well, went up in smoke .
 The fence would have been to his back, but he either had eyes in the back of his head, or turned around and saw the puff of smoke, which was still visible hanging in the air . Though he didn’t say so, since the fence would’ve been
 Another Union Terminal Company employee, Richard Calvin Dodd, was atop the railroad overpass . Dodd was watching the presidential motorcade approaching when he heard shots being fired . Dodd is a track supervisor at Union Terminal Terminal Company .
 Mark Lane got a hold of Dodd for a filmed interview on March 24, 1966 . Dodd came up with an observation pointing to conspiracy, just like so many other people before and after him who were interviewed by Lane . Dodd: "I think there is a conspiracy in my life"
 Dodd told Lane that he saw smoke at the time of the shots and “the smoke came from behind the hedge on the north side of the plaza,” in other words, the grassy knoll . Dodd said Lane was pleased to hear that the smoke was coming from the
 Dodd didn't say anything about seeing smoke coming from the grassy knoll, the FBI says . Dodd told the FBI that “his attention remained on President Kennedy’s attention,” according to a report on the interview .
 CNN's John Sutter says he didn't see smoke . He says he did not see smoke, but it's not clear he did .
 Thompson writes that Sam Holland also saw ‘cigarette butts’ in the same area of the footprints . Thompson also writes that Holland saw cigarette butts in the area .
 Thompson did not include that portion of the transcript where Holland mentioned seeing cigarette butts . But at least in the quoted excerpts from Thompson’s interview of Holland, the transcript does not show that .
 Holland made no reference to cigarette butts in his testimony to the Warren Commission . Holland testified that he was not smoking butts at the time .
 Thompson quotes Richard Dodd, who was on top of the railroad overpass with Holland at the time of the motorcade, as seeing ‘cigarette butts” behind the fence . Thompson quotes as his source as an interview of Dodd by Mark Lane .
 Conspiracy community photographic expert Robert Groden tried to convince the HSCA that in the background of the photo of the grassy knoll taken around the time of the shot to the president’s head, he can see “a large puff of smoke” in the grass
 It was just another Grodenian observation that the HSCA could not see, nor, to my knowledge, could anyone else . It was not the first time anyone else could have seen it .
 Smoke from a rifle would be very small and, as indicated, would vanish immediately on this windy day . One, the smoke from a . rifle would have been very small .
 If what Groden encircled were smoke, it would appear to be smoke from a small smokestack . Groden: "Smoke appears to be a small smoke cloud cloud"
 The image is probably fifty times larger than what could be expected from the muzzle of a fired rifle . If that’s an exaggeration, what is not is that the image is .
 The large image is not anywhere along the stockade fence, being to the west of the fence near the Triple Underpass . Moreover, the large image does not appear to be near the fence .
 Wiegman's photo had to have been taken at least a few seconds after all the shots were fired . Groden has also encircled the presidential limousine on the photo, and it is “disappearing under” the Triple Underpass .
 Conspiracy author Jim Marrs is more sure than Groden that the smoke originally came from a rifle fired behind the picket fence . Instead of vanishing in the wind, the smoke actually mushroomed into a large, cloudlike image .
 He said the “frames of the Wiegman film that show this white image don’t show any movement of it, which there would be if it was smoke, particularly on a windy day,” he said . Perhaps most importantly, he said the frames of
 The image is near the Triple Underpass, not the tree on the grassy knoll, Trask says . Trask also agrees that the image is not near the triple underpass .
 The only other Dealey Plaza witness who alleges to have seen any puff of smoke in the air in the . air has to be dismissed almost out of hand . Only other witness to see any smoke in Dealey .
 Three puffs of smoke hung around on this windy day in neat form until he finally saw them above the Triple Underpass . In other words, not just one puff of smoke, but three of them hung around .
 All Warren Commission witnesses were interviewed by assistant Warren Commission counsel before they testified, as is the customary situation with all witnesses in criminal and civil cases . Though he would only be expected to answer questions while testifying, all Warren . witnesses are interviewed before testifying .
 He was asked to tell his interviewer all he saw, and if he wasn’t asked about this, he would have been expected to volunteer the information .
 Author Richard Lewis interviewed the doctor who attended Bowers' death . Dr. Bowers was not the only doctor who treated Bowers . Bowers died in a car crash in 2005 .
 'He was wringing wet when he came in and I wondered because of this whether he had a coronary. He was wringer wet when . He was . wringing . wet when they came in, I wondered . whether he . had a . coronary .
 The man was in a state of severe shock, the kind of shock you could expect from the type of accident he was in . He was taken to hospital in a serious but stable condition .
 Conspiracy theorists have named nearly all of the people they say are accused of murdering President Kennedy . Nearly all of them have been named as JFK's assassins .
 Igor "Turk" Vaganov is a Latvian emigrant with as many aliases as bad checks on his resume . The most prominent being Igor “Turk’s” Tippit, a twenty-year-old .
 A reader of Mein Kampf who railed against ‘Jews and niggers,” Vaganov lived in Philadelphia and worked as a credit manager in a bank .
 On several occasions in 1963 he had requested a transfer to Dallas but was turned down . He had requested several times in 1963 that he wanted to play in Dallas .
 On November 7, 1963, he suddenly left Philadelphia with his eighteen-year-old girlfriend, Anne Dulin, marrying her en route . He arrived in Dallas on November 11 or 12 or 12 .
 The couple took up residence in an apartment in the Oak Cliff area of the city . They took up to live in a suburb of Oak Cliff .
 FBI agents went to Vaganov’s apartment, interrogated him, and apparently became satisfied that the .38 caliber revolver and a rifle he had in his bedroom had not been recently fired .
 When Vaganov provided evidence by way of his wife and the apartment manager that he was at the time of the assassination, they eliminated him as a suspect, presumably writing off the episode as a marital spat . The episode was apparently written off as a marriage spat .
 Anne Vaganov told Berendt that her frantic call to her sister the night before the assassination was due to her fear that her husband was going to harm her or himself . It had nothing to do with the assassination, she said .
 Vaganov said he wanted to be able to visit his first wife, who was living in nearby Garland, Texas . He said he had a sense of obligation to his new wife that prevented him from seeing her again .
 Conspiracy theorists have suggested that Vaganov may have been Tippit's assassin . He owned a .38 caliber revolver and drove a red Thunderbird . Conspiracy theorists say he lived just eleven blocks from the murder scene .
 Tippit murder scene witness Domingo Benavides testified before the Warren Commission that “I think there was another car that was in front of me, a red Ford, I believe. I believe’s another car,” he said .
 "I didn't know the man, but I guess he was about twenty-five or thirty, and he pulled over," she says . "He pulled over. He pulled over, and I didn’t know what he was," she adds .
 Benavides changed his description of the red car he gave to the Warren Commission to the extent that he told Berendt it had a white top . It is now clear that the mystery man was not Igor Vaganov but Jack Tatum, the eye-witness who reluctantly
 It was also suggested for a time that the discarded light-gray jacket found near theTippit murder scene was Vaganov's, until it was discovered that the six-foot twoinch Vaganova wore 36-inch sleeves . The evidence jacket sleeves were 32 Vz inches
 Conspiracy theorists say Vaganov had a .38 caliber revolver and was away from his apartment at the time Tippit was killed .
 Berendt wrote, “That thesis held for awhile until Anne [who never got along with Vaganov] said she remembered distinctly that she had the pistol with her when he went out.” The pistol was said to have been kept by Anne, who was separated from
 "Sharp [the apartment manager] had come up while she was alone and had told her that a cop had been killed in the neighborhood," she says . Sharp had come to her apartment and told her of the killing .
 Vaganov had told the FBI that he went to his bank on the afternoon of the assassination . But Berendt, without quoting a source, wrote that the bank had no record of activity on his account that day .
 Vaganov showed no fear of being identified by witnesses as Tippit's killer . He readily agreed with Berendt to meet face-to-face with two of the witnesses, Helen Markham and Domingo Benavides .
 Berendt observed that Benavides had testified to the Warren Commission only that there was a “red Ford” at the killing site . He said he had testified only that the Ford was at the site of the killing .
 No evidence has ever been presented connecting Vaganov in any way with the Tippit killing . No evidence was ever presented connecting the two men .
 Berendt: "There is not one shred of evidence linking with either killing that day or with any of the principals involved" The investigation concluded that there was no evidence linking the killing to either killing or the principals .
 All three almost assuredly were never even in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination .
 All three came forward for the first time years later (Beverly Oliver, Virgil “Ed” Hoffman, the deaf-mute, four years later; and Gordon Arnold, fifteen years later). All three significantly changed their story every time they told it, although the
 The stories of these three witnesses are so far-fetched and contradictory that it is easy to form the opinion that not one of them was even present in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination . The stories are so absurd that some of the witnesses are not even present .
 Forensic pathologists who examined Kennedy’s body concluded that Kennedy was shot twice from behind, not from the grassy knoll .
 A sixth segment was added in 1995, and in 2003, on the fortieth anniversary of the assassination, three additional segments were released .
 The subtitles for the nine segments or episodes are The Coup d’Etat, The Cover Up, The Forces of Darkness, The Patsy, The Witnesses, The Truth Shall Make You Free, The Smoking Guns, The Love Affair, and The Guilty Men .
 Another alleged French assassin of Kennedy is Jean Rene Souetre, a member of the French right-wing militant group OAS . The group opposed French President Charles de Gaulle’s decision to grant Algeria independence .
 Seymour, in their book, Triangle of Death, not only give no motive for Souetre killing Kennedy, but also don’t tell us anything about how he went about doing it . Seymour says the OAS hated Kennedy, though not saying why . Seymour: Unlike other assassins
 Authors: Why Souetre was in Fort Worth and Dallas on the day of the assassination is suspicious . They say they can't find out what federal agency picked him up, which one expelled him, and which country he was expelled .
 Conspiracy theorist J Gary Shaw learned that Souetre had a good friend in Houston, Texas, a dentist named Dr. Dr. David S. Shaw . Shaw also learned that Dr. Suroetre's friend Dr. Shaw had a dentist friend in Texas .
 Author Hurt says Shaw told him that Alderson and Souetre corresponded around Christmas time for around ten years . Alderson said he hadn’t seen his friend for “many, many years,” but Shaw said he had seen him for around 10 years .
 The FBI started tailing Alderson shortly after the assassination . Alderson was a major informant for the FBI .
 Alderson apparently was asked by the FBI why Souetre was in Dallas on the day of the assassination . Alderson said to Shaw, “I don’t have the vaguest idea according to the CIA when they interviewed me he was on his way to see me
 We can’t know if what Alderson said is accurate, but I am satisfied from reading the transcript of Shaw’s interview of him that Alderson definitely knew Souetre .
 The answer to the mystery of who picked up Souetre in Dallas and why he was expelled from the country may be found in Hurt's film .
 At least two inspectors for the INS were given urgent orders to pick up specific foreign nationals in Dallas in the immediate aftermath of the assassination, he says .
 National Archives: "I was unable to locate any reference to Bailey in the JFK database" National Archives says it has no record of Bailey in its database .
 The FBI conducted the most comprehensive murder investigation in American history in the Kennedy assassination . If Souetre had murdered Kennedy, it obviously would have arrested him immediately and not expelled him from the country .
 It's reasonable to assume the FBI would have quickly found out who it was and why he or they expelled Souetre . And if anyone else had done so without justification, it would have been found out . The FBI should have quickly tracked down who it is .
 Souetre’s being in Fort Worth and Dallas on the day of the assassination, while interesting, is no evidence at all of his involvement in the assassination . Second, Souete's being in Dallas and Fort Worth on day of assassination, is not evidence of involvement in
 There is no evidence from anyone that Souetre was even in Dealey Plaza, nor any evidence connecting him in any way with Kennedy’s murder . And there is no . evidence that he was in the area at the time of Kennedy's murder .
 The only FBI interview of Alderson that I was able to find occurred on March 6, 1964, in Houston . Also, with no evidence, other than a bare allegation that Souetre and his group were involved in the murder .
 FBI agents wanted to know how Alderson knew Souetre . Alderson said they had exchanged Christmas cards since they had worked together in 1953 .
 Alderson told the FBI he was unaware that Souetre had ever been to the U.S. and says nothing about him intending to visit him at any time . Alderson said he did not know Souete had ever visited the United States .
 The FBI felt that Souetre may have been in Houston around the time of the assassination . It's inferable from the report, however, that the FBI checked the records of Pan American World Airways to see if anyone had left Houston for Mexico around that time .
 The Souetre Soux family found nothing under the name Sourere but did find listings for an apparent husband and wife named Dominique and Vivian Roux leaving Houston for Mexico City on November 22, 1963, and a John, Irma, and Sara Mertz departing Houston
 It stretches credulity to believe that with the overthrow of de Gaulle being the primary focus of Souetre and his OAS, he would take a breather to fly to America to kill Kennedy .
 In June of 1986, Steve Rivele turned over his fairy tale to Michael J Tobin, chief of the Heroin Investigation Section of the Drug Enforcement Agency in Washington, D.C., who told him he would forward his material to the FBI, which he did . Rive
 Rivele told Nicoli that it was imperative that he speak to Michel Nicoli . Before doing so, he told him that he would speak to him . Nicoli was the first person to speak to the former president of France .
 Christian David told Christian Rivele to find a man named Michel Nicoli . Nicoli was Nicoli, a friend of Christian David, who died in 2003 .
 Rivele suggested to Tobin that Nicoli would confirm the charges . Tobin interviewed Nicoli, who was living in New Jersey, in touch with Nicoli himself .
 Nicoli said that after Kennedy was assassinated, Christian David told him that he, David, had been approached by Antoine Guerini to kill Kennedy . Nicoli wasn't sure, from talking to David, whether Guerini had actually mentioned Kennedy’s name .
 Nicoli said he and David were in a coffee shop in Buenos Aires with Roger Bocognani, Lucien Sarti, and Sauveur Pironti . Nicoli: "Something was said by someone other than" him or David that “they did something
 All three of the Marseille “petty criminals” were accounted for, in France, on the day of the assassination . All of this, obviously, is pure, unadulterated moonshine, and not just because we already know that .
 Hemming claims to have met Oswald when Oswald was stationed in Santa Ana, California, and even provided Oswald with documents to get to Cuba . Hemming was an anti-Castroite undoubtedly involved in South Florida, as so many other soldiers of fortune during the period .
 Roy Hargraves, William Seymour, Frank Sturgis, Lawrence Howard, John Martino, and Larry de Joseph were among others like him during this time .
 Noel Twyman, a retired engineer and businessman, flew Hemming out to his home in San Diego to regale him with his nonsense . Oliver Stone hired Hemming as a consultant on his film JFK, and he paid for some meals .
 Hemming said the teams used to kill Kennedy “would believe that they were on an operation.” Hemming used language hovering between fairy tale and abstract theory . Hemming: “The teams” used to . kill Kennedy would “believe” they were
 The HSCA was on your side in alleging JFK was killed as result of a conspiracy . Kennedy's shot was less than sixty yards from the grassy knoll, but missed Kennedy's limousine .
 Hemming tells Twyman that he doesn't know who all the killers were, but "we've identified two of them" Hemming says he doesn’t know who the killers are, but “we’ve identified two,” he says . Hemming
 You can put a smile on the shooter's face because then he realizes that it’s a super-pro job and there are backup and decoy teams and that's where those shots are coming from . The shooter's smile can be put on the face of the shooter’
 Apparently it was an open secret that ‘they’re going to kill Kennedy and “they” were asking Hemming and everyone else like him to please do the job, but Hemming said no . The group that was asking everyone to kill JFK was the same group
 I wish Hemming had said no to Noel Twyman when he wanted to talk to him, so I wouldn’t have had to read about this silliness in my book . Hemming should have said no when he spoke to Noel, so he didn't have to read
 On May 22, 1990, John Rademacher sent out a “To Whom It May Concern” letter to Granbury, Texas . The addressee is unknown to this author .
 Rademacher was another among a great many nuts or con men in the JFK saga . He was trying to make a buck, become a part of history, or both, and no one paid any attention to him . The JFK conman was another one of many who tried to make
 Hemming says Nelson Bunker Hunt was in the room at the time but away from the conversation . Hemming did not identify the man, and said Bunker Hunt, who was nearby, was not involved .
 Dallas Morning News reporter Larry Powell interviewed Rademacher in 1989 . He said he used no metal detector, and used only a metal detector .
 In October 1987, he and a handful of partners used trowels to probe the soil . They found a .222 casing on the second day and a second .222 shell the next month .
 Rademacher told the class about his findings and passed out a map showing where he found the shells . The shells were found near the steps on the grassy knoll, but to the east of the picket fence .
 West became aware of the “dent” or “bite marks” on one of the two shells Rademacher had found . So as of March 3, 1992, and undoubtedly earlier, West knew of the marks .
 After talking to Summers, Rademacher immediately started looking in gun catalogs for a strange-looking gun that could fire .222 shells . The gun could fire at least one of the world's deadliest guns .
 Remington Fireball XP-100 pistol sits on a little tripod . The gun is a Remington pistol that sits on the tripod . It's not the first time a gun has been fired .
 The only problem is that the ad clearly says it only fires .221 shells . The ad clearly states that the only gun can only fire .221 .
 Remarkably, Rademacher or someone promoting him changed the .221 number in the ad to .222 . The number was changed from .221 .
 Stimson told Perry, "Vernon and I got a little crosswise" Stimson said Perry and Stimson got "crosswise" on a phone call in 1998 .
 I mentioned human dentition could be one of several causes for the dent . Human dentition is one of a number of causes for a dent .
 An animal bite, ejector marks and even a vice grip could cause it . I also mentioned an animal bite .
 Rademacher turned over the shell with the alleged teeth marks to conspiracy theorist Jim Marrs in 1990, seventeen years ago . The shell was found in 1990 .
 If a casing was found, and teeth marks were found on it, they’re most likely from some nut-cracking squirrels . The squirrels are most likely to crack nuts .
 CIA agent David Atlee Phillips was paying him three hundred dollars per month to transport guns to Lee Harvey Oswald in Clinton, Louisiana, Louisiana . He also said that for a while, CIA agent paid him $3,000 per month for transporting guns .
 His wife, however, said there was no twin, and Kroll confirmed there is no twin . Kroll's wife said there were no twins .
 Brown says this is of “serious interest” and suggests it is not a “coincidence,” implying that this helps tie Wallace into JFK’s murder . Brown suggests that this may help tie Wallace to JFK's murder .
 LBJ’s ‘fear’ of Estes could not be eliminated by his murder of Marshall Marshall . Estes was only thing related to LBJ related to his involvement with Estes in cotton allotment scandal . LBJ's "fear" was not eliminated
 Nowhere does Estes even allege in his book, Billie Sol Estes, that LBJ had anything to do with LBJ's crooked business dealings .
 The start of Estes’ fall was three articles published in the Pecos Independent and Enterprise, a biweekly in the small Texas town where Estes lived . Estes' fall was the start of his fall, three articles in the biweekly .
 A Pecos doctor, John Dunn, was a crusader who wanted to get to the truth of Estes’ corrupt business practices . Dunn bought the newspaper with an associate in order to publish the results of his dogged investigation . Dunn wanted to expose Estes' corrupt practices .
 The three resulting articles became a sensation that triggered a federal investigation of Estes and won a Pulitzer Prize for the writer . Estes was investigated by the federal government .
 The grand jury concluded that “Henry H Marshall’s death was a homicide, not a suicide,” went on to say . The parties named as participants in the offense are deceased, and therefore it is not possible for the grand jury to return an indictment .
 You can have only unindicted co-conspirators where there is an indictment . You can only have unindictment co-contradicts where there has been an indictment. You can't have an indictment where there's an indictment, he says .
 Common sense tells us that if there had been any indictment naming LBJ as an unindicted co-conspirator, surely it would have surfaced by now . Moreover, common sense says that if LBJ had been indicted for murder, he would have been found guilty of it .
 Sources requested anonymity since grand jury testimony is secret under Texas state law . The sources requested anonymity .
 Estes testified he attended three meetings with Johnson, two in Washington and one at the Driskill Hotel in Austin . Estes said they discussed the need to stop Marshall Marshall .
 Robertson County district attorney John Paschall would not reveal the identities of those Estes named . Paschall noted that “they’re all dead,” making it all the easier for Estes to make his charges, and impossible to indict .
 Former U.S. district court judge Barefoot Sanders says the FBI investigated the Marshall case "to some extent" The FBI found nothing that tied Johnson, Estes, Carter, or Wallace to Marshall’s death .
 Marshall’s death in 1964 was investigated by the United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, chaired by Senator John L McClellan . The subcommittee was unable to substantiate any connection between Marshall's death and Estes' investigation of Estes .
 Marshall’s death on his Robertson County ranch on June 3, 1961, was not suicide . Lee Farmer, the local justice of the peace who also served as the county coroner, ruled, without autopsy, at the time .
 Estes describes himself as a loyal person who would never “turn on my friends,” and he considered LBJ one of them . Estes says LBJ was a loyal friend who never turned on his friends .
 Estes justifies what he did by the fact that when he had been prosecuted and convicted back in the 1960s on fraud charges, “I believed Lyndon would protect me,” and he didn’t. Estes says he didn't .
 Estes may have been an accomplished con man at one time, but today he couldn’t con a two-year-old . Estes was arrested for allegedly conning a toddler .
 Estes: Carter told him that Wallace fired the fatal head shot at Kennedy from the grassy knoll . Estes says Carter told Estes that he carried out all the details of the assassination . Wallace was Wallace, Estes said .
 Billie can have every assurance that no one in their right mind is going to knock on his door asking to listen to the tapes solving the Kennedy assassination . Billie says he's confident no one will ask for the tapes to be solved .
 I’m doing it because, writing a book myself about the assassination, I have to read books by nuts and charlatans like you . I'm doing it for myself, and I'm going to write a book about it, he says .
 Cliff Carter on tape saying LBJ ordered JFK’s murder, put it out and you’ll be rolling in money, really big money, in a very short time . But Billie, if you have Cliff Carter . on tape . putting it out, you'll be
 "For the first time in your life, Billie, you won’t be conning anyone," says Billie . "And I’m not going to con anyone," she says .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of CNN iReport . Send your photos of your favorite travel destinations by email jennifera@dailymailonline.com .
 Retired Texas Ranger captain Clint Peoples testified at the Austin hearing . He was “delighted” by the court’s ruling . Retired Ranger Clint Peoples spent many years investigating Marshall's death .
 He said he now considered the case closed, yet added that he was ‘satisfied’ that Estes’s testimony before the grand jury in 1984 was truthful .
 Estes was the first person to say he believed the story . Peoples did, and it's not the first .
 In other words, since novels are fiction, McClellan admits he made these scenes up, gratuitously calling himself a journalist in the process . He calls himself a "journalist" in the way he does it .
 McClellan is hopeful he has long forgotten the “journalistic novel” reference, assuming he ever read it in the first place . Obviously, by the time his reader is reading these conspiracies deep in the book, he hopes he has forgotten the reference .
 Faction is a term first applied to Truman Capote’s famous true-crime book, In Cold Blood, to designate a book (on nonfiction lists) that is actually somewhere between fiction and fiction .
 Nowhere does McClellan tell his readers when he is inventing scenes and when he's not, and the thrust of his entire book is that the story told therein is true . The thrust of the book is true, and that the stories told therein are true .
 Howard Donahue points out that several people smelled gunpowder at the time of the shots . George Hickey fired his weapon, according to Howard's claim . Howard says several people smell gunpowder .
 Senator Ralph Yarborough was in the car behind Hickey’s car when he was killed . Yarborough says Yarborough is a friend of Hickey, who was behind him .
 Manchester cites no source for this, and in Yarborough’s only statement to the Warren Commission, an affidavit on July 10,1964 , he makes no reference to this . Yarborough cites no sources for this. Manchester cites .
 Donahue’s statement that if people on the street smelled gunpowder it could not have emanated from sixty feet above is an assumption for which he provides no support . The statement doesn't support his assertion that people in the street couldn't smell gunpowder .
 One also has to wonder if there was any smell of gunpowder at all . A few people perhaps only imagined they smelled it, perhaps only imagining .
 Only a handful of people in the plaza reported smelling gunpowder . After all, only a small handful of the hundreds of people reported smelling it .
 Howard Donahue is proud to point out that two members of the Forensic Ballistics Unit of the New South Wales Police Service in Sydney, Australia (who may or may not have been students of the assassination) wrote him to his publisher, St. St. John’s publisher
 Robert Perrin's wife Nancy worked for Jack Ruby as a bartender at Jack Ruby's Carousel Club in the summer of 1961 . Perrin lived in New Orleans, and many of Garrison's conspiracy villains lived or had lived in the city .
 With Garrison’s very pregnant and paranoid mind, there were no such things as coincidences or innocent associations . Garrison's paranoid mind ruled out coincidences and innocent associations, he says .
 In two interviews with the FBI in 1963, Nancy Perrin Rich (her new married name) spoke of her dislike for Ruby and of her quitting work after a quarrel with him in which he threw her against a wall .
 She alleged that after leaving Ruby’s employ, she attended a meeting in Dallas with her husband that Ruby attended in which a uniformed army colonel offered her husband ten thousand dollars to bring Cuban refugees out of Cuba by boat .
 Not liking Castro, she had no objection to that, but the second and inconsistent part . She objected to on the grounds it would be disloyal to the United States . No deal was consummated, and no deal was .
 She claims she saw Ruby, with his pockets bulging, and the colonel go into a room, and when Ruby came out of the room, the “bulge” was gone .
 Nancy Perrin Rich admitted that her previous husband, Robert Perrin, had turned her into a prostitute . Rich, in her testimony before the Warren Commission, told essentially the same story, and admitted that .
 Not only have confessed assassins in the Kennedy case, but we’ve also had confessed tramps . We've also had a confessed tramp in the case, as well as confessed assassins .
 Chauncey Holt, a career con man with a rap sheet longer than his arm, confessed to being the shortest of the three tramps arrested in Dealey Plaza . Holt claimed to have been an associate of mob financial wizard Meyer Lansky . Holt was arrested in 1991 .
 Holt claimed he was working as a CIA operative at the time . His role was to deliver fake Secret Service identification pins to a "contact" in Dealey Plaza he never named .
 Houston police forensic artist Lois Gibson identified Holt photographically (along with Harrelson and Rogers) as one of the three tramps . She said she'd “bet the farm” on her identification .
 Holt said he and his two fellow “tramps” were taken to a sheriff’s command post . After producing phony ATF documents, they were released, Holt said . Holt said that he and two other "tramps" were released .
 Holt conjectures that he and his fellow tramps may have been set up as alternative patsies . Holt conjecture that they were set up by the government as alternative patsies and that they may be set up . Holt says he and others may be used as pats
 If Holt was an associate of Lansky, apparently Lansky didn’t know it . When you can't even even even know if you’ve been associated with Lansky . Holt was a friend to Lansky; he was a close friend to him .
 Lansky’s biographers never knew of Holt, or felt him to be so insignificant that he wasn’t worth one mention in their books . Or, to be fair to Holt, at least apparently .
 Holt improved on his tale, dramatically, in early 1992 . Holt improved dramatically in his book, "Little Man"
 It would certainly have been nice if the authors had provided their readers with some documentation to support their charges, but I could only find one in their entire book .
 It stands to reason that if Rogers was upset with the U.S. back in the early 1950s, he probably was also in 1963 . Rogers was unhappy with the United States in the 1950s and 1963 .
 It stands to reason he’d want to kill Kennedy, the leader of our government and from behind the picket fence on November 22, 1963 . And if he was, it also stood to reason why he wanted to kill JFK .
 This was independently evidenced by the absence, on the “arrest’s reports, of an arrest report number and right thumb print . The absence of a thumb print on the "arrest" reports was also noted in the reports .
 The “arrest” reports for the three hoboes were called “dummy sheets,” used for those who were detained but not booked . Wise and Vaughn said that the �arrests’s reports were used to book the hoboes . The reports
 The dummy sheets were usually discarded in sixty to ninety days . Wise believes these three dummy sheets not discarded because of the detainees’ connection to the assassination .
 During the course of telling his woes, he started talking about his arrest in Dallas on the day of the assassination, at which time the sheriff’s office called the FBI office in Memphis . The sheriff's office was alerted by the FBI in Memphis, Tennessee .
 Elrod shared a cell on the fifth floor of the city jail with an unknown man . Elrod told Special Agents Francis Cole and Norman Casey that on the day of the assassination he shared a jail cell .
 A cell mate saw a man with a smashed-up face being brought into the jail, he told Elrod he remembered seeing this man at a motel where five men, one of whom was Jack Ruby, had been advanced some money for some type of contract .
 Elrod said he had difficulty remembering things because of his extreme use of alcohol . Elrod: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do this again."
 The La Fontaines are convinced it was none other than Lee Harvey Oswald . Elrod’s brother told them in 1993, thirty years later, that Elrod had said it was Oswald .
 Oswald told a stranger in an adjacent cell that he had been in a motel room with Jack Ruby . Oswald had been charged with the murders of President Kennedy and Officer Tippit . The authors don’t trouble themselves with asking why in the world Oswald would want to tell a stranger
 Neither Elrod nor any other inmate was in any cell adjacent to Oswald’s, La Fontaines say . The real problem with Elrod's story is that he was not in the cell of Oswald's, they say .
 Detective Jim Leavelle was the Dallas officer who got Oswald out of his cell around 9:30 on Sunday morning, November 24, and brought him down to Captain Fritz’s office . He remained with Oswald right up to the time that Oswald was shot by Ruby in the
 Oswald was in F-2, the middle one of three cells, F1, -2, and -3, to the block . He said there were three cells in the middle of the block and Oswald was one of them . Oswald was killed by a single gunshot wound to the
 F-l, to Oswald’s right , had a steel wall on its left, and F-3, on his left, had a . steel wall . Oswald's left, F-L, to F-2, to his right, was a steel . wall on
 Oswald, then, had steel walls separating him from the other inmates at his back and left and right . Oswald was held in a prison cell at the time of his death . Oswald had to be separated from his fellow inmates at the back and right of them .
 The front of the cells had bars, but they “opened to a corridor that had a steel wall on the other side of it,” the inmate says . The prison cell doors had bars but they opened to a different corridor, he says .
 If the La Fontaines, who live in Dallas, Texas, visited the jail site, it's difficult to see how they could have reached the conclusion they did . It was a central issue in their book .
 Not only wasn’t in a cell adjacent to Oswald on the day of the assassination, but there’s no evidence he was ever incarcerated at all . Not only, then, there's no evidence that Elrod was ever in such a cell .
 The La Fontaines say that “the FBI did not tell the truth” in the report . The family says the FBI “lied” about the truth about the investigation into the case .
 Elrod’s arrest report, as if the words arrest and incarceration were synonymous . Elrod's arrest report: ‘Arrest and incarceration are synonymous.’
 The La Fontaines are apparently unaware that it is not uncommon for someone arrested without incarceration when the police immediately recognize the arrest was without merit . Police recognize that it's not uncommon to be released without incarceration .
 The “release” block on Elrod’s arrest report is blank, meaning he never was incarcerated . The ‘release’ block on his arrest report says he was released from jail .
 Elrod's arrest report contains no arrest report number nor a right thumb print . Elrod’s arrest report was released without a right hand print .
 There are, as would be expected, some unanswered questions on this matter . There are still some questions surrounding the decision to step down .
 A Daniel Douglas, in cell F-l, made a phone call while Oswald was in F-2, the Prisoners Telephone Contact Form for November 22, 1963, shows . Another discrepancy is that although we know no one was in adjacent cells F-f and F-3 while
 One “Halleymon,” a civilian employee of the police department, is listed as the person who escorted Douglas to the phone . It’s hard to automatically assume the entry is correct because one civilian employee is listed in the entry .
 In two others, he wrote over the letter of the cell, seemingly inserting the wrong letter first . Instead of a hyphen between the F and the numeral 1, he has a very strange marking that is foreign to known punctuation .
 Thornley wrote two short books on Oswald: Oswald in 1965 and The Idle Warriors in 1991 . Thornley also wrote a novel, which was written before the assassination in 1991.
 Thornley blustered in 1992 on the television show . An avowed right-winger, Thornley is a former right-winger .
 Marina Oswald said her husband used the name “Aleck” on his forged Selective Service card . She said that was the name given to him by his coworkers in Russia . Oswald spelled his name ‘Alek’ on the forged card .
 They then asked her if he had ever used the name ‘Aleck Hidell’ and she said no . She said no. She said he never used to use the name 'Aleck' Hidell . She also said he had never used that name .
 Marina spoke of her husband’s attempt to murder Major General Edwin Walker in an interview . It is unlikely that Marina was trying to cover up this insignificant matter, since in the same interview, she spoke of the attempted murder attempt .
 For whatever reason, she never added that he did use the last name, Hidell, or conceivably, she did say this . Secret Service agents never bothered to put this in their report, she said .
 Oswald's use of the name Hidell may be a variation on the name of his hero, Fidel Castro, says Marina Marina . There is another, less likely explanation for Oswald’s use of Hidell .
 Coincidences abound in life, and one such coincidence concerns the name Hidell . Hidell was born Hidell and Hidell. Hidell is one of the world's most famous musicians .
 Oswald was stationed with John Rene Heindel at Atsugi Air Base in Japan . Oswald was born in New Orleans, New Orleans . Oswald's father was a marine by the name of Heinde . Oswald died in 1945 .
 He told an AP reporter, Mike Cochran, thirty years later, that he turned the notebook over to the FBI . But before he did, he had already dictated every page of the notebook (some thirtyfour pages) into a tape recorder .
 In terms of authenticity it would be virtually worthless, the tape depending for its credibility solely on the word of the transcriber . Not only would it take well over an hour to do, the writings on the pages are difficult to read and many are in Russian .
 Howard, in telling his implausible story, then proceeded to make it even more unworthy of belief than it already was . Howard's story is implausible, but Howard then makes it even worse, he says . Howard, Howard says, "I'm not sure what happened"
 Oswald’s blue notebook is currently at the National Archives . None of this, however, is contained in Oswald's blue notebook . The pages of the pages are reproduced, as indicated, in the Warren Commission volumes .
 Howard’s story that Oswald said he intended to kill Connally and LBJ has absolutely no ring of truth to it since he had no reason to do so and had never expressed animosity toward either of them . On its face, Howard's story has no merit to it .
 Howard did tell the reporter that he mentioned the story earlier, but not to his superiors or the Warren Commission . Howard did say he mentioned it to the reporter, but didn't tell his superiors . Howard told the reporter he did not mention the story to his boss or the commission .
 He quotes LBJ as telling him that the page about Oswald’s plan “to kill Connally was missing when the book got to the Warren Commission,” and LBJ and he speculated that J Edgar Hoover had had the page removed .
 Johann Rush, the cameraman for WDSU in New Orleans who filmed Oswald distributing Fair Play for Cuba leaflets in front of the International Trade Mart on August 16, 1963, has been a student of the Kennedy assassination for years . Rush has come up with a subtle motive for the assassination
 Oswald acted on two different types of motives, he wrote to me in 1999 . In 1999, he said he now thinks Oswald had two different motives for his actions . He said in a letter to me, "After many years of thought on this subject, I now think that Oswald acted
 'Psychological' or 'psychiatric' theories include ego, desire to ‘be somebody’ and leftist politics . ‘Psychiatric’ was ‘psychological,’ which involved his obsession with leftist politics, and his sudden compulsion to shoot the President .
 Rush: Oswald’s personal and conscious motive for the assassination was the one he actually thought about while he was waiting for the Presidential motorcade to enter Dealey Plaza . Rush then wrote: “I think Oswald's personal and . conscious motive was the motivation for the . assassination
 The motive was his idea to shoot the President... and hope right-wingers would be blamed for the assassination . The motive for the shooting was his own idea, he said .
 Rush believes Oswald knew “old-time Communists” would realize they had no choice but to try to exonerate him, and in the process would blame the Far Right for the assassination . Rush believes that Oswald knew he had a chance to be exonerated of his crime .
 Rush’s theory correctly, I think, presupposes that Oswald was willing to do whatever was necessary to hurt the Far Right . Oswald tried to murder one of their leaders, General Walker, to further the Marxist movement here and abroad .
 Rush’s logic that Oswald felt he could hurt the Far Right by murdering Kennedy is hard to accept . Rush's logic is that Oswald wanted to hurt the far right by killing Kennedy .
 He knew his defection to Russia was well known and did everything possible to publicize his devotion to international Marxism and Castro’s Cuba . He had to know that if he was apprehended, it would be the Communists, not the Far Right, who would immediately be suspected, which
 Even if he was believed to have acted alone, he could only hurt, not help, the cause of Communism . He could only help, not helping, Communism, says historian .
 In so doing he served the Communist cause its worse setback in the forty-six years since its baneful inception,” said the Baltimore News-Post on November 23, 1963 .
 Oswald had no reason to believe the Far Right would be blamed for JFK's assassination . Political climate in Dallas at the time of the president’s visit was a cauldron of right-wing fervor and anti-Kennedy hatred . Only if Oswald felt extremely confident he could escape
 The fact that he left his wedding ring and virtually all his money behind for Marina suggests he was well aware he might not survive his horrendous deed . But he also left virtually all of his wife's wedding ring .
 Majority of Americans have come to believe that one or more agencies of the American government (or organized crime) were behind the assassination . It is highly problematic that Oswald would have contemplated this at the time he killed Kennedy, and did so, as Rush posits .
 He would have little basis for believing that any substantive evidence would ever surface implicating some other person or group in the murder he knew he alone had committed . He would be unlikely to believe that any of his friends or family members would be able to come forward .
 Rush has presented a fascinating theory that perhaps requires more exploration and contemplation . Rush, who has an intellectually facile mind, has presented the fascinating theory . However, Rush's mind needs to be explored further .
 Rush: Oswald had a very strong belief that rightwingers would be blamed for the assassination if he could carry it out without being detected . Rush: "I’m not saying that Oswald could predict the distant future or even six months into the future," he wrote .
 'After he thought of the idea, there was no way he could not go through with it,' she says . 'It became an obsession and a compulsion in his own mind,' she adds . 'I say that after he thought . of the ideas, there were no ways he could
 “By his standards, he couldn’t face himself as a man or a human being if he chickened out and failed to take advantage of the unusual set of circumstances fate had placed right in front of him . “ was a natural consequence of his paying attention to the
 Warren Commission critics and conspiracy theorists have attacked the case against Oswald as being weak because it was “only circumstantial” The implication is that any case based on circumstantials evidence is not solid . A note about evidence: For years, Warren .
 circumstantial evidence has erroneously come to be associated in the lay mind and vernacular with an anemic case, but nothing could be further from the truth . Indeed, circumstantials have erroneously been associated with anemic cases, but that is incorrect .
 Whether a circumstantial case is strong or not depends on what type of evidence one is talking about, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If it's physical circumstantial evidence, the case could hardly be stronger . Physical evidence, such as the murder weapon being traced to the defendant by bullet matchups, is stronger . DNA or fingerprints are also present in the Oswald case .
 The true circumstantial evidence case is one in which there is no direct evidence and there are no bullet, blood, hair, semen, or fingerprint matchups . There is no physical evidence of any kind whatsoever, such as clothing or glasses, connecting the defendant to the crime .
 Oswald case bears no resemblance to the case against Oswald . Oswald was charged with murder in the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln in 1917 .
 Direct evidence is evidence which, if true, proves a fact in issue without the necessity of drawing any inference . With respect to the distinction between circumstantial evidence and direct evidence, direct evidence is . If true, it is evidence that proves fact in question without the need to draw any
 Direct evidence can only be given by the testimony of a witness who purports to have actual knowledge of that fact . Almost by definition, direct evidence cannot be given directly by a witness .
 The most common type of direct evidence in a criminal trial is eyewitness testimony . Witness testimony is the most common form of evidence in criminal trials .
 Circumstantial evidence, on the other hand, is evidence which only tends to prove a fact in issue by proving a secondary fact . Circumstance evidence is based on circumstantial evidence, rather than circumstantry evidence, which tends to tend to prove the facts in issue
 From this secondary fact, an inference can be drawn that the fact in issue exists . From this inference can then be drawn to the fact that the issue in question exists .
 The identity of the thief is the fact in issue . For example, from the secondary fact of seeing a stolen television set in the defendant’s home, one reasonable inference is that it was he who stole the set, the judge says .
 If the defendant’s fingerprints are found at the scene of a burglary, this is circumstantial evidence that it was he who committed the burglary . In another example, if the defendant's fingerprints are . found at . scene of burglary, it could be circumstantially evidence that
 It is not conclusive since he could have left his prints there at some other time . However, it is not inconclusive since the prints could have been left there some other times .
 We can analogize this type of circumstantial evidence to the spelling of a word, such as spelling, to a word .
 With the addition of each letter, the number of possibilities dwindles . But with each letter being added, the possibilities dwindle .
 The witness who testifies to seeing the television set in the defendant’s home is furnishing direct evidence of that specific fact, but only circumstantial evidence that the defendant stole it . The witness could have come into possession of the set in other ways, since he could have
 All evidence, even eyewitness testimony and a defendant’s confession, requires that some inference be drawn . Actually, all evidence, including eyewitness testimony, requires some inference .
 When a witness testifies he saw the defendant rob the victim, from the secondary fact of the witness’s observation, the jury must still draw the inference that the witness was correct . This is not a case of mistaken identity, a not uncommon occurrence .
 The testimony of a police officer that the defendant confessed to a crime still requires the inference that what the defendant said was true, that the confession was not the product of coercion or any other factor . Likewise, the testimony of police officers that a defendant confesses still requires an inference that the
 Arguably, then, it could be said that there is no such thing as direct evidence . It could be argued that there are no such things as direct .
 If the only inference sought is that the fact testified to is true, then the evidence is still deemed to be direct evidence . But if the only inferences sought are that some other facts are true, that's not circumstantial evidence, then it's still considered direct evidence.
 Warren Commission critic Sylvia Meagher says, “Oswald’s visit to Irving on Thursday night, November 21, may not have been unprecedented” (Meagher, Accessories after the Fact,37), but there is no credible evidence to support this . Meagher:
 Check G493187, aTexas Unemployment Commission check for $33.00 payable to Lee Harvey Oswald, was cashed at his store on either Thursday, October 31, 1963, or Friday, November 1, 1963 .
 Tarrants, almost five months after the assassination, would be able to look back and recall whether Oswald cashed the check on Thursday as opposed to Friday night . At that time she would have no reason to make note of what night Oswald was at the store .
 Marina Oswald, Ruth Paine, and Wesley Frazier would have every reason to remember that Oswald had never, before November 21, come to Irving on a Thursday night . Oswald, who had never been to Irving before, had never come to the city on such a date .
 Lane leaves the impression that Brennan’s eyes were “not good” at the time of the assassination . Lane does tell his readers that Brennan suffered a trauma to his eyes after the assassination, but doesn’t say that .
 Brennan said he had excellent eyesight at the time of the assassination but poor eyesight since the sandblasting incident . Brennan: 'I had excellent eyeight at time of assassination but now have poor eyeight since incident'
 FBI interviewed Brennan on the evening of the assassination . Brennan had “volunteered he has been informed by his optometrist, Dr. Dr. Michael Brennan,” FBI agent wrote .
 Bonar, Port Lavaca, Texas, says he has 'perfect vision' at a distance . Bonar says he is farsighted, or, in other words, he has perfect vision at distance .
 No source says HSCA did not believe Brennan, sources say . Brennan was the subject of an investigation by the National Security Council . Brennan is accused of lying to the HSC about his actions .
 Critics use another argument to attack Brennan’s credibility with respect to his testimony before the Warren Commission that Oswald “appeared” to be “standing up” with his rifle on his “right shoulder,” Brennan said .
 Oswald couldn’t have been standing at the window, says Oswald . Oswald couldn't have been seen standing at a window in Oswald’s home, he says . Oswald was killed in November 1945 .
 The sniper’s nest window, like all the windows, has a horizontal divider in the middle of the window . At the time of the shooting only half of the bottom half was open . Tom Dillard photos taken seconds after the shooting were taken .
 Oswald, at close to 5 feet 10 inches tall, could only have fired his rifle through the top half of the window . The top half was not open and the glass on the top part was not broken . Oswald was 5-foot 10in tall when he was standing behind the window
 Brennan estimated Oswald's height by extrapolation from what he could see of Oswald’s upper body . I don’t believe Brennan was ever asked this question but we can assume that he estimated Oswald .
 Frazier said there was no place in the building to buy food, just two soft drink machines . Frazier said that there were no food, only soft drink vending machines in the facility . Frazier: "There is no place for food. There is no food. Just two soft drinks."
 He added that sometimes an employee would buy his lunch from the catering truck during the morning break . He added, however, that sometimes employees would buy their lunch .
 If she's not Oswald, we can still safely assume Oswald got off at the bus stop . It was the closest the southbound Beckley bus would take him to his rooming house . If she’s not Oswald was Oswald, and the person she saw was not Oswald .
 Though one or more of these observations may have been correct, I am not including Bledsoe's observations as evidence of Oswald’s guilt . I'm not including one or two observations as proof that Oswald was guilty of Oswald's murder .
 Her observations of Oswald’s physical condition were such that if they were accurate, they would have been noticeable to Roy Truly or police officer Marrion Baker .
 Oswald would not have been in such a bedraggled condition that would have caused him to get so badly . But they apparently saw no such thing, and I can’t imagine anything that Oswald would have done .
 Warren Commission critics have attacked the credibility of Helen Markham as a witness to Tippit’s murder . For years, Markham's credibility has been attacked by critics .
 Dallas assistant DA Bill Alexander says Helen Markham used to be a waitress at the Courthouse Cafe . She served him a barrel of coffee throughout the years, he says .
 Critics have seized on the purportedly inconsistent descriptions of Tippit’s killer that Mrs. Mrs. Tipper's killer gave . Critics say the descriptions are inconsistent .
 Markham gave, but they aren’t wildly inconsistent at all, and one of them did not even come directly from her . Markham’s comments are not wildly inconsistent, but one of the best ones came from Markham herself .
 Poe testified he gave Walker a description of the suspect based on interviews of Markham and one of the Davis girls . Poe testified it was only similar to but not the precise one Walker called in . It almost assuredly was a synopsis or synthesis of what witnesses said at the murder scene .
 The Warren Report incorrectly says that “according to Patrolman Poe, description came from Mrs. Poe,” the report says . From this background, the Warren Report erroneously says that the description of the woman came from her .
 Markham said she did tell the agent the killer was “young looking,” though she doesn’t believe she said she said 18 . Markham remembered telling him he had black hair, but definitely did not tell him he was red-complexioned .
 The supposedly inconsistent descriptions by Markham of the killer are much to do about nothing . Markham's description of the man's killer is not consistent with nothing, it's nothing .
 Conspiracy author Sylvia Meagher attacked Markham in a related attack . Meagher also attacked the author's reputation in the wake of the Markham attack .
 Markham obviously was thinking “before” meant before the shooting, not before the lineup . Markham was thinking "before’s before" was before the shooter .
 Meagher deliberately mislead readers into thinking that Markham “wasn’t sure” of her identification of Oswald . Markham was sure, and Meagher knows that she was sure .
 Meagher omitted the next questions and answers that followed in Markham’s testimony . Meagher simply omitted the answers and answers from Markham in the testimony .
 Markham said she got cold chills when she saw the man . Warren Commission counsel asked Mrs. Markham to explain why she got the chills . Markham was asked to explain her reaction to the man's appearance .
 I am more than sure that Sylvia Meagher didn’t want her readers to know that Mrs. Meagher’s story was untrue . I'm more than certain that Sylvia . Meagher is a woman who has been married for more than 20 years .
 A myth that has taken hold among a great number of people outside the criminal justice system is the supposed unreliability of eyewitness identification . The myth is that eyewitness identification can be unreliable .
 An eyewitness to a crime has always been and will always be a critically important witness at a criminal trial . Witness is highly prized by the prosecution and given great weight by the jury . Witness testimony is often a "star witness for the prosecution" witness, highly prized .
 Pointing a finger at the defendant from the witness stand has sent countless defendants to prison and death row throughout the years . “He’s the man who raped (or robbed, etc.) me” or “the man I saw shoot the victim” has sent
 The basis for the value of eyewitness identification is that there is something incredibly distinctive about a human face . There is something that is very distinctive about the human face, says CNN.com .
 No two people, other than identical twins, look exactly alike . So unique that out of the over six billion people on the face of the globe, no two people are exactly identical .
 So unique that we oftentimes recognize people we only knew very casually ten to twenty years ago, we often recognize them very casually . So unique people are so unique that they often recognize each other very casually, ten to 20 years ago .
 Even newborn infants in a crib, even animals, easily recognize a face . So unique that even newborn infants can identify a face from a crib .
 The fragility of the latter (fleeting glance) has been demonstrated by the erroneous identifications that are so common in staged-crime experiments, like someone running into a room of students, grabbing an object like a briefcase and running out, all within seconds .
 To dismiss positive identification of Oswald under the bromide “eyewitness testimony is unreliable” is unfounded . But when people get a good, meaningful look at someone on a clear day, such as in the Tippit murder, they can identify Oswald . To dismiss their positive
 Reynolds gave a stronger identification of Oswald before the Warren Commission than he did five months earlier to the FBI . Reynolds' first recollection is the one we have to place the most reliance on .
 An unknown man emerged from behind a filing cabinet and shot him in the head . He had only gotten around to pushing two of the thirty buttons that doused the lights of the establishment .
 The attempted murder of Reynolds went unsolved, although the Dallas police originally arrested a mentally disturbed man . Darrell Wayne Garner had been on the Reynolds lot the morning of the shooting trying to sell a used car to Reynolds without having its title, and getting very angry at Reynolds when he wouldn't buy
 Mooney was arrested and charged with disturbing the peace a few weeks later . She hung herself in the Dallas city jail after being arrested for disturbing peace .
 Lewis was on the Reynolds lot when he saw a man run by holding a gun . Lewis says he saw the man holding up a gun on the lot .
 Domingo Benavides is the driver of the pickup truck who was right across the street from Tippit and Oswald, the closest witness to the murder . The driver of a pickup truck was right next to the bodies of Oswald and Oswald . He is one of the closest witnesses
 Benavides was never brought to an Oswald lineup . And this, obviously, is the reason why he wasn't brought to the Oswald lineup.
 Posner suggests to readers that Warren Commission critics who think Benavides couldn't identify Oswald are incorrect . He says that Benavide was able to identify Oswald . Posner doesn't offer an alternative explanation .
 Benavides’s actual testimony, which Posner didn’t quote, was a little more tentative . The testimony was more tentative than the actual testimony given by the judge .
 Posner’s book was published in 2007, but Posner failed to identify the author . Posner's book is published in the U.S. and published in 2009 .
 Posner quotes what Benavides told CBS News three years later, saying he had “no doubt at all” that Oswald was the man he had seen . To support his case, Posner then quotes what he says Benavide said three years after the shooting .
 Benavides said he didn't think he could identify the man he saw at Tenth and Patton . He said on the day of the assassination, he wasn't sure who he saw that man .
 A single brown, delustered, viscose fiber and several light-green cotton fibers found inside the bag matched in all observable microscopic characteristics’ with fibers from the blanket in Ruth Paine’s garage, where Oswald stored the Carcano rifle . Also a “single
 Witnesses gave different color descriptions of Oswald’s light gray jacket . Witness: Witnesses gave differing color descriptions .
 Sam Guinyard and William Smith said the jacket that was found looked like the one the man was wearing was found . The jacket was found at the scene of the shooting .
 William Scoggins thought it was lighter than the one the man was wearing . William thought the man's clothes were lighter than that of the one he wore .
 The Warren Report gives no citations to back up the claim . But there is nothing in the three citations it gives to back this statement up .
 The name of Bill Shelley isn’t even mentioned in the text referred to by the three citations . Indeed, the name of the author is not mentioned in those citations .
 Captain Fritz's handwritten notes were taken at the time of the interrogation . He wrote five brief pages written during twelve hours of interrogation .
 Fritz claims to have had lunch with Bill Shelley in front of him . Fritz says he claims 2nd floor Coke when Off came in, to 1st fl had lunch . Fritz writes, “Claims 2nd Floor Coke when off came in .
 Oswald said he had lunch on the first floor after the confrontation with the officer on the second floor . Oswald couldn’t have told Fritz this, since he couldn't expect anyone to believe that after his confrontation with an officer in the second-floor lunchroom, which had to be
 Oswald told Fritz he was having lunch on the first floor at the time of the shooting, Fritz says . Oswald told him he had lunch at the scene of the attack, Fritz writes in his report .
 Oswald said he was on the second floor drinking a Coca-Cola when he was stopped . Oswald was stopped by Fritz Fritz when he asked him where he was when the officer stopped him . Oswald told Fritz he was drinking a Coke at the time .
 Oswald said there was so much excitement that he didn’t think there would be any more work that day . Oswald said he left the building that day after he was asked why he left .
 Fritz makes no reference to Oswald telling him that Shelley had told him this . Oswald had told Fritz that Shelley told him that Oswald had said this .
 Oswald told Fritz Fritz he saw Bill Shelley in front of the building during his interrogation, Fritz wrote in his notes . Oswald had told Fritz that on his way out of the . building, he saw Shelley in . front .
 Oswald thought he was the precise type of person who would be expected to do what he did . There were, apparently, a few exceptions, but they don’t change the reality of several of the people .
 Meagher even cites Samuel Ballen, who met Oswald only once, when he interviewed Oswald for a job . Meagher cites Ballen's interview with Oswald as a reason for the book's conclusion .
 Meagher doesn't bother to cite for her readers even one member of the subject community who wasn’t surprised at all that Oswald had killed Kennedy . In any event, Meagher writes .
 The JFK Assassination: Dispelling the Myths by Mel Ayton . Another, much more obscure book, published in England in 2002, is published in 2002 . The JFK assassination is a conspiracy theory .
 Though it’s a good book, the author devotes only a few pages specifically to why the various conspiracy theories make no sense . The book is a good read, but it's not easy to read .
 New theories routinely surface, old ones are periodically revitalized . Old ones such as the threat of worldwide communism have transmogrified into updated theories about the United States by the United Nations .
 Judyth Vary Baker is the obviously unbelievable story of one Judyth Baker . Baker's story is obviously unbelievable, but it's a very silly thing .
 The story Judyth came up with was so fraudulent on its face that even conspiracy theorists have ganged up on her to debunk it . Judyth's story is so fraudulent that even most conspiracy theorists agreed with her .
 Judyth has a solid group of supporters called “Team Judyth” who have been warring with her debunkers for several years on the Internet and elsewhere . Judyth's debunkers say Judyth is not a myth .
 Judyth’s story is so absurd that it is not worthy of citations to sources, and I shall give it none except to say that her story, in bits and pieces, has appeared in a number of places in recent years .
 Judyth's story started when she saw Oliver Stone’s fantasy film JFK in 1998 and decided she had an even bigger fantasy story to tell . Judyth used the technique of “recovered” memory .
 Judyth had shown promise at Manatee High School in South Bend, Indiana, for her amateur work on cancer research . She says she won a science prize at a local fair . Judyth says she was recruited by Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 Jack Ruby, she said, was the bag man who brought the money for the project to New Orleans . Jack Ruby was the man who helped bring the money to the project .
 The 'cocktail' included a virus to neutralize the bearded one’s immune system and cancer cells to kill him . The ‘cocktail’ was created to kill the bearded man .
 It was around this time that she met and fell hopelessly in love with Lee Harvey Oswald, who became a part of the project and with whom she had a torrid sexual affair . She had an affair with Oswald .
 Judyth has embroided her tale with virtually every far-out conspiracy allegation extant . Judyth's first ‘outing’ in 1998, when her story was rather skeletal, was skeletal . She has read a lot of conspiracy books and, together with her association with other conspiracy buffs
 The remarkable twenty-year-old, in just a few months, had more contact in New Orleans with leading figures of conspiracy lore than perhaps any other known figure in the conspiracy community .
 Judyth's former husband, Robert Baker, is the subject of her fantasy story . Robert Baker is the father of Judyth Baker . Judyth and Robert Baker were married at the time .
 Later in the day or the next day, brought home a newspaper and was studying it closely and said, ‘I think I may have seen this guy.’ He said he was studying the newspaper closely and thought he had seen the man .
 Judyth says Clay Shaw started paying for their trysts at nice hotels in the city . The staff of CBS's 60 Minutes gave Judyth’s story long consideration .
 Judyth claims the National Enquirer offered her $600,000 for her story . But Judyth apparently wasn’t interested . The publisher might offer that amount if Jesus returned and his agent promised an exclusive .
 Mary Sherman worked on their research project in Feme's and Sherman’s New Orleans apartments .
 The CIA did research in a CIA lab in the Washington, D.C., area, with highly qualified scientists possessing medical and doctoral degrees, to develop some medical concoction to kill Castro . It is an established fact that the CIA did do research .
 Judyth told us that the CIA decided to also fund the motley group in New Orleans . Judyth says the CIA also funded the group .
 Per Judyth, her lover Lee’s role in the plot to kill Castro was to deliver the “cocktail” to Mexico City, where he was to turn it over to an individual who would smuggle it into Cuba . Lee himself tried to get to Cuba with
 When this project failed, the CIA and mob decided to go after Kennedy, not Castro . Kennedy was the target of the mob, but not Castro, according to the CIA . The mob was behind Kennedy's assassination .
 Lee, Judyth said, didn't want to be part of the plot to kill Kennedy . Lee played along with his co-conspirators for the purpose of thwarting their attempt . Lee didn’t want to play along with the plot, she said, but he played
 He told her he even got in touch with J Edgar Hoover and told him of the plot . Hoover never stopped it because he wanted Kennedy killed since Kennedy was going to force him to retire, she said . Hoover was never stopped .
 Lee told Judyth that another step he had taken to protect Kennedy was to orchestrate the assault on Adlai Stevenson shortly before Kennedy came to Dallas so that the authorities would be alerted to give greater protection to Kennedy .
 Lee told Judyth, “Better Stevenson getting bops on the head than the Chief getting bullets in the head.”
 Judyth tells us that Lee intentionally missed Kennedy with his shot or shots but other assassins killed him . Judyth says at the time of the shooting in Dealey Plaza, Lee deliberately missed Kennedy . Kennedy was killed by other assassins, Judyth said .
 Judyth says she and Lee Lee had a tearful conversation over the phone two days before the assassination . Judyth was apparently in school in Florida when Lee was assassinated, Judyth said .
 Judyth told Lee she “would never allow anyone to replace you in my heart” Lee said he would try to escape from the plotters after the shooting in Dealey Plaza . Lee directed Judyth to wait for him at a “fine hotel” in Canc
 Judyth’s debunkers pointed out that Cancun never had fine hotels way back in 1963, just sand dunes . Judyth and her team retreated and said that her coauthor on a book she was writing had put this in her manuscript .
 David Lewis was the individual during Garrison’s investigation and prosecution of Clay Shaw . Shaw came up with allegations like he knew the names of the people involved in the plot to kill Kennedy, and there were over twenty, and someone shot at him in front of a New Orleans hotel .
 Lewis, whom Merriman Smith described as a “dangerous mental case,” was so lacking in credibility that even Jim Garrison never called him as a witness at the trial . Garrison didn’t even mention Lewis in his book On the Trail of the Assassins .
 Of course, just because David Lewis had no credibility doesn't necessarily mean that Anna doesn’t, she said . Of course .
 Judyth has also come up with some love letters she said she wrote to Oswald . Judyth also has some letters from Oswald that she believes she wrote .
 She claims that Lee wrote inscriptions on the margins of some of his old books but that her dogs chewed those portions of the pages away . She even claims that she even wrote some inscriptions .
 One inscription remains, but she and Team Judyth have not produced an affidavit from even one documents examiner saying that the writing is Oswald’s, only alleging that the “preliminary reports” are favorable . The inscription remains .
 Judyth responded with a rebuttal titled “My Boring Life” in which she tries to prove the opposite . Judyth responds to David Lifton's claim that she made up her wild story to spice up her boring life .
 Judyth has claimed she is a descendant of Russian aristocracy . Liberace learned to play piano on her family’s upright when he was a child, Judyth says .
 Judyth presently lives in the Netherlands, saying she fled America because of death threats, presumably from the conspirators who would like to silence her . Judyth says she fled the U.S. because of the death threats she received .
 I can see why Carlos wouldn’t want Judyth fingering him to the authorities over JFK’s murder, but it's not clear what interest he would have in whether she continued her medical research . Carlos wouldn't have interest in whether Judyth continued her research .
 Since Carlos is dead and no longer around to protect her, she says she only feels safe in Europe . She says she feels safe now in Europe, since Carlos is no longer with her .
 Judyth, like all earnest humans, deserves an audience for her story . Judyth is a puppy who deserves a story for her .
 I thought I was through dealing with the ludicrous Judyth Baker in the endnote you have just read . I'm not sure how long I'll be able to get through this .
 Judyth came out with two volumes on the Kennedy assassination and her love affair with Oswald .
 The True Story of the Accused Assassin of President John F Kennedy by His Lover is clearly not written by her . She is listed as the author of the book, but she is not the author .
 Sometimes the ghostwriter forgets he is one, such as where he writes, “A strange and warm romance began to blossom between Lee Harvey Oswald and Judyth Vary Baker” Then he goes back into the first person of Judyth telling her fairy tale . Sometimes the
 Baker’s alleged romance with Oswald is also alleged to have occurred . Baker is accused of having an affair with Oswald . The book is just another garden-variety conspiracy book .
 Judyth Judyth is a gold-plated phony, Baker says . Baker's book will remove that doubt from Baker’s book, he says .
 Baker’s story, on its face, was not only not believable, but also laughable . All sensible people already know that Baker's story is not believable and laughable .
 She knew that if she wanted people to stop laughing at her she had to come up with some evidence to show that she knew Oswald, much less was his lover . However, she knew she needed to prove that she was Oswald's lover . She knew she was going to have to come
 She makes her greatest effort to show that she and Oswald worked at the Reily coffee company at the same time and had a close relationship with him at work .
 She says she has no evidence that she even worked at the coffee company . But nowhere does she come up with any evidence she did work there .
 She keeps showing document after document in her book, such as canceled checks and time cards, to prove that Oswald worked there . Oswald worked at the time of his death .
 Only documents from the Reily coffee company that she presents have Oswald's name on them, not Baker's . Baker's name is not Baker’s, but the only documents she presents are those of Oswald . The only documents Baker presents are the company's coffee company documents .
 The closest Baker comes to establishing that she worked at the Reily coffee company is a copy of a May 27,1963, check from Judyth to the A-1 Employment Agency for $17.44, representing a fee she paid to get her a job .
 Judyth never established that she worked at the Reily coffee company . The fee could have been for a job A-l got Judyth somewhere else . Judyth's fee was not established, but she never established it .
 Judyth’s contention is that if she worked with Oswald, this meant, without any further proof or evidence, that she had an affair with him, and through him met and learned about all the central figures in the alleged conspiracy to murder Kennedy .
 Report: Tomlinson said it appears to be the same bullet he found on the stretcher . Wright said it “looks like the slug” he found in the bullet found on a stretcher, the report says .
 Aguilar concludes that the Airtel was the truthful report and that the July 7, 1964, report was "bogus" in that it claimed Tomlinson and Wright thought the bullet they were shown was the same one they saw on the afternoon of the assassination . Aguilar
 The FBI authors of the July 7,1964, report probably thought that “Secret Service agents would have been more likely to read the FBI reports” than Tomlinson and Wright would, Aguilar writes .
 Conspiracy theorists look for other apparent contradictions in the vast and inviting literature on the assassination . That’s one of the most important things all conspiracy theorists look at, and then they go merrily on in search for other contradictions .
 Tomlinson was shot in the head by the agent who showed him the bullet . Odum, almost forty years after the fact, has simply forgotten the name of the agent .
 Odum said if he had shown anyone the bullet, he would have prepared an FBI report on it . Odum: "If I had shown it to anyone, I'd have prepared a report" Odum says if he'd shown it, he'd prepared a FBI report .
 It fits the modus operandi of virtually all mainstream (as opposed to fringe) conspiracy theorists like Aguilar, Anthony Summers, Henry Hurt, John Newman, and others . And, like the previous one, it fits the same pattern of conspiracy theorists .
 The moment they spot something contradictory or, in their mind, suspicious, they make “noises,” without making direct accusations, that the party or group involved is complicit in the conspiracy . They make ‘noises’ without making directly accusations, they say .
 Aguilar does not explicitly accuse the FBI of murdering Kennedy or knowingly covering up for those who did . Aguilar doesn't say he believes Kennedy was murdered or that the FBI intentionally covered up .
 Aguilar wants his readers to infer that the FBI must be somehow involved . But certainly, if FBI agents are falsifying their official reports, they must be involved, Aguilar says .
 If it doesn't go anywhere, then that means there is an innocent, not sinister, explanation for the discrepancy . And if it doesn’t go anywhere then that’s an innocent explanation, it could be a mistake .
 Conspiracy theorists continue to imply that this person, and this group, and that person, were involved somehow in the assassination . They never stop adding to their list as they scour the assassination library of books, articles, and documents .
 A bullet found at Parkland school was found in the FBI's Crime Lab, FBI says . However, he adds, “What may have happened at the FBI’s Crime Lab after some bullet found in Parkland got there is another matter .
 In his cross-examination of my witnesses and in his summation, my opposing counsel, Gerry Spence, strongly implied to the jury, without expressly charging, that either the CIA, the FBI, or some other group was behind the assassination of President Kennedy and had framed his client .
 He argued that since the assassination and frame-up in 1963 there had been a massive cover-up . And he argued that ever since the murder of JFK, there was a huge cover up .
 “If he said the CIA murdered the president, or the FBI murdered him, it would sound downright silly,” I thundered . “Because if he said . the CIA . murdered the . president, he said, “it would sound . downright silly�
 Spence implied to you that there was some nebulous, mysterious, powerful group that murdered the president and framed Lee Harvey Oswald, but he never put this hat here on anyone’s head . Spence said the group was a "mysterious, mysterious" group .
 The purported March 3, 1964, document has McCone telling Rowley that “Oswald subject was trained by the agency, under cover of the office of Naval Intelligence’s Naval Intelligence, for Soviet assignments .
 He stamped the document “Confidential,” the very lowest security classification . If the document were real, it would virtually guarantee that it would soon see the light of day . The document was stamped "Confidential"
 If Oswald was a CIA agent, the CIA would obviously never put anything in writing saying that he was . The CIA has publicly declared he never was, and the CIA never wrote that Oswald was .
 The highest security classification, “Eyes Only,” would have been used . But if it was crazy enough to do so, it would have used the highest security classified .
 If the forged document were genuine, McCone would have known on May 14, 1964, that he was committing perjury before the Warren Commission . McCone's signature on the document would have been enough to prove that he had committed perjury .
 If we wanted to publish it, they either had to declassify it or fight us over the issue . If they wanted it to be declassified, they had to fight it or they would fight it .
 Author Gus Russo sent me an extensive study of the “sworn statement’s ‘sworn statements’ in which Hoch discovered that, among many other irregularities, the supposed 1947 statement was on a post-1966 FBI letterhead . Hoch: Among many other
 Rubenstein and Alek Hidel were released by the police . Rubenstein was released by police after the incident . Hidel and Rubenstein were arrested by police .
 The report is dated October 12, 1963, a Saturday, yet it says the day of the arrest, October 11, which would be Friday, was Thursday . The report says the arrest was made in 1963, but it says it was made on October 11 .
 Oswald's and Ruby’s ages were wrong on the report, Oswald‘s listed as being twenty-two, when he was twenty-23 at the time, Ruby‘’�s being listed as thirty-nine, when . he was fifty-two at
 Perry spoke to one of the people who put together the report in 1966 . Perry said that as a result of a tip in 1999, he spoke to the man who put the report together . Perry: "It's a good thing that you can talk to a man who helped put together
 Mark Lane sent the original of the bogus report to Mark Lane and waited for Lane to call a press conference . His and his partner’s plan was to send the report to Lane and wait for him to call it a press release .
 If Ruby was connected to Mark Lane the year before the assassination, this could smell of conspiracy . Lane represented Oswald’s mother after the assassination in that he represented her .
 Jack Rubenstein was one of the sponsors of the dinner . The Textile Workers of America vice president turned out to be the vice president of the textile workers .
 Jim Koepke is a member of Mensa, the national high IQ_society, but he forgot to take his IQpills before he wrote his book, Chasing Ghosts .
 Haldeman, Nixon’s chief of staff, tried to block the FBI investigation of Watergate under the pretext that it might open up the “whole Bay of Pigs” matter, which would not do the country or the CIA any good, he says .
 Koepke maintains that Helms refused to do it, angrily telling Haldeman that Watergate had nothing to do with the Bay of Pigs . Helms said Watergate had no connection with the incident .
 Helms agreed to try to block the FBI investigation of Watergate because of the alleged Bay of Pigs connection, by the very language of the proposition this would have nothing to do with Kennedy assassination .
 Haldeman would later deny that this was his interpretation, saying his coauthor, Joseph DiMona, wrote it . DiMonna told author Anthony Summers that these words were his, and Summers makes a strong case for the proposition that they were .
 DiMona said that the book went through several drafts, with Haldeman editing every page he, diMona, wrote . The book was edited by the author, who was the author of the book .
 Haldeman didn't disown the passage but acknowledged that it was merely his speculation . Also, in a 1989 interview with Summers, he acknowledged that he didn’t disown it .
 If Nixon were referring to his belief that the CIA murdered Kennedy, it is inconceivable that he would only use modest language like ‘unfortunate” for the CIA, country, and foreign policy . Nixon was referring to the CIA's murder of Kennedy, but it's incon
 If he were referring to Kennedy’s assassination while talking to Haldeman, it is even more inconceivable that he would say, “Don’t lie to them to the extent to say there is no involvement,” which would suggest his own complicity in Kennedy
 Whatever connection the Kennedy assassination may have had in Nixon’s mind with respect to the Bay of Pigs and Cuba, it would almost necessarily have been limited to his not wanting the information to get out that the CIA had tried to murder Castro . As many have made, as many have
 Author says former CIA director William Colby “was literally pleading with me to believe him” when he said the CIA was not involved in the assassination . Helms tried to “intimidate” him by telling him to ‘stay out of this matter,�
 The author made sure he wrote his book after Helms and Colby had long since passed away . He wrote the book after the two men had long died .
 He wouldn't be bothering them at their meetings with his special brand of drivel . Maybe that’s because while he was doing that, he wouldn’t be bothered by them at meetings .
 I believe the very notion of a conspiracy to be per se absurd and far-fetched . The reader should not assume that I’m scoffing at all the conspiracy theorists in this case, he says .
 There is much, much more of a belief in a conspiracy in the assassination of President Kennedy than in the murder of his brother, Robert . I had thought that Koepke’s Watergate theory of the assassination was at least his, but I later found that an earlier book by
 In a small chapter near the end of his book Koepke got a little more daring with his fakery . In the book, he gets a little daring with faking .
 Koepke tells readers that he tracked down Deep Throat and had a long telephone conversation with him about Watergate and the Kennedy assassination . He first agreed to Deep Throats' demand that he, the author, not publicly disclose his identity .
 Koepke could rely on Woodward and Bernstein, but he didn’t count on Deep Throat himself . Mark Felt, the number-two man at the FBI during Watergate, came out of the woodwork and identified himself one year after Koepkes’s book
 When I say ‘evidence’ of a conspiracy, this is not the same as saying there was a conspiracy. When I . say “evidence” of a . conspiracy, not the . same thing, I say . This is not . the same thing . as saying
 Proof, then, is the result or effect of evidence, the successful establishment of the fact by evidence . Proof is then the result of the evidence, established by evidence, by establishing the fact . Proof, therefore, is a result of a successful establishment by evidence.
 I was brought into the investigation of RFK’s assassination several years after the event by others who were pursuing two separate, private lawsuits . I was . brought into . investigation several years later .
 I'll just mention one of several serious problems, and in a very shorthand way . Although my involvement was limited to specific areas of inquiry, not the entire case, I do not feel I have any kind of a “handle” on the case .
 All eight rounds in Sirhan’s .22 caliber Iver Johnson revolver had been fired, and all eight had been accounted for . In the official Los Angeles Police Department ballistics report on the case dated July 8, 1968, .
 LAPD says no bullets were found at the scene of the assassination . Other than a hole in the ceiling caused by the lost bullet, there were no bullet holes on any of the doors or walls of the pantry .
 Two additional bullet holes were found at the assassination scene in the center divider post between the swinging doors of the pantry . Yet there is witness evidence (including that from an FBI agent)
 At the time of his involvement in the case, I said publicly, “There is no question about Sirhan’s guilt.” At the . time of the . involvement in . the . case, he said . ‘There was no question’ about Sir
 I have no way of knowing whether or not more than one gun was fired at the assassination scene . However, it is possible that one gun may have been fired in the assassination .
 Sirhan al-Ahmad: 'In the absence of official contravening evidence, we were talking about too many bullets for Sirhan to have fired all'
 In September of 1975, seven firearm experts from around the country came to Los Angeles to test-fire Sirhan’s gun and reexamine the evidence .
 All seven testifies they were unable to determine the number of bullets fired at the assassination scene . Under questioning by me, all seven testified they were .
 All testified that they could find no evidence of a second gun, although they could not rule out the possibility of the second gun . However, all testified that no evidence was found of another gun .
 Five who were troubled recommended further scientific tests, which were never conducted . Five of those who recommended further tests were never done .
 Los Angeles County district attorney recalls late-night call from his office to prepare search warrant . He recalls knocking on the door of a judge at his home in the middle of the night to ask him to sign it .
 When I arrived at Sirhan’s car, I recall that FBI agents broke into it with a crowbar . Sirhan's car was broken into by FBI agents, he says . FBI agents used crowbar to break into the car, he adds .
 Oswald's guilt was proved beyond a reasonable doubt at the trial in London . The only issue for the jury to resolve was whether or not the prosecution had proved Oswald’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt . Oswald was found guilty of the murder of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 It was not alleged in the indictment that Oswald was part of a conspiracy, therefore, this was not an issue for the jury to decide . Oswald was not accused of being part of the conspiracy .
 Oswald would have been prosecuted in real life if he had been prosecuted for his role in Oswald's assassination . Oswald's actions would have led to him being shot at least one of the world's most famous men .
 The U.S. government has never believed that Oswald was part of a conspiracy in the assassination, so it would never have alleged a conspiracy . Oswald’s defense attorneys wouldn’t argue the opposite, because they would be arguing Oswald's guilt . Under the vicarious liability
 If Oswald was part of a conspiracy to kill Kennedy, he could have been at home sleeping at the time of the shooting in Dealey Plaza, and he’d still be guilty of Kennedy’s murder . Oswald could be found guilty of the murder of Kennedy if he was
 It was inferable from the evidence I presented to the jury that I believed Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy . As discussed in the text, it was . It was . inferable . that I . believed Oswald . acted alone .
 If the jury believed or suspected that others were involved, this would inevitably generate in their minds a number of unanswered questions about who these people were and the nature of their involvement . And if the jury believes or suspected others involved, it will inevitably generate questions about the identity of those involved .
 Oswald's guilt could hurt the credibility of my case against Oswald, says author . Jurors may think they simply did not know the whole story, what really happened, he says . These thoughts could hurt Oswald's credibility of his guilt in their minds .
 Salandria, one of the chief founders of the assassination research community, is highly revered in the conspiracy community . The reverence is almost achieving a spiritual level . Salanria is a member of the Warren Commission critic and conspiracy theorist community . He is one of many of the founders of
 Philadelphia lawyer is an intellectual and a purist who has remained true to the cause throughout the years, never seeking to profit from it and gladly remaining in the background .
 'Because of his fiercely antiestablishment views, he is completely paranoid. His problem is that because of his . fiercely anti-establishment views he is . completely paranoid,' he said .
 Salandria was one of New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison's chief advisers during his prosecution of Clay Shaw for Kennedy’s murder . Comedian Mort Sahl told me that “Salandria didn’t trust me, he thought I was CIA,” from
 The day before the Warren Commission submitted its final report to President Johnson, New Times reviewed Joachim Joesten’s book Oswald: Assassin or Fall Guy? New Times started reviewing even offbeat conspiracy books as far back as September 23, 1964 .
 The second article, “A Philadelphia Lawyer Analyzes the Shots, Trajectories and Wounds,” was in the January 1965 edition of Liberation magazine .
 Salandria’s article on the grassy knoll witness appeared in Minority of One, March of 1965 . Her third article, “A Philadelphia Lawyer Analyzes the President's Back and Neck Wounds,” was published in Liberation the same month .
 Salandria’s first article in Minority of One, “The Impossible Tasks of One Assassination Bullet,” was published in its March 1966 edition . The author's first article was published by the magazine in 1966 .
 Well-organized annual conventions of conspiracy theorists did not start until 1991, when a music promoter’s group out of Austin, Texas, called South by Southwest, sponsored the Assassination Symposium .
 Following release of the Oliver Stone movie JFK, the Third Decade series sponsored two conferences in Chicago, the first in 1992 and the second one in 1993 . The latter was one of the biggest assassination conferences ever .
 Third Decade also sponsored a conference in Providence, Rhode Island, in 1993 .
 The Coalition of Political Assassinations was formed in 1993 on the thirtieth anniversary of the assassination of President Kennedy . The Coalition was formed on the anniversary of Kennedy's assassination .
 Fensterwald continued to head the group until his death in 1991, when Jim Lesar took over as president . Lesar has held a position he has held to this day since then .
 In 2004 and 2005, the AARC held two conferences on the assassination in Washington, D.C. The 2005 one was particularly impressive in its lineup of prominent speakers .
 COPA held national conferences in Washington, D.C., from 1994 through 1997 and “regional” conferences in Dallas from 1995 through 1997 . John Judge, one of the founders of COPA and its current executive director, told me that COPA conferences were held in Washington
 Since then it has continued to hold a yearly conference in Dallas but denominates it a regional conference . Attendance comes from all over the country .
 COPA also sporadically holds regional conferences in Memphis and Los Angeles . COPA has a primary focus on the respective assassinations of Martin Luther King and Robert F Kennedy .
 JFK Lancer is the Secret Service code name for JFK . COPA conventions, like COPA’s, continue to be called November in Dallas .
 Most of these conventions draw several hundred diehard conspiracy theorists from around the country for two to three days . The attendance fee of $150 to $250 is a hefty sum .
 The conspiracy community holds conferences and field trips to Dallas sites steeped in assassination lore . The fights among the critics over opposing theories are often bitter, some becoming legendary .
 Harold Weisberg says the Warren Commission never intended to solve the President's murder . He says a government that “never intended solving” his murder never intended solving his murder .
 Craig was not a defense attorney in the strictest sense of the word . He was representing Oswald’s interests before the Commission . Marguerite Oswald wanted Mark Lane to fill the role .
 By February 25, the Commission had already taken the testimony of four witnesses without anyone representing Oswald’s interests, including the one who proved most devastating to his innocence, his wife Marina . It should be noted that by that time, the testimony had already been taken by the Commission .
 Before then, he was a stringer for Drew Pearson in Uruguay in 1948 . He was known for inaccurately reporting on United States embassy events there .
 As an executive for El Sol in Quito, Ecuador, in 1953, he was considered to be “unreliable, dishonest and unsavory by Americans and Ecuadorans” alike . He was considered ‘unsavory’ and ‘dishonest�
 Oswald arrives at Love Field for her flight to Washington, D.C., to testify before the Warren Commission . Oswald will be the first woman to testify in the Warren inquiry .
 After she departed, the group had coffee at the airport restaurant with Forrest Sorrels, head of the Dallas Secret Service . The group also had coffee with the Secret Service chief .
 Penn Jones’s frequent modus operandi: Make a mysterious-deaths allegation and give no source or citation of authority for it . This was Penn Jones' frequent modu operandi—make a mysterious deaths allegation .
 Jones offers no support for his allegation that Underhill was a CIA agent . Jones doesn't tell his readers from whom he obtained his information or the identity of Underhill's friends .
 The CIA says Underhill “served with the Military Intelligence Service from 8 July 1943 to May 1946 as an expert in photography, enemy weapons, and related technical specialties”
 Israel implies from the context that Umberger was the director at the time of Kilgallen’s death and that it was he who conducted her toxicology test . Israel doesn’t get around to saying it, but she implies that he was responsible for her death .
 The man in the pub told Israel that Umberger had told him that Kilgallen had been murdered and that he was using the conclusion he reached as something to “hold over” the head of Dr. Dr. Michael Umbergar . Israel doesn't identify the man
 Dr. James L Luke, who conducted the autopsy, certified her death . Dr Luke and Dr. Luke were both certified as having died .
 Israel doesn't bother to tell her readers what the evidence was that pointed to murder . Israel doesn’t bother to say what evidence pointed to the murder, she says .
 Though she mentions the possibility of other drugs in Kilgallen’s system, most notably Nembutal, she says she doesn’t preclude the possibility that the drug was involved in the murder .
 In view of Israel’s dreadful sloppiness and the implausibility of the whole story, I’ve already written much more than Israel's story deserves . In view . I‘ve already wrote much more . than Israel‘s story deserves. In view
 Another prominent mysterious death that conspiracy theorists have talked about was that of Naval Lieutenant Commander William Bruce Pitzer . Pitzer's death was the death of a Navy Lieutenant Commander .
 Dennis David, a medical corpsman at Bethesda Naval Hospital, gave impetus to the rumor . He claimed that he, David, was present at the autopsy of Kennedy and he saw Pitzer film the autopsy .
 Conspiracy theorists believe that the film of the autopsy that Pitzer allegedly took, which has never surfaced, would contradict the official autopsy findings . Pitzer committed suicide, according to the autopsy report . Conspiracy theorists say they haven’t been able to get a copy of the report .
 There are serious problems with the story conspiracy theorists peddle on Pitzer . And there are other serious problems, including serious problems in the story .
 The HSCA’s list of those present at the autopsy does not include David . David was merely “chief of the day for the medical school,” would he have had any reason to be present .
 David didn't even claim to have been inside the autopsy room, telling Lifton he had no firsthand knowledge of when the autopsy even commenced . David went into considerable detail as to everything he saw that night .
 As if David’s credibility wasn’t already weak enough, he made it worse . David made a mockery of his own credibility, he said .
 In 1997 he conceded to ARRB investigators that he was not present at the autopsy, being in the administrative offices upstairs on the second floor of the building . David Lifton indicated in 1979 that he wasn't present at autopsy, and told Harrison Livingstone in 1988 .
 David may have been too committed to believe that Pitzer was murdered . Even after this misconception was rectified, David remained committed to the case .
 David Lifton's book, Best Evidence, doesn't mention Pitzer . John Stringer, referring to Pitzer, told me, “I knew him well.”
 Pitzer was the administrative assistant to one Captain Bird in the audiovisual department at Bethesda . Stringer said he was found dead in the television studio of the department .
 The Montgomery County deputy medical examiner who conducted the autopsy on Pitzer on October 30, 1966, concluded that Pitzer’s death was a suicide . This was consistent with the conclusion of John G Ball, the Montgomery County . Ball, a Montgomery County Deputy Medical Examiner, concluded P
 Even Law, a dyed-in-the-wool conspiracy theorist, was uneasy with Custer’s answers during the interview . Custer is clearly a person with credibility problems, so much so even Law was uneasy .
 Custer actually thought that his experiences on the night of the autopsy were important enough to write a book . Custer was in the process of trying to get one published when he died in July of 2000 .
 J_he Pitzer case is a perfect example of how some fraud or nut will always come forward to keep the conspiracy community fed in perpetuity . Pitzer is the latest example in a series of conspiracy theories that have been debunked .
 Dan Marvin, a former lieutenant colonel in U.S. Army Special Services, took up David’s baton in 1993 and tried to run with it . Pitzer wasn’t present in the autopsy room .
 Marvin claims that when he saw a reference to the Pitzer affair while watching Nigel Turner’s Men Who Killed Kennedy in November of 1993, he realized that the CIA had asked him to murder Pitzer in 1963 . Marvin claims to have been asked to kill Pitzer .
 Marvin alleges that as a captain in U.S. Special Forces in 1964, he attended a course conducted by the CIA in assassination techniques at the Special Warfare Center in Fort Bragg, North Carolina . Marvin alleges he attended the CIA course in 1964 .
 In other words, the CIA murdered Kennedy, and they’re bragging about it at coffee breaks for others to hear . The CIA is bragging about the killing of Kennedy, the author says .
 He says his commanding officer instructed him to meet a CIA agent outside the headquarters building . He says that one day in August of 1965 at Fort Bragg, he was told to meet the agent . The agent was a CIA operative .
 When he got outside he was joined by a fellow assassinationcourse colleague, David Vance, and the two of them approached the CIA man, who was standing under some pine trees .
 Marvin says CIA man took him aside and asked him if he would volunteer to kill a U.S. naval officer . Marvin says the CIA man, whom he did not know, told him that Pitzer was Pitzer . Marvin said he was asked to kill Pitzer, a U
 Marvin says he declined, telling the CIA man, “I don’t do that sort of thing here in the States.” Marvin said he declined . Marvin: "I don't do that kind of thing in the United States."
 Marvin implied to an author in later years that he conducted routine foreign assassinations for the CIA . Marvin said he told the CIA agent that he would have killed Pitzer if Pitzer were overseas . Marvin never expressly said it, but he strongly implied to author that he did .
 The CIA routinely conducted foreign assassinations, especially since the Church Committee was unable to come up with any evidence that the spy agency even committed one assassination .
 Marvin was a student at a CIA course in assassination who, if we’re to believe his story, should have been teaching the course . Marvin says he was a CIA student who should be teaching the assassination course .
 He assumed the CIA had killed Vance to silence him for having killed Pitzer . And when he couldn’t locate Vance, he assumed he had been killed by the CIA . Pitzer assumed Vance was killed to silence Pitzer for killing him .
 Only a confirmed conspiracy theorist would believe such a story . Robin Palmer and Allan Eaglesham believed Marvin to the extent of working with him for ten years trying to confirm his story .
 Vance said he never knew Marvin Marvin, never attended any course in assassination, and certainly was never approached by anyone to murder Pitzer . Vance eventually surfaced, saying he never met Marvin Marvin and never attended a course of assassination . Vance said Marvin was never involved in the murder plot .
 Marvin’s conduct thereafter certainly did. That itself wouldn’t have ruined his fantasy in their eyes, but it did . Marvin's conduct afterward certainly did .
 Marvin started to retreat on his story, became evasive, and began to make conflicting statements . Marvin was evasive and started making conflicting statements, he said . Marvin's story was the subject of a series of questions about his story .
 Marvin declined when asked to call and confront Vance with the two of them listening in, Marvin says . Marvin declined to call Vance to confront him .
 Eaglesham: "You have to have known him as Robin and I did to understand how much his behavior changed” Eaglesham said . “I did, I did, understand that Robin’s behavior changed after Vance surfaced.”
 Palmer and Eaglesham are no longer Marvin’s friends; they are angry at him for leading them on for so many years, and call him a liar . Palmer, Eaglesham and Palmer are now no longer friends, they say . Palmer: “They are angry that they
 "To their credit, they have made a sincere effort to inform the conspiracy community of their findings," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 His book has become big in the conspiracy community and is being publicly trumpeted by former Minnesota governor Jesse Ventura . Jesse Ventura is also publicly trumpeting the book .
 Per Armstrong, the CIA’s plan was to merge the identity of the Russian-speaking refugee with that of American-born Lee Harvey Oswald over a period of many years . Armstrong: The plan was intended to merge Oswald's identity with that that of the American born .
 If the merging of identities was successful, the CIA could then place the native Russian-speaking young man, with Oswald’s American identity, in the Soviet Union as a spy .
 The first project was approved on April 20, 1950, right in the midst of the cold war, by CIA Director Roscoe Hillenkoetter . The project is the first project approved by the CIA in 1950 .
 The means was to be hypnosis in conjunction with any other feasible aid, including neurosurgery and electroshock treatments . Some of the first subjects were twenty-five North Korean prisoners of war .
 MKULTRA was an offshoot of the original BLUEBIRD program . The emphasis was on the use of biological and chemical agents, mostly psychedelic drugs such as LSD, to achieve the same end .
 Most of the subjects experimented on were inmates of the federal drug hospital in Lexington, Kentucky . Inmates volunteered for the program with the understanding they would get a reduction of their sentences . Most were inmates at the hospital .
 LSD was apparently also administered to some subjects without their knowledge . Under MKULTRA, LSD was also apparently administered to subjects without them knowledge .
 The CIA at least once administered the drug to one of its own people, with tragic consequences . And apparently, and unbelievably, the drug was administered by the CIA . The CIA has a history of administering the drug .
 Dr. Grose writes that “on November 27,1953, seven months into MKULTRA, an American physician engaged in the project, Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was the first person involved in the program to be interviewed by a U.S.
 Per Grose, the CIA was of the opinion that the death of Olson was directly related to the LSD, although testimony from an LSD expert at one of my murder trials was that LSD leaves the body within twenty-four hours after ingestion .
 ‘Flashbacks’ may occur much later . But then again there’s the well-known phenomenon of ‘flashbacks” which may occur later .
 Strangelove presided over most of the CIA’s mind control programs . After two decades of feckless and silly efforts, he and the CIA abandoned their search for the Manchurian candidate in June of 1972 .
 Many of MKULTRA’s financial records survived and led to the exposure of the program in hearings before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence in 1977 . The CIA made an effort to destroy all of the documents that arose out of its mind control program, many of them survived .
 Armstrong alleges that this Russian refugee successfully “defected” to the Soviet Union in 1959 and returned to the U.S. with a Russian wife in 1962 . Armstrong alleges this refugee successfully defected to the United States in 1959 .
 A year and a half later this young man was set up as the ‘patsy’ in an elaborate scheme engineered by career CIA officials to assassinate President John F Kennedy . A year later, a young man in his early 20s was the 'pats' set up
 Harvey Oswald was shot and killed by Dallas nightclub owner/CIA gunrunner, Jack Ruby . The Russian-speaking refugee, Harvey Oswald, was shot two days after the Kennedy assassination .
 Armstrong has a source for any of the things he charges, he would be only too eager to give it to him . Armstrong has been charged with numerous crimes against him .
 He obviously made up out of whole cloth what I have quoted to you, and with that wild premise he was off and running with his story . "He obviously made it up out whole cloth," he said. "He made up a wild premise," he added .
 It would have been nice to know just who this Russian refugee fellow was, and how the CIA recruited him . It's not clear who he was .
 If CIA conspirators got the Russian refugee to impersonate Lee Harvey Oswald, they wouldn’t give him the same, identical name . Nor does he tell us why, if they got the . Russian refugee, he says, would have the same name as Oswald .
 The author of the book does not present evidence that the CIA had anything to do with Kennedy’s murder . Nor does he bother to present in his book one single piece of evidence .
 If the real Lee Harvey Oswald were to tell what happened to him to any friend or anyone at his job (for instance, at the Des Moines zoo or in the Allstate Insurance Company Claims Department in Atlanta) this would set in motion information that would ultimately expose the CIA as Kennedy�
 He offers no credible evidence that Ruby had anything to do with the CIA, as a gunrunner or anything else . Ruby is accused of being a gun runner for the CIA in the 1980s .
 Armstrong doesn't deign to tell us why this incredibly elaborate and difficult scheme was necessary . Armstrong doesn’t deigns to reveal why it was necessary for the project .
 Armstrong: Both Oswald and the imposter Oswald were recruited by the same conspirators at the CIA . Both were being “handled” by the CIA, Armstrong says . Armstrong: "Both were being handled" by them .
 By framing the real Lee Harvey Oswald, the CIA would eliminate the Second Oswald and all the problems inherent in such a project . Many conspiracy theorists believe the CIA framed the real Oswald, whom they had no reason to believe would be more difficult to frame than the imposter .
 Armstrong's premise for his book is seen to be prodigiously ridiculous . Armstrong writes a long tribute to absurdity before he writes the first word of his long tribute .
 Armstrong proceeds to take readers through the parallel lives of Lee Harvey Oswald and his imposter, Harvey Oswald, showing his readers that while one is in one city, the other one is somewhere else . Armstrong: "The two men were in the same city at the time of the assassination .
 Armstrong claims that in the months leading up to the assassination, the CIA had Lee Harvey Oswald impersonating Harvey Oswald . The CIA had the Russian refugee impersonating Oswald for several years, Armstrong claims .
 At the moment of the assassination, Harvey Oswald was in the second-floor lunchroom having lunch . Oswald was on the sixth floor firing at Kennedy . Oswald had lunch in the lunchroom at the time .
 It's Harvey Oswald who was arrested for Kennedy's and Tippit's murders, even though, per Armstrong, he killed neither and Lee Harvey Oswald killed both . Armstrong: It’s Harvey Oswald, who killed Kennedy, and Oswald killed Oswald, for Kennedy .
 Armstrong’s theory is that there are many photographs of Oswald, and the Lee Harvey Oswald known to the world looks slightly different in many of them . One of the two pillars of Armstrong's theory is to believe that there is no photographic evidence of Oswald .
 I remember Armstrong telling me about them in Tulsa, Oklahoma, years ago and shortly thereafter sending me a copy of his chronological poster, which I assume he put together with conspiracy theorist Jack White . He had included many of the photographs in his earlier videotape, The Many Faces of Lee Harvey
 The current poster Armstrong and White are using has seventy-seven photos of Oswald in it, but the one Armstrong sent me back then, which I still have in my files, only has sixty photos, starting with Oswald in 1941 at the age of two, and the last six of Oswald
 Armstrong says Dallas police arrested at least two imposter ‘Oswalds’ for Kennedy’s murder . Since Oswald looked different in all six photos, I suggest to Armstrong that contrary to his theory, it appears the Dallas police . The Dallas police appear to have arrested
 Armstrong includes photos of Oswald taken over a twenty-two-year period, from ages two to twenty-four . The photos were taken from age two to age 24 .
 Armstrong: If there are two photos of you that are not identical, the real explanation is that one of the photos is really not of you at all, but of someone else who resembles you . Armstrong: "If you have a photo of you ... that is not identical to one of
 Armstrong doesn't say that since there are many photos in his Oswald collection that differ from each other, this automatically means many “Oswalds” not just two, as he claims . And although Armstrong doesn’t say this, he is starkly inconsistent when he
 Lee Harvey Oswald described as having a strong sense of social justice, highly argumentative, passionate, obsessive in his anticapitalistic views, and so on . Oswald was very serious, very argumentative and passionate, according to his friends and family .
 Armstrong finds someone, anywhere, who describes a different aspect of Oswald, it’s a second person, not Oswald . Armstrong: When Armstrong finds a different part of Oswald's life, it's a second part .
 Palmer McBride spoke to one person in New Orleans about his family, but spoke to another in Japan . If he never talked to McBride, McBride's family, again, we must be talking about two different people, he says .
 Armstrong misleads his readers to help prove his conspiracy theory . Armstrong misled his readers into believing he had a conspiracy theory to prove his theory .
 John Armstrong might come into your life claiming either that you are an imposter or that someone with the same name as yours is impersonating you . If you like country-western music, you better keep listening to Hank and Willie and Waylon 24-7 for the rest of your life
 He doesn't even realize that the argument he makes (Harvey Oswald acting differently than Lee Harvey Oswald) is an argument that disproves his own impersonation theory . What he doesn’t even realize is that .
 If CIA conspirators could pull off the most sophisticated frame-up in history and find someone who looked so much like Lee Harvey Oswald that no one knew he wasn’t the same person they had always known, surely the conspirators would know all about the real Oswald . They would
 Armstrong: Harvey Oswald was out there for years doing his darnedest to impersonate Lee Oswald . Armstrong: "If we are to believe Armstrong, Harvey Oswald ... was out for years trying his darningest" Armstrong: Oswald impersonated Lee Oswald.
 Armstrong doesn't explain why Harvey’s CIA handlers would have him do (or not do) obvious things that Lee was doing . Armstrong doesn’t explain why Lee would not do obvious things .
 CIA conspirators just goofed in not realizing that they had to have their impersonator not only look like Lee Oswald but also act like him . And you can’t even argue that, well, the CIA conspirator just goofs .
 No further effort at impersonation had to be made after they found someone who looked like him, police say . That after they find someone who resembled him, no further effort was made .
 Harvey Oswald’s CIA handlers got him to learn to write exactly like Lee Oswald. That finding, all by itself, proves either that there weren’t, as you maintain, two Oswalds, or that Harvey Oswald was the same as Lee .
 Harvey and Lee were conscious of the need to make every effort to help ensure they appeared to be the same . But if you say this, you’re necessarily saying they were conscious .
 Lee wouldn't be a driver if Harvey didn’t even have a driver’s license . Therefore, Harvey and Lee would not, as you say, have different personalities . Lee would have been a driver without Harvey having a license .
 John Sutter: "You can't have it both ways. I mean, John, in the little game you're playing, you can’t have both ways"
 Armstrong was interviewed by the FBI on November 23, 1963, the day after the assassination . Palmer McBride was the subject of an FBI interview on that day .
 McBride said he became friendly with Oswald when they both worked at Pfisterer Dental Laboratory in New Orleans . McBride: Oswald and McBride became friendly when they worked together at the lab .
 Oswald worked at Pfisterer from late 1957 to around May of 1958, not in 1956, when the evidence shows that Oswald worked there . The problem is that he is certain Oswald worked in late 1958 to late 1958 .
 Armstrong concluded that the ‘Oswald’ at Pfisterer in New Orleans in 1957-1958 must have been a different Oswald from the one in Japan . Ergo, Armstrong concluded, that the real Oswald was the imposter, Harvey Oswald .
 Marguerite and Robert Oswald both place Lee Harvey Oswald at Pfisterer in 1956, not 1957-1958, when McBride was positive he was there . McBride is positive that he was in the late 1950s, but that wasn't until 1958 .
 Palmer McBride has been accused of lying on the cover of a murder trial . Palmer's testimony is far more reliable witnesses than Palmer's . Marguerite and Robert Oswald are more likely to be reliable witnesses to the case .
 Just as people frequently conflate words, they also conflate events, which has to have been what happened here . "Just as people often conflate terms, they often conflify events," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 On August 2,1955, Leonid I Sedov, the chairman of a Soviet commission on interplanetary affairs, announced in Copenhagen that “in my opinion, it will be possible to launch an artificial Earth Satellite within the next two years”
 The USSR Council of Ministers announced they had approved the launch of the satellite in January 1956 . The launch of Object D, designated “Object D,” was scheduled for 1957 .
 The Soviets were making enormous progress in their space satellite program, which was something many Americans were aware of . Though these weren't actual launchings, the news reaching America certainly suggested that the Soviets had made enormous progress .
 McBride must have conflated his memory of Russian progress in space with the Sputnik launching in 1957, an easy error in memory for the mind to make .
 On the resolution of this issue, we don't need Marguerite Oswald’s testimony to show that McBride made a simple error . McBride's testimony and Robert Oswald's recollection are proof of McBride error, says author .
 Oswald’s 1956 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, signed and filed by him on February 7, 1957, shows that he worked at Pfisterer in 1956, with wages of $612.00 and taxes withheld of $69.30 .
 Oswald worked briefly as an office boy after leaving Tujague's and before being employed at Pfisterer's with $5.00 withheld . Oswald worked very briefly as a office boy .
 Armstrong has no evidence that the FBI destroyed Oswald’s original W-2 forms and fabricated a new 1956 one along with a 1956 tax return . Armstrong: Of course, there is no evidence at all that the original forms were destroyed or fabricated .
 By his naked assertion, he now necessarily brings the FBI into the picture as being part of the conspiracy to frame the Russian refugee for Kennedy's murder .
 Armstrong's owners have not told anyone else, like the FBI or Armstrong himself, about the case . Why the owners haven’t told this to anyone else is not known .
 Armstrong made a specialty of relying completely on what people told him decades later, and often ignoring what they said later . Armstrong often ignored what people said much closer to the time in question .
 Armstrong goes from the ridiculous to the sublime in another one of his examples that he cites to support his two-Oswald argument . Armstrong: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do this again, but I'm sure I am going to do it again
 Robert told the Warren Commission that Lee “was thirteen years old” in 1952 when he attended Stripling . Lee’s father said Lee was 13 years old when he went to Stripling in 1952 . Lee's father told the commission that Lee was “13 years old
 In his book Robert makes no reference to Lee going to Stripling after the sixth grade, and in fact contradicts his Warren Commission testimony, which is perfectly understandable since he is reconstructing events that happened years earlier . But in his book, Robert says Lee went to Striplings after sixth grade
 He writes in his book that he enlisted in the Marines in July of 1952 and left home . He writes that he left home in July 1952 .
 This throws into question whether Lee ever attended Stripling . Marguerite Oswald, in her Warren Commission testimony, made no reference to Lee going to Stripling, according to her testimony .
 Robert Oswald’s Warren Commission testimony alone suggests he attended Stripling . However, the Warren Commission volumes show no document affirming this, and a search of the Fort Worth public schools by the Dallas Police Department did not reveal Stripling as one of the five schools he attended there .
 Armstrong saw a better opening at Stripling for his two-Oswald theory was two years later, in 1954 . Armstrong's theory of the two-oswalds theory came to light in 1954, two years after Stripling .
 In 1996, the former assistant principal at Stripling, Frank Kudlaty, told Armstrong that on the Saturday after the assassination, the principal called and asked him to go to the school to give the FBI Oswald’s school records, which he said he did .
 He said he "briefly” looked at the records, and told Armstrong, “I think he was in the ninth grade” at Stripling . Armstrong: “He was in ninth grade"
 The first problem with the Kudlaty story is that Robert Oswald attended Stripling for one year, apparently the ninth grade (1 H 297, WCT Robert Edward Lee Oswald), so there could easily have been some confusion on the principal’s part as well as Kud
 The possibility that Kudlaty is like the hundreds upon hundreds of people in the Kennedy assassination saga who, for one reason or another, told a phony story . And then there’s the possibility that he is not the same person .
 Kudlaty made a copy of Oswald’s school records to give to the FBI, or give the FBI the originals but make a copy to retain for the school's files . It seems almost inconceivable that he didn’t do the normal thing and simply make a
 The junior high school did not have one single copy machine . The story is a completely improbable story that the school had no copy machines .
 He adds that the FBI, having taken the originals, never gave him a receipt for the records . He adds a further improbability, asserting that the originals were taken from the originals .
 The FBI had told Armstrong in 1994 that it had no records of Oswald from Stripling . Armstrong immediately became convinced that the FBI had destroyed the records .
 Armstrong is certain that the Oswald at Stripling in 1954 must have been Harvey Oswald, the Russian refugee impersonating Oswald . Armstrong believes the FBI was definitely a co-conspirator with the CIA in framing “Oswald”
 The FBI is definitely a part of the conspiracy to frame Oswald for Kennedy’s murder . Kudlaty thinks he only received grades for one six-week period . The FBI has thousands of employees and millions of documents to search for Oswald‘s school records .
 Armstrong found two former students who claim they went to school with Lee Harvey Oswald at Stripling in 1954 . Armstrong also found two people who claim to have lived across the street from the school in a duplex .
 Lee Harvey Oswald attended the same school, P.S. 44, this time using the same name as Lee Harvey . Oswald . Oswald and Oswald were friends at the same time .
 Armstrong believes that Robert Oswald very possibly also joined in the conspiracy to frame his “real” brother, or at a minimum, sat by and acquiesced to whatever was taking place .
 Rufie Cox occupied apartment A at the subject Thomas address, and there was no listing for anyone in apartment B, the other apartment in the duplex . The Warren Commission, in a thorough effort, proved where Marguerite and her dwindling family lived .
 In fact, 2220 Thomas Place doesn't show up as a place where Marguerite and her family lived at any time .
 Armstrong’s whole investigation with respect to Stripling didn’t start with these 1964 and 1965 Fort Worth directories, with Armstrong working backward trying to force everything into his fairy tale . One wonders if Armstrong's whole investigation started with these .
 Armstrong set forth the original purpose of the impersonation, before it metamorphosed into a presidential assassination . Armstrong: The impersonation was originally intended to be an assassination .
 This is too crazy for words available in the English language to describe. But this is, once again, too crazy . It's too crazy to describe, but it's still crazy .
 Armstrong himself is very aware of this practice because he gives an example of it to support his cockamamy theory when it obviously only serves to refute it . Remarkably, Armstrong is aware of it because he himself is himself aware of the practice .
 Konan Trofimovich Molodi was born in Moscow in 1922 and was the son of a Soviet science writer . He tells the story of Konan, born in 1922, who was a Russian science writer who died in 2003 .
 In 1929 he was sent to Berkeley, California, to live with his aunt, who he apparently believed was his mother . He apparently believed that he had been sent to live there .
 In 1939 he returned to the Soviet Union, was given a commission in the Soviet navy . He began training in espionage against the British, probably because he could speak English . He returned to Russia in 1939, where he trained in espionage .
 Molodi-Lonsdale and four colleagues were ultimately arrested and convicted of espionage against the British government in 1961 . Molodi Lonsdale traveled to England, where he and four of his colleagues were arrested and ultimately convicted .
 Much of it is based on the premise that although Lee and Harvey look very much alike, there are sufficient differences, though slight, to prove that two different people are shown in the photographs .
 Armstrong misleads readers by telling them the Bronx Zoo photo is of a “small, thin, almost frail-looking boy” and very different from a photo taken a year earlier in Fort Worth . Armstrong misled readers .
 The Bronx photo shows Lee to be a perfectly normal, healthy young boy . Lee was taken to a hospital in the early hours of October 1 .
 There is no way to discern from the Bronx Zoo photo that the boy depicted is of a different height . There is also no way of discerning that the photo of the boy is different from the photo .
 Armstrong’s own theory throughout most of his book contradicts his own theory . In other words, it's a very poor impersonation, which contradicts Armstrong's own theory, he says .
 Armstrong was so confused by his own theory that he couldn’t even come up with a title to his book that makes sense . Indeed, it seems that Armstrong was confused with his own title .
 This suggests that the real Oswald, Lee, was framed for Kennedy’s murder, not some unknown Russian refugee who was merely using the name Oswald . The real Oswald was Lee, Lee . Lee was not a Russian refugee, not an unknown Russian .
 Armstrong says the real Lee Lee is the one who murdered Kennedy . Armstrong says Lee was the real Kennedy, but not the Kennedy .
 There is another point that, all by itself, conclusively negates Armstrong’s entire theory . Armstrong: “There is no doubt that there is no evidence that this is true”
 If we are to believe Armstrong, when Harvey’s body was disinterred on October 4, 1981, there shouldn’t have been any scar from the mastoidectomy on the corpse since, per Armstrong, Lee had the mastoidsectomy but Harvey was in the grave
 Surgeons identified the corpse of Lee Harvey Oswald from dental records . They also identified it as the left temporal bone of the corpse .
 Armstrong was not aware of the exhumation and the doctors’ report, he says . Armstrong was cleared of wrongdoing by the doctors' report, Armstrong says .
 Oswald's remains were identified by comparison with Oswald’s dental records in the Marines . Oswald's dental records were used to identify the remains of Harvey Oswald, who was killed in the July 4, 1911 .
 There wasn't room in his long book for such an insignificant detail as the mastoidectomy . There wasn’t room in the long book, he said .
 Armstrong’s gross and deliberate misrepresentation, by omission, is serious and inexcusable, but typical in the conspiracy community . Armstrong's gross . misrepresentation by omission is serious . Armstrong”s gross . and deliberate mischaracterization is .
 He failed to tell his readers of the mastoidectomy found on Oswald’s left ear when his body was disinterred and examined . One would think he wouldn’t have had the audacity to make any issue at all out of the presence or absence of the .
 The autopsy surgeon was not making an effort to identify the corpse, as the exhumation doctors were, to identify it .
 Armstrong contends that it was Harvey Oswald who was in the Fort Worth grave . In any event, this is all irrelevant to Armstrong .
 Armstrong concedes Lee Oswald had in 1945, seven years before Armstrong’s game started . The corpse in that same grave did have evidence of the mastoidectomy to his left ear, which Armstrong concedes .
 Armstrong’s theory could be dismissed solely on the ground that it is ‘ridiculous’ on its face, even if no evidence were offered to disprove it, it could still be dismissed . Armstrong's theory could also be dismissed on the grounds it is 'rid
 I resent having to write just one word in refutation of his theory but felt I had no choice since it has become so popular in the conspiracy community . I said earlier that I resent . having to . write just a . refutation, but felt he had . no choice .
 I've already gone far beyond merely saying that Armstrong’s theory is ridiculous, and could actually write much more pointing out one absurdity after another, which I of course will not do . I’ve already written much more to point out the absurdity, but I won’
 Armstrong asserts in his book that Marguerite Oswald, the short and stocky woman whom the rest of the world knows as Lee Harvey Oswald’s mother, was not really his mother, but also an imposter . Armstrong says there was a long-standing imposter impersonating
 I say elsewhere in this book that within the world of insanity there’s an internal logic. I say . Within the world . of insanity, within the . world of . insanity there is an internal . logic .
 Armstrong claims that a Russian refugee was impersonating Oswald . Armstrong says it makes perfect sense that the CIA would get someone who looks like Oswald to impersonate Oswald .
 Armstrong doesn't even say the imposter’s face looked anything like the real Marguerite, suggesting the opposite . Armstrong doesn’t even say that the face was anything like that of the woman .
 Armstrong doesn't say why the CIA picked someone who looked so unlike Marguerite, even being, per Armstrong, much taller, Armstrong doesn’t say . Why the CIA, trying to have someone impersonate Margueite, would choose someone so unlike her, Armstrong says .
 The real Marguerite’s sons, Robert Oswald and John Pic, as well as her sister and brother-in-law, didn’t shriek when the imposter appeared on television at the time of the assassination . Neither does he explain to readers why, when
 Armstrong threw out logic and reason long ago with respect to his fairy tale, but at least he had his insanity to fall back on . Armstrong had his own insanity back on, but it's not the same thing he did . Armstrong is accused of lying to the public .
 The fairy tale loses even its ‘internal logic” insanity when he asserts that the CIA got someone to impersonate Marguerite who looked nothing like her . The CIA got an impersonator who looked like her, he says, but he says it was a fake .
 Every word I wrote about this freaky book is one more word than Armstrong deserves . Armstrong and his theory deserve. Armstrong's theory deserves more than any word .
 A book that at worst doesn’t deserve First Amendment protections and at best is merely fun and games . Here’s a book that doesn't deserve first Amendment protections . At worst, the book is merely a book of fun, games .
 Brown encourages other Armstrongs to go off on delirious odysseys into the twilight zone . Brown is encouraging others to follow his example . He is doing nothing more than encouraging other conspiracy theorists .
 Armstrong did an enormous amount of good research on Lee Harvey Oswald’s background and life . Armstrong doesn’t show the readers of his book these two photos, but he does on pages 1 and 2 of the companion publication .
 The photo was taken when Marguerite was younger, when she married Edwin Ekdahl in 1945, more than ten years before the 1956 photo . She is on the slender side, but the photo is taken when she was younger .
 The 1956 photo of Marguerite, sitting down, that elicited “That’s her.” The photo of her sitting down in 1956 elicited "That's her," she said .
 Actress Marguerite McBride is not heavyset, only above average in weight . McBride says she met McBride, "that's the woman I met"
 She looks like the Marguerite in the marriage photo, only eleven years older, not the imposter Armstrong claims she is . Much more importantly, she looks like she did in the wedding photo .
 Armstrong has another photo in the companion publication that he claims is of Marguerite with a group in 1957 . Armstrong also has a photo he also tells his readers depicts Margueite as tall . Armstrong has also told his readers that the photo he claims depicts her as tall depicts Marguer
 Only portions of the bodies on her immediate left and right can be seen in the photo, so no clear opinion on height can be made . But only the upper half of her body and only portions of her immediate right and left can be shown .
 It cannot be assumed that this second photo is even of Marguerite, though there’s a resemblance . Moreover, as opposed to the unquestioned authenticity of the marriage photo with Ekdahl, it can't be assumed it's even of her .
 The best source for Oswald’s history from Minsk to Dealey Plaza is the seminal book, Marina and Lee, by Priscilla McMillan, who wrote the book .
 Oswald’s name “Lee Oswald, Dallas, Texas,” turned up on the guest book page for that date at the Fox and Hounds Restaurant in Huberton, Wisconsin . The next report of Oswald being in an unexpected place was also in Wisconsin .
 The signature was turned over to the FBI lab and an FBI handwriting expert determined it was not the signature of Oswald . Oswald's signature has never been found to have been Oswald's .
 Oswald sighting concerns a Dallas insurance agent, an insurance agent . Bogard's story is the subject of conspiracy theorists' theories .
 Swaldald’s alias at the rooming house where he lived, “H. H Lee” (Oswald) came to his office to purchase automobile liability insurance .
 Mr Lee presently doesn't own a car, Brand couldn’t quote him a rate . Brand couldn't quote him because he didn't own any car .
 Brand didn't know enough of the details of Oswald’s life to make it believable . Brand didn’t know enough details to make his story believable, according to the book .
 He claimed he saw Lee's “Texas driver’s license,” which we know Oswald never had, and believes the last name on the driver's license was Lee . He claimed to have seen Lee's license, but we know he never had .
 This location is a block and a half west of the Texas Theater, where Oswald was arrested, and about eight blocks southwest from where Tippit was murdered . The location is about a half a block from where Oswald's arrest took place .
 Office Tippit was murdered on November 22, 1963 . The owner of the record shop and his assistant saw him rush into the shop to use their phone . The victim was murdered in 1963 .
 He made a hurried call, and when he did not get an answer, he quickly left the shop, seemingly in a worried or upset state of mind . He then drove away in his squad car at a fast clip in the direction of Tenth and Patton, where he was murdered .
 The first time the story was publicized was in a December 1982 article in Gallery magazine . Earl Golz, a Dallas Morning News reporter, wrote enough pieces on the JFK assassination to fill a book .
 In his haste, Tippit had to ask customers to step aside as he made his way toward the phone .
 Stark and Cortinas recognized him from previous visits to the hospital, they said . Stark, Cortinas, said they recognized him when he visited them .
 Cortinas estimates Tippit let the phone ring ‘maybe seven or eight times’ without saying a word, hung up, and walked out fast . Cortinas estimated Tippits let the call ring ’maybe seven to eight times,’ before hanging up and walking
 Stark and Cortinas had told Golz the same story, and neither had apparently tried to sell their story to anyone or were seeking publicity . Golz: Stark, Cortinas were not seeking publicity, but they had credibility .
 Tippit was not at his police radio at the time of the alleged record shop incident, police say .
 At 1:03m., Dallas police dispatcher Murray Jackson attempted to get in touch with him . At 1-03m.m., he attempted to contact him again . He was found dead at a Dallas hospital .
 Andrews told Greg Lowrey, a Tippit researcher, that around 1:00m. he was driving west on Tenth Street about eight blocks west of Tenth and Patton . Andrews told Lowrey he was eight blocks away from Patton when he was killed .
 Andrews claims Tippit passed him on the left and then pulled in front of him, to the right, forcing Andrews to stop . He claims that he was forced to stop by the move . Andrews says he was hit by a speeding motorist who pulled in ahead of him in the
 Tippit, he said, rushed over to the driver’s side of his car, looked at the floor between the front seats . Then, without saying a word, just as quickly left, jumped back into his squad car, turned it around, and drove away at a
 Andrews told the story to Lowrey in 1990 or 1991, more than thirty-five years after the assassination, Lowrey says . The story doesn't have the ring of truth to it, but Andrews told it to the Lowrey more than 30 years after his assassination .
 It defies logic that Cortinas and Stark didn't call the authorities, especially during the Warren Commission period . The Kennedy assassination has proved to be the most publicized and controversial murder case in history, and Dallas has been at vortex of controversy .
 Cortinas and Stark's failure to sell their story hurts their credibility more than the fact they never tried to sell it helps it . That failure hurts Cortinas’s credibility far more than it hurts Stark and Cortinas .
 Drenas, who lives in Massachusetts, traveled to the AARC and made copies of the notes . He published the notes in his article .
 Stark and Cortinas' notes turned out to be devastating to the credibility of both of them . Cortinas and Stark were accused of lying to the public .
 Oswald bought a ticket to the Dick Clark show that evening at Dallas’s Memorial Auditorium . Stark told Golz that at 7:30 on the morning of the assassination, Oswald came into his store and bought the ticket .
 Oswald was actually waiting outside Stark’s record shop for it to open when he, Stark, arrived . Stark told author Dale Myers on September 8,1997, that Oswald was waiting outside the record shop when he arrived . Oswald died at Stark's record shop in September 1997 .
 Oswald bought the ticket to the Dick Clark show, Stark said . Stark added that Oswald left on a bus after buying the ticket for the show .
 Only one of the citizens of Oak Cliff who heard the tale (about Oswald buying a Dick Clark ticket) bothered to call the authorities . Oswald bought Dick Clark tickets in Oak Cliff .
 Police would be more inclined to pursue, on foot, anyone resembling the description of the presidential assassin sent out over the police radio . Then sometime would be likely to leave their patrol car without taking the time to notify their dispatcher .
 Five witnesses told Ramparts magazine reporter Bill Turner in 1966 that for around ten minutes between 12:45 and 1:00m., they saw Tippit sitting in his squad car at the Gloco gas station at 1502 North Zangs .
 Tippit suddenly left the station and took off at a high rate of speed south on Lancaster, which would be the general direction in which he was killed . The record shop was two miles to the southwest, with the record shop two miles away .
 No one will ever know what caused Tippit to leave his observation post at the gas station and speed off down the road .
 Police radio logs are silent as to any instruction to Tippit to do so . Police log log says he checked in at 1:08 a.m., last anyone heard from him prior to his death .
 Oswald came back to the record shop on the morning of the assassination to buy a second ticket, presumably to the same Dick Clark show, and this time Tippit was in the store . Oswald came to the store to buy the second ticket to Dick Clark .
 Oswald had bought the last one of the tickets . Maybe Tippit was also there to get one of these tickets, and Oswald had already bought one . Oswald bought the final one .
 Maybe the murder of Tippit by Oswald had nothing at all to do with the Kennedy assassination . Maybe it was just a fight that got out of hand over tickets to the Dick Clark show .
 Oswald, Marina, and their "kids" would come into his shop from time to time to buy records . Oswald and Marina would buy records from his shop .
 Oswald’s youngest daughter, Audrey Marina Rachel, was born on October 20, 1963, just one month before the assassination on November 22 . Oswald's youngest daughter was born just a month before he was assassinated .
 She lived at Ruth Paine’s house in Irving, about twenty miles from the Oak Cliff area of Dallas, during the entire period between the birth and November 22 .
 Stark also told Golz that Jack Ruby used to come into his record shop all the time . Stark also said Jack Ruby would come in and buy records from the record shop .
 Officer Tippit often came into the store to buy records for his children, store owner says . Officer often came in to buy music records for the children, he says .
 Cortinas says he thought Tippit was having an affair with one of the waitresses at Austin’s Barbeque . He says he would also see him at Ship's, a private club, and the Theatre Lounge strip joint . Cortinas said he thought he saw T
 The weight of the evidence is that Tippit never worked at either Ship’s or the Theatre Lounge . The only problem is that although one other person told Golz he had seen Tipperit working at Ship's, the only other person said he'd seen him working at
 Golz was unable to track down people who owned or worked at these two clubs . Drenas spoke to two close friends and fellow officers of Tippit’s who said he never worked at either place . Golz said he spoke to friends and colleagues who said Tipp
 In Stark’s original story, there is no mention of Tippit rushing in to make a call from the store and rushing out in a worried state shortly before he was murdered . Both officers, Bill Anglin and Morris Brumley, added that .
 Stark, with his employee, Cortinas, may have embroidered the original story with the Tippit phone call story . Stark and Cortinas worked together in the early days of the day .
 Tippit's wife, Marie, told the FBI that other than his job with the Dallas Police Department, her husband only worked at Austin’s Barbeque on Friday and Saturday evenings, and at the Stevens Theater in the Stevens Park Shopping Center .
 This, of course, further erodes the credibility of Cortinas’s entire story . Cortinas' entire story was published in the New York Times .
 Stark and Cortinas told Golz that Tippit, while on duty, used to come into the record shop from time to time to use their phone . Stark, Cortinas and Cortina say Tippits used to use the store's phone .
 Tippit’s Patrol District, 78, is about three miles, the way the crow flies, from the record shop at its closest point . But this does not ring true since the shop was at the border of Dallas Police Districts 91 and 92 .
 District 83 was a little closer to the record shop, but still a good distance away, and 84 was equidistant from the shop with 78 . The record shop was also a little further away from District 83 .
 Former Dallas sheriff Jim Bowles was with the Dallas Police Department for many years . Bowles says it was “not uncommon at all” for a patrol officer to drive outside of his district .
 His son, Matthew, told me that whenever he and his sisters and brothers would ask their father about the record shop incident, “he’d never want to talk about it.” He said that whenever they would ask him about it, he wouldn't want to say
 "We kind of joked that it was some kind of mystery that he didn’t want to go into any of the details about," he said . The actor said he didn't want to give details about the mystery .
 The only thing that he told me that I remember clearly is he said Officer Tippit was in the store shooting the bull with him and the owner of the store when they all heard over the radio that Kennedy was shot . The only one thing he said he remembers clearly is that Officer
 Matthew said his father told him that Tippit would often come by the store to shoot the bull . Matthew said he was told by his father that the bull would often shoot at the store .
 Stark and Cortinas could hardly have any less credibility in the story they ended up telling . But the fact is the fact that the story is more credible in the case they were telling .
 Conspiracy authors accept it as if it were an established fact . Yet conspiracy authors have accepted it as a fact . It is not the first instance of a conspiracy theory .
 Warren Commission assistant counsel David Belin came up with a theory on where Oswald may have been headed . Belin: Oswald may be headed to Mexico City .
 Oswald had the bus transfer from the Marsalis bus in his shirt pocket at the time of his arrest, according to the draft of the Warren Report . Oswald was arrested on November 4, 1945 .
 Oswald’s bus transfer was marked for 1:00m. in the downStreet . No one had ever seen Tippit there before, and no one had seen him before .
 Tippit made hurried phone calls while on duty unrelated to work unrelated to his work, investigators say . Mrs. Tipperit confirmed to HSCA investigators in 1977 that she had made the phone calls in 1977 by Tipper .
 Johnnie Maxie Witherspoon that she had had a one-year affair with T ippit. Johnnie said she had an affair with the actor for a year or more .
 Her married name inl963hadbeen Thompson was Thompson . She worked as a waitress at Austin’s Barbeque in Dallas, where Tippit also worked as security guard .
 Witherspoon told HSCA investigators that in late June or July of 1963 she quit her job at Austin's, told Tippit her husband “had returned home,” and ended the affair . Author Dale Myers’s research from divorce documents filed by Mrs
 Thompson's affair with Tippit had extended into that month . Thompson's divorce was granted but the couple continued to live as common law man and wife until they eventually broke up for good . Thompson’s affair with Thompson was discovered in September .
 Conspiracy theorists, always seeking to defend Oswald on the Kennedy and Tippit murders, suggest that maybe Thompson’s husband may have killed Oswald . Thompson was living at the time with his wife in the 2500 block of South Tyler in Oak Cliff, about two and a half miles away
 Witherspoon told the HSCA that her former husband “probably did know about Tippit” or “at least suspected something,” she told author Henry Hurt in 1983 that her estranged husband actually followed her around Oak Cliff at night during the months of
 Oswald could save the bus fare by using his transfer, a not unlikely course of action based on his living habits . Oswald walked to the transfer point and used his transfer to get on the bus .
 Oswald got on a bus at Marsalis and Jefferson, “barely a block away was another bus which could have been boarded by Oswald at Jefferson and Ewing.” Instead of Oswald getting on the bus, Oswald could have boarded another bus at Jefferson, Ewing .
 Route 55 traveled south on Ewing and eventually Lancaster Road . Route 55 is Route 55, which is located in Lancaster, Lancaster, Pennsylvania .
 Oswald’s transfer would have taken him to a point on Lancaster Road where the first southbound Greyhound bus was scheduled to stop for passengers around 3:30m. Oswald would have been good for that bus, which would have allowed him to get on the other side of the
 Greyhound bus could be taken directly to Waco, Austin, and San Antonio, Texas . Connections could be made for Corpus Christi, Brownsville and Laredo, Texas, and Monterrey, Mexico .
 Oswald could not have been at the airport that morning . Unless the incident happened in the hour or two before 8:00 m. a. m. , Oswald could have been there at the time of the incident .
 Conspiracy theorists cite the statement of Mary Dowling, a waitress at the Dobbs House Restaurant, as proof Oswald wasn't at work on the morning of November 20 . Dowling said he frequently had breakfast between 7:00 and 7:30m. The restaurant is two blocks from where
 Oswald had breakfast at her restaurant around 10:00m. on the Wednesday before the assassination . Dowling claims he complained to her about how his order of eggs had been cooked . Officer Tippit was in the restaurant at the time and she noticed he “shot a glance at
 The likelihood of Tippit driving to a restaurant more than six miles outside his assigned patrol district, 78, is implausible on its face .
 No one at the restaurant confirmed Dowling’s story that it took place around 10:00 on Wednesday morning and that Tippit was present . Another waitress also said there was an incident with Oswald over the eggs on Thursday, November 21 .
 Matthew Smith, the smiling Brit, decided to exploit the completely discredited Wayne January and see if, after twenty-eight years of lies by January, he could squeeze one more out of the story .
 On November 18, two days before the assassination, an air force colonel came out to sign ownership papers for the purchase of a Douglas DC-3 . January’s partner had sold to him over the phone a few days earlier . January's partner sold the plane to January over the
 The colonel was accompanied by a CIA pilot who had been in Castro’s air force but had turned against him and had flown for the CIA in the Bay of Pigs invasion . The colonel and the pilot were accompanied by the CIA pilot .
 The pilot confided to January that anti-Castro Cubans “are going to kill your president” for withdrawing air support during the Bay of Pigs . Three days later, three days before the assassination, he confided that the Cuban president was going to be killed .
 The pilot, suggesting he had firsthand knowledge of all he was saying, responded, “Never mind. Never mind.” The pilot responded, "Never mind."
 I think I can safely say that I have finally found a lie that January didn’t tell. ‘I think I . can safely . say that January’s a lie. I think it is a lie,’ she writes .
 Smith quotes January’s words from his 1991 interview of January . Smith is mum on the CIA pilot's assertions about anti-Castro Cubans planning to kill Kennedy .
 Anti-Castro Cuban exiles and CIA renegades working with them killed JFK and RFK, author says . Ted Kennedy's brother, Ted, would never be able to run for president after Chappaquidick .
 Someone called Ted on the phone and told him to accept what happened as a warning of what would befall him if he pursued his ambition to reach the presidency .
 Smith should be embarrassed at telling such a tale, but my guess is that he is not . Smith should have been embarrassed by telling such an embarrassing tale .
 Wayne January's late friend, Wayne January, was a CIA pilot . He never made up the CIA pilot story, but we can know that he did . Wayne January was a friend of Wayne January . January died in 2008 .
 Redbird Airport played into another invented story about the assassination, this time by a fraud so pathetic that he is an insult to those who make their living by fraudulent means . The airport played into a fake story about an assassination .
 William Robert “Tosh” Plumlee, aka William H “Buck” Pearson, is the son of William H "Buck" Pearson . His name is William Robert "Tosh," aka William Robert 'Tosh' Plumlee .
 Plumlee has been attempting to attract attention with his story, but on November 21,2004, he issued a “Personal Statement” saying that “anything in previous publications is subject to question’s authenticity’
 "My purpose ... is to clarify previous errors of fact, which have been attributed to me," she says . "I'm not a politician, but I'm a businessman," she adds .
 Plumlee and his copilot flew a team of people from Florida to Dallas to "abort" the assassination . The CIA had learned that there was going to be an attempt on President Kennedy’s life in front of the Hotel Adolphus in Dallas .
 If we're to believe Tosh, the CIA learns that Kennedy might be killed and the agency wants to prevent it, instead of using the Secret Service, the FBI, and local law enforcement to do so . The CIA flys in Johnny Roselli and some fellow mobsters, as well
 The route through Dealey Plaza was published in the Dallas newspaper as early as three days before the assassination . But we know, of course, that it was not, and the route was published three days later .
 shooters might be located, but didn’t spot any potential assassins . No assassins were spotted .
 He said he heard “4 or 5 shots,” and believed one was from a location near the underpass . The man says he heard the shots from an area near an underpass in the area .
 After the shooting he returned to Redbird and flew his dejected team of aborters (except Roselli, who never showed up) out of Redbird around 2:00m. that day . He flew his team out of the Redbird at 2:30am .
 The next day he told a reporter for the Dallas Times Herald, Robert Fenley, that he was “certain” Oswald had been to the office on a few occasions to get money orders for “$10 or $15” The reporter said he knew it was Oswald
 Hamblen said he couldn't identify Oswald from photos . He said he wouldn't say that it was Lee Oswald . He couldn’t identify the man as Oswald .
 He denied telling the reporter what he admitted signing his name to . He also denied telling him what he said to the reporter .
 A complete search by officers of the Western Union for records of the telegram and money orders under Oswald’s name or any of his known aliases failed to uncover any such telegram or money order . Oswald's name has never been found .
 The Warren Commission, being generous to Hamblen, said it accepted this innocent assessment . The Warren commission said it was innocent . It accepted Hamblens' innocence .
 Clifton Shasteen, the owner of a barbershop in Irving, told the FBI and the Warren Commission that he “knew” Oswald had had his hair cut in his store five or six times on Friday evenings or Saturday mornings in 1963 .
 One of Shasteen’s other two barbers, Bert Elmo Glover, identified Oswald, saying he was thirty-four to thirty-five years old . Oswald was arrested at the time of the shooting .
 Ruth Paine, whom Shasteen said he saw around Irving, owned such a vehicle, but this fact had been reported in the news . Oswald stayed at the Paine residence after the assassination, but Shasten acknowledged learning that Oswald had stayed there .
 Paine told the FBI she had never let Oswald take her car anywhere . Paine said she did not recall Oswald going for a haircut on a weekend in October or November .
 On Friday evening, November 8, Oswald was accompanied to the barbershop, Shasteen said, by a 14-year-old boy . The boy came back to the shop alone three or four days before the assassination, he said .
 The topic of conversation in the shop was foreign aid and the boy “volunteered” to Shasteen that things wouldn’t be right in the world until there was only one leader for all people and the wealth was spread equally—boilerplate Marxist dogma .
 I hope the reader now understands the extreme relevance of the barbershop story . I hope this story will help us understand the importance of the story .
 Ruth Paine said she knew of no boy about 14 years old with whom Oswald was ever associated in Irving, she simply didn’t know what was going on . Paine: "No boy about fourteen years old" with Oswald ever associated with her .
 The 14-year-old, from his piggy-bank savings, may have even funded the whole project, paying Oswald to do the awful deed .
 Hubert Morrow said Lee Harvey Oswald applied for a job with him just days before the assassination . Morrow said Oswald asked about the height of the building and whether it had a good view of Dallas .
 Oswald was waiting to talk to his boss, Garnett Claud Hallmark . He said that the last he saw Oswald that day, he said, was waiting for Garnett Hallmark to talk .
 Morrow never said why he never contacted the authorities with his information . Dallas police contacted him when an informant told them that Morrow was telling his story to others . The story he relates makes little sense .
 Second Oswald conspiracy advocates point out that not only did Oswald himself list his height as being different at different times, but actual photos of Oswald show him to have different heights .
 Measurements on October 24, 1956, and August 9, 1963, were by height charts, and the HSCA pointed out what has been known in law enforcement for years—these measurements are unreliable .
 The HSCA said that “unless the subject photographed is standing with his back against the height chart at a correct distance from a properly positioned camera equipped with an appropriate lens, it is unreasonable to assume that the resulting picture is ever a precisely accurate indicator of both height and head size
 Oswald could be expected to tell people his height at various times based on documents he had seen showing his height as measured by a height chart . Oswald could not be measured by himself, since people don't normally measure themselves .
 A 1971 study of 6,682 army personnel that measured their actual heights versus the heights these individuals reported for themselves showed a typical discrepancy of just over one inch .
 People don't always give the same height when asked at various times in their lives . Apart from any motivation of possible vanity, it is well known that people don’t always give same height as they do .
 Conspiracy theorists argue that Oswald gave different heights at different times are necessarily arguing out of both sides of their mouths . Conspiracy theorists who argue Oswald gave . different heights were necessarily arguing for each other .
 If their position is that the difference in height means one is the real Oswald, the other an impersonator, they can only sound silly arguing that in one of the allegedly most sophisticated and complex impersonations ever, the impersonator gave a height two inches different from the height of the man
 Oswald is usually described as being of average height, and photos of him make him look around five feet eight or five feet nine . Oswald has been described as having an average height of around 5 feet eight .
 Panel members gave tentative opinions for copies of documents . Nearly half of the documents available were originals . Panel members did not make definitive conclusions about documents not the original .
 Panel concludes that original documents purport to be Oswald’s are all in the handwriting of the same person . Panel concluded that “as far as . original documents are concerned, the conclusion is that the signatures and writing on them which purport . to be . Oswald's are
 There were some cases where, for whatever reason, an expert did not examine a particular document or had no opinion . There were also cases where an expert didn't examine a specific document .
 Oswald wrote a letter to oilman H L Hunt purportedly written by Oswald . Oswald's writing was very brief and limited, and one or two examiners would form one opinion, and the other another .
 One examiner, Joseph McNally, concluded it was a fake . Another, David Purtell, had no opinion, and the third, Charles Scott, said it was “probably Oswald’s signature .
 Hidell, to a Fair Play for Cuba card, was only one other instance in the separate reports of each examiner where one of them said he believed a document was not signed, written, or printed by Oswald . Hidell: "I could find only once other instance ... where one
 Oswald, before he left for Mexico City, didn’t get his friend Clay Shaw (who, according to Perry Russo, had just recently conspired with Oswald and David Ferrie to murder Kennedy) to intercede on his behalf .
 There’s been a question as to the authenticity of the signature on document 63 , a photograph of the fingerprint card for Oswald on the day of the assassination . After all, the Cuban consulate in New Orleans is located in the city .
 Two handwriting experts, David Purtell and Charles Scott, did not authenticate Oswald’s purported signature on this document, simply not examining it . Conspiracy theorists note that two of the HSCA's handwriting experts didn't authenticate the signature on the document .
 The third one, Joseph McNally, implies he did not authenticate number 63 by not authenticating it . McNally did not list it as being one of the documents he authenticated as containing Oswald’s signature .
 The main relevance of a signature on a fingerprint card is to help confirm that the fingerprints on the card belong to the party that law enforcement claims they belong to . The fingerprint signature is used to confirm the identity of the person using the card .
 In a 1975 interview with the Los Angeles Times, a former CIA contract agent said Oswald had told both the Soviets as well as the Cubans that he had information about a new CIA plan to kill Castro . He offered to give it to them in exchange for the Cuban visa .
 Rodriguez’s story, in the abstract, might be worthy of belief, but we know it is not true . None of the many Cuban and Russian officials who met Oswald have spoken or testified about what took place have mentioned this .
 Transcripts are verbatim transcripts from wiretapped phone conversations at the Cuban consulate and Russian embassy and consulate in Mexico City, from September 27 to October 3, 1963 . Transcripts include phone calls from Cuban consulate, Russian embassy, and Cuban embassy .
 It should be noted that two of these conversations do not pertain to Oswald if for no other reason that the person seeking the visa is speaking in Spanish . Oswald is the subject of two of the conversations .
 Oswald had a Spanish dictionary, and Nelson Delgado, a friend of his in the Marines, says he taught Oswald a little Spanish . Oswald was far more fluent in Russian than Spanish .
 Even if he did speak Spanish, there would be no conceivable reason for him to call the Soviet embassy and speak to the staff in Spanish instead of their native language .
 Oswald asked the person to whom he was speaking at the Soviet embassy to speak to him, Oswald, in Russian . In fact, Oswald asked to speak in Russian, Oswald said . Oswald asked for the person he was talking to to speak Russian .
 In any conversation where a male is calling the Soviet embassy and speaking in Spanish, we can know the man is not Oswald . Therefore, in any conversation . We can know that the man who calls the embassy in Spanish speaks in Spanish .
 One of these conversations (October 3, 1963) is erroneously believed by some to pertain to Oswald . The conversation is nonetheless included here because it is still believed to be of Oswald's .
 Man calling says he needs to get a visa to go to , Man inside tells him to call 15 60 55 and ask for the Consul . Man inside says he can't get visa and asks for help in getting a visa for him .
 Man outside [man talking on phone outside the embassy] asks for the address . Man outside asked if the address was for the embassy .
 Woman outside is Silvia Duran from the Cuban Consulate and explains the same thing to another man inside . Woman outside explains the situation to a man inside the Cuban consulate .
 The latter asks her to leave his telephone and name so they can call him later . She leaves him with his phone and name and asks him to leave them to call him again .
 Silvia then furnishes it to him as well as telephone 11 28 47 and she takes that opportunity to say something personal of her that she changed her address and has not been able to notify them so they could send her the bulletin and that now she give it to them . Silvia
 Man inside asks her to call Kourkharenko to give him her change in address . He asks for the name of the Counselor or Cultural Attache . The man then asks for her to give the man her name .
 Silvia Proenza says that her name is Teresa Proenza and she can be called at 14 13 26 . Silvia says that she is a mother-of-two .
 Man inside says that if his wife is now in Washington but is going to get right now the visa or the permit from the USSR to return to this country, she would be notified at any place, here for example, or anywhere else, but they don’t have it right
 Silvia says of course and that besides they cannot give him a letter because they don’t know if his visa will be granted . Silvia also says they can't give a letter to him because it's not known if he will get a visa .
 Man inside says that they will only grant the visa according to the instructions . Man inside said that they only grant visas according to instructions .
 Man inside says that besides he is not known and excused himself for the inconveniences . Man inside: "Besides he was not known, besides he was ... not known"
 Cuban Consulate says there in her Consulate is an American that was there in the Soviet Embassy . The woman says she was in the embassy at the time .
 Northamerican takes phone and says in broken Russian ‘I was in your Embassy and spoke to your Consul.’ ‘Northamerican’s phone was answered in broken English . Northamericans take phone and say they were in Russian Embassy in Moscow .
 If an “interested” CIA officer wanted any given tape preserved, this could be done . The report also stated that if an ‘interested’ CIA officer . wanted any . given tape to be preserved, it could be preserved .
 There is no evidence that any CIA officer requested preservation of any Oswald tapes, nor, it would seem, was anything on the tapes that would have alerted or alarmed the CIA into wanting to preserve the tapes .
 Oswald was already given the phone number Oswald was given during the October 1, 1963, conversation . The man is speaking to the Soviets in Spanish, the man’s words don’t quite ‘sound’ like those of Oswald . The Russian official directs Oswald to a
 ARRB: CIA has transcripts of calls believed to have been made by Oswald . CIA has maintained that it did not retain tapes from the period of Oswald’s visit . The ARRB says the station continually recycled the tapes after it transcribed any useful information .
 Only one of the calls, made to the Soviet Consulate, actually identifies a Lee Oswald as the caller . According to the transcripts, only one of those calls actually identifies Lee Oswald .
 A September 17,1998, memorandum from J Barry Harrelson, senior reviewer for the CIA, to Ms. Ms. Obeidallah . The memo was sent to her by a senior CIA official .
 ARRB’s executive director: “Over the years, there have been a number of efforts to determine if any electronic surveillance audio tapes made during the period Oswald visited Mexico... still existed.”
 The Directorate of Operations has again made a thorough search of its records system as well as the index to retired records . It is searching for tapes or documentation that would shed light on their disposition .
 CIA headquarters sent instructions to its Mexico City station on November 22, 1963, to suspend its usual practice of erasing and reusing tapes . CIA headquarters instructed Mexico City to stop erasing tapes .
 Based on the evidence, I can only conclude that the CIA erased the Oswald tapes before the assassination . The CIA may have erased the tapes before Oswald's assassination, author says .
 Newman has no documentary evidence to support the categorical assertion he made in the Probe article . Newman did not respond to my request for comment .
 The only possible CIA document I know of that Newman could be using to base his assertion on is really, upon scrutiny, no authority at all . Newman's assertion is based on no authority from a CIA document he could use .
 FBI memo dated November 25, 1963, from the deputy director of plans to J Edgar Hoover, refers to a CIA Teletype, 84515, dated November 23, 1963 . CIA had transcripts of several phone calls made, pre596 ENDNOTES sumably by Oswald .
 The clear weight of the evidence is that Boris Tarasoff, the CIA staff officer in Mexico City who translated and transcribed the tapes, did so on or around October 1,1963, long before the assassination .
 Goodpasture was a close assistant to Win Scott, the head of the CIA station in Mexico City, and was very knowledgeable about everything taking place there . He was also a close friend of Win Scott .
 Goodpasture told the ARRB that “I think there was” a “copy” made of that portion of the main tape of the CIA’s intercept of the Soviet embassy calls on October 1, 1963 . Yet remarkably, seventeen years later, Goodpast
 She retired from the CIA in 1975 after thirty-one years, and although she still spoke well in 1995, she must have been up in years . “After the assassination, look in the records, there might be —there should be . a reference to some FBI agent who hand
 The agent trekked across mountain ranges and desert from Mexico City to far off Laredo . Somehow I have the image of the photo and tape in a small bag of the agent, and the agent .
 It is unlikely the CIA would have kept the tapes when it had already gone on record as not having them, risking their discovery . And if, for whatever reason, the CIA did, it is also highly unlikely that it would keep the tapes . The tapes are likely proof that the CIA
 The Hartman-Oswald tapes were at the archives and someone removed them, Tilley says . Tilley said he never indicated to the researcher that he was alarmed that at one time the tapes may have been removed from the archives .
 Conspiracy theorists have also relied on the statements of former Warren Commission counsel W David Slawson that the CIA retained one or more tapes of Oswald’s telephone calls to the Russian embassy . Oswald's phone calls to Russian embassy may have been recorded .
 Slawson visited the Mexico City CIA headquarters in April of 1964 with fellow assistant counsels William Coleman and Howard Willens . The three men visited the headquarters of the CIA in April 1964 .
 Slawson said he could not remember hearing any tapes of Oswald during his visit to Mexico City . He said he did not recall hearing any recordings of Oswald in Mexico City in February of 2000 .
 Oswald believed his partner, Coleman, heard the tape of a call Oswald made to the Soviet embassy . But he told me that while he was being shown something elsewhere at the headquarters, he believed, but was not sure, that his partner Coleman heard the call . Oswald believed the tape was
 With respect to Slawson, in March 2006, researcher Gus Russo provided me with information I had been unaware of of . Gus Russo was an expert assassination researcher, says author . He adds: "Gus Russo provided us with information that I had previously been unaware"
 Russo was one of the two lead reporters for the Frontline documentary on Lee Harvey Oswald that was shown on PBS in November 1993 . Russo was a reporter for Frontline's documentary on Oswald .
 Anthony Summers sent me the transcript of Anthony Summers’s September 11,1993, taped interview of Slawson for Frontline dealing with the Mexico City tapes issue . The transcript of the interview was published by Frontline .
 Slawson’s statement to Summers was not used on the Frontline show and this is why I had been unaware of it, he says . Slawon’t used it on Frontline: “I’m not sure why I’ve been
 Slawson told Summers, “I know that they had the tapes of the wiretaps with Oswald’s voice on them.” He said he knows that Oswald's voice was on the tapes, and that the tapes had Oswald's .
 "My recollection is that we listened to them, but I don't think we listened all the way through," says singer . "I don’t think we listen to them all the time through," she says .
 Slawson heard Oswald’s voice on a CIA tape in Mexico City, Mexico City . Hardly the type of statement that one could take to the bank on the issue of whether Oswald's voice was heard .
 When I called Slawson back in March of 2006 to discuss the tape issue, he essentially reiterated what he had told me in February of 2000 . Rowell or his daughter [each wrote to him] dated August 24, 1990, December 4, 1992, and April 14, 1993
 Slawson said he didn't see any point in it, since he had the transcript and he could not authenticate that it was Oswald’s voice on the tape . He said he was not familiar with Oswald's voice . At that point he didn’t see any
 Slawson: "You know, Vince, when I was saying these things, my memory was very vague. When I was . saying these . things, Vince said, "My memory is very vague"
 CNN.com's John D. Ely interviewed John Ely in the early 1990s . Ely's interview with Ely was after a 1990s interview and letters with Ely . Ely.com: "To you and John Ely, which was after ... ... Actually, to you ... it was after
 Oswald tapes would have been forwarded on to headquarters, CIA says . Oswald tapes from Mexico City station would have forwarded to headquarters .
 Oswald’s words fell into the 95 percent category of conversations that the CIA erased, the author says . The CIA erased Oswald's words, but there was nothing on the tapes that would cause the CIA to feel they should be retained, he says .
 Slawson’s “belief” that the CIA people told him in Mexico City that they had the Oswald tapes is most likely incorrect, and attributable simply to a failure of memory . No one can question the integrity of someone of a well-earned stature, but
 Jeremy Gunn, the former executive director of the ARRB, has articulated an interesting twist on the whole tape issue . Gunn: "The tape tape issue is not the answer to all the questions"
 Gunn says a standard operation was to impersonate Americans who were in phone contact with the Embassy . Gunn says, “A standard operation there was . impersonation of Americans’s phone calls to the Embassy. Gunn says .
 Gunn said the purpose for the impersonation was to learn more about the embassy and its employees . Gunn said he wanted to know more about embassy and employees .
 There were two other ‘photographic sites or bases” covering the Soviet embassy . The embassy was located at the embassy in Moscow .
 It did not directly face the gate of the embassy and was not installed until after Oswald’s Mexico City visit . It was installed after Oswald visited the embassy in Mexico City in 1953 .
 The second, from a home owned by the CIA that backed up to the rear of the embassy property, was trained on the courtyard where the employees would spend leisure time, including playing volleyball .
 It should also be borne in mind that the operators of the surveillance cameras were not CIA agents, for whom a certain degree of competence could be expected . The operators of surveillance cameras should be expected to be able to be trusted .
 Scelso said “at least half of the people, or even more,” weren’t picked up by the cameras . He said a very high percentage of people entering the Russian and Cuban embassies in Mexico City were not picked up .
 Oswald visited one or the other embassy in Mexico City at the time of his assassination . The percentages would seem to dictate that a photo of him would be secured on at least one occasion, yet none were .
 Oswald, being a defector, would be the type of person who might do so, Scelso said . Oswald was the type to conceal his faces in the presence of the installations .
 Oswald would be “perfectly capable of approaching the Cuban or Soviet embassy that his face could not be photographed," HSCA counsel says .
 In other words, if this is the Soviet embassy and our vantage point is over here, he can walk under the window and walk straight across the street . In other . words, "If this is . a Soviet embassy ... he can . walk under a window and then walk across the
 "The story" Agee heard may have been incorrect, but it may be incorrect, he says . Agee says he heard the story about the embassy photos .
 Bustos testified before the HSCA that “I don’t remember ever finding an Oswald photograph” at Washington headquarters . Bustos also denied telling Agee or Smith that she had .
 Lopez: Win Scott, the CIA’s Mexico City station chief, died in 1971, left an unpublished manuscript behind titled “Foul Foe” about his entire intelligence career . Lopez: Scott left a manuscript about his intelligence career in which he left a book .
 It was one thing for him to expose and denounce whatever CIA misconduct he saw or participated in, but to publish the identity of CIA agents, operatives, and informants he had encountered during his years with the CIA throughout Latin America .
 The only thing that stands in the way of Scott’s story is common sense . Scott's story is that common sense. Scott is the only thing to stand by common sense, says CNN.com .
 Not to do it and for it to be found out that he conceded this information could be the end of his career . Not to admit it could end his career if it is found out .
 Even if we assume that the CIA, or rogue elements thereof, were involved, as nearly all conspiracy theorists believe, in the assassination, this too makes no sense . Second, even if we . assume that . rogue elements . were involved in the . assassination, and they ordered Scott to
 If they were involved in Kennedy’s murder, they’d want to show photographs of Oswald with the Cubans and Russians more than anyone in the world, since doing so would promote a theory that they would be pushing . Someone other than they were behind Kennedy's murder would
 Scott’s story on its face isn’t reasonable, it sounds to me like he was just puffing up a book he wanted to peddle . Since Scott on his face isn't reasonable it sounds like he's just puff-up a new book he wants to pedd
 Joseph Piccolo Jr. was working out of the CIA station in Mexico City from 1957 to 1960 and 1965 to 1968 . He says he was “led to understand” they were of Oswald “entering or leaving” the Cuban embassy/consulate . One was a
 It should be noted that Goodpasture was working at the CIA station in Mexico City throughout this entire period . One of her jobs was to review all photographs taken by the CIA’s photographic surveillance of the Russian consulate and embassy .
 She reviewed photos taken at the Cuban consulate and embassy when there was a question of the identity of someone who may have also gone to the Russian embassy . She also reviewed photographs taken in Cuba and Russia at the time .
 Angleton did come to Scott's funeral, but suggested it was not to retrieve anything from Scott’s safe at home . Angleton came to the funeral for Scott, but said he did not want anything from the safe . Goodpasture said Angleton was not at the funeral
 She spoke very highly of Scott, describing him as a very competent, intelli-intelli . One thing that doesn’t ring true is that all one has to do is give them a little time, as I did with Lopez at the London trial, and they self-
 Win Scott may have been a nice man but when he wrote his manuscript, he was full of, er, wind . Win Scott's manuscript was published in 1998 .
 The cable was sent to Langley headquarters on October 10 . It focused almost exclusively on Oswald’s defection to Russia and his status as a U.S. citizen .
 The CIA had already learned about Oswald's activities in New Orleans from FBI reports . This is probably why there is no reference in the cable to Oswald’s activities there .
 The statement in paragraph three of the cable that the latest information on Oswald that Langley had had was in May 1962, though technically incorrect, was correct in the context of information relating to Oswald’s status as a citizen, which was the subject of a cable .
 A reference to Oswald’s activities in New Orleans would have been out of place . These words clearly show that the May 1962 reference only pertained to matters concerning Oswald's citizenship status .
 Anti-conspiracy theorists have repeated the claim that “the CIA did not have any photographs of Oswald in the files they maintained on him, and did not know what he looked like” (Posner, gent, and honest man. 1055 no resemblance to Oswald in face
 The November 16, 1959, Washington Post clipping contained a UPI photo of Oswald . It was captioned “Rebuffed” about Soviet authorities rejecting Oswald’s bid for Soviet citizenship .
 The November 26, 1959, Washington Evening Star clipping was an article by Priscilla Johnson (“ United States Defector to Reds Turned to Marx at 15”) with an AP photo of Oswald . The article was published in the D.C. Evening Star .
 On October 4, 1963, CIA headquarters requested of the Office of Naval Intelligence two copies of the most recent photographs of Oswald so that an attempt could be made to verify his reported presence in Mexico City . Oswald's photograph of Oswald is the only image of Oswald in the CIA files .
 ONI did get one photograph of Oswald taken at the approximate time of his Marine Corps induction . Oswald was inducted into the Marine Corps .
 It sent requested copies of the requested copies to the CIA, but not until after the assassination . The requested copies were sent by the CIA but not by the end of the day .
 First, there is an endemic incompetence among human beings at all levels in our society. First, it is there is a endemic incompetence in all levels of society. Second, it's the incompetence of human beings in society .
 Two small newspaper photos of Oswald being overlooked and slipping through the cracks at the time of the incident is more understandable . Viewed from this perspective, the two small photos are more understandable than the original photos .
 She asked for a “name trace” for Lee Oswald on October 9 after the Mexico City station cabled CIA headquarters that someone named “Lee Oswald” had been to the Russian embassy . As noted in the text, she testified she asked for the name trace for Lee
 She came across in her HSCA testimony not only as having a dreadfully poor memory, but as not being particularly competent . However, she came across as having poor memory .
 One would think she would know the numbers and nomenals of these memos very well . She should know the nomenalities of memos, she says .
 The second number is the more specific category and I believe 5 has something to do with politics . The third number is just the title of the folder that is next in line .
 The fact that Oswald was an American who had defected to the Soviet Union raised the “possibility” he was working for the Soviets, Bustos said . Bustos was not the Mexico desk chief but an assistant . She did not think the October 9, 1963, cable
 Oswald incident in Mexico City was not treated with any sense of importance or urgency at CIA headquarters, says CIA official . CIA official: Oswald incident was treated with no sense of urgency at headquarters . Oswald incident not treated as significant or urgent at CIA HQ, she says .
 On August 10,1961, two American tourists were visiting Minsk . Rita Naman and Monica Kramer were killed in Minsk, Belarus .
 Kramer and their Intourist guide to the left of it and the Palace of Culture and a statue of Joseph Stalin to the rear and left rear, respectively .
 Oswald is Oswald, the man in the middle of the car . Naman and Kramer were not aware of Oswald's involvement in the shooting . Oswald was Oswald's partner in the case, Naman says .
 These photos were stored at the CIA in the graphics section for the Minsk area . The CIA stored the photos at the time .
 After the assassination, the CIA found the photograph during a search of its graphics files for photographs possibly relevant to Oswald’s stay in Minsk .
 Contreras told a U.S. foreign service officer at the United States embassy in Mexico City that one evening in late September 1963, Oswald approached him and some other students following a roundtable discussion at the School of Philosophy . Oswald was approached by a United States foreign service official at
 Oswald told them he was looking for pro-Castro students who might help persuade the U.S. embassy to grant him a visa to Cuba . Oswald said he was from California and was a member of a pro-Cuba organization in New Orleans . Oswald told the students he was
 Contreras alleges he made an unsuccessful effort to help Oswald with the Office of the Cuban Consulate . Officials there told him Oswald was suspected of being an American intelligence agent, he says .
 In 1978, Summers tracked Contreras down in Tampico, Mexico, where he was editor of a local newspaper, El Mundo .
 Contreras identified the American who approached him and his friends, whom he identified as Oswald, as Harvey and Oswald . The names were familiar as names of characters in a popular cartoon in Mexico about rabbits, he said .
 Oswald said the Cuban consulate was refusing him a visa, and asked Contreras and his fellow students for their help, including accompanying him to Mexican authorities . Mexican authorities reported to the HSCA that Contreas was registered at the university in 1960, but not 1963 .
 The HSCA said that the CIA had earlier “confirmed” that Contreras had, in fact, been a student there in 1963 . However, in an unsourced footnote, it said that that had earlier been “confirmed” the CIA .
 HSCA footnote seems to be setting forth what Contreras told CIA agents . This may have been loose language since the CIA’s June 29, 1967, entry into its “Mexico City Chronology”
 There’s no suggestion that they confirmed that Contreras was at the university in 1963 . There's no suggestion they confirmed Contrera was there .
 Contreras said, like Azcue, that the man looked over thirty years old (Oswald was three weeks shy of twenty-24 at the time) and was at most five feet six inches tall . Summers reports to be five feet nine inches, which is short enough for
 Oswald said he was broke and asked if he could spend the night at the apartment of Contreras and his friends, and they let him stay one night . Oswald was broke . Oswald asked to stay at his friends' apartment and said he wanted to spend one night there . Contre
 A Cuban intelligence officer told friends to break off contact with Oswald because they were suspicious he might be trying to infiltrate left-wing groups . Contreras also told Summers that that same night he and his friends contacted Azcue as well as a Cuban intelligence official .
 Lee Harvey Oswald,, the television trial I was preparing my prosecution case for, also interviewed Contreras in Tampico, Mexico . Oswald was the subject of a television trial he was preparing for .
 Contreras told Redhead that Oswald had stayed at his home in 1959 or 1960 . He said he was certain the incident took place in 1959/1960, not 1963, and that Oswald stayed there for two or three nights .
 The amazing thing about the Contreras incident is that the U.S. authorities considered it to be of any significance at all . The Contreas incident is not considered significant by the United States authorities, but by some .
 Each of the two options that present themselves in the Contreras incident is benign. Each of them is benign, says CNN's John Sutter .
 If Contreras fabricated the incident, it has no significance, it's no significance . Contreas fabricated the story, but it's not significant, he says .
 Even if the incident took place, there is nothing from which any sinister inference can be drawn . But even if it took place the incident was the way he described, there was no sinister inference .
 Oswald would have asked for help in getting an in-transit visa to Cuba . Oswald would simply be seeking to get a visa, from all the other evidence, he says .
 Oswald would be following Duran’s advice in approaching Contreras, who obviously fit the bill . Oswald would follow the advice of Duran, who said Contreas should be approached .
 There are two other Mexico City allegations, indirectly related to the issue of imposture, that deserve only scant attention . There are also two other allegations that should be taken seriously seriously .
 Oswald and two tall “beatnik looking” American companions had attended a “twist” party at the home of Ruben Duran Navarro, Silvia Duran’s brother-in-law .
 Conspiracy theorists argue in self-contradiction that this proves Oswald had associates in Mexico City, and hence, the specter of a conspiracy arises once again . Conspiracy theorists feel Oswald wasn’t even in Mexico city, only his impersonator was . Most of the conspiracy theorists feel
 Silvia Duran did confirm that there was a twist party that Garro attended at the home of her brother-in-law in the fall of 1963 .
 Azcue told the HSCA that he was never at any party with Oswald . Garro claimed that Azcue was also at the party, but Azcue said he was not .
 Garro told the CIA in 1964 that an American Communist by the name of June Cobb rented a room from her . Cobb was a Communist . Garro said in 1964 she had rented out a room to a Communist woman in 1964 .
 She also believed Cobb had been “planted” on her by Communists since her former husband, Octavio Paz, was a Communist . Paz's ex-husband was a poet .
 Oswald is only in Mexico City for four days and already acquires a mistress . Oswald was only in the country for a four-day visit to Mexico City .
 An unidentified informant told the CIA in May of 1967 that Duran had told him that she had gone out with Oswald “several times” and “had sexual relations with him” during the four-day period . The Mexican authorities had beaten her until she admitted her
 LIRING/3’s credibility suffers from his own admission that he called Duran at the home she shared with her husband, Horacio, and Duran asked him how he got her phone number . LIRing/3: "LIRING 3's credibility suffers
 Duran denied to the HSCA that she had any affair with Oswald, that the Mexican authorities beat a false confession out of her, or beat her period . By clear implication (counsel never expressly asked her) Duran denies that she ever had an affair .
 The day after the assassination, Mexican authorities placed her under arrest and she physically resisted them . However, she did confirm that she did not agree to cooperate with them .
 After grilling her, they let her go but returned the following Wednesday and held her in custody for two and a half days . They let her off but returned to the police station the next day .
 During both grillings they accused her of being a Communist (she denied it) and of having sex with Oswald . She denied it, saying she was a socialist, and said she was socialist .
 Young Rojas wrote to Robert Kennedy on December 31, 1963, claiming he “used to be a friend of Oswald” as well as “three more people” associated with The Mexican Federal Security Police arrested and interrogated Duran, a Mexican citizen, at the request of
 On January 10, 1964, the Mexico City station of the CIA interviewed Rojas . Rojas was interviewed by the CIA in Mexico City, Mexico City .
 Rojas claims Oswald was introduced to him in front of a Guadalajara theater by a Cuban . Rojas says in the middle of August 1962, he met Oswald for the first time . Oswald was a Cuban citizen .
 Cuban told Rojas to travel by bus from Guadalajara to the town of Cozumel on the island of CoZumel, just off the easternmost seaboard of Mexico, just over a thousand miles away but close to Cuba .
 Rojas met with two Cuban men, a Cuban woman, and Oswald, who had flown in from Jamaica, about the proposed Castro propaganda operation . Rojas says he met with Oswald, Cuban woman and Cuban man .
 Rojas stayed in Cozumel, and Oswald flew in again from Jamaica in mid-February . Rojas and Oswald both stayed at the end of the month .
 Oswald and Albert discussed assassinating Kennedy, Rojas said he had forgotten but had written in a notebook and given to Daniel Solis, a policeman relative of his in Cozumel, who told the CIA, that he had no such notebook .
 Oswald said he had to go through with it to save his life, and that he was under orders to do so . Albert and the Cubans ended up being against it, but Oswald had to do it .
 On March 5, 1964, Rojas admitted being desperately in need of money, and about to be given a lie detector test, decided to stop playing his game . Rojas signed a statement in Guadalajara that he had never known or met Oswald anywhere .
 On February 3, 1966, Robert Kennedy called Lawson B Knott Jr., the administrator of the General Services Administration . He said he had talked “to Secretary [of Defense Robert] McNamara about getting rid” of the casket .
 Kennedy: “I don’t think anybody will be upset about the fact that we disposed of it.” Kennedy said he needed “clearance from the Attorney General” when he asked Knott to get clearance .
 The format gives Kennedy’s name, followed by a colon and his words, then Knott’S name . Knott's name is followed by the words of Kennedy and Knott . The format is based on the names of Kennedy, Knott and Kennedy .
 The casket should be destroyed, the judge said . He said he was "unable to conceive" of any manner in which the casket could otherwise have an “evidentiary value”
 On February 17, 1966, forty-two holes were drilled through the casket, three sandbags weighing eighty pounds each were placed inside the coffin . The lid was locked into place, and the lid was bound with metal banding tape . The casket was placed in a casket
 The casket was turned over to Department of Defense representatives early on the morning of February 18 .
 Two airdrop parachutes were used to break the shock of impact upon hitting the water . The crash was the first time the parachutes had been used in a major crash .
 David Lifton doesn’t purport to know the identity of the doctor or doctors who did the alteration to Kennedy’s body . Lifton says he doesn't want to know who altered the body .
 The only alteration done was to someone else’s body . What he also doesn’t know is that the only alteration was to the body .
 A Texas Legend, told me and all the other readers of his book, what happened . A Texas legend, A. A. Legend, tells me what happened.
 The alterations weren't to Kennedy’s body but to a Kennedy look-alike . The alterations were made to a lookalike, Kennedy's father says .
 The alterationist, per Estes, was James Melvin Liggett, a Dallas mortician who reportedly performed reconstruction surgery on the body of deceased actress Jayne Mansfield .
 Estes said that Liggett himself confessed to him in 1971 that he was assigned two jobs in Kennedy’s assassination . Estes: The only inference from the context is that the assignment came before the assassination .
 On November 22, 1963, Liggett was in charge of a funeral for a member of his wife’s family at Restland Cemetery in Dallas . According to Ligsgett, the funeral was held in Dallas, Texas .
 In the middle of the ceremony a cemetery aid whispered in Liggett’s ear, and a few minutes later he left the ceremony in a hearse containing the corpse of the Kennedy look-alike . The corpse had been stored in the morgue at Restland,
 When they got to Love Field, Liggett and the body got on a private plane headed for the nation's capital . The body was found at Love Field in Washington, DC .
 At this point, everything was making a lot of sense to me, but then what followed was, well, hard to follow . "At the end of the day, I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm glad to see you back," he says. "I'm
 Estes writes that “I do not know all the details [which was a big disappointment to me] except I know there were two bodies [presumably the real JFK and his look-alike] at Bethesda and at least ten pictures were taken of each body .
 The grand conspiracy theory of controlling the autopsy and making changes at Bethesda Naval Hospital was not necessary, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I don't believe in the conspiracy theory"
 The autopsy report and photographs were immediately sent to the White House . The autopsy and photographs of the victim have been sent to White House.
 Lifton was all wet with his theory . It's nice to know, finally, what happened, and as you can see, Lifton says .
 Estes said Liggett told him that after he completed his work, he flew back to Dallas, packed his wife and children in a car, and left in a great hurry for Galveston, receiving a speeding ticket between Dallas and Austin . Estes says he received a
 Estes said that Liggett was not only a mortician but a “cold-blooded murderer” Estes called him “a cold-blooded killer’s”
 Liggett’s former wife, Lois, said she believes her then husband was involved with JFK’�s body in a cover-up of the assassination . The Smoking Guns was shown on the History Channel in 2003 .
 She said she was present when her husband and his brother Malcolm were in a Corpus Christi motel room . She added that two days after the assassination she was .
 She said “they had conversations that made one feel like I didn’t belong . That they knew something I didn't know,” the implication being that Malcolm was involved in the cover-up .
 Turner then capped the segment by showing a photograph of Jack Ruby allegedly standing beside Malcolm and his wife, Suzanne . Turner then showed a photo of Ruby standing with Malcolm and Suzanne . The segment ended with a picture of the couple's wife and daughter .
 Malcolm was in California at the time he was supposed to be in Corpus Christi with his brother discussing their participation in covering up the conspiracy to assassinate Kennedy . Malcolm was also in California during the time of the supposed meeting .
 Malcolm Malcolm filed a federal lawsuit against A & E Network, the company operating the History Channel, for its blatantly false story . A settlement was reached in March of 2005 in a settlement . Malcolm was the subject of a lawsuit against the network .
 Andy Purdy and another HSCA investigator did interview O’Connor at his home in Florida, but that was on August 25, 1977 . That was the long interview, not the 1978 telephone one, which I had in London .
 O’Connor, in his telephone conversation with me, told me the length of the interview conducted at his home, but he was talking about one date and I another . O'Connor told me that in his phone conversation, Mr. O'Conner was talking .
 "I have no explanation for how the rest of the discrepancy came about. But I'm not sure how it came about," he says .
 London Weekend has not secured all prior interviews of Mrs. Edmonds . The interview may have been lost in the translation between the London Weekend staff .
 Peck was beaten about her face and head and left for dead on a burning bed inside her home . Peck had been beaten and burned to death in her burning bed . Peck was found dead on the burning bed at her home in a burning room .
 Liggett was forty at the time and was described by police as an unemployed undertaker . He was described as a forty-year-old undertaker and described as unemployed .
 Peck’s life, arson and aggravated robbery were added to the attempted murder charge . Peck was found dead at the scene of the shooting . Peck's life and robbery charges have been added .
 During the one-block ride back to the county jail with eleven other prisoners, Liggett somehow freed himself from his handcuffs and when the paddy wagon doors opened, he bolted and ran away on Houston Street in Dealey Plaza . The one block ride was one of the one
 When a Dallas deputy sheriff commanded him to stop and he didn’t, the deputy shot him once in the back . The suspect was shot by a Dallas police officer after he refused to comply with his orders .
 Of the thirty-two personnel present at the autopsy, nearly all of whom either testified before some official body or gave a statement or affidavit . The only two who even came close to saying what Paul O’Connor did were the assistant autopsy photographer, Floyd Riebe, and an
 O’Connor: ‘It was less than half a brain there’ But he quantified this by saying, “Less than half brain there.” It's quite a long way from O'Connor’s assertion that the brain was entirely missing .
 Riebe’s and Custer's statements were at odds with the recollections of everyone else present at the autopsy as well as with actual photographs of the brain . O’Connor's statements are not as far as O'Connor's does .
 Lab technician James Jenkins said, “The brain was taken out of the president’s cranium by “Dr. ‘Dr. Dr. “James’
 Posner does not cite any source for this, and Custer, as indicated, was never interviewed by the HSCA . Custer did not tell Lifton Lifton this .
 Posner doesn't quote Jenkins as having told him this, and he doesn’t cite any other source or document . Posner says Jenkins told him that, but he doesn't cite other sources or document to support his claim .
 The colonel's body may have arrived at Bethesda before the president’s body did, Posner writes . But, as Posner says, it may have been a long way from the president's .
 Harrison Livingstone met with Paul O’Connor, James Jenkins, and Floyd Riebe in 1991 and showed them autopsy photographs . O”Connor, Jenkins, Riebes, and Riebs met with Livingstone in 1991 to show them autopsy photos .
 Each found different things in one or more of the photographs that convinced them the photographs were definitely not taken at the Bethesda Naval Hospital .
 The photos must have been taken when the president's body was somewhere else, most likely when it was being altered by Lifton’s alterationists before the autopsy . The photos were likely taken during Lifton's autopsy .
 In a transcribed interview between 2000 and 2005, a lab technician said Paul said he was in a body bag . In the interview, a technician said that “Paul said was in the body bag’s body bag.”
 I don't remember a body bag . . But I wasn’t specifically involved in taking the body out of the casket, he says . I'm not sure what happened .
 "My earliest memory of the body is a clear memory of it being on the table and wrapped in sheets," she says . "I remember it being wrapped up in sheets and on a table," she adds .
 Posner gives no citation for this quote and I have not run across Ruby having told the Warren Commission these precise words . Posner says Ruby said the quote is a quote from Posner, but Posner has no citation .
 Dallas police detective Barnard Clardy testified that during Ruby’s interrogation shortly after he killed Oswald, Ruby said, “If I had planned this I couldn’t have had my timing any better.” Ruby said .
 Dallas police reserve officer William J Newman was on duty in the basement that Sunday morning . Newman said he heard someone yell, "Here he comes" or "Here they come" (presumably referring to Oswald and his police escort leaving the basement elevator) Newman said that “immediately
 He could not identify Ruby as the man because he didn’t “pay that much attention” to him, he says . He did not see the man shoot Oswald . Oswald was shot by Ruby in Dallas, Texas, in September 1963 .
 Newman told Revill and Wallace that the time between when he saw the man and the shooting was less than a minute . Newman said he saw him shooting the man less than one minute before he shot him .
 In two typewritten paragraphs on the next page, which strangely are called a “deposition,” and are followed by his signature, are the words “I recall someone going over the railing at the bottom of the Main Street ramp, but I have racked my brain and
 "I do remember that the person had on a suit, but I do not know the color," she says . She says she does not remember the person who was in a suit .
 I don't remember seeing a hat, but I can't say whether he was wearing one or not . I don’t remember seeing him wearing a hat .
 If Newman had seen a man walking down the Main Street ramp within a minute of the shooting, it would seem that he should have mentioned it in his deposition . Newman says the man was, as he says, running from the scene, was running .
 The fact that he mentioned this man for the first time a week later when he spoke to Lieutenants Revill and Wallace, and then three days later, spoke to the FBI, and in March of 1964 when he testified before the Warren Commission, raises questions about his credibility .
 Westphal of the Dallas Criminal Investigation section said he only saw the man going over the railing, not mentioning the man coming down the ramp . Westphal's new, invented story, he proceeded to tell Westphal only about seeing the man . He said he did not mention the man,
 The next night Assistant Counsel Leon Hubert took over the questioning . Apparently because of the verbal skirmish between the two, the next night the questioning was delayed .
 Reports seem to indicate that you saw a man coming down the ramp . These reports seem to show that a man was seen coming down ramp .
 These records also seem to indicate that you saw a man climbing over a rail in the basement . The records also appear to indicate a man climbed over a railing .
 Griffin said he cleared up the supposed contradiction that was cleared up was not even explored by Griffin, in his questioning, the previous day . However, this supposed contradiction was not discussed by Griffin in his interview .
 Griffin finally set forth the basis for his problem with Newman . In an April 2,1964, memorandum by Griffin to Warren Commission general counsel J Lee Rankin, Griffin set forth .
 Griffin called him a liar without explanation . Griffin: "I have only been in there, I think, twice,” Griffin said .
 "It is inconceivable to me that he could not have seen these cars from where he was supposed to be standing," he says .
 I must confess that I could not find, in Newman’s testimony, a clear basis for Griffin's statement to Rankin, he says . I must admit that I must not find . in Newman's testimony, he writes .
 In almost illegible handwriting in the bottom left side of the Wallace-McCaghren report there are words written that seem to question the report . The words seem to be written that question the findings . The report was released in March .
 "One doesn't know how much weight to give this short, handwritten notation," says the note .
 The notation doesn’t even hazard a guess, unless it does in handwriting illegible to me . The notation is so illegible that it's impossible to hazard guess .
 Pierce’s car is the only police car known to have exited the Main Street ramp just prior to the shooting . Pierce is believed to be the only officer to be shot at the scene . Pierce's car is known to be a police car that exited the ramp just before the shooting
 Butler indicated he felt Dallas police chief Jesse Curry was too “level-headed” to have attempted to transfer Lee Harvey Oswald to the county jail with all the news media present and in the way it was handled .
 Butler felt that Curry must have been pressured and ordered to do so, but he did not know by whom . Butler said Curry had been pressured by someone but did not say who .
 If Butler were a part of any conspiracy to silence Oswald, he would not be making statements like this that go in any direction, in the direction of a conspiracy . Butler would not have been making statements that go, if they go, in any way, toward Oswald .
 The report contained what was supposedly told to the FBI agent, as opposed to the actual testimony of Hyman Rubenstein . Rubenstein’s version of the testimony was published in the book, but I’ve opted to use Hyman's version of it .
 The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale showed Ruby's IQ was 109, not high, but above average and in the “73rd percentile” (Psychological Test Report on Ruby from Dr. Dr. Jack Ruby)
 One so-called casual acquaintance of Ruby’s came up with information that stood out for me because I’m unaware of anyone else giving similar information . I'm not sure if anyone else gave similar information to me .
 Ruby served as a bouncer in several Chicago clubs and often wore a hearing aid to avoid the World War II draft . He said Ruby often wore hearing aids to avoid draft .
 This information doesn’t turn up anywhere else, even from people who were more than acquaintances of Ruby’s, one wonders about its credibility .
 Dallasite Ken Holmes is a researcher who specializes in historical, non-evidentiary details of the assassination saga . Holmes is also a Dallasite, Texas, resident of Dallas, Texas .
 In 1991, Holmes called the local telephone company on a whim and asked if that number was still available . Holmes had one of Ruby’s Carousel cards with the phone number on it, which he used to collect .
 A former employee at the Carousel told the FBI that during the three-month period he worked for Ruby in 1960, Ruby instructed the bartenders and waitresses not to charge police officers for anything they got at the club .
 Dallas police officer Joe Cody said, “When people from out of town would come in, he'd charge them $1.50 for a beer when he’d only pay 9 Vi cents.”
 This varies from all accounts, particularly those concerning the Carousel Club . This is not the first time the club has been involved in a carousel club .
 The only other story similar in nature came from Dallas radio station announcer Ken Dowe . Dowe was the only other station announcer to tell a similar story .
 Dowe hardly knew Ruby, having met him briefly only once, but says he heard around the station that Ruby had procured girls for record producers visiting Dallas . Dowe says Ruby had girls, either from his club or other girls he knew, for records producers .
 Moore said Ruby frequently visited a place where he, Moore, worked, the Civello and Zamonte Italian Importing Company, which imported cheese from Italy, and Ruby was an ‘associate’ of the company, Moore said . Moore deleted the deleted paragraphs .
 There is no evidence to support this allegation, and Moore himself offered none . Moore himself has been accused of sexual assault in Alabama .
 It is not known if Dallas mobster Joe Civello, an acquaintance of Ruby’s, was the same man who co-owned the cheese company . Ruby's friend was a mobster who owned the cheese business .
 Joe Civello’s Liquor Store also sold pastas, cheeses, and tomato products . The store was also known for its pastas and cheeses .
 I can't think of another example where the Commission did something like this . In any event, I can’t think of other examples .
 Ruby once threw an after-hours party at the club for 14 Dallas vice officers, he said . Ruby also threw a party for 14 vice officers at the nightclub, he added .
 Neither of these incidents were ever corroborated, and they both sound unlikely .
 Faulkner said he never took Ruby up on his offer . But Faulkners said he couldn't vouch for the truthfulness .
 There probably is some completely innocent explanation for the deletion . Inasmuch as the paragraphs contained nothing of importance, there probably is no explanation .
 The only direct accusation that Ruby was involved in professional gambling in the Dallas area was from a source from a highly questionable source . Ruby was accused of being involved in pro-gambling .
 Jack Hardee Jr. told the FBI in Mobile, Alabama, that while spending some time in Dallas about a year earlier, he was advised by an individual he did not identify that in order to operate a numbers operation in Dallas it was necessary to get clearance from Jack Ruby . Hardee
 Hardee gave his story’s already weak probability three self-inflicted wounds . Not only is there no evidence that Ruby was ever involved in the numbers business in Dallas, but there is no evidence he was involved .
 Ruby ran a pimping operation for the girls at his club, keeping half of what they earned . Tippit used to hang around the Carousel Club and was very close to Ruby .
 There is another similar charge against Ruby, this one involving narcotics, which, though almost assuredly not true, isn't as transparently false on its face, particularly since it was made seven years before the assassination . There is also a similar charge involving narcotics involving narcotics .
 Prostitute Eileen Curry and her boyfriend, James Breen, were informants . Curry and Breen served as informants for the Federal Narcotics Bureau and the Los Angeles Police Department Vice Squad . Curry was found guilty of drug possession and distribution .
 The two jumped bail on their own narcotics violations and fled to Dallas, Texas . They were arrested on narcotics violations . The two were charged with drug possession .
 The FBI report says Curry “believes James made connections with the narcotics ring through a former associate from Seagoville Prison [in Texas] where James served time’s time .
 She embellished on Ruby in such a way that if what she said had been known to her when she had spoken to Special Agent Law on March 18, 1956, it is quite likely she would have given Law this information back then .
 On June 9, 1964, she told the Chicago FBI that when she and Breen had moved to Texas from Los Angeles in December of 1955, Breen actually took Ruby by their apartment to meet her . Ruby told the FBI in 1964 that when they had moved out of Los Angeles,
 A few days later, Ruby had taken him to a location where he showed Breen film of various Mexican and American border guards, as well as narcotics agents and "contacts" on the Mexican side of the border .
 Breen was impressed with what he considered an extremely efficient narcotics traffic operation . Breen said he was impressed by what he called an efficient narcotics operation .
 Breen left town for awhile, and while he was gone Ruby came by her apartment once or twice and tried to become intimate with her, Curry says . Shortly thereafter, per Curry, Ruby tried to get intimate with Breen again .
 He also tried to interest her in selling pornographic photographs, which he would provide, to her customers . He also took her to his nightclub after closing time, and tried to sell pornographic photographs .
 Oswald was a highly disturbed misfit who killed Kennedy on his own . Ruby was a small-time, perpetual loser who wanted to become someone important in life, he says .
 No evidence has ever surfaced that Ruby was ever involved in drug trafficking, Curry says . Curry: "No evidence" has surfaced that he was involved in drugs trafficking .
 The Dallas Police Department, Dallas DA’s office, Warren Commission, and HSCA examined Ruby's life and interviewed every known friend and acquaintance . They concluded there was no evidence that Ruby, while in Chicago or Dallas, was involved in any criminal activity apart from the most minor
 Curry’s hearsay statement over the official record would not seem to be warranted . Under these circumstances, to accept Curry's hearsay statements is not warranted .
 In 1955-1956, we know Ruby was struggling very hard just to keep the doors of his clubs open, hardly likely if he were, like James Breen believed, running an “extremely efficient narcotics trafficking operation” in Mexico and Texas .
 Ruby, who we know was a big talker and liked people to believe he had mob connections, had somehow convinced Breen that he was the man to know in Dallas when it came to big-time crime . I guess one possibility is that Ruby was convinced that he had connections with
 Author Douglas Valentine makes an effort to connect Ruby with narcotics traffic, but comes up with absolutely nothing . Ruby is the subject of a new book, "Ruby"
 "The Ruby family had a long history in the illicit drug trade. Laughably, one way he seeks to connect Ruby is to say that “the Ruby family’s long history” in the drug trade .
 There are some in the conspiracy community who do believe Ruby was part of the conspiracy . Ruby was killed in 2008 .
 Among other phone calls Ruby made to shady characters during the pre-assassination period was one to Murray W “Dusty” Miller on November 8, 1963 (the same day that Ruby spoke to Barney Baker for the last time)
 He said he quickly terminated the conversation when he learned this “mutual friend” was Barney Baker . Ruby said he considered Baker a person of questionable character and with whom he did not wish to be involved in any dealings .
 Several days later Ruby called a San Francisco gambler named Frank Goldstein, whom he had known from his youth . Ruby had known Goldstein from his Chicago youth . Goldstein had known Ruby from his childhood .
 Goldstein was surprised to hear from "Sparky" and told him he couldn’t help him with union problems in Dallas because his connections were only in the news media field, not the entertainment world . Goldstein said he couldn't help him because of his connections in the media field
 Before the upsurge in his phone calls in October and November, Ruby had also attempted to contact underworld figure Lenny Patrick, a hoodlum whom Ruby knew . Ruby’s brother Hyman told the Warren Commission that Ruby knew Patrick from his days on the streets of Chicago
 He was a member of Chicago’s ‘Outfit’ who had a long criminal history, starting with the robbing of a bank in 1933 . He was, unquestionably, a member .
 During most of his Chicago years thereafter he was involved in Syndicate gambling . He spent most of those years in Chicago .
 Patrick denied ever speaking on the phone with Ruby in 1963 . Patrick testified before the HSCA in 1978, when he denied ever talking to Ruby . Patrick said he never spoke to Ruby again .
 Patrick says during Chicago years he "never had anything to do with as far as any business or anything" HSCA counsel asked Patrick if he wanted an attorney and said, “No, I don’t see why I should have an attorney,” Patrick said .
 The examiner said he did not detect any deception by Ruby in this answer . Ruby said he was not lying to the examiner . The examiner did not find any deception .
 Lewis Me Willie had told the FBI back in 1964 that he invited Ruby to Havana because Ruby was a very close friend and he felt he could use the rest . He did not mention Tony Zoppi at all, nor that the purpose for the trip was to promote the Tropicana
 McWillie said if Ruby had told him he wasn’t bringing Zoppi with him he would have told him to stay in Dallas . Ruby was arrested in Dallas on suspicion of drug possession .
 Conspiracy theorists have raised the issue of just how many times Ruby went to Havana . Conspiracy theorists maintain that the real reason Ruby visited Havana was not pleasure and relaxation but to meet with Trafficante . Trafficante was no longer in Havana when Ruby visited there in 1959 .
 The Cuban government gave the HSCA two tourist cards bearing the name and signature Jack Ruby . Ruby and McWillie each confirm that they visited Cuba in early September .
 One indicated he entered Cuba on August 8, 1959, and left on September 11, the other that he reentered Cuba the very next day, September 12, and September 13 . The other indicated that he left Cuba the next day .
 The HSCA had two handwriting experts compare the signatures on the two tourist cards with known Ruby exemplars . The signatures were compared to known examples of Ruby .
 One expert concluded that the signatures were Ruby’s, and the other agreed but qualified his conclusion because of the use of photographs of the cards, not the originals .
 The cards were kept in 1963, four years after Ruby supposedly filled them out, and before he became a historical figure . But that doesn’t answer the question of why the cards were still being kept . Ruby’s cards were being kept four years later, but he was
 Ruby wouldn't be going back to Cuba through any encouragement by McWillie . One thing we can be reasonably sure of is that she wouldn’t be going to Cuba again .
 Ruby has said many times he only went to Havana once (e.g., 5 H 205), McWillie said Ruby was there only once . Alice Nichols, Ruby’s girlfriend since 1949, said that Ruby had only gone to Cuba once .
 He wrote her from Havana on September 8, 1959, telling her about how beautiful the Tropicana was and how carefree the Cuban people were . He told her about the upcoming trip and wrote her about it .
 Ruby was visiting McWillie in Havana, Cuba, but for some unexplained reason he took the short flight to Miami for one day . Ruby was in Miami for a day, but it was not clear why he left Cuba for Miami .
 Meyer Panitz, a longtime friend of Ruby’s and McWillie, was living in Miami at the time . Panitz said he visited Ruby there and “believes” Ruby was there for two or three days and visited Ruby twice .
 HSCA chairman Louis Stokes never got around to asking McWillie the obvious question of whether Ruby, while visiting him in Cuba, left for Miami for a day or two . No one else ever asked Ruby this question either .
 INS records and Panitz’s statement would seem to confirm that he did . The INS records show that Panitz made the statement . Panitz says he did, but the INS records seem to show he did.
 The HSCA said that Ruby left Havana for good on September 13, 1959 . The committee, of course, had no evidence to prove that .
 The HSCA did not say when it believed Ruby resumed his trip back to Dallas . Ruby is believed to be on his way back to Texas .
 The reason may have been to visit Panitz, who, McWillie said, was a “good friend” of Ruby’s who used to live in Dallas, Texas .
 The HSCA, in its several references to Meyer Panitz, never indicated that he had any connection to organized crime . Panitz was never charged with any crime in connection with organized crime.
 HSCA says Ruby took a trip to Cuba on August 8, 1959 . The INS records show that Ruby was in Miami at the time of the trip .
 The scenario is bad enough as it is, but what makes it worse is that the HSCA offers no evidence to support it . It's bad enough to be bad enough, but it's even worse that there's no evidence that it's true .
 I have come to expect silliness on the part of conspiracy theorists, but when I have to take my time dealing with silliness by the HSCA, it’s a bit much . I'm not surprised by the silliness, but it's a bit too much for
 With a second-Ruby hypothesis, we can eliminate having poor Jack enter and leave Cuba as if he couldn’t escape from a revolving door . With this hypothesis, Jack would have been able to escape from the revolving door in Cuba .
 He attempted by telephone to get in touch with this person to “make a buck,” but nothing came of it . He attempted to contact this person by phone, but it was never answered .
 On November 29, 1963, Las Vegas television commentator Gordon Kent said on TV that a confidential source had told him that Ruby had played golf at the Tropicana Golf Club the weekend of November 16 and 17, 1963 . Kent: Ruby had made out a credit card application at the Stard
 FBI agents spoke to the golf pro, caddy, and general manager at the golf club in Texas . None recalled seeing Ruby at the club, although the caddy said that someone from Texas had given him a card from the Carousel Club .
 The Riviera searched all credit and hotel registration records for the name Jack Ruby or Jack Rubenstein . The manager of the Riviera said there was no record of these names at the hotel .
 When McWillie, in Havana, got worried about the possibility of Castro’s regime taking over and wanted some protection, he contacted Jack in Dallas and asked him to get four Cobra handguns for him . Ruby did, although it isn't clear from his testimony before the Warren Commission
 McWillie is so tied to major Mafia figures like Santo Trafficante that he has to turn to his friend Jack Ruby in Dallas to get some handguns for him at a Dallas hardware store . The mobster is so close to Trafficante, who is right close by at another casino
 For whatever reason, McWillie was afraid to pick up the guns at the Havana post office . He never did . For whatever reasons, he never did.
 McWillie denied that he asked Ruby to send him guns in Havana, claiming that when he was working the graveyard shift in early 1963 at theThunderbird Hotel in Las Vegas, he asked for a gun because he got frightened over a series of holdups in Vegas casinos .
 It’s nice to know someone knows such things, even if he doesn’t take the space in his book to tell his readers how he came to such knowledge .
 Munich weekly even claimed that Lee Oswald and Jack Ruby worked together on the attempted murder of Major General Edwin Walker . De National Zeiting und Soldaten Zeitung even claimed to have worked together .
 Leo Sauvage, the American correspondent for the Paris newspaper Le Figaro, was convinced of just the opposite . He says Wade, in prosecuting Ruby, did everything possible to prevent the existence of a conspiracy .
 Wade would be destroying “all that he had said and done” (about there being no evidence of a conspiracy) before Oswald was killed, he says . Wade would destroy ‘all that’s that he’d said or done’ before Oswald’
 The Warren Commission made every effort to see if, through friends and acquaintances, there was any chance of a possible link between the two, but it found nothing . It found no link between Oswald and Ruby .
 Ruby’s association with Bertha Cheek, the sister of Earlene Roberts, who was the housekeeper where Oswald lived at 1026 North Beckley . The Commission looked into the possibility of a link between Ruby and Cheek .
 In response to an advertisement Ruby had run in the newspaper seeking to sell a half interest in the Carousel Club, she called him . Ruby called him after he had run an ad for sale in a few years earlier .
 When she learned he wanted $12,500, she felt it was way too high . She had no further contact with him until November of 1963 . She felt he wanted to pay her $10,000 .
 In November she had been scouting around Dallas to invest in a nightclub . She had been looking at a nightclub in November . In November, she was scouting Dallas for a nightclub investment .
 Ruby went to the Carousel Club to meet with him sometime around November 18 . This may have gotten back to Ruby because he called her and she went to meet him . He called her on November 18 and she met him again .
 Ruby proposed that he and Mrs. Ruby had an interior decorator with him, one Frank Boerder, and Ruby proposed to decorate the home . Ruby had been with Frank for several years .
 Cheek opened a club at an undisclosed location he had found, Ruby putting up $1,000 and being responsible for operating the club . Mrs. Cheek was responsible for running the club, and Mrs. Ruby put up $2,000 .
 Cheek wasn’t interested in Ruby’s proposal, not wanting to invest six times as much as he did . Cheek was not interested in investing six times more than he wanted to .
 She did not know of Oswald prior to the assassination . That was the extent of her association with Ruby . Oswald was the only person she knew of .
 Ruth Paine’s residence in Irving, Irving, where Marina lived and Oswald visited, was at 2115 West Fifth Street . Paine lived in Irving with Marina and Oswald in the 1930s .
 William F Simmons was a piano player in a musical combo that worked at Ruby’s Carousel Club from September 17 until November 21, 1963 . He was a member of a musical group that worked for Ruby's Carousel club .
 Simmons said his only relationship to Ruby was in his short employment at the Carousel Club . Simmons said he had never seen Ruby in the neighborhood where he lived, and that he did not know Oswald .
 Conspiracy theorists believe Killam was silenced by the conspirators who murdered the president . Killam died a half year after the assassination, and conspiracy theorists believe that he was silenced .
 Conspiracyists say Killam could have possibly put Ruby and Oswald together, and that's why he was probably killed . So, the conspiracists say, Killam may have been killed .
 Carter told the FBI that he was “acquainted with” Killam and his wife, Wanda, and knew Wanda worked at the Carousel Club, but that he had never met Ruby or been to the club .
 His mother recalls that her son received a phone call and left the house at 4 a.m. on March 17 . Her son says he received a call at 4:30am that morning .
 Street sweepers heard a crash on a downtown street and saw a man staggering in front of a broken display window . About a half hour later, two street sweepers hear a crash and saw the man staggering . The incident happened in downtown Chicago .
 Coroner seemed to believe that the cause of death was accidental, but Pensacola police concluded it was a suicide . There is some indication that the Pensacolas police, after what must have been the shortest of reflections, concluded that it was suicide .
 Killam’s brother said that two days before his death, Killam told him, “I’m a dead man.” Killam was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 Killam had earlier complained to him that he was being constantly questioned by “agents” or “plotters,” though not specifying who these agents or plotters were . Killam: “I’ve run as far as I’m going to
 Penn Jones Jr. writes that “according to Wanda Joyce Killam, her husband was constantly hounded by federal agents after the assassination .
 He told FBI agent John R Brett that he had been to Ruby’s club about three times . He said he considered Ruby a violent man, basing this on two incidents, one being when his wife, Wanda, fed some pizza to his dog and Ruby became so enraged
 The other incident involved his overhearing the Carousel bartender telling Ruby about some customers heckling the emcee . Ruby asked his bartender why he didn't hit them in the head .
 Killam said he knew of no connection between Ruby and Oswald . Killam says he did not know Ruby well and didn't know Oswald well .
 There can be no question that Killam died a strange death, but there also can't question that it had nothing to do with the Kennedy assassination . Killam's death was mysterious, but it wasn't linked to the JFK assassination .
 There’s no evidence that he knew of any connection between Ruby and Oswald . No evidence that Oswald knew of Ruby or Oswald .
 I agree with Killam’s brother that one doesn’t commit suicide by jumping through a plate glass window, but murder of his brother by the alleged conspiracy conspiracists is even more far-fetched . Killam's brother says one doesn't commit suicide .
 It's too ridiculous to imagine that if they were determined to silence him, the method they would use would not be to shoot him dead on the spot, but push him through a plate glass window on a downtown Pensacola street . Such a method might only cause injury, not death
 The coroner’s conclusion of an accidental death, though itself unlikely, seems to be the least improbable . The other alternatives of suicide or murder are suicide, or murder, are suicide .
 A few other claims of a Ruby-Oswald connection include one by a Dallas lawyer named Carroll Jarnagin . It's a wonder the Texas State Bar didn’t conduct a hearing into his fitness to practice law .
 Former stripper says he saw Jack Ruby talking to Oswald in the next booth . He says he was seated in a booth in the Carousel with a former stripper known as “Robin S Hood” .
 People lie or imagine things all the time, and if Jarnagin had left it at that he wouldn't have stood out, he wouldn’t have been the star of the show, he says . He says: “People lie and imagine things, and people lie or
 Jarnagin sent an eight-page typewritten letter to the FBI detailing, word for word, everything Ruby and Oswald said back to each other in a very long conversation . The letter was a transcript of the conversation between Oswald and Ruby .
 Jarnagin admits he was drunk at the time, had an alcohol problem, and was considering joining Alcoholics Anonymous . No rational person would believe this, particularly when Jarnag admits he had a drinking problem .
 Jarnagin: Ruby and Oswald discussed their decision to murder Governor Connally because Connally wasn't allowing syndicated crime into Texas . The gist of the conversation was that they wanted to kill Connally for refusing syndicated crimes .
 She does recall Ruby coming over to their booth and asking her to work at the Carousel again . She says Ruby came over to the booth and asked her to do it again .
 Ruth Paine herself testified to the resemblance of Ruby-Oswald . Crafard's similarity to Oswald probably caused confusion .
 Mary Lawrence says she saw Jack Ruby having breakfast with a young man who looked "very similar" to Lee Harvey Oswald . Lawrence: Ruby, whom she knew, had breakfast with the young man . She says the man looked “very similar” to Oswald .
 She said the cashier at the B & B, Bobby (last name unknown), agreed with her on this . She said she said she didn't want to stay in the B&B .
 In all of the medical records on Oswald, there is no mention of his having such a scar . Oswald's medical records are not mentioned in all of his medical records .
 Photos of Crafard appear to show a small scar above and to the right of his mouth . There is no reference to this in the Warren Commission volumes .
 Beverly Oliver claimed in later years that Carousel stripper Jada introduced her to Ruby and Oswald at the Carousel Club . Beverly Oliver, the “Babushka lady” of conspiracy legend, claimed to have been introduced to Ruby by Jada .
 Jada told the FBI she had never seen Oswald in the Carousel Club . Jada said she had no knowledge of any connection between the two men .
 Crowe called a news media friend of his, David Hoy, in Evansville, Indiana, and said nothing about having possibly seen Oswald in the Carousel . Less than twenty minutes after Oswald was shot, which was two days after Crowe had first seen Oswald on TV and allegedly thought
 DeMar DeMar came up with his story when he was spotted outside the Carousel Club in Dallas . DeMar says he didn't know what happened to him when he saw the media .
 Hoy said he was “shocked’ to later hear DeMar had told the media in Dallas about Oswald possibly being in the club . Hoy: "I was shocked" to hear that DeMar said Oswald may have been in the Dallas club .
 The Carousel Club is hosting a live show at the Carousel club in New York City . DeMar claimed that it would be difficult to recognize anyone in the audience . Wally Weston, master of ceremonies at the club, pointed out that because of the spotlight shining in your face while on
 When Weston told Oswald, he, Weston, was an American and to please sit down, Oswald said, “Well, I still think you're a Communist,” whereupon Weston said he jumped off the stage and slugged Oswald . Oswald said he still thinks he's a
 Ruby, per Weston, wrestled Oswald to the floor and then threw Oswald down the stairs . Ruby then wrestled him to the ground and threw him down stairs .
 Rackley said he saw Ruby and Oswald seated at a table together at the Carousel on the evening of November 8, 1963 . Rackley says he saw the two men seated together at a restaurant .
 The obviously phony storyteller gave no explanation why he would ask a waitress for the identity of two men sitting at a table .
 Rackley was very hazy on describing the interior of the Carousel Club or even where it was located . Rackley said he was not sure where the club was located or if it existed .
 Another witness, Harvey Wade, said he was at the Carousel Club on the evening of November 10, 1963, between 11:00m. and 1:30m. Another witness said he saw the shooting on November 11, 1963 . Harvey Wade says he was in the club at
 The FBI located the source of the rumor, one William Huffman, who worked at a boat fueling dock in Key West .
 Oswald never had money to pay for the fuel, he called a “Ruben” in Key West to come and pay for it, which Ruben did, in cash . Ruben paid Oswald in cash in cash, which Oswald used to get the fuel .
 Ruben Huffman was five feet three inches tall, of heavy build, “pot-bellied,” and had brown hair . Huffman said that Ruben was five-foot-three-inches tall and of heavy builds .
 One of the most well-known and investigated allegations was made by one Wilbyrn Waldon Litchfield II, a thirty-year-old who claimed to have seen Oswald at the Carousel with Ruby . Waldon is a professional bowler who claims to have been at the
 He was also a professional con man who forged checks in Fort Worth and Dallas . He served hard time in the early 1950s for forging three checks in the Fort Worth area .
 After he got out, he served another six months for writing “hot checks” in Virginia . He was also sentenced to six years for writing "hot checks"
 His military record included a special court martial, for which he served six months, and a dishonorable discharge . He was sentenced to six months in prison for his part in a court martial .
 As late as April of 1961 he was arrested on an armed robbery charge in Dallas, but no charges were filed .
 Litchfield says he saw a man wearing a white sweater go into Ruby’s office with Ruby for 15 to twenty minutes . He later told the Warren Commission it was the “middle of October” He later said he saw the man in the Carousel Club with Ruby
 Litchfield said he later saw Oswald on TV on the day of the assassination . He told someone that he thought he had seen Oswald before . He later said he thought Oswald was Oswald .
 Two days later he was playing poker with his friends when the news of Ruby shooting Oswald came on the television screen . Ruby shot Oswald two days later .
 Oswald was the man in the sweater he had seen that night at the Carousel . He said that man looked “real sloppy” in his uncreased pants, and “his hair wasn’t combed,” hardly the description of Oswald we would expect
 A week or so later he called Don Green, a Dallas police officer on the vice squad who was a friend of his and told him the story . A week later, he called Green, an officer on vice squad, to tell him what happened .
 The Dallas Police Department gave Litchfield a polygraph test on December 2,1963 . Litchesfield was a member of the Dallas police force .
 Captain Will Fritz, head of the Homicide and Robbery Bureau, personally interviewed Litchfield the following day, December 3 . The charges were so serious that Fritz personally interviewed him that he was interviewed .
 Fritz already knew Litchfield to be a ‘confidence man’ because of past dealings with him . Fritz already known Litchf as a “confidence man,” because of his past dealings .
 Fritz concluded that Litchfield was “definitely lying about seeing Oswald and Ruby together,” Fritz told the FBI he wouldn’t place credence in anything he said . After talking to the FBI, Fritz said he would not place any credence into anything Litch
 One thing that caused him back down in his identification of Oswald, he said, was that one of the FBI agents had told him that furnishing false information to the authorities was a federal crime .
 All three said he only mentioned knowing Ruby, not Oswald . One recalled Litchfield saying, “That’s the fellow that owns the nightclub.” Another said he said he knew the nightclub owner .
 One added he felt he felt Litchfield was an honest person, but another said he would never place any faith in anything he said . Another said if any names were prominent in the newspapers he would make a point of remarking he was familiar with that particular person .
 A third poker player described Litchfield as being “of poor character and definitely not a man to trust,” that he was up to his old tricks on the subject night . Laughably, we learned .
 He lost at poker that night and paid his debt with a check that bounced over the moon . The check bounced off the moon after he lost his game that night .
 Ruby's alleged association with Oswald led to the death of a “Mrs. Ruby’s” in the days after the assassination . Ruby is alleged to have been involved in the assassination of JFK's assassin .
 Dallas police spent valuable time interviewing three witnesses, trying to confirm if the rumor was true . The Dallas police actu636 ended up unable to confirm the rumor, but were unable to do so .
 Two other people, young women, believed Ruby to be homosexual, but how they arrived at this conclusion is somewhat dubious . Two other young women also believed Ruby was homosexual, though how they did it .
 Ex-lovers claim Ruby used to call them on the phone and speak obscenely about sex with them . One said Ruby described his private parts to one and told her in minute detail about the great pleasure she would have engaging in sexual intercourse with him .
 FBI: Comments gathered by FBI about Jack Ruby's sexuality were either opinion without hard facts to back it up . Comments were either idle chatter or gossip without attribution, or idle chatter without attribution . Jack Ruby was convicted of murdering himself in 1995 .
 FBI special agent James Weir’s report on the remark by Edward H McBee stands out . It is this fact that makes this fact of the remark stand out .
 McBee's comments and his opinion that Ruby was possibly bisexual were based on an actual event he witnessed . Unlike many reports that merely stated the feelings of others, McBee’s comments were based upon an actual incident he witnessed in Ruby's home .
 McBee worked for years as a waiter and bartender at various nightclubs in the Dallas area . McBee was known for his work as a bartender and waiter .
 McBee and his roommate shared an apartment that became a frequent after-hours watering hole and party place for Dallas nightclub employees . It seems that McBee shared the apartment with his roommate .
 Ruby was a frequent guest at the parties, often lasting until dawn . Ruby was accompanied by girls from his club, often accompanied by other girls .
 McBee stated that Ruby rarely drank as he could not hold his liquor . Ruby appeared to have been drinking when he showed up, and then continued to drink wine .
 As McBee recalled it, Ruby was goaded into joining a gyrating and suggestive dance . Ruby stripped down to his underwear when one of the girls started a suggestive dance, McBee said .
 While attempting to do the twist, he found himself down on all fours, his face just inches away from the gyrating dancer's face .
 When she backed away, McBee recalls Ruby saying, “Come on, man or woman.” Ruby then said, ‘Come on man or she.’ Ruby later said she wanted to see a man and a woman .
 After this incident, McBee said he concluded there was a strong possibility Ruby was bisexual . McBee: Ruby may be bisexual .
 A story about Ruby that may be true, but has only been told, as far as I know, by one witness, comes from an old friend of Ruby’s from his teenage Chicago days, Harry Goldbaum . Goldbaum is a friend of the late actor's from his
 On a trip through Dallas in the summer of 1963, Goldbaum paid a visit to Jack at the Carousel . Goldbaum visited Jack a few times before he died .
 A female dog among the three was in heat and Goldbaum claims that Ruby told him he would show him something interesting, whereupon he proceeded to sexually excite one of the male dogs by masturbation . Ruby told Goldbaum he would do something interesting to him .
 Ruby stopped when Goldbaum objected, telling Ruby it was making him sick . Goldbaum stopped when he objected to Ruby's actions .
 Ruby was so proud of his physical build that he would come back to the girls’ dressing room with his shirt off, pat his chest, and ask the girls if they didn’t think he had a good physical build . Penny Dollar said that Ruby did take pride in his
 Penny Dollar’s statement has to be considered highly problematic . In the absence of any statement like this from any of the other girls who worked for Ruby over much longer periods, Penny Dollar's statement has been highly problematic, says Penny Dollar .
 This sounds like a highly improbable remark, and one wonders if it was fabricated the day after Ruby shot Oswald by an officer wanting to become part of an international story . One wonders if the remark was fabricated by a police officer .
 As far as I know, only Dyson has claimed to have heard the alleged remark . Of the five other people in the room, only five others have claimed to hear it .
 Even if Ruby made the remark, he obviously wouldn’t be referring to any plan of his to commit murder in the near future, but to the fact that he was a man about town, as he was, and that in due time Ellis would know all about him .
 Ruby said to the officers who subdued him immediately after he shot Oswald, “You guys all know me.” Ruby said . Ruby said, "You guys know me," as he was subdued .
 Bill Alexander, who prosecuted Ruby for killing Oswald, told me he had never heard of this alleged statement of Ruby’s before . Alexander had not called Dyson or Ellis to the witness stand at Ruby's trial . This is virtually conclusive evidence that either the statement was never made or
 Six black people were positive that Ruby was in Houston on the afternoon of November 21 . Ruby Ruby was found in Houston, Texas, on November 20 . Ruby was reported to have been in Houston that day .
 When Williams saw Ruby on TV three days later, he was certain he was the man he saw in Houston . Williams says he was sure he was Ruby when he saw him in the Houston shooting .
 Five other black people living on or near Milam Street were located . Ruby identified from photographs as being the man they saw talking to Williams or had personal contact with that afternoon .
 Three-day-old beard, dirty hands and dirty, he tells police he's not a bum . He says he has money and a nice car parked around the corner . Police say he had a twoto three-day old beard and dirty hands .
 He told one or more of them the same story about being an oil field worker and looking for a man in the pool hall . He told them he was looking for an oil worker .
 One of the witnesses actually had a beer with “Ruby,” who pointed out to him a faint scar on his left cheek . The scar runs from just under his left ear to within about one inch of his mouth .
 The Secret Service conducted an investigation and concluded that Ruby was in Dallas on the afternoon of November 21, and that the Houston story was false . Ruby was reportedly in Dallas that afternoon, November 21 .
 Conspiracy author David Scheim says he is convinced that the man in Houston was in fact Ruby operating in “a carelessly presented disguise” as an oil worker . Scheim: From the statements of the witnesses in the Secret Service report, he was there from about 2:30
 He simply doesn’t discuss the 12:30 to 1:00m. issue, and also ignores the statements of Andrew Armstrong and Larry Crafard that they saw Ruby at the Carousel Club that afternoon .
 Ruby himself seemed to recall talking with Ryan probably in the early afternoon hours at the club . And Ruby himself seems to recall speaking with Ryan at the time of the incident .
 FBI interviewed Ryan on July 23, 1964, eight months after alleged incident . Ruby and Armstrong were interviewed just two weeks after the alleged attack . The FBI interviewed both men in July 1964 .
 Scheim doesn't have the evidence on his side, but his whole premise is ludicrous . Scheim has been accused of being a racist and sexist in the past .
 It requires the belief that Ruby was part of the conspiracy to murder Kennedy, a notion that even most of his fellow conspiracy theorists don’t subscribe to . Ruby was not a member of the Kennedy conspiracy to kill Kennedy, according to CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Ruby spent several hours apparently in a black area of Houston, Houston . Ruby does not say why, if there was such a purpose, Ruby would be spending his time there .
 Thanksgiving is always on the fourth Thursday of the month, and Thanksgiving in 1963 was on November 28, six days after the assassination . If Campisi was referring to the previous Thursday, November 21, it's rather odd he would remember that he saw Ruby at his restaurant seven days before Thanksgiving
 In Jim Garrison’s book On the Trail of the Assassins, he tries to bring Lawrence Meyers, Jean Aase, and Jack Ruby into the assassination conspiracy with David Ferrie . Jack Ruby was killed in the assassination .
 In 1967 he asked New Orleans attorney G Wray Gill for his office’s 1962 and 1963 telephone records . He asked his secretary to indicate which calls she believed were made by David Ferrie . Ferrie had been a part-time investigator for Gill during this period .
 Even 10 percent of a law office’s long-distance phone calls over two years would add up to hundreds of legitimate business calls by others in Gill's office, Gill says .
 Garrison said he found a phone call that was made on September 24,1963, from Gill’s office to Chicago phone number WH 4-4970 . Garrison said the phone call was made from September 25, 1963 .
 Garrison, like Gill’s secretary, had no way of knowing that Ferrie made the call . Garrison doesn't know to whom the call was made, and doesn’t know who it was made .
 Garrison wondered whether Ferrie was reporting this fact to someone . Garrison was suspicious because he wrote that September 24, 1963, was “the day before Lee Oswald left New Orleans,” Garrison said . Garrison wondered if Ferrie had been reporting that fact to him .
 Garrison believed he had struck gold was when this same Chicago number turned up in the Warren Commission volumes in the phone records of the Ero Manufacturing Company of Chicago, the employer of Lawrence Meyers, a friend of Ruby’s .
 A call was made to this number on November 20 at 9:09m. from Kansas City using a credit card . A call from this number was made from November 20 to November 20 .
 Peter Whitney is confident that Meyers made the call to a young lady friend named Jean Aase . Meyers and Aase saw Ruby the following evening at the Carousel Club in Dallas, Texas .
 Garrison needed to connect Ferrie to Ruby, the guy who killed Oswald . This was all that Garrison needed was to connect him to the man who killed JFK .
 We don't know that Ferrie made the New Orleans call to Chicago . Dialing WH 4-4970 connected one to the main desk of the apartment building where Aase lived in Chicago .
 The likelihood is only 1 out of 146 that Ferrie called Aase, or worse, that he was calling Aase . Even if Ferrie made the call, the chances are only 1 in 146 that he called the woman .
 Aase says she never met or spoke to David Ferrie over the phone . She says she met Meyers only a few weeks before she went to Dallas with him .
 This would be about a month and a half after the September 24 phone call from New Orleans to Chicago . The call was made from September 24 to September 24 .
 If this is true, she could not have been a conduit or intermediary for information from Ferrie to Meyers back on September 24 . Ferrie and Meyers were involved in the death of Meyers .
 Telephone records could not have said who made the call from Gill’s office .
 Even the HSCA flatly declared that it ‘found’ that Ferrie had made the call . Even the agency said it “found” Ferrie .
 As stated in the main text, hearsay is inadmissible in a court proceeding unless one of the many hearsay “exceptions” applies, such as a self-incriminating statement from a defendant . People normally do not incriminate themselves falsely .
 People about to meet their maker aren’t as likely to lie . Another exception is a deathbed declaration since, again, people about to die aren't as likely as people .
 Jack Ruby, in the three years since he shot and killed Oswald, slipped in and out of lucidity . Ruby, who shot Oswald three years ago, slipped out of consciousness . Ruby has been in a coma for three months since his death .
 On December 16, 1966, during one of his last lucid intervals, and less than two weeks before he died, he was interviewed on tape at his hospital bedside .
 His attorney, Elmer Gertz, his brother Earl, and two of his sisters, Eva and Eileen, were also present . The funeral was held in New York City .
 The Uber tape recorder was concealed in a black attache case and the taping took place without the knowledge and consent of the authorities . Uber recorded the Uber driver's interview with the company . The Uber driver recorded the interview in a case hidden in an attache .
 On tape, Ruby confirms everything he had told the authorities earlier . Ruby confirmed everything he'd told the police about the incident . Ruby is now being held in custody .
 He said he noticed a police squad car at the head of the ramp and an officer leaning over talking to him with his back to me . He said the officer was leaning over to talk to him, not to him .
 The November 25 date was a “typographical error which had been discovered by SA C Ray Hall of the Dallas Office while he was preparing to testify at Ruby’s bond hearing on January 20, 1964 . However, in an internal FBI memorandum of February 7, 1964, to
 Ruby went on to say he tried to get in touch with someone he had read an article about who had “smuggled guns to Castro” and had been given a jail term for doing so . Ruby said he was trying to find someone who had been jailed for smuggling guns
 When Ruby went on to talk about the John Birch Society, Warren didn’t have Ruby return to the jeep story, but the implication from the context was that nothing came of his plans . Warren didn't have Ruby back to the story .
 Ruby didn't say if he actually contacted the man, but the implication was that he did not . Ruby didn’t say whether he actually did contact the man . The implication is that he didn't contact him .
 The FBI concluded that the man Ruby had most probably tried to contact was Robert Ray McKeown, an American who was arrested on a charge of conspiracy to smuggle guns to Cuba . The FBI in Houston concluded that he most probably called the man he tried to call .
 He was convicted and given a sentence of sixty days and a $500 fine on one count and a two-year suspended sentence on another in a Houston federal court .
 There had been articles about McKeown’s gunrunning in the Houston Chronicle . Indeed, there was an article in the newspaper about McKown's gunrunning .
 Ruby undoubtedly felt that if McKeown could get guns to Castro, he could also get jeeps . Ruby felt it was a good move for him to get the weapons .
 When Castro visited Houston in 1959, McKeown met with him at the Houston airport . Castro said he would be given a post in his administration if he moved to Cuba . The Chronicle published a photograph of them in its April 28, 1959, edition .
 FBI agents contacted McKeown on January 24, 1964, about a week after Castro came to power . A Harris County deputy sheriff told him that someone from Dallas was desperately trying to get in touch with him . The name of the caller was unknown .
 When McKeown said he’d have to be paid up front, he never heard from “Rubenstein” again . He never did again .
 A man personally appeared at McKeown’s drive-in and said he had an option on a great number of jeeps in Shreveport, Louisiana . About three weeks later, a man personally showed up and said the jeeps were available .
 He desired to sell them to Castro and needed a letter of introduction to Castro . He needed to write a letter to Castro to get him to meet him .
 The man agreed to the terms but said he didn't have the $5,000 on him, and McKeown never heard from him again . The man said he never had the money on him .
 From photographs, McKeown felt “strongly” that the man was Jack Ruby . The FBI never went back to Ruby with what he said, but never did .
 Ruby did try to contact McKeown, but whether he actually met and talked to him about the jeep deal is debatable . This would not be unlikely, but it is very debatable whether this would be unlikely .
 McKeown says Ruby called him on the phone to help him get three people out of Cuba . It's unlikely and almost assuredly not true that the story is true .
 There’s no evidence, anywhere, that Ruby wanted to get anyone out of Cuba, nor that anyone in Las Vegas would supply Ruby with money to do so . Ruby is accused of trying to get the government of Cuba out of the country .
 Even by McKeown’s own story, he doesn’t say when he met Ruby a few weeks later, Ruby talked to him about getting anyone out of Cuba or made any reference to calling him on the phone .
 HSCA said McKeown’s close association with Castro prompted many people to ask him for assistance in affairs pertaining to Cuba and Castro . It is probable, however, that someone may have called for help to get people out of Cuba .
 Ruby was a part owner of the Colonial Inn in Hallandale and was engaged in gunrunning to Cuba . Another nut case was one Blaney Mack Johnson, who said he knew Ruby in 1952 and 1953 .
 The FBI determined that the Colonial Inn, a mob hangout, wasn’t open then, having been closed on February 12, 1948 . But there is no credible evidence of Ruby being in South Florida in the early 1950s .
 The FBI contacted three people who Johnson said could verify his story, but each said they had no idea what Johnson was talking about . The FBI has not confirmed Johnson's account .
 She says she met Ruby, who she said was from Chicago and had killed a couple of men there . She says Ruby said he had killed two men in Chicago . Ruby was a Chicago native, she says .
 Dolores, Thompson’s daughter, saw the man her mother said was Jack Ruby, but said his last name was not Ruby and he had a “full head of dark brown hair,” whereas the real Jack Ruby was nearly bald . Dolores said the man she
 The notion that Ruby was used by others to further their ends never came out was voiced by Ruby in a different but again irrational way at his trial in 1964 . Ruby's lawyers did not call him to the witness stand on his own behalf .
 He was free to talk to the Fort Worth television interviewer and say whatever he wanted to him . But he was not allowed to do so .
 It is well known in law enforcement that the validity of a polygraph examination is almost directly dependent on the competence of the operator . The validity of the polygraph exam is also dependent on a person's competence .
 Herndon’s beating around the bush with his questions and his apparent inability to ask the only two explicit ones that any sensible person would want to know the answer to, slightly throws into question his ability to do anything right with respect to the test .
 The polygraph test is not considered scientifically conclusive and inasmuch as Herndon acknowledged that the test’s reliability depended on Ruby being mentally competent, and Dr. Ruby was mentally competent . The test is considered not scientifically conclusive . Ruby was not the subject of a polygraph
 As many as ten people were sometimes in the room, several talking during the pretest period, causing inevitable distraction to Ruby . Standard practice is to have only the polygrapher and the person being tested in the .
 The more a person is tested, the less he tends to react when lying when lying . Also, recommended practice is to ask only three relevant questions, because the more tests a person has to do, less likely to react .
 Panel member says he has never seen more than seventeen relevant questions asked . Panel member: In 27 years of practice he has seen no more than 17 relevant questions . Panel members say they have never been asked more than a dozen relevant questions.
 Even if we were to assume the total invalidity of the polygraph test given to Ruby, his willingness—in fact, his insistence—to be given one is strong circumstantial evidence of his innocent state of mind and the truthfulness about everything he said .
 Lay people, including Ruby, believe that lie detector tests can detect lies . Ruby believes that lie detectors can be used to detect lies in the world .
 It is a considerable stretch to believe that if Ruby were guilty of being involved in a conspiracy, he would insist on taking a polygraph test . Ruby is supremely confident he could conceal his guilt and pass the test .
 The panel found an “indication” that Ruby was lying in response to 3 other “relevant” questions out of the 55 asked during the test . Ruby was found to have lied in three other ‘relevant’ questions, out of 55 .
 Harry Hall claimed to have known Ruby fairly well and believed him to be a criminal . Hall said he believed Ruby was a criminal and that he had a criminal record .
 Hall told the FBI from Terminal Island penitentiary cell off Long Beach, California, didn’t sound believable . The problem is that the story Hall told was not believable . Hall is serving a life sentence in prison in California .
 Hunt claimed Ruby won “a large sum of money from Hunt,” which he and Ruby split . Hunt, the richest man in Texas at the time, was the richest person in the state . Hunt claimed that Ruby won large sums of money on big football games .
 One of the wealthiest men in the country is a pal of Jack Ruby, who takes him for large sums of money gambling . Jack Ruby is a friend of the richest man in America .
 The HSCA tried to substantiate that he even knew Ruby by asking people who knew Ruby well if they had ever heard of Harry Hall . The other problem with Hall is that he tried to prove that he actually knew Ruby .
 "On its face it's not the Capone errands as support, on the face it is not. Moreover, although he lists it with Capone . It's not a good idea that Capone ran errands for the mobster, it's a bad idea, he says
 Ruby did not meet with Trafficante in Cuba since the latter had left Cuba the previous month . Further, we know that Ruby didn't meet Trafficante with him in Cuba . Ruby had not met Trafficante since he left Cuba that month . Ruby was not in Cuba at the time of
 The only support for the contention that Ruby met Trafficante is the British journalist, John Wilson Hudson, whose story is absurd on its face . Kantor cites Hudson's story as the only support .
 The shot grazed his forehead and was believed to have been fired by Vincent “The Chin” Gigante, a Vito Genovese enforcer at the time . It is believed to be the shot fired by Gigante .
 A doorman at Costello’s apartment identified Gigante as the gunman, but Gigante was acquitted of attempted murder . Costello testified he was unable to identify Gigante, who was acquitted .
 One reason for the decline of organized crime is the “Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act” Title IX of the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970 . Title IX was part of the "Organized Crime control Act" of 1970.
 RICO was a sleeping giant that was rarely used until the early 1980s . RICO credited with helping, since then, to severely weaken organized crime in America .
 The statute provides for criminal punishment as well as civil remedies . It is not limited in its application to organized crime . The statute has proved to be complex .
 If a group commits two or more criminal acts constituting a “pattern of racketeering activity” that affects interstate or foreign commerce, it becomes a criminal “enterprise” If one receives income from, invests in, or participates in the enterprise, he is guilty under
 Mob defections and ignoring omerta have become almost routine . Today, mob defections are almost routine in the world of social media . The Internet is no longer a reliable source of information .
 Vitale testified he had participated in eleven mob murders, seven of which were on the orders of Massino . Seven of those were on Massino's orders, he testified .
 Mala Vita used to describe the Sicilian Mafia and its companion groups, the Calabrian “Fibbia” and the Neopolitan “Camorra,” was Mala . The term in Italy used to refer to not only the Mafia but its
 A1 Capone’s incarceration on the eleven-year federal sentence for income tax evasion was not the first incarceration for him . Capone was sentenced to 11 years in prison for income .
 Two Philly detectives recognized him from a movie theater . They frisked him and discovered his shoulder holster with a loaded automatic .
 Capone produced for them a permit to carry the gun in Chicago, but he was in Philadelphia, where the permit was no good . Capone's gun permit was not good in Philadelphia .
 He was arrested, convicted, and served ten months of a one-year sentence for carrying a concealed weapon . His brother Ralph and Frank "The Enforcer" Nitti acted as his surrogates in running the Chicago mob .
 The source for this high number was always thought to be Joseph Yalachi . The source of the high number is Joseph Yyalachi, who is believed to have died at the age of 50 .
 Author George De Stefano writes that “the Mafia gangster truly became a mythic figure in the late 1960s with the publication of Mario Puzo’s novel The Godfather . In the early 1970s, the release of the first two Godfather films made the
 The Godfather, in both its literary and cinematic incarnations, sold the public the fiction of a vast, centralized, and enormously powerful criminal organization run by Sicilians .
 These dark, dangerous men made offers that could not be refused, sent enemies to sleep with the fishes, and loved their families enough to kill for them . These dark and dangerous men sent their enemies to bed with the fish .
 Meyer Lansky was instrumental in arranging to turn over to Hoover in 1939 Louis "Lepke" Buchalter, whom Hoover had called ‘the most dangerous criminal in America’ Hoover called Buchalter the ‘most dangerous criminal’ in America . Lansky and Hoover were
 Lepke was not tied in to the mob as much as Lansky, but his operation was intertwined with mob business . Lepke had Albert Anastasia, head of organized crime’s Murder, Inc., kill witnesses against him .
 Lepke was a close friend of Lansky’s, but was thought to be “kill crazy” and no one felt comfortable or safe dealing with him . Lepke died at the age of 92 in October .
 Lansky convinced Lepke to turn himself in to Hoover under the pretext that a “deal” had been worked out with Hoover, which it had not . Lepke turned himself in under the guise that a deal had been agreed with Hoover but it wasn't .
 The apprehension of Lepke was a major victory for Hoover that helped solidify his image as America’s number-one crime-buster . Lepke surrendered to Hoover personally by getting out of one car on a Manhattan street and entering Hoover's car . Hoover was in the car with
 Hoover at one time reportedly was linked romantically with Lela Rogers, mother of Ginger Rogers, never married . Hoover never married, but was linked to Rogers' mother Lela .
 She chose army officer who was stationed in Europe during the First World War over him . But she chose an army officer stationed during the war over the soldier . She chose an officer who served in Europe at the time .
 FBI colleague Clyde Tolson was Hoover's closest friend and confidant for forty-two years . Hoover was Hoover’s constant and virtually only companion, at evening dinners as well as on vacations, was Tolson . Tolson is Hoover's former FBI colleague and FBI colleague .
 All of this would be, shall we say, “circumstantial evidence” that the relationship between Hoover and Tolson was something more than mere friendship . All of the evidence would be circumstantial evidence .
 As associate director, Tolson was the number-two man at the FBI, a career man whose total devotion to the bureau was matched only by Hoover’s . Tolson, however, was the No. 2 man in the FBI .
 Those who knew the two said that Hoover “couldn’t have done the things he did without Clyde,” that Tolson was “equal, but subordinate” to Hoover . In fact, those who knew Hoover and Tolson were ‘equal but subordinate
 Those who believed the estimates of Hoover’s estate, including his home, were very low . However, there are those who believed those estimates of his estate were very high .
 Hoover's only debt at the time of his death was a bill for $650 for two custom-made suits ordered a month before he died . Hoover’s only debt was a $650 bill for two suits ordered one month before his death .
 Crawford, a black who was an FBI agent himself, was Hoover’s chauffeur for thirty-seven years up to his retirement in 1972 . Crawford was Hoover's driver for 37 years .
 J Edgar Hoover was adept at excuses for not enforcing laws he apparently had little interest in . Hoover was not interested in enforcing the laws he was supposed to enforce . Hoover had a long line of excuses for his lack of interest in enforcing laws .
 Law enforcement in the South failed to investigate crimes against blacks by law enforcement, he says . The most egregious example was his failure to investigate crime against blacks .
 This was the main reason why Martin Luther King publicly asked for Hoover’s resignation . King publicly called for the resignation of Hoover .
 Hoover would later say that he didn’t have jurisdiction over these crimes until the Civil Rights Act was passed in 1964 . Hoover said he didn't have jurisdiction until the civil rights act was passed . Hoover would also say he had no jurisdiction over the crimes .
 Ever since Reconstruction in the South following the Civil War, federal authorities have been authorized to arrest, prosecute, and convict “whoever under color of law’s violates the civil rights of another”
 The law was passed in Congress in 1873 and to this very day (e.g., the prosecution of four LAPD officers in the Rodney King case) remains the main law, not the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . The Department of Justice prosecutes law enforcement for brutality and misconduct toward
 A contributing factor toward Hoover’s nonaction against civil rights violations by law enforcement in the South was his racism . Hoover's racism was a contributing factor to his nonaction . Hoover was a leading law enforcement officer in the Southern South .
 At the time RFK became attorney general, there wasn’t one single black FBI agent doing regular FBI work . Though never blatant, it manifested itself in several ways, one of which was never blatant .
 The only five in the entire bureau were employed doing personal work for Hoover . Hoover was one of the only five men in the bureau to be employed in personal work .
 RFK kept pressuring Hoover to employ black agents, to the point where FBI agents would mock Kennedy by saying, “Boys, if you don’t work with vigah, you’ll be replaced by a niggah,” in reference to all the
 Robert F Kennedy told a reporter this suggests that as late as December of 1961, Hoover still wasn’t really aboard in fighting organized crime . Hoover was still in charge of organized crime in the '60s .
 Author Curt Gentry noted that the very next month Hoover at least “officially declared” war on organized crime . However, the author also noted that Hoover’s war was declared the next month . The next month, Hoover was still in the grip of organized crime in
 FBI says Levine's 1,500 number was an “exaggeration” Levine’s number was at least fairly close to the mark, FBI says . The FBI, not denying Levine's charges, says that number is an ‘exaggerated’
 Names of familiar mafiosi kept cropping up . 1157 mob’s Apalachin meeting: There is disagreement as to the number of mob leaders who attended the summit .
 Yalachi had been serving time on two drug trafficking convictions at a federal penitentiary in 1962 . He was convicted of drug trafficking in 1962 at the time of his conviction .
 He was sharing a cell with Vito Genovese, the head of the Mafia family Yalachi was a member of . He was serving time on his own narcotics conviction .
 Valachi said Genovese, who had been the best man at his wedding years earlier, said to him, “You know, you buy a barrel of apples, and one of them is touched.” He said that one night in their cell Genoves, who
 Valachi knew this was a Mafia kiss of death, Valachi said . Genovese thought Valachi had informed on the mob to the Federal Bureau of Narcotics on another matter .
 On June 22, 1962, Valachi, holding a two-foot piece of iron pipe, bludgeoned a co-inmate named John Joseph Saup to death . Valachi mistakenly believed Saup was actually Joe Di Palermo , who was out to kill him .
 Valachi learned the United States attorney was going to seek the death penalty against him for the Saup murder . Valachi decided to become an informant against the Mafia for a plea bargain that let him plead guilty to second-degree murder with a life sentence .
 Joe Valachi would have to go some, however, to compete with his Sicilian Mafia counterpart . Tomasso Buscetta turned on his fellow mafiosi and became the chief prosecution witness against them .
 The Outfit: The Role ofiChicago’s Underworld in the Shaping of Modern America . Joe Kennedy felt his son needed the mob to win the presidential election, author Gus Russo says .
 Joe's association with mob figures stemming from his bootlegging days in Boston during Prohibition has been well chronicled in several books . Russo says the Chicago mob was contacted for help in the 1960 presidential campaign by Joe .
 Joe Kennedy met with Chicago mob boss Sam Giancana in a judge’s chambers in Chicago to ask him to deliver the union vote in Cook County . Russo says sources told him that Joe Kennedy actually met with the mob boss in a Chicago judge's chambers .
 Conspiracy theorists allege JFK would not pursue the Mafia in America in return for organized crime supporting Kennedy's candidacy in a big way . Even if these questionable sources for Russo’s information are to be believed, the quid pro quo still does not begin to establish the agreement that conspiracy theorists
 There was much, much more to the American Mafia than the Chicago Outfit . After all, there was much more than the American Outfit.
 There is no implication in Russo’s book that JFK had anything to do with the alleged agreement, the sense being that this was something Joe Kennedy had done on his own and without authorization from his son .
 Powerful politicians from around the country would not fly to a mobster’s hotel room in Chicago to get marching orders on how to help Kennedy . Powerful politicians would be highly unlikely to fly to the mobster's hotel room .
 I wouldn't think too many Teamsters would be willing to defy their iron-willed boss, Jimmy Hoffa . Hoffa was someone who didn't look kindly on dissenting members of the union .
 Hoffa and the Teamsters’ executive board, you see, had endorsed Nixon over Kennedy for president . The Teamsters' executive board endorsed Nixon .
 Hersh says Joe Kennedy had turned to Touhy, an old friend, to set up the meeting . Touhy had in turn asked Robert McDonnell, a mob attorney, for help, he says .
 Hersh says McDonnell told him that he gave Touhy the name of a local politician to set up arrangements for the meeting . Hersh: McDonnell said Touhy set up a meeting with Touhy . McDonnell told Hersh that Touhy's name was given to a politician .
 Cal Neva was owned in part by Chicago mobster Sam Giancana and Sinatra . It was owned by Sinatra and owned by Sam Giancanana .
 D’Amato would tell anyone . anyone who would listen that Joe Kennedy approached him to raise money among his mob associates for the West Virginia primary . D'Amato told anyone . listen that Kennedy . approached him .
 D’Amato says he agreed if Joe Kennedy would see to it that a 1956 deportation order against New Jersey mobster Joe Adonis was overturned in the event Jack Kennedy became president . D'Amato: Joe Kennedy agreed to see to a federal deportation order overturned against mobster
 D’Amato claims he raised $50,000 from mob friends and delivered it to local Democratic politicians in West Virginia . He says it was to help them buy campaign supplies in their effort to support Kennedy’s efforts .
 D’Amato claims that Joe Kennedy said that Bobby Kennedy, now the attorney general, would not allow it . D'Amato wanted Joe Kennedy to deliver on his agreement, but he says he was denied it .
 One could expect D’Amato to exaggerate his contribution to the West Virginia primary, and $50,000 is a rather piddling sum .
 Roemer’s last clause was loose speaking on his part in that it implies he was aware of examples when the mob did go after a member or members of these categories of people . Roemer: ‘I’m not sure if I’ll be able to
 No evidence that organized crime in America has ever killed or attempted to kill a reporter, judge, FBI agent, or cop . Organized crime in the U.S. has never been found to have killed a reporter or a cop .
 In one of the more transparently worthless observations about whether or not Carlos Marcello made the subject remark, author Gerald Posner quotes a former New Orleans police intelligence chief as saying he was “personally acquainted” with Marcella .
 Marcello is the subject of a new book, "Marcello the Mob" The book is being published on CNN.com/Heroes.com . The author of the book is believed to be the co-founder of the mob.
 Posner: Badeaux never investigated Marcello because if he had, Posner would have emphasized this fact . And we can also be reasonably confident that Marcella never investigated . Posner says Posner is trying to make a point, and we can't be confident that
 Badeaux "knew of’s Marcello, possibly to the extent of even nodding to him in passing each other on the street . That really only leaves one other option—that he “knew’ of” Marcella, possibly .
 Posner would be sure to tell his readers exactly why he was wronged by his actions . Posner is not a Republican, but a Democrat, he says .
 Becker: Marcello, per Becker, was speaking Italian, not English . Becker: Dees, dems, and dose are English, not Italian . Becker says he's more fluent in Italian than English, but says he was speaking English .
 Badeaux adds that for Marcello to have said what was claimed he said “would have been a goddamn oration” for Marcelo . The former New Orleans Saints star says he would have made a 'f***ing oration'
 The reason you don't know, Hubie, is that it couldn’t be more obvious that you are no authority, of any kind, on Marcello . The reason for not knowing is that you’re no authority in any way, Marcella .
 Sicily is a region of Italy and although Sicilians speak a distinctive dialect, they still speak essentially Italian . Sicily is one of Italy's most densely populated regions .
 Marcello, speaking Italian, allegedly uttered a well-known Sicilian expression . He allegedly uttered the phrase in a Sicilian dialect . The incident occurred in the early hours of Wednesday .
 John Davis, author of a book that imputes guilt in the Kennedy assassination to Carlos Marcello, offers up a flake to his readers as one of his supports for his charge . John Davis: "I'm not a believer in the assassination"
 Eugene R Dela Parra, an ex-marine on a 70 percent nervous-breakdown disability, worked as a racetrack groom and part-time waiter at Traegle’s Bar in New Orleans . Davis says he overheard a conversation at the bar between Traeg
 Oswald's Carcano without a telescopic sight and shipping charges was $12.78 . The well-known cost of Oswald’s Carcano is $12,78 .
 Dela Parra says he overhears a conversation about a woman . He says he was not just overhearing a conversation, but he was actually eavesdropping .
 He looked over their shoulders and down on precisely what they were looking at, even picking up the cost of the rifle . The parties to the conversation never mentioned it, though they never mentioned the conversation .
 Dela Parra says he heard Traegle say he wanted to buy a rifle to get the President . He says he thought it would be a nice rifle to buy to get him . Dela. Parra: "It's a good idea to get a rifle"
 There is a price on the President’s head, and other members of the Kennedy family . There is also a price for the President's head .
 Davis writes loosely throughout his relatively well-received book, frequently without citing any source for what he says . He does say that on February 23, 1967, Dela Parra was interviewed by the FBI in Newark, New Jersey .
 Dela Parra said Ben Traegle came up to him in the backroom after the remark was made . DelaParra said that after the comment was made, he was approached by Traegles .
 He repeated the remark (Dela Parra didn’t have to eavesdrop and look over anyone’s shoulder anymore) and then, laughing, added that they were “only paying $1,000” for the hit .
 The author chastises the FBI for disbelieving Dela Parra’s tale, but adds his own rubbish to the brew . Not only doesn’t he chastise the FBI, but he also chides his own nonsense, he adds it to the mix .
 David Ferrie listed himself in the New Orleans telephone directory as “Dr. Dr. David’s” Ferrie . Davis writes that Ferrie lived in New Orleans, New Orleans . Ferrie was listed as ‘Dr. Ferrie’
 David Ferrie frequented Marcello-backed bars in New Orleans and was known to lecture people in a professional manner, Davis says . Davis: "One wonders whether the ‘Professor’ in Traegle’s bar” was Ferrie .
 One of the BRILAB bugs that the FBI placed picked up a conversation between Carlos Marcello and his mob friend Santo Trafficante on September 16,1979 . The FBI placed the bug in the office of the New Orleans office of Marcella Marcelli .
 In the twenty-seven-page transcript of the conversation there is only one brief and passing reference to the Kennedy assassination .
 Marcello tells Trafficante, without any response from the latter, that some person had told him, “Carlos, he said, I guess they gonna nail us for this shit, just like that.” Trafficante says, ‘Carlos’ Marcell
 FBI concluded that nothing of any evidentiary value could be inferred from this Kennedy reference . FBI: "Nothing of any apparentiary value" was inferred from the reference .
 Marcello allegedly told the man to shut up, and that they should go outside and talk, which the two did . When the person asked how he would respond to the HSCA’s suspicions about him, the man allegedly said he would not respond to it .
 Conspiracy theorists have accused Carlos Marcello so many times of being behind Kennedy’s murder that he allegedly blurted out in 1989 that he was. However, conspiracy theorists have said he was behind Kennedy's murder .
 Marcello, seventy-nine at the time, was serving time on a conspiracy to commit bribery conviction at the Federal Correctional Institution in Texarkana .
 In February of 1989, his mental condition had worsened to the point where he would wander around the FCI halls and forget where his cell was located . In February 1989, he was found dead in a cell cell .
 When he started having dizzy spells, he was placed in the Wadley Regional Medical Center in Texarkana, Texas . He was placed there after he started experiencing dizzying spells .
 FCI guards James Cates and Vincent Brown were asked to work overtime and go to the hospital to guard Marcello . The two guards were not their regular assignment, but were sent to guard the hospital .
 Cates says Marcello climbed out of his bed and told the two of them, “I want to thank you boys for coming by.” Brown and Cates say the boy thanked them for their help .
 They got the impression he thought they thought they were his bodyguards in New Orleans . They got an impression that they were the bodyguards .
 Cates and Brown and a nurse then got Marcello back in bed and secured his restraints after a brief struggle with him . Cates, Brown and Brown then got him back to bed .
 Dr. Stringfellow had been Marcello’s doctor for five years at Texarkana . He said he was “surprised” to hear Cates and Brown's story . Marcella's doctor had never heard him make any such remark .
 Marcello was eventually transferred to the Federal Medical Center in Rochester, Minnesota . None of the guards or nurses who attended to him ever reported hearing anything close to what Cates and Brown claimed they heard .
 If there is one tiny speck of credible evidence that Marcello had Oswald kill Kennedy, that would be one thing . If there were one tiny, credible evidence, that's one thing. That would be a miracle, he says .
 If Marcello said these words, they probably reflected a desire on his part that Kennedy die . The thought of his being behind Kennedy’s murder being implanted in his subconscious mind by so many accusers .
 Even the conspiracy community that trumpets Marcello’s involvement in the assassination has virtually ignored the report from Cates and Brown . The conspiracy community has largely ignored the reports that Marcella was senile or delirious when he made the alleged statement .
 FBI interviewed Marcello at the Federal Medical Center in Rochester, Minnesota, in September of 1989 . He denied making the statements attributed to him by Cates and Brown and said he had no information on John F Kennedy's killing .
 Marcello said he had never made such a statement . He was told that someone allegedly overheard him say in 1985 that he had had John Kennedy killed . He said this was “crazy talk,” and that he did not kill Kennedy himself .
 Unless Marcello was feigning senility, it was clear that at this point in time he was indeed suffering from it . Unless he's feigning it, it's clear that he's suffering from senility .
 When other agents interviewed him, he said he had nothing against Robert Kennedy and did not have any information to indicate he was responsible for his deportation . He said he did not know anything about Kennedy .
 In the same interview, he was asked if he was familiar with certain names . He said he was not familiar with some of the names .
 He said the name David Ferrie was familiar to him but could not recall who he was . He said he was familiar with Ferrie but was unable to recall him . Ferrie is believed to be the father of two children .
 Murret apparently recalled running such a service but said he had many people working for him . Murret said he could not recall all the people he had worked for him at the time .
 He said he did not know anyone named Edward Becker and denied telling anyone what Becker said he said . He also said he didn't know anyone who named Becker .
 Marcello said he never had an attorney named Gil Wray . Only one Mike Maroon, who had come to Guatemala to help him, said he had a lawyer .
 Marcello said Gil Wray was the attorney who defended him in his 1963 prosecution for falsifying government documents . He said he did not recall any such prosecution . Marcella said he does not remember any such prosecutions .
 Sam worked for Sam outa his place downtown, you know, Saia’s restaurant, the Felix Oyster Bar or something like dat . He worked for Saia's restaurant .
 I'm putting this in an endnote because its credibility is so weak it’s not worthy of the main text . I’m putting this into an end note because it's so weak .
 Oswald's employment record shows that wherever he worked, there were witnesses to his employment . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 All of Oswald’s time in New Orleans has been accounted for by several sources, including documentation and work records . There is no meaningful period when Oswald could have been working for his uncle .
 There is no evidence, from anyone, to confirm Oswald’s having done so . Even if there were, there was no evidence that Oswald had done so, it is impossible to confirm .
 Davis's excuse for Marcello’s remarks about Oswald not being on tape is nothing short of laughable . Davis’ excuse for the remarks is laughable, but it's not laughable .
 Let’s assume that Hauser never had his tape recorder present when Marcello allegedly made the alleged remarks .
 There are many other reasons why I don’t believe Hauser on this matter. There are other reasons .
 Dutz Murret seemed to be quite concerned about the welfare of his nephew Lee and desired that he lead a straight and narrow life . Lee Murret's uncle, Dutz, said he was concerned about his nephew's welfare . Lee's uncle said he wanted his nephew to lead a
 Lee told Lee he had better show up in court on the Bringuier altercation, and to thereafter go out and get a job and support his family . Lee also told Lee to show up for court and get back to work .
 Dutz was appalled at his nephew’s affinity for Fidel Castro, indicating his displeasure to Lee by asking him if he was part of any “Commie’ group, to which Lee, cowed, said he was not . Dutz also expressed his displeasure at his
 It should be noted that even if, for the sake of argument, Marcello had made the subject remarks, they certainly don’t add up, in any way, to what conspiracy theorists want us to believe . Oswald killed Kennedy for Oswald, not for Marcella,
 Even Davis doesn't apparently think too much of Hauser’s credibility .
 Frank Ragano took vast liberties with the truth in his book Mob Lawyer . There are other examples of Ragano taking vast liberties . Ragano's book is available on Amazon .
 On June 8, 1959, six months after Fidel Castro took power in Cuba, he announced that all undesirable aliens would be rounded up for deportation . The deportation of undesirable aliens occurred in Cuba in 1959 .
 Trafficante was arrested without any specific charges lodged against him . Trafficante had stayed in Havana trying to salvage what he could of the wealth generated from gambling interests .
 He was detained at the Trescornia Immigration Station in Havana, Cuba . A large old home is being used as a temporary detention center in Havana .
 Ragano: Trafficante's house was encircled by a chain-link fence but no guards were in sight and the front gate was unlocked . The house was surrounded by a five-foot-high fence, he writes .
 Castro has shown remarkable compassion against some of his most deadly enemies . Rolando Cubela's sentence of death for conspiracy to murder Castro was reduced by Castro to life imprisonment .
 Trafficante had done business with Castro’s predecessor, Fulgencio Batista, and Castro could assume that Trafficante supported Batista financially . That would have been no reason for Castro to kill Trafficante as opposed to incarcerating him if he decided to .
 In My Story, Judith Exner’s tell-all book in 1977, she never said or even hinted that there was any relationship between John F Kennedy and Sam Giancana . Exner never said in her book that any relationship existed between the two men was anything .
 Earlier, in her testimony before the Church Committee in 1975, she said she never told Kennedy about any of her mob friends .
 In 1988, she said she set up about ten meetings between Kennedy and Giancana, one of which, she believes, was at the White House . But in a long cover story by writer Kitty Kelley in the February 29, 1988, edition of People magazine, she changed her story
 Before and after Kennedy became president, she served as a “courier” for Kennedy . She delivered envelopes to Giancana and mobster Johnny Roselli .
 The two mobsters apparently had no way of communicating with each other . Kennedy had to get Exner to deliver an envelope from one of them to the other .
 In The Dark Side of Camelot, Seymour Hersh writes that Martin Underwood, a former political operative for Chicago mayor Richard Daley, watched Exner hand a satchel in Chicago to Sam Giancana . Underwood told Hersh that on one train trip from Washington to Chicago
 Hersh seems to suggest that he believes Underwood even though the story is not believable . Hersh suggests that he does not believe Underwood's story .
 She had terminal cancer and she says she wanted to clear her conscience . She says she was terminally ill and wanted to clean her conscience up for good .
 Former FBI director says those conducting the investigation “sure didn’t come to me’s” report says . Former assistant FBI director Courtney Evans, who headed the Special Investigative Division, says she was not told about the investigation .
 The HSCA Report would use Evans to support a position that committee, for whatever reason, was pushing . But it’s remarkable that Evans was used to support committee's position, the report says . Evans is not a member of the committee, but it's remarkable that he
 Evans testified before the HSCA that under the facts of this case, it would not have been FBI policy for the Special Investigative Division to investigate organized crime . Under the facts, Evans testified, Evans couldn't have been clearer .
 In this situation the primary criminal statute involved was the killing of a federal officer . In this case, the primary legal statute involved is the killing . The primary criminal law involved is that federal officers are killed by federal officers .
 The jurisdiction of this type of crime was in the General Investigative Division . The jurisdiction was in .
 Senator Carl Curtis of Nebraska wanted to know about organized crime in his area . Senator Curtis was asked to know if organized crime was linked to organized crime . Curtis says organized crime is a problem in his Nebraska area .
 Conspiracy theorists think nothing of accusing the CIA of being behind the assassination . They become upset when the CIA does the perfectly normal thing to defend itself in any lawful way .
 James DiEugenio filled nearly three pages of his book Destiny Betrayed with an April 1, 1967, dispatch from CIA headquarters to “Chiefs, Certain Stations and Bases” to counter the charges of the Warren Commission critics .
 DiEugenio believed the CIA, even if innocent, should just lie down and play dead when accused of murdering Kennedy . He said the CIA should just play dead .
 CIA: Conspiracy theorists have frequently thrown suspicion on our organization . CIA headquarters said conspiracy theorists have often thrown suspicion at the CIA .
 Also to “employ propaganda assets to answer and refute the attacks of the critics’s critics. Also, to employ propaganda assets .
 In 2005 a federal court ordered the CIA to disclose the CIA budget for 1963 . The CIA budget remains classified to this day .
 Aftergood said he was unable to confirm any CIA budget other than the one for 1963 . Aftergood: "I'm not sure if the CIA budget is for 1963"
 CIA counsel Janice Galli McLeod provided Aftergood with budget figure for 1963 . She attached a copy of the “Cost Reduction Program” (which Aftergood said he already had) to Aftergood . McLeod did not suggest in her letter that any of the figures were
 All CIA agents take an oath of secrecy, and this oath can collide with the imperatives of law . CIA agents are sworn to secrecy, but this oath may collide with law, the agency says .
 Richard Helms testified in 1973 that the CIA had not given funds to opponents of Salvador Allende Gossens, the Marxist president of Chile, in an attempt to oust Allende from power in the 1970 national election .
 $8 million had been funneled through the CIA to anti-Allende groups . Although technically the CIA had not given money directly to the candidates, this was a distinction without substance . Some in the Department of Justice wanted to charge Helms with perjury .
 If he lied, which he surely did, Helms was not lying to protect himself but the CIA and our national interests . Most everyone wanted the matter to go away, but since Helms lied, most everyone wanted it to go .
 Helms never had been formally charged with perjury, but a plea bargain was worked out . If he pled nolo contendere (“I will not contest it”) to two misdemeanor counts of failing to testify “fully and completely” to Congress, he would be
 There’s no way to know what would have happened if he had simply refused to answer . There's no way of knowing if he would have simply refused .
 The CIA is not the only federal agency that has gotten in bed with the mob when it was to its benefit . The CIA has been accused of being involved in the mob in the past .
 Lucky Luciano, Meyer Lansky, and others aided the Allied invasion of Sicily in July of 1943 through the mobsters’ ties with the Sicilian mob . U.S. naval intelligence officers solicited and received the assistance of the Mafia to aid them with intelligence and informants in
 Dewey was a special prosecutor in the biggest case of his career . He convicted Luciano and fifteen of his associates on vice charges in 1936 . A few of the prostitutes themselves testified against Luciano .
 Sciacca is no defender of Luciano, whom he accuses of multiple murders . Sciacca writes a powerful indictment of the prostitution conviction in his book .
 He concludes, as Luciano would always maintain (and the most notorious madam of the era, Polly Adler, supported), that Luciano had absolutely nothing to do with The Sicilian Mafia .
 Several witnesses later signing statements recanting their trial testimony . The main witnesses who testified against him did so “because of favors promised or because of threats by Dewey’s staff,” said .
 Luciano as the family boss profited from the prostitution racket, but there is a strong possibility that he may have been framed by compliant witnesses with false accusations, he says . Luciano's trial record shows that Luciano profited in the prostitution .
 Dewey was elected DA in Manhattan in 1937, where he continued his assault on organized crime . The conviction of Luciano vaulted Dewey to national prominence .
 Shortly after Luciano arrived back in Italy, the Sicilian-born mobster obtained a Cuban passport and in late September of 1946 headed for Havana . His brethren, primarily Meyer Lansky, had established a gambling empire years earlier under the friendly protection of Cuban leader Fulgencio Bat
 Frank Costello, Vito Genovese, Albert Anastasia, Meyer Lansky, Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante Sr., Joe Adonis, Joe Profaci, Thomas Lucchese, and Tony Accardo, among many others . Frank Sinatra,
 The meeting was so big that the Hotel Nacional was closed to the public . The hotel was so large that it was closed for the meeting .
 New or confirmed spheres of influence, launching a drug trade, and opening up Las Vegas, starting with the Hotel Flamingo .
 Luciano, who had presided over the Havana summit, naturally thought he was back, big-time . Luciano thought he had returned to the role he had been in .
 When everyone left the city to go back home, Luciano stayed, and moved into the exclusive Miramar neighborhood . The neighborhood is just a few blocks from the private mansion of Cuba’s then president, Grau San Martin .
 Harry Anslinger, the U.S. commissioner of narcotics at the time, writes that Luciano quickly became close to Cuban officials through the lavish use of expensive gifts . Anslinger: Luciano became close .
 The Isle of Pines, south of Cuba, was to become the Monte Carlo of the Western Hemisphere . It was to be the 'Monaco of the Eastern Hemisphere'
 Anslinger had the American ambassador to Cuba demand that the Cuban government deport Luciano, but it refused to do so . Anslinger: "The Cuban government refused to remove Luciano"
 Eventually, the U.S. government formally announced an embargo of medical supplies to Cuba . The embargo was formally announced by the United States government .
 The U.S. was virtually its only supplier of medical narcotics at the time, the Cuban government was forced to capitulate . Luciano was sent back to Italy, where he lived until he died in 1962 .
 Throughout Luciano’s exile in Italy, American mafiosi paid homage to him by visiting him . Meyer Lansky, Frank Costello, and Vito Genovese sent him money on a regular basis from their mob earnings .
 If he is correct, it is possible that Sinatra made two trips to Havana, once during the convention to sing for a Luciano tribute, and two months later when he came with the Fischetti brothers .
 DEA and CIA reported that leading Contra commanders were major traffickers . ‘His staff and friends . . . were drug smugglers or involved in drug smuggling’ the DEA said .
 The Times managed to obtain a copy of this secret history, though the history still remains classified . The Times has published excerpts of it .
 In 1940, the Roosevelt administration learned that Axis agents had established a “string of espionage bases from Mexico City southward to the Strait of Magellan . The president issued a directive giving the FBI jurisdiction over the gathering of intelligence in Central and South America .
 The bureau set up a precursor to the CIA in the Special Intelligence Service to coordinate intelligence south of the border . State Department, State Department and other governmental agencies also gathered intelligence from Mexico .
 The FBI set up an SIS school to train agents for assignment in Central and South America . The FBI even set up a comprehensive course in conversational Spanish and Portuguese .
 In undercover operations, one FBI agent went to South America as a soap salesman for an American company . The operation was similar to those conducted later by the CIA .
 One man reported to the FBI that his reports were even more important than those to his clients . Another opened a stockbrokerage business in Argentina, from which his reports to FBI were more important .
 Another went to South America under the guise of being an American reporter . Another tried to get into South America with the help of a reporter .
 At one point in 1944, five SIS informants were being detained by Argentine police and it was feared that they might disclose the identities of SIS agents there . Hoover ordered the agents out of Buenos Aires .
 The National Security Act of 1947, creating the CIA, removed the SIS from jurisdiction over the gathering of foreign intelligence . The SIS was statutorally removed from jurisdiction by the CIA in 1947 .
 7,064 enemy aliens in the U.S. were moved from strategic areas, or deported . 7,000 enemy aliens were moved or deported from the United States .
 Domestic Contact Service of the CIA gathered intelligence on foreign countries from American citizens returning home after traveling abroad . The domestic contact service was deemed to be perfectly lawful .
 Hersh alleged that the CIA had spied on and kept dossiers on American dissidents . Hersh and others alleged that CIA had gone far beyond this and had intercepted personal mail of Americans to and from the Soviet Union .
 By the time the mail intercept operation ended in 1973, it had spread to San Francisco, Hawaii, and New Orleans for brief periods .
 When asked for an explanation on why only two Oswald-related letters were flagged, the CIA pointed out that it only opened up a very small percentage of letters to copy and analyze .
 Its goal was to collect information on dissident Americans overseas from CIA stations in foreign countries . CIA stations were CIA stations overseas from foreign countries. The CIA was in charge of collecting information on dissidents .
 Rockefeller Commission: CIA eventually began spying on and accumulating files on New Left activists, campus radicals, and black nationalists . Most of the files were involved in the anti-Vietnam War movement . That always remained its primary focus .
 By the time Operation CHAOS closed down in 1974, the CIA had compiled files on 7,200 Americans . By the end of the 1970s, it had collected files on more than 7,000 Americans .
 Investigation revealed there had been ample warning that the Japanese were up to something . Reams of information picked up here and there should have alerted Army and Navy commanders in the Pacific that we were in danger .
 This intelligence had lain unused because there was no single, central organization equipped to analyze it and see to its speedy dispatch to those concerned . But for the most part this intelligence, gathered by military informants, had been ignored .
 The OSS was established in December 1942, one year after Pearl Harbor . The U.S. government took a long time to establish the OSS in response to it .
 President Truman created an agency responsible for foreign intelligence in the interim until the establishment of the CIA in July of 1947 . The CIA was created in 1947 .
 The CIG had a staff of only around eighty “officers and clerks on loan from the War and State Departments.’s staff of around 80 ‘officers’ and ‘clooms’ on loan .
 Many say the CIG was simply renamed the CIA when the CIA was created under the National Security Act of 1947 . Many say that the CIA is simply a fully staffed and funded agency .
 Souers succeeded after four and a half months by General Hoyt Yandenberg, who served for almost a year and then was succeeded by Roscoe Hillenkoetter . Souers was succeeded after 4 months by Hoyt .
 In 1961 CIA covert project code-named ZR/RIFLE was brainchild of Richard Bissell . "Executive Action" capability, a CIA euphemism for the standing capability to assassinate foreign leaders, was set up .
 Harvey testified before the Church Committee that Executive Action covered a “wide spectrum of actions” to “eliminate the effectiveness” of foreign leaders . Harvey testified that assassination was the “most extreme” action in the spectrum . Harvey said assassination was “the
 Notes of meetings with Joseph Scheider contain phrases like “last resort beyond last resort and a confession of weakness,” “the magic button” and “never mention word assassination” which Harvey acknowledged to the committee all referred to the assassination capability .
 Bundy believed that neither of these conditions had been fulfilled, and said further that he did not brief President Kennedy on the Executive Action project . Bundy said that he didn't brief the President on the project, nor did he brief him on it .
 There can be no question from the timing of the visit to Leopoldville, and the history of what was transpiring leading up to the visit, that he was sent there to kill .
 The support for the proposition that “removal” meant assassination is extensive, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Removal’s removal is not assassination"
 Bronson Tweedy, the CIA’s chief of the Africa Division, testified before the Church Committee that shortly before the Dulles cable, Deputy Director for Plans Richard Bissell spoke to him about the feasibility of assassinating Lumumba . Tweedy testified that before the cable,
 Whether these ‘other assignments’ could include assassination is not known . He was described as someone who, if “his case officer ordered him to carry out ... he will dutifully undertake appropriate action for its execution without pangs of conscience .
 Scheider was under the impression that President Eisenhower had ordered the CIA to assassinate Lumumba . Scheider had been under the clear impression that the CIA ordered the assassination of the president .
 In a later appearance, he acknowledged that Mulroney “had been asked to plan and prepare for” the assassination of Lumumba . He acknowledged that he was asked to “plan and prepare” for’s assassination .
 Of all the federal agencies, the FBI conducted the principal investigation into the assassination . The Secret Service was a distant second in the investigation .
 CIA conducted its own investigation in foreign areas touching on the assassination . However, the CIA did not conduct the investigation .
 John Scelso (CIA pseudonym of John Whitten), was the CIA veteran who at the time was the chief of WH3, which ran clandestine operations for the Western Hemisphere . At least at least at the beginning, at least technically, it was John Scellso .
 Richard Helms, the deputy director of the CIA, gave Scelso the assignment . Helms made it clear that everything pertaining to the investigation should go through him . The CIA says it is investigating the CIA's involvement in the case .
 James Angleton ignored Helms’s directive and conducted whatever investigation he deemed appropriate on his own . Angleton dealt with J Edgar Hoover and Allen Dulles, a member of the Warren Commission .
 Scelso said he had a staff of around 30 agents and 30 clerical workers assigned to the investigation . The investigation is ongoing .
 Oswald killed Kennedy and acted alone, according to his unit's report to Helms . After sifting out the relevant from a great amount of “bizarre fabrications,” he passed on allegations to the FBI and the Warren Commission .
 Helms removed Scelso from the case and turned over the investigation to Angleton and his counterintelligence staff . Angleton proceeded to savage the report for its many purported inadequacies .
 G Robert Blakey, the former general counsel for the HSCA, has changed his position on the CIA’s cooperation with the committee . Blakey has not changed his stance .
 It apparently started with a provocative article in the April 12—18, 2001, edition of the Miami New Times titled “Revelation 19.63” It was written by Washington Post reporter Jefferson Morley .
 Morley himself doesn't have too much confidence there is any meaningful “revelation” in his article . Morley's article will be published in the next edition of this week's iReporter .
 This inference was in part confirmed when I later wrote and spoke to Morley . Morley was the author of a book about the book, "The Daily Mail's"
 Because of their open opposition to Castro, they were forced to go underground or flee to Miami . The group was forced to flee to Cuba or hide in Miami .
 In mid-1961, the CIA station in Miami began working with the DRE to send anti-Castro students to universities throughout Latin America . The DRE was the CIA's first to send students to Latin America in the 1960s .
 The Miami CIA station also trained certain DRE members in clandestine operations . They were trained to be infiltrated into Cuba in teams, the Miami station said .
 In 1978, the CIA had called Joannides out of retirement to handle the HSCA’s requests for CIA documents . In 1978 he was called into service to handle requests for documents .
 Blakey sent to PBS an “Addendum” to his appearance on the November 16,1993, Frontline special on the case . Blakey was very upset, for Frontline's fortieth anniversary special in 2003 .
 Morley tries to build a case against Joannides as perhaps being involved in the assassination . Morley, clearly a very fair-minded and responsible writer, is clearly a responsible writer .
 Former CIA operations officers say Joannides would have completed reports on the DRE on a monthly or at least quarterly basis . Morley secured statements from former CIA operatives .
 An internal CIA report dated August 29, 1962, said, “Although the CIA conducts joint activities with the DRE and puts up all of the money for such operations, the CIA is not fully responsive to CIA direction.” The report said the CIA conducted joint activities .
 Morley seemed to be on more solid footing on this matter than in his article . But when I spoke to Morley later, he seemed to have been on a solid footing .
 Joannides’s predecessor, CIA agent Ross Crozier, filed a threeor four-page summary report to JM/WAVE, the CIA station in Miami, each month from September 1960 to November 1962 on his relationship with the DRE .
 Morley believes they do exist and the CIA is stonewalling for some reason that’s not good . Morley: ‘If you’re going to believe they exist, that's not good.’
 Morley says Joannides’s story doesn’t prove the existence of an assassination conspiracy . Morley is obviously proceeding under the assumption that the CIA may be hiding something . The thing it is hiding, just as obviously, is the knowledge of the DRE having Kennedy
 The Joannides conspiracy theorists have found that the CIA had nothing to hide in thousands of previous documents the agency initially refused to release voluntarily but ultimately did release under court order . Morley and his inevitable band of followers think the only reason why the CIA is resisting the release of documents pertaining
 The CIA specializes in always acting guilty, even when it is not, and always being, from a public relations standpoint, its own worst enemy . The CIA is always being its own best enemy, even though it is innocent .
 Not one speck of credible evidence has ever emerged showing that anyone other than Oswald was involved in the assassination . The gaping hole in Morley's claim is that even he, the chief proponent of such a possibility, apparently doesn't truly believe it himself .
 "We used to have a cup of coffee at Howard Johnsons ... three times a week to once every two weeks," he says . "He never even remotely hints that they were involved in the assassination," he adds .
 DRE only has, for the most part, a supporting role in his stage production . Indeed, the main person he wants to talk about is Joannides, the DRE .
 Morley seems to accept unquestioningly every word the former DRE members told him . Morley relies on them to prove his case against Joannides . The bottom line is that Morley accepts unquestioningly .
 If one reads Morley’s article literally , one can only conclude that Joannides, not the DRE with whom he dealt, may have been involved in the assassination .
 Morley seems to have eluded Morley: if he exonerates the DRE, which he does by default in his writing, he thereby also exonerates Joannides . Morley has failed to explain why he exonerated Joannide by default, in the writing .
 Morley hasn't spelled out how Joannides or anyone else used the DRE to get Oswald to murder Kennedy . But unwitting is synonymous with innocent, since one cannot be guilty of any serious crime unless they have “mens reaf a guilty and reprehensible state of mind,
 Morley goes so far as to write that the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald ‘alone and unaided’ had killed Kennedy . He does let someone else make the accusation in just one sentence—Fabian Escalante, the retired head of the Department of State Security under
 George Joannides was “at the heart of the Kennedy assassination cover-up,” says Morley . Morley rejected the notion that the DRE hated Kennedy as much as Castro, only saying that “the DRE vehemently opposed Kennedy’s Cuba policy,
 Jose Antonio Lanuza, the coordinator of the DRE’s North American chapters, heard the stories on November 22, 1963, that linked Oswald to the shooting . He went to DRE headquarters to check his files, Morley writes .
 There he found Bringuier’s letter about the confrontations with Oswald, along with tapes of the WDSU radio debate . There he also found the letter about Oswald .
 The call was to Joannides, who told the DRE representative not to do anything or contact anyone else for at least an hour so he could contact Washington headquarters for instructions . Washington headquarters is in Washington .
 Most of the paper's contents consisted of Carlos Bringuier’s recitation of his contact with Oswald in New Orleans . The paper was published in New York City .
 This is why the more one reads of Morley’s story, the more illogical it becomes . Morley's story is illogical, but the more I read of it, it becomes illogical . This is not the first time Morley has been accused of being a
 If it turns out that Joannides wrote little, if anything, about the DRE’s connection to Oswald, it may very well be because he was unaware of it .
 Oswald was in Miami, not New Orleans where he had contact with the exiled group . He would have been far less likely to know about the insignificant event in New Orleans at the time of the event .
 One DRE leader told Morley that his group told Joannides about the Oswald-Bringuier street incident and radio debate . Two other leaders indicated they had not . Lanuza only recalled telling Joannide after the assassination, when it became common knowledge anyway .
 DRE thinks nothing of not following CIA’s orders, but the radio debate in New Orleans wouldn’t even qualify as falling within the instruction . But not only did the DRE think nothing of . not following . orders, it would be the first time a radio debate
 Morley says he learned from a “source whose identity I am not free to disclose” that Joannides visited New Orleans in 1963 . Morley said in 2005 that he has “recently” learned from “a source whose identity’s not free
 Morley doesn’t know what brought Joannides to New Orleans or whether it was before or after the Oswald-Bringuier incident . Morley says he's not sure whether it happened before or before the incident .
 If he met with Bringuier, he most likely would have learned of it from him . But if after, and if he met, he probably would have met with him .
 Morley has met with Bringuier, but has not yet nailed down whether he met Joannides in New Orleans . Morley says he has not nailed down if Joannide met Bringuie in the New Orleans area .
 Joannides conspiracy devotees are led to believe that being a handler of the DRE was Joannide’s job in Miami . Finally, the conspiracy devotee is led to believing that being an agent for the CIA in Miami was his job in the 1980s .
 The notion that the incident that happened in New Orleans would be something Joannides would automatically know about and be on top of the news is unrealistic .
 Joannides’s DRE job was a small part of his CIA responsibilities . While the Miami CIA branch had a yearly budget of $2. million, the monthly sum the CIA paid the DRE seemed to be about $25,000 .
 He can't mean that since Joannides was exercising control over the group he could order them to kill Kennedy for him. Certainly he can’t mean that . Certainly he . can't say that since he was exercising . control over . the group, he said .
 In any event, whatever modicum of control he exercised, we know it wasn’t for long . We know it was for long. In any case, it’s not long enough.
 Shackley said the group had “failed to create anything in the past 18 months” Shackley: The group has failed to “create anything” in the last 18 months .
 In the ultimate denigration, he treats them like students who had left school in Havana to flee Castro . “We would prefer to maintain on the payroll 15 or 20 AMSPELLS provided they were fully matriculated at a junior college or college in the JM/WAVE
 In their after school hours, we would encourage this group to continue a radio and mailing propaganda effort targeted toward fellow students in Cuba .
 There seems to be nothing to the Joannides-DRE story, and I’m confused that someone like Morley feels there is possible merit to it .
 Blakey suggesting this all came out with Morley’s article years later . I’m also confused by his statement in his addendum to Frontline that “outrageously, the Agency did not tell. . . our Committee that it had financial and other connections
 The CIA was funding virtually the entire anti-Castro effort by the exiled groups and making direct monetary payments to them . But it is too well known to cite that the CIA was making direct payments to exiled groups .
 Documents furnished by the CIA to the HSCA are overflowing with the extent and nature of that connection . CIA documents reveal the extent of the connection between the CIA and the CIA .
 Washington Post writer says either the CIA murdered Kennedy or it covered up for those who did . "With absolutely nothing to go on, this fine writer who reports for one of the world's premier newspapers, the Washington Post"
 Morley hasn't written what I have just said, and won't say it in conversation, but the words he writes necessarily mean this . Morley won’t say what he writes, but he says it means this .
 If there had been a conspiracy to kill Kennedy, the most likely conspirators would have been anti-Castro Cuban exiles, says author .
 Joannides’s assumed reports on the DRE see the light of day they will show that Kennedy murdered, he says . He offers a special discount to anyone who pays by certified check .
 If the CIA records on the DRE that the HSCA received were those turned over by Joannides, this isn’t accurate . However, if the CIA turned over those records, it’s not accurate .
 Spooks at Langley will fight Morley and his lawyer every inch of the way, thereby helping them convince everyone that it has something to hide . Joannides’s and perhaps its own complicity in the assassination . Langley is like the pathological liar who lies even when it
 "It's all just sublime silliness. But as I’ve said before in the book and these endnotes, it’s all just plain silliness," he says .
 Joannides and the CIA conspired with Oswald to kill Kennedy as much as you and I did, says JFK's widow . "Joannides" and "Oswaldo" conspired to kill JFK, says Kennedy's widow and others . Kennedy was killed by the CIA,
 Gaeton Fonzi, a former HSCA investigator, says he saw Maurice Bishop with Oswald in Dallas . He says Blanch had dealings for many years with a CIA agent named Maurice Bishop . Blanch was a militant anti-Castro militant, he says .
 Fonzi was positive Bishop was CIA agent David Atlee Phillips . Even after Yeciana saw Phillips in Washington D.C. and told him he was not Bishop, he refused to give up belief .
 Phillips has been the main “rogue” CIA agent the conspiracy community has claimed was behind the assassination . Fonzi actually went on to write a book, The Last Investigation, making the allegation .
 George Joannides may or may not have even known or met Phillips . So whenever Phillips’s name comes up, everyone around him, and even those who weren’t but could have been, are brought in .
 Joannides is accused of being a part of a conspiracy to murder Kennedy or cover it up . He and Kennedy were both associated with the DRE at different times, and that is enough to make him part of the conspiracy .
 No one is really claiming that an obscure CIA agent named George Joannides decided, on his own, to murder Kennedy or cover up the deed for those who did .
 Someone had to bring him into the preexisting conspiracy, and that person was the real villain and mastermind . David Atlee Phillips was the mastermind .
 Arbenz, duly elected president in 1951, had been one of the heroes of an uprising against Guatemalan dictator General Jorge Ubico in 1944 . He was elected president of Guatemala in 1951 .
 When Arbenz took over some of the unused land of the Boston-based United Fruit Company in Guatemala and gave hints of being susceptible to Moscow’s influence .
 Fonzi's book was published in 1986, seven years before he published it . The author says he had a pretty good idea of who was behind the attack on him . He says Phillips wrote that Lopez, Hardway and Hardway tried to find evidence that CIA was involved in the
 Joannides story really owes its parentage to Fonzi and David Phillips, David Phillips . Phillips is accused of being a drug dealer in the 1980s .
 When I contacted Morley to send me what documentation he had connecting Phillips to the DRE and Joannides, he did his best, for which I thanked him . Morley never really came up with anything that, upon scrutiny, stands up that well .
 Hunt is one of the ‘rogue’ CIA agents frequently connected, with Phillips, to the assassination by conspiracy theorists . Hunt is often connected to Phillips' assassination .
 The question was only if he knew of the DRE, not whether he was aware of any association Phillips had with it . Phillips' association with DRE is not clear whether he knew anything about it, it's if he did .
 Hunt was referring to a broad and imprecise term, but it's not clear what he was talking about . Hunt has not said what time period he was in, nor do we know just what he meant .
 Phillip was head of covert operations at the Mexico City station . He could have easily meant that the output of the DRE, essentially intended by the CIA to be used as an anti-Castro propaganda organization, fell under his overall jurisdiction . Phillip was the head of the covert operation at
 Morley says he asked Hunt what date he was referring to when he said Phillips ran the DRE . Hunt said it was the pre-Bay of Pigs period, the Bay of Pigs incident being in April of 1961 . Morley's letter to me of February 9, 2005, says
 In 1960-1962 Phillips was in the covert section at the Mexico City station . Phillips was responsible for the anti-Castro propaganda effort against Castro . This makes sense .
 Crozier said he left his assignment in Miami as the CIA’s handler for the DRE in November of 1962 . He said he was in Miami when he was assigned to the CIA in 1962 .
 Phillips’s book, though no specific date is given, it is easily inferable from the context that he was reassigned from his job as head of covert operations to head up the Cuba section .
 No one has come up with a document that could be troubling if all the i’s are dotted, which hasn’t been done, and if the most sinister implications are drawn, which there seems no basis for doing . As we’ve seen, no one Mor
 A CIA document dated the day of the assassination and released by the CIA in 1997 under the JFK Act reads, “Henry J Sloman arriving next 22 Nov order meet wife AMHALF-2.” The CIA document was dated on November 22 .
 WAVE expecting priority message, concerning maritime exmtratton of headquarters asset, in exit pouch which presumably will arrive next 22 Nov. WAVE expects priority message to arrive in 22 Nov., which presumably means it will arrive in a pouch .
 DRE leaders in Miami were not among the DRE leader in Miami. Indeed, whomever he recommended, they were not .
 The date of the document, November 22, 1963, has taken on increased importance among conspiracy theorists . Sloman is believed to be a CIA hit man named Anthony Sforza, and Choaden is Phillips .
 Phillips was stationed in Havana in 1959 . Phillips' cover as a CIA agent in Havana had become known to some, and Phillips was in Havana .
 He responded in his February 9,2005, letter, “Yes, one of them acknowledged visiting Phillips’ office on Humboldt Street in Havana in Havana.” He responded to the letter .
 In 2005, Morley finally made at least some meaningful claims to support the Phillips-DRE connection . Morley said in a telephone conversation with Morley on February 27, 2005, he finally made some meaningful statements .
 "I didn’t get the sense that he was just pulling things out of his hat because he was trapped, rather more of the sense he merely neglected to mention them in his articles and letter to me," he says .
 I believe Morley when he says he was told the following by various sources, including DRE leaders, a good part or all of which may be true . Morley says he believes Morley's comments were true . He says Morley was told by sources who may have told him
 The nucleus of the DRE was formed in Havana, not Miami, and the Catholic student group there first organized itself to protest Anastas Mikoyan’s visit to Havana in February of 1960 . The Cuban Student Directorate was born in Havana .
 Two main founding members were Alberto Muller Quintana and Juan Manuel Salvat . They formed their group totally independent of him . They ended up spending twenty years in Castro prison .
 Phillips helped Borja and Salvat escape to Miami and arranged for the CIA to start funding their group as an anti-Castro ally of the CIA in September of 1960 . The support of the student group continued up until 1966, per Morley .
 Morley acknowledges that other than arranging for the original funding, it did not appear that Phillips had any direct contact with the DRE in Miami . Morley assumes, sensibly, that Phillips never lost interest in the group . Crozier, in Miami, admits to coordinating his handling
 Morley only got a statement from one DRE member, Borja, that he ever met Phillips, and then on only one occasion in Phillips’s Havana office . One big weakness in Morley's scenario is that he only got the statement from Borja .
 As indicated, Morley’s lawyer, Jim Lesar, is convinced that Phillips, among others, was behind the assassination of Morley . Lesar: Phillips, along with others, were responsible for Morley's assassination .
 He cites the Havana relationship Phillips had with the future DRE people, and the fact that Phillips was in Mexico City the same time Oswald was . Oswald was in Havana at the time .
 Phillips' friend, Alonzo Hudkins, was also a friend of Phillips’s . Hudkins was the second newsman to promote the story, and Phillips is a friend .
 Morley asked Phillips if Phillips even knew Joannides, he responded in his February 9,2005, letter, “Great question, Vincent.” Phillips responded to Morley’s question . Morley: Phillips even asked Morley if Phillips had even known Joann
 When I first asked Blakey this question in 2003, he said, “I don’t know.” When I asked him, Blakey said he didn't know . He said, "I don't know. I don't want to know"
 There is no evidence to link Joannides to Oswald, the author says . And he acknowledges that “there are no evidence’s no evidence linking Joannide to Oswald.”
 The most likely explanation would seem to be that Joannides’ knowledge was innocent and that when Oswald killed Kennedy whatever his knowledge of Oswald’s actions in August 1963 was, hidden .
 In a follow-up telephone conversation with Morley on March 4, 2005, what became even more evident was the ambiguity and ambivalence of Morley’s state of mind with respect to the Joannides affair . Morley was ambivalent about the affair .
 Morley is not a conspiracy theorist, and he is not about to knowingly state something that the evidence does not support . Morley: "I'm not going to say something that doesn't support"
 When I told him that a portion of the conspiracy community is aware of his work on the matter, he immediately distanced himself from this conclusion . He said he didn't mean to convey this in his article, and was not willing to say the CIA may have been involved .
 The FBI, another federal intelligence agency, not only knew but also talked to Oswald about his activities in New Orleans . The FBI also talked about Oswald's activities .
 Morley had no good answer for this, except to say that if this was true, it would show ‘negligence” on the CIA’s part in dealing with Oswald . Morley presumably meaning that the CIA should have taken some affirmative steps to prevent the assassination
 If his theory was correct, this may be why the agency doesn't want to give him the documents he wants, it’s covering up its negligence, he says .
 The FBI should have kept tabs on Oswald right up to the president’s visit to Dallas, he says . The CIA's charter only authorizes it to gather foreign intelligence . But it was the FBI (not the CIA) if anyone, he adds .
 Jefferson Morley: "I’m not willing to say, in the last analysis, that it really goes anywhere as far as the events of November 22, 1963, are concerned" Morley says he doesn't think Joannides story goes anywhere . Morley is not willing
 Morley’s position is somewhat of a puzzle to me from the first time I read his Miami New Times article . But here's the other side, making Morley's position somewhat of an issue .
 There is no evidence that Joannides was involved with the DRE or anyone else in the murder of Kennedy . There has also been no evidence he was involved in the killing of Kennedy.
 Phillips was involved with Joannides, the DRE, or anyone else in the murder of Kennedy . And there is no evidence that he was involved in the killing of Kennedy. Phillips was not involved in any of the murders .
 There is no reason to believe that this whole Joannides story should be given another thought on the issue of its relevance to the Kennedy assassination . Since there is no evidence of any of these things, there should be another thought .
 The HSCA requested that the CIA reveal where these earlier documents pertaining to Oswald had been disseminated internally, which would indicate what section or sections of the CIA had been interested in Oswald . The CIA has not responded to the request, but the CIA has said it will respond to the
 The CIA advised the HSCA that because document dissemination records of relatively low national security significance were retained for only five years . None of the dissemination records for documents pertaining to Oswald for the years 1959 to 1963 were still in existence .
 McCone subsequently told an interviewer from the CIA’s Office of Legislative Counsel that what he had said about Bishop was an error and the HSCA should be so advised .
 A retired CIA “employee’s” told the CIA interviewer that he had seen a man at the CIA whom someone, perhaps a secretary, had pointed out to him as being Maurice Bishop . However, a retired CIA "employee" told the same CIA interviewer he
 He did not know the man personally and didn't know his organizational connection to the CIA . He could not pick him out from photographs shown him .
 He had traveled to Haiti as early as 1956 because of his interest in a possible geological project funded by American and Haitian interests . He was traveling to Haiti to discuss possible geological projects funded by U.S. interests .
 De Mohrenschildt intended to negotiate his Haitian contracts with a Haitian bank . The bank's president, Clemard Joseph Charles, came to Washington, D.C., in 1963 to negotiate contracts .
 Charles urged Matlack to get the U.S. to invade Haiti and overthrow Duvalier, she says . She says she was dismayed that de Mohrenschildt and his wife, Jeanne, accompanied Charles to the meeting . The meeting was held in Haiti .
 de Mohrenschildt was told LBJ was scheduled to be out of town when he came to Washington . But the very next day, Walter Jenkins, LBJ’s administrative assistant, wrote that he was out of the country .
 The kooks who have tried, without a shred of evidence, to implicate the CIA in Kennedy’s murder include some from the most unexpected quarters . The CIA is accused of being involved in Kennedy's murder .
 Underwood also told Palamara that Scott said the FBI and Mafia also knew . For good measure, Underwood said that Scott also knew the FBI .
 The following year, when Jeanne de Mohrenschildt was interviewed by conspiracy theorist Jim Marrs, she was singing a different tune . She was interviewed again by Marrs in 2011 .
 She still said she did not believe her husband committed suicide but had been “eliminated before he got to that committee,” not explaining why anyone would want to kill her husband . She said he knew nothing about the assassination .
 Jeanne added that her husband was dead and couldn't talk, and “that’s why I am doing all the talking while I can’t talk, she said . Jeanne said her husband is dead and can't talk . She added that she is doing all of the
 Casasin was working in Paris at the time as the chief of Branch 6, the section of the Soviet Russia Division of the CIA’s station in Paris . His primary work was amassing information in support of the SR Division, whose mission was espionage within the Soviet Union . Cas
 The memo was sent by Casasin to Walter Haltigan, the chief of the SR Division . Casasin sent the memo to the SR division's chief of staff .
 Oswald was on leave from his work and traveling through Europe with his family that summer . He believes the conversation, he believes, took place in July of 1962, which is when Oswald returned to the states .
 He said the only information he had on Oswald at the time of the conversation in Paris was based on details he had seen in information from the State Department . He said he had no further information on Oswald .
 Casasin said his suggestion was just a "lead" that was never followed up . Casasin says he did not prepare any memo at the time of the informal discussion, saying it would not be customary to do so .
 The CIA interviewed Haltigan and several other members of the SR Division’s clandestine operations section, and none of them knew of any contact by the CIA with Oswald at any time .
 Oswald worked in the area of those plants, but Oswald is not believed to have worked in any of these plants . Anyone in those areas of interest was of interest to the agency, though he did not believe Oswald worked there .
 Casasin probably speculated without any evidence that the CIA in fact did . Casasin’s ‘operational interest’ in Oswald may have been in his mind . Inas694 ENDNOTES: Casasin speculates without evidence .
 Author Jerry Kroth found a document showing ‘Andy Anderson’ had debriefed Oswald for the CIA, a fact denied then and now by former directors including Richard Helms as recently as 1993 .
 Even if such a document existed, it would apparently only concern a debriefing of Oswald by the CIA . Oswald was apparently debriefed after returning to the states from the Soviet Union .
 Oswald did not fit comfortably into the type of Americans, mostly business people, who traveled abroad and were debriefed by the CIA’s Domestic Contact Service upon their return, to elicit anything they had learned about a foreign country that might be helpful to the U.S. interests
 Domestic Contact Service was nonclandestine, so therefore it did not deal with internal investigations relating to national security . As indicated in the main text, the domestic contact service was non-clandestine . The Domestic Contact service was not involved in national security investigations .
 The CIA's statutory job is to investigate on foreign soil matters pertaining to U.S. security . Anything that did did would be the jurisdiction of the FBI, not the CIA, the FBI .
 James Angleton, CIA’s counter-intelligence chief, said he had no knowledge that Oswald was ever debuffed by the CIA . Angleton assumed that if he hadn’t been, it was because such a defector on American soil would be the job of the FBI
 The CIA sting operation against Hensen was conducted in July of 1963 in Mexico City, not on American soil, and hence the CIA did have jurisdiction over such an investigation . The CIA has jurisdiction over the investigation .
 Many conspiracy theorists suspect FBI Director J Edgar Hoover of being behind the assassination . Any association by him with someone outside the FBI made that person suspect too .
 The ARRB determined that he had no connection with the CIA back in 1963 . Bush later became director of the CIA, and he later became CIA director .
 There was a George Bush in the CIA in 1963, but he was a junior analyst . He has repeatedly denied being the George Bush referred to in the Hoover memo .
 The date of this earlier Corpus Christi Times article is given in a Warren Commission volume as October 2, 1959 . The date is almost surely a typographical error or a misstatement .
 President Johnson's aide said a friend of his told him that Oswald had been an FBI informant . Walter Jenkins, a special assistant to President Johnson, told the FBI . Jenkins told him an FBI agent formerly assigned to the New Orleans office of the FBI told him of Oswald .
 The agent was transferred from the New Orleans office to the Dallas office because of some difficulty he had with a woman in the French Quarter . The agent had been transferred from New Orleans to Dallas .
 The FBI found the names of three agents who had been transferred directly to Dallas from their New Orleans office but only one fit the description . The agents were transferred directly from New Orleans to Dallas .
 Former Speaker of the House Thomas P “Tip” O’Neill made the allegations in his book Man Of the House . O'Neill said the FBI attempted to frame Oswald in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 O'Neill writes that over dinner with presidential assistant Kenny O'Donnell in 1968, he was surprised to hear O’Donnell say he was sure he had heard two shots that came from behind the fence on the grassy knoll . O‘Neill: "I was sure
 FBI said it couldn't have happened that way and that I must have been imagining things . I told the FBI what I had heard, but they told me it couldn’t have happened, he said .
 "So I testified the way they wanted me to, that the shots came from the right rear. So I testified . So I testify the way . They wanted to get him to testify, he said, "that the shots were from the . rear"
 O’Donnell allegedly said, “Tip, you have to understand. I would have told the truth,” whereupon he allegedly told him, ‘Tip’ He allegedly said he would have said the truth . Tip: "I would have been honest. I
 The likelihood that O'Donnell would tell O'Neill that he really didn’t care that the true killer of Kennedy, whom he loved and was extremely close to, was brought to justice is too absurd for words .
 O'Neill has O’Donnell allegedly saying that the FBI wanted him to lie in his testimony . But that’s not the equivalent of what he allegedly said . O‘Neill has said that . O'Donnell allegedly said that he lied in testimony .
 If O’Donnell had been the only witness, you could argue that the FBI would have achieved something . O'Donnell was only witness to Oswald's assassination .
 If one believed that O'Neill got the story straight, then one also has to believe that O’Donnell committed the crime of perjury and did not hesitate to announce his crime to third parties . And let’s not forget that if one . believed that one believed O�
 The allegation that the FBI influenced O’Donnell to change his story was first made in 1975, when a CIA “liaison man” told it to investigators for the Rockefeller Commission . The allegation was made to investigators in 1975 .
 William Sullivan was killed while hunting deer near his home in Sugar Hill, New Hampshire, on November 9, 1977 . Sullivan was a member of the New Hampshire hunting club .
 He was shot accidentally by another deer hunter, Robert Daniels, a twenty-year-old named Robert Daniels . Daniels was also killed by a deer hunter .
 Local authorities investigated, and no charges were brought against Daniels . Daniels was not charged with any crime .
 One of the most bizarre tales in conspiracy assassination literature, and one that conspiracy theorists have treated very seriously . It touches on the same theme as Mark North’s Act of Treason .
 It deals with the story of one Richard Case Nagell (aka Joseph Kramer, Joe Krane, Robert C Nolan) as set forth in The Man Who Knew Too Much by Dick Russell .
 Nagell, a decorated army captain during the Korean War, alleges that as a double agent assigned by the CIA to penetrate Soviet intelligence, he learned that the Soviets became aware before American authorities did of Oswald and former CIA employees plotting to kill Kennedy .
 He claims that the Soviets believed that suspicion for Kennedy’s death would be focused on them because of the defection of Oswald . He says they ordered him to meet with Oswald in Mexico City and try to persuade him not to do it .
 Oswald was on his way to Mexico City, not Washington, D.C., in late September, with hopes to get to Havana . Nagell knew more about Oswald’s schedule than Oswald did, since we know Oswald was going to Mexico .
 It would have been rather difficult for Oswald to kill Kennedy anywhere in the United States, even the tip of the Florida Keys, from Havana . Oswald's shooting spree would have taken place in Havana, Cuba, Cuba .
 There is no evidence other than Nagell’s word that he ever met Oswald . Oswald was assassinated in November 1963 . Oswald's death was the only known assassination of President Kennedy .
 There is a piece of circumstantial evidence that goes in the direction of his writing such a letter . On the other hand, there is no evidence that he wrote such a note .
 Of course, the above only helps support Nagell’s claim that he wrote the letter, not that he had any basis for what he said in the letter . The above is not the only reason for the claim .
 A foundationless letter to the authorities saying that the president might be killed could have been one manifestation of his sickness . After all, if we know from the evidence that Nagell was nearly psychotic .
 The legend that has formed around Nagell is that he began to suspect he was in over his head and was being set up . To establish an alibi for himself he decided to commit a bank robbery in El Paso and get caught so he would be in custody at the time Kennedy
 This apparently apocryphal story originated in an article by William Turner in the January 1968 edition of Ramparts magazine . It has been accepted, without question, by many in conspiracy community .
 Garrison has little credibility, but it's hard to know if Nagell told him this fable or whether he was simply parroting Turner . Garrison has no credibility, and it's unclear if he was parroking Turner .
 Nagell: "There was a reason for having myself arrested in the manner I did, which I thought would turn into a misdemeanor" In an October 26,1975, interview by author Russell, Nagesle said he thought the arrest would be a misdemeanor . Nageslee:
 "It wasn’t because of the Kennedy assassination, in that sense, but for a reason I’ve never disclosed to anybody in the United States," he says . "For a reason, I have never disclosed that to anybody," he adds .
 Other than Nagell’s alleged letter to Hoover that said the assassination was going to take place in late September of 1963 in Washington D.C., the principal source for the foreknowledge story is lacking in credibility .
 Bundren told Russell in a May 11, 1990, interview that at one of Nagell’s pretrial hearings on the bank robbery charge, “Well, I’m glad you caught me.” Russell said in a 1990 interview that he was glad he
 That Nagell did try to escape completely refutes the alleged purpose he had for what he did in the bank . That is not the case, but it refutes his alleged purpose for the bank robbery .
 Nagell was charged with attempted bank robbery, and because his conduct was so bizarre, the judge sent him to the United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners in Springfield, Missouri, for a psychiatric evaluation .
 Nagell refused to submit to the requisite tests, but he was found competent to stand trial . He was found not guilty of attempted murder, but was found to be a competent man .
 Nagell was the sole survivor of a military plane crash in 1954 in which he sustained severe head injuries . His lawyers argued at his trial that he was temporarily insane when he fired the two shots in the El Paso bank . He was convicted by a federal jury on May 6,1964
 His conviction was overturned on appeal in 1966, and he was retried and convicted again . He was convicted of murder in 1966 and convicted of attempted murder in 1986 .
 Nagell was convicted of robbery in 1968, but later released from custody . Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit found no specific intent to rob in his conduct, and no intent of robbery .
 In April and May of 1962, he had checked himself into the psychiatric ward of the VA hospital in Westwood, California, and in December of 1962 he checked himself in the Bay Pines YA hospital in St. Augustine . In December of that month, he says the CIA was
 The clinical social worker’s report reads, in part, “Patient feels his intentions were to go to California, but came to Florida instead.” The patient feels he intended to move to Florida, but went to California instead, report says .
 Russell first interviewed Bundren on October 21, 1975, fifteen years earlier . Russell never said one word about what Nagell supposedly told him, the very important utterance that has bothered him ‘ever since” 1963 .
 As late as September of 1963, just before the El Paso incident, he unsuccessfully sought psychiatric care at the YA hospital in Los Angeles yet again . In fact, in September of that month, he had unsuccessfully sought treatment at the hospital .
 Conspiracy researcher Scott Van Wynsberghe says Russell saw nothing unusual in explaining to his supposed source the source’s own story . The source then continued to modify the original story, he says .
 Russell would argue that he was only clarifying Nagell’s tale, but a journalist should know that, after a point, the incomprehensibility of a story is the story . Russell: "A story that is incomprehensibly incomprehensible, but the story is
 On January 3, 1967, Nagell got off a letter to United States Senator Richard Russell in which he talked about Oswald coming under scrutiny in 1962 and 1963 . On January 4, 1967 he wrote to Russell, who was in the Senate .
 He continued that Oswald was part of a conspiracy to murder Kennedy that had nothing to do with a foreign government . Oswald was not involved in any of the Kennedy's murders, he said .
 Nagell remained, and remains, a fixture in the conspiracy firmament . But he was still a key member of the conspiracy conspiracy .
 Richard Nagell had wilder imagination than New Orleans DA Jim Garrison . Garrison's looney, conspiratorial theories knew no boundaries . Garrison had looney theories about the JFK assassination .
 He met with Nagell on a park bench in Central Park, hoping he would help break the case wide open for him . The case is still being investigated .
 Garrison was deliberately evasive, except to say, without providing any supporting evidence, that Guy Banister, Clay Shaw, and David Ferrie were behind the assassination and had manipulated Oswald . Nagell answered very few questions, except for providing no evidence .
 Nagell refused to discuss the CIA or any other federal agency except that he claimed he was ignored by the FBI when he tried to warn them of Kennedy’s assassination . Garrison says he believes the CIA is the devil behind the assassination .
 When one is a crackpot even in the eyes of someone as screwy and erratic as Jim Garrison, it’s time for that person to go home . Garrison: "It's time for one of these crackpots to leave" Garrison .
 The ARRB learned that Nagell died in his Los Angeles apartment on November 1,1995 .
 The U.S. was an ally of General Fulgencio Batista, whose acts of tyranny during his two reigns as Cuban president cannot be questioned . The United States was a major ally of the Batista regime in Cuba, but it is clear .
 Garrison says Nagell made no positive impression on Garrison . Garrison was a guest of honor in the White House . Garrison says he was impressed by the experience . Garrison: "It was a great experience"
 Nagell surfaced at the American consulate in Zurich, Switzerland, claiming he was on a secret U.S. government mission in Geneva . A month later he surfaced in Zurich claiming to be working for the United States in Geneva, Switzerland .
 "After that fiasco in the GDR you worms did your best to screw, blue and tattoo me," he said . "You worms did the best to Screw, blue, and tattooed me. After that . After that fiasco, you worms tried to screw me."
 In a September 2, 1969, memorandum to the director of the CIA’s Office of Special Investigations, a CIA agent writes, “While Nagell may be something of a crackpot, the item does appear to contain somewhat of an implied threat.” Nage
 Nagell told the interviewer that the document is authentic . But this could simply have been what he told the interview, assuming it is even authentic .
 There is also an undated photo of Batista (it could have been after he returned to power in 1952) walking with military personnel in front of cadets at attention .
 Batista’s army used arms mostly furnished by the U.S. during his long struggle against Castro‘s forces . Batista used arms mainly supplied by the United States during his struggle .
 The U.S. ambassador to Cuba met with Batista in 1958 urging him to leave the island . He suggested that after a year in Spain, he could return to the United States . Batista died in 1959 at age of 65 .
 American multimillionaire William Pawley, a close friend of President Eisenhower’s, met with Batista, exhorting him to leave the island to avoid bloodshed in an inevitable defeat . Eight days before this meeting, Pawley served as a secret emissary of the United States
 Because Batista would not yield to U.S. wishes, this country eventually abandoned him . Batista died in 1953 in Cuba .
 The American Mafia negotiated asylum for Batista in the Dominican Republic, where they had ties to Rafael Trujillo’s government . The Mafia remained loyal to Batista for all he had done for them and negotiated asylum .
 In the old British common law misprision of a felony was committed when one, knowing of the commission of the crime, failed to report it to the authorities . However, in the old common law there was a crime committed when a person knowing of a . felony, failing to report
 Hoover certainly knew the difference between a wiretap and the use of hidden microphones . RFK would have been able to furnish many of such writings, signed by RFK, as documentation to support what he said .
 Hoover came up with one letter signed by RFK, dated August 17, 1961, from Gross . Hoover didn't help Hoover find Gross, but he found the letter .
 Hoover would tell Gross this was an “example” in support of his assertion that RFK had approved all FBI “wiretaps’s” is curious . Why Hoover would say this was a ‘example’ is curious, Gross says .
 Hoover furnished no documentation that RFK had ever authorized wiretaps in non-national security cases . RFK was assassinated in November 1968 . Hoover says RFK never authorized wiretapping in national security cases.
 RFK apparently didn’t recall signing the August 17, 1961, letter, which most likely appeared to be a routine, relatively unimportant document . RFK’s later declaration that he had no knowledge that the bureau conducted bugging operations was a mistake .
 RFK "listened to the results of microphone surveillances," Hoover's letter to Gross said . RFK approved of FBI buggings, Hoover said . Hoover also spoke of the FBI getting "better equipment" to do it .
 RFK said he was aware of the FBI's "bugging" practices during his term as Attorney General . RFK: "It may seem ‘inconceivable’ to Mr Hoover that I was not aware of Mr Hoover’s ‘bugging’ practices
 RFK authorized FBI wiretaps in non-national security cases, but no one came up with an authorizing signature of RFK . RFK's signature is not found to have been found in the case .
 Evans’s letter to RFK said that “individual requests in . . national security cases for wiretap authorization were sent to you by the FBI for approval . RFK .
 An internal FBI memorandum in 1966 indirectly confirms RFK’s position . Actually, the “arrangement,” a letter dated May 21,1940, was actually a letter .
 Assistant Director William Sullivan memoed back to Cartha DeLoach that “we do not obtain authorization for ‘black bag’ jobs from outside the Bureau’s . Sullivan: “We do not get authorization for 'black bag' jobs from out of the Bureau
 Such a technique involves trespass and is clearly illegal, therefore, it would be impossible to obtain any legal sanction for it . Such a form of 'trespass' would be illegal to use such a technique .
 He wrote in one of his books that there was even “an intense three-week course” at the bureau, euphemistically referred to as the “Sound School,” where the practice of wiretapping and bugging was taught . He became an accomplished writer .
 Wiretapping not only didn't require a break-in, but was much easier, he said, than bugging, the latter requiring “some skill in carpentry, plastering, and matching paint,” he said . The bug or microphone usually being installed in walls
 Hoover was so powerful that he could openly have friends whom other prominent government officials would scurry from . Lewis Rosenstiel, the president of Schenley Industries, was a strong anti-Communist ally of the director’s .
 Meyer Lansky was one of the very top organized-crime figures in America . Rosenstiel was close friends with Lansky, a top organized crime figure in the U.S.
 During the years RFK was attorney general there was no federal law on bugging . As Hank Messick, a Lansky biographer, wrote in the April 5, 1971, edition of the Nation, “The overriding puzzle to to overcome’s overriding puzzle”
 The United States Supreme Court had held that evidence obtained by the use of a bug through illegal entry onto the premises was not admissible in a legal proceeding . However, the U.S. Supreme Court has held that .
 If there was no illegal entry or trespass, the electronic bugging was not deemed to be a violation of the Federal Communications Act or a defendant’s constitutional right of privacy under the Fourth Amendment . The evidence was admissible .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer was one of the many women JFK had a sexual liaison with . She would become a part of the conspiracy lore of the assassination because of her relationship with JFK .
 CIA’s supersleuth, James Jesus Angleton, made it a point to come into possession of Mary's diary the day after she died . Mary was murdered a month short of a year after JFK's death, and Angleton made a point of interest in her diary .
 Suspicions of conspiracy in the assassination have been born from much less than that, but it appears there was a lot less here than meets the eye . Suspicion of conspiracy was born from little more than that .
 Mary Meyer came from JFK’s world of wealth and privilege . Unlike perhaps all the other women with whom JFK had a sexual tryst during his brief Oval Office .
 JFK first came to the attention of the attractive and bright woman at a dance his senior year at Choate in 1935 . JFK’s date, who believed her to be the prettiest girl at the dance, recalled JFK continuing to cut in on him on the dance floor .
 Cord Meyer, a World War II hero and high-ranking CIA official, was a close friend of Mary Angleton . Angleton was Angleton's closest friend at the CIA, but his marriage to Mary foundered in 1958 .
 Mary, with her well-bred background and social graces, was part of Washington’s social scene for years . Mary was close to Jackie and was on the A-list for small parties at the White House .
 Meyer, forty-three at the time, was shot twice, once in the head, by an unknown assailant on the towpath of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal .
 A bloody tree, drag marks in the gravel, and screams from Mary that were heard by a witness, police concluded that a struggle between Mary and her killer preceded the fatal shooting . Police concluded a struggle preceded the shooting .
 Meyer’s funeral a few days later had many powerful and influential people in the church . The funeral included the likes of Richard Helms and Richard Angleton, who would soon head the CIA, and Ben Bradlee .
 Mary’s intimate relationship with JFK is believed to have started in January of 1962 and continued through August of 1963 . Mary and JFK had an intimate relationship between 1962 and 1963 .
 Secret Service recorded her frequent evening visits to the White House, all but one when Jackie was known to be out of town . This has been confirmed by White House gate logs of the Secret Service recording .
 Not everyone knew about her close relationship with JFK at the time . Tony, Tony, for example, found out later . Tony found out .
 Knowing of Mary’s affair with JFK and that she kept a diary, Anne called the Bradlees and Angleton, telling them it was of some urgency that they find Mary's diary before the police did, to ensure that Mary's private life not become public . The day after
 When the Bradlees went to Mary’s brick house in Georgetown the next morning to look for the diary, they found Angleton already there . Angleton was already at the house when they went to find the diary .
 The Bradlees found it in a converted garage studio behind the house, where Mary painted . But it was the Bradlees who found it, in the converted garage behind the home .
 About ten of the fifty pages included references to her love affair with JFK, and they turned it over to Angleton for safekeeping .
 Angleton would later say that he read the diary and allowed “M” and “F” (not identified) to read it, as well as Mary’s eldest son, Quentin . Angleton later said that he allowed ‘M’ and �
 Tony Bradlee burned the diary “in the presence” of Anne Truitt . Tony burned it in the presence of Anne, Anne's mother . Tony and Anne were married in 2004 .
 Two mechanics, Henry Wiggins and William Branch, were in the vicinity at the time of the two shots . The two mechanics were both in the area when the shots hit .
 Wiggins looked over the canal wall and saw a black man in a light tan zippered jacket standing over Meyer’s body . Wiggins looked at the scene and saw the black man standing over the body .
 The man then put a dark object into his pocket and walked away into bushes . He then put it in bushes separating the canal from the river .
 Police found Ray Crump, a 25-year-old black laborer, in the vicinity of Wiggins’s call . Crump was found in the area of Wiggins' call .
 Crump was soaking wet, one of his hands was bleeding, his pants were torn, and his fly was open . Crump: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it was a bad accident"
 He said he had been fishing, had fallen asleep, and he and his fishing pole fell in the river . He had been asleep when he fell asleep .
 When Wiggins identified Crump as the man he had seen standing over the woman's body, Crump was arrested for Meyer’s murder . Crump is charged with Meyer's murder .
 Later that day the police recovered a light tan zippered jacket in the river around three hundred yards from where Meyer's body was found .
 Crump, an alcoholic who suffered from severe headaches and blackouts, was prosecuted for Meyer’s murder the following year . Crump was an alcoholic with severe headaches, blackouts .
 Wiggins explained that the reason he was off may have been because he was looking down from a height at the time he saw the man . Wiggins said that he may not have seen the man in the moment he saw him . Wiggins says he may have seen him in the wrong direction at the
 Crump didn’t testify in his defense, and the jury of ten blacks and two whites found him not guilty . Crump was found not guilty in the case .
 The Meyer murder case is closed, police say . But as far as the Washington Police Department is concerned, they had the right guy in Crump .
 Crump later told an officer that he had accidentally fallen in the river while walking away from his fishing spot . Crump says he fell into the river, but not the conspiracy community, which continues to include Meyer .
 He also told conflicting stories as to the cut on his hand, telling one officer he had cut the hand on rocks in the process of trying to get his fishing pole out of the water, and another officer said he cut it on fishhook .
 Its lists of mysterious and suspicious deaths of people whom the alleged conspirators have silenced have been silenced .
 Conspiracy theorists have come up with no evidence to support this, nor have conspiracy theorists bothered to speculate what poor Mary Meyer could have possibly known about JFK's killers .
 In the year following the trial, Crump, per Meyer’s biographer, was in and out of trouble with the law . Meyer's biographer says Crump has been in trouble since the trial .
 In 1969 he was charged with assault with a deadly weapon . The disposition of the case is unknown, but the old records have been destroyed .
 In 1971, he committed arson by dousing a tract house with gasoline and setting it ablaze while his new wife and her children were inside . He set the house ablaze in front of his wife and children .
 While on probation he assaulted a police officer and was arrested again on an ADW charge for pointing a gun at his wife, causing her to jump out of a window and sustain serious injuries . He was arrested on a charge of ADW after he pointed the gun at her and she jumped
 Between 1972 and 1977, he was charged with assault with a knife, grand larceny, another arson, and several charges of destroying property .
 In January of 1978 he set a fire in the entryway of the building where a girlfriend of his lived, after threatening to kill her . He set the fire in January 1978 . In January 1978 he threatened to kill his girlfriend after threatening her .
 Before his conviction he was charged with raping the 17-year-old daughter of a friend, but the case was never prosecuted .
 In 1983 he torched a neighbor’s car and served two and a half years in prison . In 1983, he served 2.5 years in jail for torching a neighbor's car .
 It was the Levinson matter that started the FBI's tapping of King’s phone . The Levinson case was the subject of the FBI investigation .
 Jack Puterbaugh was not a Secret Service member, but a political advance man for the Democratic National Committee . He was on loan as part of the White House advance team for the president’s Dallas trip .
 He arrived in Dallas with Special Agent Winston Lawson on November 13 . He was present and a part of the main discussions about whether the president would speak at the Trade Mart or the Women’s Building .
 Conspiracy theorist Penn Jones Jr. found Puterbaugh to be a suspicious character, mostly because he wasn’t a member of the Secret Service . He suggests that it was put up the assassination .
 When Walt Brown wrote in his publication, JFK /Deep Politics Quarterly, that “current research” put Puterbaugh as one of the motorcade planners, he said he received an “angry” letter from Puterbaug saying he had nothing to do with the
 Of note, Puterbaugh came to JFK’s White House from Minnesota, along with Orville Freeman, Secretary of Agriculture . Brown goes on to write ominously, “Of note,
 The implication is that Puterbaugh was somehow a part of a conspiracy to murder Kennedy, Brown says . Brown says, just possibly, he may have been a member of the conspiracy to kill Kennedy .
 A rumor that has circulated throughout the years in the conspiracy community is that a Secret Service agent was killed during the assassination . A rumor has circulated through the years that the Secret Service officer was killed in the attack .
 Scripps Howard reporter overheard a nurse ask a Western Union man about a report that a Secret Service Agent had been killed out on the street, he wrote .
 In 2005, Vincent Palamara put out a revised edition of his book with page numbers and changed the title to Survivor’s Guilt: The Secret Service and the Failure to Protect the President . Palamara: "Survival's Guilt"
 The HSCA never established why Kennedy canceled his trip to Chicago . Most probably was the need for him to stay in Washington with his closest advisers to deal with the assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem .
 The HSCA said it “was unable to document the existence of the alleged assassination team’s existence” The agency said it was “unable’t document’S alleged assassination .
 In 1964, Bolden was convicted of conspiring to sell official information in a counterfeiting case and sentenced to six years in prison . Bolden has been convicted of six years of conspiracy to commit counterfeiting .
 The Secret Service learned of Vallee's existence on October 30, just a few days before Kennedy’s scheduled visit . Vallee is the daughter of President Barack Obama .
 Chicago police surveiled Vallee after he requested time off from his job on November 2, the date of the president’s visit . When agents discovered that he was in possession of several weapons, they had him surveil him . Vallee was found to have several weapons and
 He told the police the country was in “serious trouble” if Goldwater didn’t defeat Kennedy, he said . After a brief interrogation at the station, he accompanied them back to his apartment .
 Author Lamar Waldron points out that “Vallee was either in custody, or under surveillance and about to be arrested before the trip cancellation” at 9.15m. at 9:15m . Author Waldron: “The trip cancellation was a precautionary measure
 White House decision to cancel trip could have contributed to cancellation . Unknown associates of unknown associates of Yallee’s still at large could have played a role .
 Revilo Oliver, a member of the John Birch Society, wrote two articles on the assassination in the February and March 1964 editions of the Bircher magazine American Opinion . Oliver's main charge was in the first article .
 Without a stitch of evidence to support his preposterous charge, he alleged that President Kennedy was actually a valuable agent of the Soviet government who couldn’t keep pace with the Communists’ timetable for taking over America . So he had to be removed, he said .
 Oliver said Oswald was trained by the Russians as a terrorist and was readmitted into this country with the cooperation of the Communist-dominated U.S. State Department . Oliver said the State Department readmitted Oswald into the country with help of the United States .
 Oswald was about to confess to the Communist conspiracy being behind the assassination so the Soviets (not the mob, as virtually all other conspiracy theorists believe) had Ruby silence him . After Oswald was captured, he was captured .
 Wives are normally closer to their husbands than anyone else, and thereby know how they feel about other people . Wives usually know more about their husbands' feelings about others than their husbands .
 If Khrushchev were an enemy of Kennedy’s to the point of preferring to kill him rather than work out a peace between their respective nations, Kennedy never picked up on it and his advisers never communicated any such thing to him if the words of Jackie Kennedy are any indication .
 She thanked him “for sending Anastas Mikoyan as your representative to my husband’s funeral.” She also thanked him for sending her representative to the funeral .
 You and he were adversaries, but were also allies in your determination not to let the world be blown up . You were adversaries but allies in the fight against the world being blown up, Obama says .
 I am sending you this letter because I am deeply mindful of the importance of the relations that existed between you and my husband, and also because you and Mrs. Johnson were close friends and family members . I am also deeply mindful that you and your husband were married .
 He also wanted to end four-power control of Berlin . He thought he could do this by signing a treaty with East Germany . The treaty would give the Soviets control over access routes to West Berlin .
 In early August 1961, Kennedy answered Khrushchev’s threat “with a call for 217,000 more men in uniform.” Kennedy answered the threat with “217,000 in uniform” in August 1961 . Kennedy: “In the summer of 1961
 With the Soviet determination to eliminate West Berlin and the U.S. commitment to preserve it, the prospect of a third world war was greater than ever . The prospect of West Berlin being eliminated by the Soviet Union was great .
 The crisis intensified with the August 1961 construction of the wall that prevented eastern European refugees from entering West Berlin . The wall was built in 1961 to stop refugees from reaching West Berlin from entering the city .
 The crisis ended in late 1961 when Khrushchev decided not to sign agreement with East Germany as he had promised he would .
 After shaking hands, Khrushchev "stepped back and looked" over from "head to feet" for "inappropriately long period of time" "Krushchev began to get uncomfortable" after shaking hands with Soviet leader .
 To colleagues shocked by his candor, he spoke of the “grave perversions of party principles by Stalin” to colleagues . Stalin’s “glaring violations of revolutionary legality,” referring to the tortures and many murders committed under his direction .
 Khrushchev was the first Soviet leader to speak out publicly against the crimes and tyranny of Stalin . He was speaking out just three years after Stalin’s death, when Stalin's “cult of personality” was still all-pervasive in the Soviet Union . Khrush
 Khrushchev did not mention his complicit role in Stalin's crimes, being one of Stalin’s chief enforcers . He was a chief enforcer of the Stalinist regime .
 Between 1929 and 1938, Stalin’s most homicidal years, when Stalin purged his party with many murders, Khrushchev prospered under the brutal dictator . Even vaguely suspected dissidents were routinely tortured and murdered .
 Khrushchev was the first Russian leader to end murder and torture as a normal instrument of policy . He was also the first to ease the repressive regime Russians had accepted as a way of life since 1917 . But long before Gorbachev, he came from peasant stock .
 The CIA interrogation of Yuriy Nosenko went on for 1,277 days, about three and a half years . The FBI was the first agency to interview him because of the FBI’s investigation into the assassination of JFK .
 Two mathematicians for the National Security Agency defected to the Soviet Union . Bernon F Mitchell and William H Martin defected in 1959 and 1960 . Mitchell and Martin were both mathematicians .
 The CIA has acknowledged that at the time of Yuriy Nosenko’s defection in 1964, it also promised to pay him “$50,000 for previous cooperation,” meaning that the heavy-drinking Nosenkos was a CIA mole in Russia
 The CIA promised him an additional $10,000 for his identification of a particular espionage agent . That agent is believed to be William John Vassall, a clerk in the British Admiralty . He was arrested, tried, and convicted on espionage charges in 1962 .
 When he defected in 1964, Nosenko would also “out” Boris Belitsky, a correspondent for Radio Moscow who the CIA thought was working for it . He defected from the CIA in 1964 .
 Belitsky had passed a polygraph test in 1961, but was actually a double agent under KGB control . He was being managed by Nosenko himself, who was managed by the KGB .
 The CIA knew it had been had when Nosenko revealed the names of the two CIA agents, Harry Young and George Goldberg, who were Belitsky’s CIA case officers . Young and Goldberg were in Geneva pressing Belitski for information while he was reporting back to N
 The HSCA knew that the Warren Commission was aware of Yuriy Nosenko and did not call him as a witness or mention him in its report . The Warren Commission did not mention him or call him a witness in its Warren Report .
 The HSCA also had an independent polygraph expert, the president of Scientific Lie Detection Inc., examine three polygraph tests the CIA had given Nosenko . The CIA gave Nosenkos a polygraph test on the information he was furnishing .
 The HSCA’s polygraph expert concluded that the second test was the most valid and reliable of the three . Nosenko was lying in that test, but the expert agreed with the original CIA examiner that he was lying .
 He also believed Nosenko lied on the first test, but couldn’t manage, in a sloppy report, to say whether he felt he did so . He said he also believed he felt that he did not lie on the third test .
 Oswald’s job, as a radar specialist in MACS-1, was to utilize radar to direct Marine squadron pilots, by radio contact with them from the ground, in the landing of their aircraft at Atsugi . Oswald's job was to direct pilots to land at A
 Radar operators would additionally be assigned a particular sector on the horizon to plot the movement of all incoming foreign aircraft .
 Oswald defected to the Soviet Union and appeared at the American embassy in Moscow on October 31, 1959 . He told a secretary at the embassy that he had already volunteered to unnamed Soviet officials that if he became a Soviet citizen he would make known to them such information about the United States Marine
 Gary Powers, a former U.S. Air Force pilot, was shot down over Russia in May 1960 . Powers was a CIA pilot flying a U-2 sixty-eight thousand feet above the earth . Six months later, Powers was killed by a Soviet missile attack .
 After being interrogated by the KGB for sixty-one days at Moscow’s Lubyanka Prison, Powers was prosecuted and convicted of espionage . Powers was sentenced to life in prison after being convicted of spying .
 Powers was expecting the death penalty, but was sentenced to ten years of confinement . Powers sentenced to three years in Soviet prison and seven years in a labor camp . Powers was expected to be sentenced to death penalty .
 Rudolph Abel spent one year, nine months, and ten days behind bars in 1962 . He was freed in a highly publicized exchange on a bridge in Germany for Soviet spy Rudolph Abel .
 The whole affair brought international humiliation to the U.S. not because of the spy mission itself, but from being caught in a public lie to the Russians . tPowers himself entertained this possibility.
 Oswald felt he might have learned of the height at which the U-2 flew while he was a radar operator at Atsugi, Japan . Oswald felt Oswald might have given this information to the Soviets . Oswald believed Oswald gave this information .
 Nosenko's bona fides have been pretty well accepted, but most observers have never felt it plausible that the KGB never bothered to interview a U.S. defector like Oswald simply because it found him uninteresting . The KGB apparently reached without even talking to him .
 Oswald was never in a position to know anything about the operation of the spy plane . Oswald saw the black, sleek, unusuallooking plane in the sky above Atsugi, as everyone else who lived there probably did .
 Oswald confided to Marina, even to the extent of admitting he tried to murder Major General Edwin Walker . We know of Oswald’s grand visions and we also know how he confided with Marina .
 Oswald would have boasted grandly to Marina of having had a hand in the shooting down of the U-2, an international incident, and if he had, surely Marina would have remembered this . If Oswald would admit attempting to murder Walker, we can reasonably assume he would .
 Kennedy’s concern for the poor, particularly as it related to the rich in our society, was a subject he referred to often in his speeches . Kennedy was a passionate advocate of the poor in the 1960s .
 Contrary to the assertions of Mr Khrushchev, the Soviet Union can accept differences of ideology, politics and economics . It can also accept differences in ideology and politics, and accept differences .
 On November 20,1962, Kennedy took a small but significant step to combat racism in America . Kennedy signed a decree to end racism in the U.S. by 1963 .
 He signed an executive order on that date prohibiting racial and religious discrimination in housing that was built or purchased with federal aid . The order was signed by President Obama .
 The order called for the admission of two clearly qualified young Alabama residents who happened to have been born Negro . That order was ordered by the Alabama governor .
 "I hope that every American, regardless of where he lives, will stop and examine his conscience about this and other related incidents," says CNN's John Sutter .
 It was founded on the principle that all men are created equal, and that every man's rights of every man are diminished when the rights of one man are threatened . The U.S. Supreme Court was founded in 1877 on the basis of equality .
 Today we are committed to a worldwide struggle to promote and protect the rights of all who wish to be free . We are committed .
 When Americans are sent to Vietnam or West Berlin, we do not ask for whites only . We don't ask for white people to be sent to West Berlin or Vietnam, we don't want whites .
 It ought to be possible, therefore, for American students of any color to attend any public institution they select without having to be backed up by troops . It is possible to attend public institutions without backing by troops, the author says .
 It ought to be possible for American consumers of any color to receive equal service in places of public accommodation, such as hotels and restaurants and theaters, without being forced to resort to demonstrations in the street . It should also be possible to register to vote in a free election without interference or fear
 In short, every American ought to have the right to be treated as he would wish he would be treated, as one would wish his children were treated . The U.S. should be treated in the same way as he wishes his children, he says .
 The Negro baby born in America today has about one-half as much chance of completing high school as a white baby born on the same day . One-third as much . chance of becoming a professional man; . one-seventh as much of chance of earning $10,000
 Difficulties over segregation and discrimination exist in every city, in every state of the Union . In many cities, a rising tide of discontent that threatens the public safety threatens public safety .
 In a time of domestic crisis men of good will and generosity should be able to unite regardless of party or politics . Men of goodwill should be united regardless of parties or politics, says Julian Zelizer .
 New laws are needed at every level, but law alone cannot make men see right . It is better to settle these matters in the courts than on the streets, and new laws need to be needed .
 One hundred years have passed since President Lincoln freed the slaves, yet their heirs, their grandsons, are not fully freed . The slaves' descendants are still waiting for their freedom .
 "This nation, for all its hopes and all its boasts, will not be fully free until all its citizens are free," says President Obama .
 The events in Birmingham and elsewhere have increased the cries for equality that no city or State or legislative body can prudently choose to ignore . No city or state can choose to choose not to ignore the cries of equality .
 The fires of frustration and discord are burning in every city, North and South, where legal remedies are not at hand . The fires are burning, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "Redress is sought in the streets, in demonstrations, parades, and protests which create tensions and threaten violence and threaten lives," says President Obama . Redress sought "in the streets" in demonstrations and parades .
 It is time to act in the Congress, in your State and local legislative bodies and, above all, in all of our daily lives . It's time to take action in Congress, State and Local legislative bodies, and above all .
 A great change is at hand, and our task, our obligation, is to make that revolution, that change, peaceful and constructive for all, says President Obama . "A great change at hand," he says .
 The federal judiciary has upheld that proposition in the conduct of its affairs, including the employment of federal personnel, the use of federal facilities, and the sale of federally financed housing . The federal courts have upheld the proposition, the judge says .
 There are other necessary measures which only the Congress can provide, and they must be provided at this session . Congress must provide these measures at this time of year .
 In too many communities, in too many parts of the country, wrongs are inflicted on Negro citizens and there are no remedies in law . The old code of equity law under which we live commands for every wrong a remedy, but in many areas, there is no remedy in law,
 I am, therefore, asking Congress to enact legislation giving all Americans the right to be served in facilities which are open to the public . Hotel, restaurants, theaters, retail stores, and similar establishments should be free to serve .
 No American in 1963 should have to endure, but many do . Its denial is an arbitrary indignity that no American should have had to endure . The denial is a "immediate indignity"
 I have recently met with scores of business leaders urging them to take voluntary action to end this discrimination . I have met with Scores of businesses to urge them to end discrimination .
 In the last two weeks over 75 cities have seen progress made in desegregating facilities . Over 75 cities across the country have seen desegregation progress made .
 Nationwide legislation is needed if we are to move this problem from the streets to the courts . But many are unwilling to act alone, and for this reason, nationwide legislation is necessary . It is hoped legislation will allow us to move the problem from streets to courts .
 I'm also asking Congress to authorize the federal government to participate more fully in lawsuits designed to end segregation in public education . I am also asking the Congress to legalize the use of federal government in lawsuits .
 "We have succeeded in persuading many districts to desegregate voluntarily," says President Obama . "We've succeeded in convincing many districts, voluntarily," he says .
 A Negro is attending a statesupported institution in every one of our 50 States, but the pace is very slow . Today a Negro attends a state-supported institution in all 50 states, but pace is slow .
 Too many Negro children entering segregated grade schools at the time of the Supreme Court’s decision nine years ago will enter segregated high schools this fall, having suffered a loss which can never be restored . The Supreme Court's decision was made in 2003 .
 "The lack of an adequate education denies the Negro a chance to get a decent job," says President Obama . The lack of a good education denies blacks a chance of getting a job, he says .
 The orderly implementation of the Supreme Court decision cannot be left solely to those who may not have the economic resources to carry the legal action or who may be subject to harassment . Those who might not be able to carry legal action cannot be affected by the decision .
 Other features will be requested, including greater protection for the right to vote .
 It must be solved in the homes of every American in every community across the country, says President Obama . It must also be solved for every American, says Obama .
 I want to pay tribute to those citizens, North and South, who have been working in their communities to make life better for all . In this respect I pay tribute .
 They are acting not out of a sense of legal duty but out of human decency . They are not acting out of any legal duty, they say . They say they are acting for human decency, not for legal reasons .
 Like our soldiers and sailors in all parts of the world they are meeting freedom’s challenge on the firing line . "I salute them for their honor and their courage," says President Obama .
 It has become one country because all of us and all the people who came here had an equal chance to develop their talents . The country is one again because of the equal opportunity to develop talents, she says . It is one country, she adds .
 We cannot say to 10 percent of the population that you can’t have that right; that your children cannot have the chance to develop whatever talents they have . That is the only way that they are going to get their rights is to go into the streets and demonstrate. We cannot
 I am asking for your help in making it easier for us to move ahead and to provide the kind of equality of treatment which we would want ourselves; to give a chance for every child to be educated to the limit of his talent .
 Not every child has an equal talent or ability or an equal motivation . As I have said before, not all children have equal talent, not equal ability .
 They should have the equal right to develop their talent and their ability and their motivation to make something of themselves . But they should also have the right to be able to make their own life, says Simon Cowell .
 "We have a right to expect that the Negro community will be responsible, will uphold the law," says N.J. "We're not afraid of the law. We're not scared of it. We have to expect it," she says .
 They have the right to expect that the law will be fair, that the Constitution will be color blind, as Justice Harlan said at the turn of the century . But they have a right to be fair .
 This is a matter which concerns this country and what it stands for, and in meeting it I ask the support of all our citizens . This is the matter which concern this country, what it's standing for,’s leader says .
 Medgar W Evers was a field secretary of the Mississippi NAACP, a black thirty-seven-year-old field secretary . He was a member of the Jackson, Mississippi, NAACP .
 The gunman was hiding in a honeysuckle thicket in a nearby vacant lot . He was shot in the back by a gunman firing a high-powered rifle with a newly attached telescopic sight .
 Evers was rushed to a nearby hospital where he died less than an hour later . After bleeding profusely in the driveway in front of his wife and three small children, Evers' wife and children .
 After two hung juries, Beckwith was finally convicted of Evers’s murder on February 4,1994, more than thirty years after he killed Evers, by a jury .
 The Kennedy administration’s civil rights bill four months later was criticized by blacks . The bill caused the nation's black leadership to condemn the administration . It was a somewhat bizarre development .
 A subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee strengthened the bill by adding provisions . Once the bill reached the House, a subcommittee added provisions to strengthen the bill .
 Draft of the administration’s bill limited protection for blacks against discriminatory voting practices to federal elections . For instance, the draft of the bill limited protections for blacks to federal election elections .
 Southern conservatives were in favor of the stronger subcommittee draft, believing it would be easier to defeat when it reached a vote in the House and Senate .
 If passed, the bill would be the broadest civil rights bill ever made into law . Black leaders and civil rights advocates condemned the Kennedy administration for softening of the draft .
 JFK was making an attempt to compete with Barry Goldwater for the vote in the South of Dixiecrats, racist southern Democrats who in later years would change their registration to Republican . The sense was that JFK was trying to compete . with his presidential opponent .
 Milteer wanted to lead Somersett to believe that he was part of the group that was behind it . Somersett was killed by a bomb blast in 1993 . The assassination took place in New York City in 1994 .
 He said he was connected to the International Underground, an organization, he said, of American patriots . This group had infiltrated Oswald’s pro-Castro group in New Orleans .
 Those who infiltrated the group, he said, had “put money into the right hands” to get Oswald to kill Kennedy for them, the patriots . The patriots, he added, had put money into Oswald's hands .
 Boling, Grand Dragon of the Association of the Klan in South Carolina, told them about his group being behind the assassination . Boling also told them at a roadside restaurant near Columbia that his group was behind his assassination .
 Somersett was of the opinion that the four Klansmen had never met Milteer before and met with him because he had asked for the meeting . Somersett said the four men met because he asked for a meeting with him to meet .
 Milteer confesses to being part of the conspiracy to murder Kennedy not only to his friend Somersett, but also to four virtual strangers . So here we have Milteeer confessing to the conspiracy .
 Somersett didn’t say whether or not he heard Milteer confess to the waiter at the restaurant . Somersett said he didn't say whether he heard the confession .
 Of course, he wouldn't have to worry if he confessed to the world, since there can’t be any adverse consequences if no one believes you . He wouldn't worry about the consequences of confessing to the public .
 In other words, though the patriots were behind Kennedy’s murder, this would be a good opportunity to blame the Jews . The patriots wanted to eliminate the Jews, whom they wanted to kill, he says . The Jews were wanted to be eliminated, he adds .
 Somersett got the impression that the Klansmen wanted to end their meeting and get away from Milteer as quickly as they could . Somersett: "I'm not sure what I'm going to say about the Klan," he said .
 Ruby's letter has never been authenticated as being in Ruby’s handwriting . Ruby wrote the letter in Ruby's handwriting, but it has not been authenticated .
 In a later book Walt Brown writes that the “conglomerates” (whom he describes as ‘the CIA,” “the corporations,’ “big oil”) were behind Kennedy’s assassination .
 He says they told Johnson “it would be in his interests ... to accede to the concerns of the conglomerates” Johnson says he was told by the media that it would be “in his interests” to comply .
 Jesse Curry, the late chief of police at the time of the assassination, was the only member of the Dallas law enforcement hierarchy who would later come to believe that there may have been a conspiracy in the Kennedy assassination . Curry also suggested Castro .
 Since he didn’t have any evidence to point to, basically only having a hunch, his view has no significance . But since he had no evidence, it's no significance, he didn't have any significant evidence .
 UPI reporter Dan Carmichael wrote on February 7, 1977, that “thirteen years ago, Curry gave little credence to any suggestion of a conspiracy.” Carmichael .
 He quotes Curry as saying, “I don’t accept the idea that Oswald acted alone.” Curry says .
 Carmichael quotes Curry as saying, “I just don’t know.” in a UPI article of February 9, 1977, in 1977 . But in a 1977 article, Carmichael quoted Curry as telling UPI he was unsure of what happened .
 I wouldn’t be at all surprised if he told his people ‘do what you can to get Kennedy’ because of United States attempts to kill Castro. ‘I wouldn't be surprised if [Castro] told [his people 'to] get Kennedy' because
 No other Dallas law enforcement official I know of has chosen to embarrass himself as Curry, a good man, did . Fortunately, no other Dallas police official has done so so far . Curry is a good law enforcement officer .
 LBJ spoke to CBS’s Walter Cronkite at his Texas ranch in September 1969 . LBJ: "I'm not going to be afraid of what's going to happen, I'm not afraid of it"
 This comment from the interview was not included in the aired segment back then, but Cronkite reported it on his CBS news program on April 15, 1975 .
 The HSCA statement that it found no specific evidence that Castro knew of CIA sponsorship of plots to kill him prior to the death of President Kennedy is essentially wrong . However, the statement says there is no evidence that the CIA knew of the plots .
 Castro knew Kennedy wouldn’t send the Boston Philharmonic or the Des Moines Chamber of Commerce after him . After all, Castro knew JFK wouldn't send the . Boston Philarmonic or Des Moines . Chamber of . Commerce after Castro .
 Johnny Roselli was killed simply because he didn't clear his Church Committee testimony with his Mafia associates, a Mafia figure says . The Mafia figure also says he was killed because he wasn't clear of his testimony on the Church Committee .
 He said Mafia leaders had been angry with Roselli since 1971 . He testified before a federal grand jury investigating underworld ownership of the Frontier Hotel in Las Vegas .
 Three members of the Mafia went to prison as a result of an investigation . The mob suspected that he had provided damning information to the U.S. attorney’s office .
 One of the most famous CIA plots against Castro was uncovered by him after the assassination . Castro was assassinated by the CIA in 1961 . Castro's assassination was a CIA plot uncovered after his death .
 Cubela went on to become a high official in Castro’s Ministry of the Interior . A former student leader who attained the rank of major in the guerrilla army in the late 1950s .
 Code-named AMLASH by the CIA, Cubela was in touch with the CIA from March of 1961 until June of 1965 . Cubela proposed doing an “inside job” on Castro when Cubela met with a CIA officer in Porto Allegre, Brazil, over
 He was arrested by Castro’s counterintelligence agents in February of 1966 . He was prosecuted and convicted of plotting the overthrow of Castro . Castro's counter-intelligence agents arrested him .
 Castro was released by Castro after 13 years and allowed to leave Cuba . He was released from prison in 1961 and never allowed to return to Cuba .
 CIA has never said who AMLASH was, everyone else said that he was Cubela Cubela . Church Committee concluded that AMLash envisioned as Cubela. CIA has said that Cubela was the man behind the scenes .
 AMLASH operation was only a plot to overthrow, not assassinate, Castro, says CIA official . CIA official Richard Helms told the Church Committee that the CIA’s deputy director for plans at that time, told the committee that the operation was not an assassination attempt .
 The CIA case officer who was Cubela’s contact at the CIA also testified the operation did not have Castro's murder as one of its goals . The operation was not intended to kill Castro, the CIA said .
 AMLASH’s CIA case officer told him the CIA would provide him with explosives and rifles . FitzGerald initially balked, telling the U.S. would have “no part of an attempt on Castro's life” on November 22, 1963, the day
 The case officer doesn’t recall whether AMLASH took the pen, but recalls his being dissatisfied with the device .
 The case officer and AMLASH broke up their meeting, they were told of the president’s death .
 The CIA delivered a cache of arms to AMLASH in Cuba in March of 1964 and again in June of 1964 . The CIA balked at the request of a silencer for an FAL rifle . AMLash said Castro’s assassination was a necessary “first step
 The second case officer, the one who replaced the first one, testified that when he took over the AMLASH project he recalled being briefed by the first case officer that Cubela's belief was that the project involved Castro’s assassination . But the second officer said he was briefed
 The agency passed AML ASH off to “B-l” the leader of an anti-Castro group, and broke off all relations with him in June of 1965 . The agency proceeded to pass AMLASH off .
 AMLASH requested a weapon, not to kill Castro, but to put up a fight with anyone who attempted to seize and arrest him, Helms says . In his 2003 memoir, A Look over My Shoulder, Helm says . Helms: "AMLASH asked a
 Morris’s brother Jack was the business manager of the Young Communist League . Morris's brother Morris was the owner of the YCL .
 President Reagan awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Morris Childs and his deceased brother Jack posthumously . The two brothers were so valuable to the FBI in furnishing it with top-secret Soviet information during the cold war .
 The Soviets were equally taken with the two brothers, particularly Morris . Morris and Morris were both taken with each other .
 On his seventy-fifth birthday, Brezhnev hosted a banquet at the Kremlin in his honor . The Soviets trusted and esteemed him so much that he was honored with a banquet .
 The secrets Morris stole from the Kremlin enabled the U.S. to read the minds of the men who ran the Soviet Union . Barron says the secrets enabled the United States to anticipate their actions, and to exploit their problems .
 It was like playing poker, knowing which cards everyone else at the table held. It's like playing a poker game, it's like knowing which card everyone else holds .
 Hoover sent Jack Childs to Cuba to find out what Castro had meant in a November 27, 1963, speech in Havana . Childs was in Havana on a mission for his other employer, the Kremlin, when he met with Castro .
 Oswald made no threat to kill Kennedy, as we have seen, the informant, Jack Childs, was indeed a very reliable source . Childs merely passed on to the FBI what Castro told him in Havana about the threat, he says .
 Castro most likely was repeating information about the threat he received from his employees at the Cuban embassy . The Cuban embassy employees were merely passing on what an eventually discredited witness said he heard Oswald say .
 Wilfried Huismann directed a one-hour documentary, titled Rendezvous mit dem Tod, that was shown for the first time in Berlin on January 4, 2006 . The documentary was shown in Berlin .
 The entire thrust of Huismann's documentary is that Castro’s Cuban intelligence people used Oswald to kill Kennedy . The person who paid Oswald to do so was the black man with the reddish hair, who is identified in the program as a top Cuban G-2 agent in
 Huismann isn't troubled by the basis for the alleged offer . Oswald allegedly said, “I'm going to kill Kennedy for this” as he headed out of the Cuban consulate office after his request for an in-transit visa to Cuba was turned down . Huis
 Oswald would have no reason to say he was going to kill Kennedy “for this,” that is, for being turned down by the Cuban consulate for his in-transit visa . Huismann is also not troubled by the fact that Oswald would not have had no reason
 Cuban intelligence had to know that the lenses of CIA cameras were focused on that area . And he sees nothing preposterous about the discussion to murder the president of the United States and the payment to Oswald .
 Alvarado’s claim to have seen $6,500 in American bills being paid to Oswald is preposterous on its face . Nor does he apparently feel that he actually counted out the money .
 Huismann isn't concerned by the fact that Alvarado said he saw this alleged payoff to Oswald on September 18,1963, when we know Oswald wasn't even in Mexico City, being present and accounted for in New Orleans . In addition to the fact, Huisman isn
 Silvia Duran and Eusebio Azcue have never indicated they told Oswald this . But they have said they told him this, but he has never indicated this .
 Oswald already knew, before he left for Mexico, that travel by U.S. citizens to Cuba was prohibited . Travel by United States citizens to Cuban territory was prohibited, he says .
 Huismann found another person named Antonio, allegedly a Cuban G-2 agent responsible for the security of the Cuban embassy in Mexico City . Antonio claims he saw Oswald meet twice with the “black man with red hair” in the embassy parking garage . This is the precise reason
 It contains, among other things, a photo of the Cuban agent who met with Oswald . The Cuban agent met Oswald . Oswald was a Cuban agent .
 Nothing was going to stand in his way in his attempt to push his ridiculous story on as many unsuspecting people as he could . Nothing would stand in the way of him pushing the ridiculous story .
 Most of Huismann’s other nuts have already told their stories and have been forgotten . But for Huisman, the attempted resurrection of them, the story of them is worth the effort .
 That someone would handle a payoff to kill Kennedy right in front of the CIA cameras outside the Cuban embassy is too ludicrous for words . But again, that someone . would handle . a payoff for Kennedy's killing is too ridiculous for words.
 Huismann said he only saw “Oswald’s” face for a “split second,” seeing his back during the rest of the event . Gutierrez would have no reason to remember Oswald, since Gutierrez would not have a reason to do so .
 In Huismann’s story, naturally, a narrator tells his audience there is no question that the man Gutierrez says he saw was Oswald . Gutierrez was shot by Oswald in September 1945 .
 Elena Garro de Paz was the former wife of famed Mexican poet Octavio Paz . She was also a distinguished writer herself .
 Oswald's story about attending a “Twist” party with two American companions at the home of Silvia Duran’s brother-in-law has been discredited by people who were at the party . Her problem, discussed in an endnote to “The Second
 This posed no problem for Huismann, who simply didn’t tell his audience this . He simply didn't tell the audience this. He simply told his audience: ‘This is not a problem. This is a problem .
 Huismann’s daughter, who has the same name as her mother, was at the party, and proceeds to tell, on screen, the same wholly implausible story her mother had told . He also told the daughter she too was at a party, who told Huis
 Identity of Cuban officers who were sent to plot the murder of President Kennedy is revealed . Identity of the Cuban officers is still being sought by the U.S. State Department .
 Identity of black man with reddish hair and a scar on his cheek who turned up at the Cuban Embassy . Identity of the black man has not been released .
 Huismann presents Ramirez to his audience as a perfectly credible witness . Ramirez's testimony is not the first time he has been charged with murder .
 Huismann's narrator also tells his audience about a “secret dossier for ‘Johnson’s Eyes Only,’ never before disclosed, until now . The dossier was never disclosed .
 The man who compiled it, LBJ’s confidant Martin Underwood, gave us the report under the condition that we make it public only after his death . Underwood was LBJ's chief advance man who handled one advance assignment for JFK, to Houston, Texas, on
 The ARRB’s final report says that Seymour Hersh was writing his 1997 book, The Dark Side of Camelot, probably long before Underwood was thinking of dying . Underwood gave his handwritten notes, with this information about Escalante on them, to a researcher for
 The researcher turned the notes over to the ARRB at some time before it submitted its final report on September 30,1998 . The ARRB submitted the report to the agency .
 When the ARRB first asked Underwood about the notes, he claimed he had no memory of having written them . Underwood: Scott told him the CIA “blew it” in Dallas in 1963 .
 Cuban G-2 “wanted to eliminate” Kennedy, says Ramirez . He then claimed that yes, yes, the notes were his, but he had written them not in 1966, when he spoke to Ramirez .
 Ramirez’s statement that the Cuban G-2 wanted to kill Kennedy suggests availability for murder . The word "availability" suggests murder . Ramirez's statement comes right after Ramirez said he wanted Kennedy killed .
 Nikolai answers, “It’s a telegram to the head of Cuban secret service Ramiro Valdes.” Nikolai says . Nikolai: “I’m not surprised. I’ve been in Cuba for more than a decade.
 Cuban secret service requested to take up surveillance of this individual . Cuba's government requested the surveillance of the individual . Cuban secret services requested the request .
 There is a serious question about whether such a telegram existed . If so, why didn’t it try to recruit Oswald while he was in Russia?
 Fabian Escalante, the former head of the Cuban State Security Department, said the telegram was “completely false” When Huismann asked him about it, he said it was "completely false"
 ARRB notes state that Underwood sought Scott’s assistance in staging a big welcome for President Johnson” when LBJ came to Mexico City . Instead, the ARRB said, “The notes state . That request was for Scott to help stage a big welcoming for President
 The ARRB asked Underwood to testify under oath to his allegations, but he declined on the grounds of health problems . It was obvious to the ARRB that Underwood had no credibility, so it asked him to testify . Underwood declined .
 F de Sales Meyers, “One Step Ahead of ‘Earthquake’ and a President,” Sun Magazine , July 22,1979, 7) Huismann, naturally, gives his audience none of this background .
 Russo met Underwood through a mutual acquaintance, Robert White, a well-known JFK memorabilia collector . Russo ended up having ‘dozens of lunches” with Underwood in the Baltimore area in 1993 . Russo told me that in 1993, he had “dozens
 Russo writes that Scott told him that a known Cuban assassin had been in Mexico City when Oswald was there and that he had mysteriously slipped through Mexican customs on November 22 . Russo: Scott told Scott that Oswald had been a known assassin .
 Scott had no proof of the Cuban’s role in Dallas, but he believed it . Scott believed it, even though there was no proof .
 Marty said he never intended for that to be made public—he was an obsessively private man . However, much to my disappointment, Marty said, "He was an obsessively private man"
 He asked me not to use the material until after his death, and I reluctantly agreed . "He asked me to not use it until after he died," she says .
 Marty called me and told me that if they persisted he would have to lie to them and say I had completely misunderstood him . Marty told me he would lie to the reporters and say he had misunderstood him. Marty called him and told them he would be forced to lie .
 In 1997,1 was working for Sy Hersh and ABC on the adaptation of his book, The Dark Side of Camelot . He was also working on an adaptation of the book, which was published in 1997 .
 Russo says that when Underwood met with Hersh and Hersh for lunch, the only matter discussed was the Exner story . Russo says the story of Fabian Escalante was never discussed or mentioned in the meeting .
 In order to convince the Board that I had been mistaken about the date of the notes, he suggested that I was confused with a trip Marty took to Mexico in 1966, he said . He suggested that he was confused .
 Marty gave them a copy of his notes of that 1966 trip, which, of course, had no mention of the assassination . Marty also gave them copies of his 1966 trip .
 The Board did not mention these inconsistencies in its final report . It completely confused the 1966 trip with the 1968 trip, exactly what Underwood hoped it would do . For some reason, the report did not include these inconsistencies .
 For supposed fear of retaliation, the man’s face is bathed in shadows on the screen . I say ‘face’ because for supposed fear . of retaliation . The man's face was bathed . in shadows .
 Oscar Marino is not his real name, though Huismann isn’t kind enough to tell his audience this . And his name, Oscar Marino, is not the real name of Gus Russo .
 Marino has absolutely nothing to say. That itself would be bad enough, but he has nothing else to say . Marino has no idea what he will do next.
 Oswald never made the threat to kill Kennedy that Alvarado claims (but later retracted) he made, we thereby know at this point that everything Marino says thereafter has to be a fabrication . Since we know that Oswald never . made the . threat to . kill Kennedy, we therefore know
 Whether or not it was Castro’s decision is a question I cannot and will not answer . Castro's decision is the question I can’t and won't answer .
 Marino could tell Huismann with ‘complete certainty’ that Kennedy’s death was a G-2 agency operation . But even though Marino, in effect, he actually knows that he has nothing to fear .
 Marino would realize that if Cuban G-2 and Castro were vindictive enough and powerful enough to wipe out the president of the United States in the U.S., they would wipe out non-entities like himself in Mexico for squealing on them . Marino certainly would realize .
 If Huismann could find the supposedly ailing Marino, surely they could . The former German president's search for the country's sickest man could be found .
 Marino knows he doesn't have to worry a whit since he knows his story is fabricated nonsense that only nonsensical conspiracy theorists would have any interest in, not very serious people like Castro and his G-2 .
 If he continued to yap these insanities in public, Castro would probably commit him to a mental institution or put him away for a spell . Castro is not sure if he will be committed to such a facility .
 Even though there is no statute of limitation for murder in the United States, Marino also knows he doesn’t have to worry about FBI agents knocking on Huismann’s door to obtain his identity and whereabouts (by court order if necessary) so they could arrest him and
 Marino, I, and virtually all other sensible people know that no one in authority would take him seriously . Because Marino, he and I, . virtually all . other sensible . sensible people would not take Marino seriously, he says .
 The authorities, including Castro, only deal harshly with real people telling real stories, not humbugs like Marino . Marino's story is a real story, not a humbug like Marino's .
 Huismann would apparently want his viewers to believe that these two Americans first made their allegations in his film, both made them years ago . With respect to the two American public servants who should be ashamed for making such a fool out of themselves in Huisman’s documentary,
 FBI Director J Edgar Hoover sent Keenan down to Mexico City to satisfy Mann’s request for an investigation and shut the ludicrous Mann up . Hoover realized he had a “pseudo-investigator” on his hands .
 Keenan arrived in Mexico City on November 27 and he, the CIA station chief Win Scott, and the legal attache at the U.S. embassy, Clark Anderson, met with Mann .
 Keenan also testified that he never got a chance to question Alvarado . Keenan testified that the CIA denied his requests to question him .
 Keenan returned to Washington, D.C., on December 1, after Alvarado recanted his allegation . Mann "advised that it was no longer necessary" for Keenan to stay in Mexico City .
 Keenan testified before the Church Committee that his investigation was to be “wide open” and he could conduct “as much investigation as I thought” This, of course, isn’t surprising, since the CIA, dating from the National Security Act of 1947,
 The FBI still has a legal attache office in U.S. embassies and consulates around the world . The FBI has an international presence .
 In rare instances involving loss of American lives overseas, FBI agents are sent to that country to conduct a limited investigation . However, in rare instances, with the agreement of the host country, the FBI is sent to investigate .
 Alvarado was in Mexico City for several days, but he didn't indicate he made any effort to interview him . He was there to interview the former president of Mexico City . He said he was in the city to interview Alvarados .
 If Keenan was trying to fool the Church Committee as to his role in Mexico City, he failed . Keenan failed. He failed.
 Sullivan would later admit that he had used a “poor choice of words,” though he denied he sent Keenan to Mexico specifically to placate Mann and disprove Alvarado . Sullivan later admitted that he was wrong to say Keenan was sent to Mexico .
 Keenan admitted that he was sent to Mexico City “to cover ourselves, to pacify the ambassador,” but it is difficult to see what further role for Keenan in Mexico would have been contemplated by Sullivan and Hoover .
 It appears to be an internal memo from Sullivan to Belmont . It is confusing, I realize, because it is confusing . Sullivan appears to have sent a memo from Belmont to Sullivan .
 Keenan is locked into his own testimony, as well as other evidence and common sense . Keenan tried to break loose from reality in a 1993 statement he gave on Frontline when he said, “Looking back, I feel a certain amount of shame,” he said .
 Mann was sent to Mexico City because Mann requested an FBI investigation of the Alvarado allegation . He was sent there because Mann was requesting an FBI probe of the allegation .
 The CIA turned Alvarado over to the Mexican authorities, that “precluded me” from ever being able to interrogate him, he says . He also said that when the CIA turned the CIA over to Mexico authorities, it ‘precluded’ me from ever
 The viewer is left with the impression that Hoover sent Keenan to Mexico City to investigate all aspects of the case as they pertained to the case . Hoover apparently changed his mind and wanted to cover up the facts of the assassination .
 Keenan’s own FBI report from Mexico City on November 28, and his report on December 3, 1963, just two days after he returned to Washington, D.C., from Mexico, clearly refutes the position he is now taking .
 Keenan’s statements on Huismann's film surprised many, including lawyer Jim Lesar . Keenan: "I’m not surprised by his statements"
 Keenan represented Keenan in a FOIA lawsuit back in 1994 . Keenan is a friend of Keenan, who represented him in 1994, and Keenan has a long friendship with Keenan .
 Keenan sent Lesar a copy of the transcript of the Berlin documentary . Keenan was Keenan who sent the transcript to Lesar for the documentary .
 He’s never indicated before that he was sent to Mexico City to coordinate the Mexico City end of the assassination investigation . "I’m not sure he meant to suggest by his words what the documentary suggests he meant," he says .
 Keenan's story in Huismann’s documentary is valueless, and he was most probably used by the viewer to convince the viewer that Cuba had Kennedy murdered, something that Keenan and his statements have nothing to do .
 Huismann uses former secretary of state Alexander Haig to peddle his empty story . Haig is the second U.S. public figure Huisman cites to peddling his false story .
 I already knew that Haig was given to making ludicrous statements about the assassination . Haig made the remarks in a bizarre way of explaining the events .
 If such a statement came from a private person, one wouldn’t have to be concerned, one would have been concerned . The statement was made in a statement that was made by a private source .
 "I personally find it scary that someone so high up and powerful in our government would be capable of making such an irrational observation. I personally find this scary," says CNN.com senior citizen .
 President Kennedy accused of ordering the murder of a foreign head of state . When he accuses President Kennedy and his brother of ordering murder, that is something else . President Kennedy's brother was assassinated in 1968 .
 No one has been able to penetrate the mystery of whether JFK and RFK gave their consent to the CIA plots to kill Castro, much less having ordered them . In a long endnote to the section of this book captioned “Cover-Up by the CIA and FBI in the
 No public figure has publicly declared that either or both of the Kennedy brothers ordered an attempt on Castro’s life . Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 If Haig had bothered to read his own words on this issue in his book, he would have seen that he was in no position to make such a reckless charge . Haig's own words were published in his own book .
 As indicated, this would be an improbability since the CIA, starting with the National Security Act of 1947, is the lead federal agency gathering foreign intelligence . The secret war was not important .
 The Act doesn’t expressly forbid other federal agencies from gathering foreign intelligence . Many, such as the National Security Agency and the Department of Defense, do .
 Hoover could have sent Keenan down there for a more expansive mission, as Keenan now seems to be suggesting . An FBI historian says he doesn't believe Keenan was sent to Mexico City for a limited purpose .
 Any investigation in Mexico City could be viewed as a ‘follow-up on a domestic investigation’ of the president’s murder, Fox said . President Johnson assigned the FBI the lead role in investigating the assassination . That would give Hoover all the authority he needed to conduct a
 He speaks of his “ignorance of the existence of the assassination plots,” and that the “secret of this deadly enterprise was so closely held that not even John A McCone,’s director of central intelligence from 1962 to 1965, knew about them .
 If he had any evidence to support his charge, that would be one thing, but he has nothing at all . "He has nothing to do with this," he says. "If he had . any evidence he had, he would have nothing to support that," he adds .
 His book, Inner Circle , is full of source citations, yet when he makes this terribly serious allegation, he gives no source for the simple reason that he has none . He gives no sources .
 He should have informed his readers who told him that he would never have been privy to such orders, he says .
 Haig heard some loose talk or speculation that the Kennedys ordered Castro’s murder, and willy-nilly irresponsibly passed it on as fact in his book and documentary . Most likely he heard loose talk of the murder of Castro, and passed it as fact
 Huismann’s Rendezvous with Death is a very trite rendezvous with a foundationless base, old witnesses whose stories have already been discredited, a star witness without a name or face and nothing to say other than to make a naked declaration .
 In defense of Russo, he pointed out that he felt the Cubans in the documentary had credibility because they had to be pressured to participate in the program, so they weren’t seeking notoriety . He said he felt they had credibility as they had been pressured to take part in the
 HSCA Chief Counsel G Robert Blakey had asked the CIA to check into Antulio Ramirez’s background and give his committee its comments on his allegations .
 As far as corroboration of most of the code names Ramirez used, this too seems to be an overly generous observation . Ramirez's code names are not corroborated by anyone else .
 The only one of the six the CIA was sure of was Ramiro Valdes Menendez, the head of Cuban G-2 .
 Another CIA source caused a flap in December of 1963 alleging that a pro-Castro Cuban-American epileptic named Gilberto Policarpo Lopez had engaged in some “suspicious” travel across the Texas border into Mexico on November 23, arriving in Mexico City on November 25
 Oswald applied to Vincent T Lee, national president of the FPCC, for a charter for a New Orleans chapter . Lee wrote Oswald on May 29, 1963, suggesting Oswald get in touch with Tampa chapter, which Vincent Lee had personally organized .
 The committee also said it could find ‘no evidence’ that Oswald ever contacted the Tampa chapter of the FPCC or had ever met Lopez . The committee said it also could find no evidence that Oswald had ever contacted Lopez or contacted Lopez .
 The HSCA also confirmed that it was the Cuban government that initially made the overtures to the U.S. for a reconciliation . The Cuban government made the first offer to the United States for reconciliation .
 JFK authorized William Attwood to meet with Carlos Lechuga, Cuba’s ambassador to the United Nations, to explore the possibility of detente with Cuba . JFK did not originally respond favorably, but on September 20, 1963, he authorized William .
 Attwood replied that the United Nations was a more appropriate talking place . Attwood said that the U.N. was a better place to talk about the world's issues .
 The wheels of diplomacy continued right up to the date of the assassination . The wheels continued right until the assassination date of that date .
 Attwood left it to Attwood how much of this he would convey in the initial message to Vallejo . "We must be clear at all times that we not supplicants in this matter," Attwood said .
 Summers doesn't say what his “source” told him Attwood said to Vallejo . Summers doesn’t say what the source told him of Attwood’s response to the question .
 Wesley Liebeler did go on to testify later that although he believed, from his interviewing of Sylvia Odio, that she honestly believed “that Oswald was there,” from what he had learned about her “psychological and other problems’ that she was having at
 There is no hard evidence of Castro having been a member of any Communist group before he showed his Communist stripes after the revolution . Castro showed his communist stripes after he showed up to be a Communist in Cuba .
 Lucille Connell told the HSCA that she had not had any intention of reporting the incident to the FBI . Connell said contact with the FBI came about in a circuitous way .
 HSCA staff memorandum interview of Connell reads, “Connell says that she was speaking on the telephone with a friend of hers who was a secretary in a law office when Oswald was shot.” Connell says she was talking to a friend at the time .
 Later that day Connell says she happened to be speaking with another friend, a Miss Marcella Insua, the daughter of the man who ran the Cuban Relief Committee, about Ruby being in her law office . Connell said she mentioned to another friend that Ruby was in her
 Miss Insua happened to have a class of American children to whom she was teaching Spanish . She was teaching a Spanish class at the time .
 In class, she got into a discussion of the Kennedy assassination and mentioned someone who knew someone who had dealings with Ruby . She mentioned that she knew someone in class who had some dealings with him .
 Miss Insua's class was the son of FBI agent Hosty, who immediately went home and told his father about the Ruby connection . Hosty is an FBI agent who served in the U.S.
 Pious X parochial grade school in Dallas, Dallas, never took Spanish . None of the above incident ever happened .
 Hosty was one of several FBI agents who interviewed Odio, but he said he never interviewed Connell . Hosty said he interviewed Odie, but never interviewed him about Connell's role in the investigation .
 The HSCA confirmed that Ruby had been a client of attorney Graham Koch’s at the law firm of Connell's friend . Ruby was the client of Koch's attorney at the firm of the friend of the lawyer who later died .
 Koch described Ruby as “a character out of Ring Lardner” Koch said he represented Ruby on a problem Ruby had with the IRS over “back taxes . Koch added it was “possible” he did since it was just a matter of filling out a
 The last contact with Ruby was on March 13, 1963, her friend said . Connell’s friend, Mrs. Koch, said the last contact was with Ruby in 1963 . Mr. Koch said his firm's ‘activity cards’ showed that Ruby was last seen alive
 Sanford Pick, told the HSCA that she had seen Ruby in the law firm office once in early 1963 and once about a week before the assassination . Pick said she saw Ruby three times in the office before the shooting .
 A canceling machine impression was received at the main post office in New Orleans at 11:00m. on September 25, 1963 . But this is not the first impression, which only shows that this form was received .
 There is no evidence that Loran Hall, Lawrence Howard, and William Seymour were ever at Sylvia Odio’s door . But apparently all three of them, plus a Cuban refugee named Celio Sergio Castro Alba, were in Dallas in September or October of 1963 .
 Hall and Howard brought a trailer of supplies to Dallas en route to Miami for the anti-Castro effort . Seymour told the FBI that sometime in late September of 1963, they had gone to Los Angeles and brought supplies, including arms, to Dallas .
 The two left the supplies in Dallas, Texas, without an explanation .
 In mid-October, he and Hall drove back to Dallas from Miami to pick up the supplies . He said they drove to Dallas, Texas, from Miami, to get supplies .
 He believes that it was because of their physical appearance that they were stopped and questioned by the Dallas Police Department on October 17, 1963 .
 He was released, but Hall was charged with drug possession . Hall said he and Hall left Dallas for Florida with a trailer of supplies . He and Hall said after a day or so they left Dallas, Texas, for Florida .
 The arms in the trailer were thereafter confiscated by United States Customs officials in Key West . The arms were seized by U.S. Customs officials .
 Seymour said Howard was never with him and Hall . Seymour said he and Hall were never together during his time in Dallas .
 Seymour left Los Angeles in September 1963 in his 1956 Oldsmobile, pulling a small trailer of supplies for the It had to be after October 10, because, as indicated in the main text, Seymour was working in Florida through October 10 .
 He said he did not recall any contacts by his group with anyone in Dallas with anyone to solicit assistance . The group says it did not solicit assistance from anyone .
 Seymour visited Kiki Ferror, the brother of a former Cuban senator during the Batista regime, at Ferror's apartment . He believes Howard and Wahito waited in the car .
 He is almost certain that the apartment was located on Magellan Circle or a street with a similar name . He is also certain that it was located in a similar neighborhood .
 Ferror introduced him to a Cuban woman living in a lower apartment, but he and his group did not solicit this woman for any kind of assistance . Ferror says he did not ask for assistance .
 He confirms, without explanation, that he left the trailer in Dallas, Texas, and that the three of them then drove to Miami . He confirms that he and his friends then drove from Dallas to Miami, Florida .
 He confirmed Seymour’s story about later going to Dallas with Seymour to pick up the trailer . He said he was able to leave Dallas after his arrest because the drug charge against him had been dropped .
 While with Seymour in Dallas, he again visited Kiki, without Seymour, and said neither he nor Seymour contacted anyone for assistance in Dallas . Kiki says he and Seymour did not contact anyone for help .
 Howard confirmed to FBI his being a part of the anti-Castro movement in Florida in 1964 . Howard was a member of the FBI in 1964, which confirmed him to FBI .
 Hall met Hall in Florida as part of the anti-Castro effort in August 1963 . The following month Hall contacted him to leave Los Angeles to help transport supplies for the rebel movement . In August of 1963 he had returned to visit his family .
 Hall was accompanied by Alba, who had also come from Florida to Los Angeles .
 The three left for Dallas in Hall’s car, pulling a ‘luggage carrier’ with medical supplies for the movement . Hall: “I’m going to do whatever I need to do to get my family back to Dallas.” Hall says he
 Hall told Howard he intended to pick up additional supplies and funds in Dallas and contact a man who was going to furnish a boat for the Cuban invasion attempt . Howard said Hall told him he planned to go to Dallas and Dallas to get supplies .
 Howard said he recalls no contacts with Odio or any other Cuban woman to solicit funds for the movement . Howard said that during his stays in Dallas he recalled no contacts . Howard: "I was in Dallas during my time in the U.S. and I was not in a position
 He said the three left for Miami around September 30, leaving the medical supplies, again without explanation, behind in Dallas . The medical supplies were also left behind without explanation .
 He said he never heard Hall mention the name Sylvia Odio in his presence . He said Hall never mentioned the name of Odio .
 Connell told the HSCA that she did not recall ever telling the FBI this . Connell said she told the FBI that she never told them this . However, she said she does not remember ever telling this .
 Martino was a low-level mobster and friend of Florida Mafia chieftain Santo Trafficante . He was a friend of Trafficante, a member of the Florida Mafia . Martino is accused of being a low level mobster .
 Martino was incarcerated by Castro until 1962 . Martino returned to the states and aligned himself with the anti-Castro movement, claiming to be a CIA contract agent .
 In their book, Martino and Weyl allege that there was an anti-Castro Cuban conspiracy behind Oswald’s assassination of the president . But when interviewed by the FBI, they were uncooperative, and it became clear they had no evidence to support the allegation, merely
 Warren Commission assistant counsel W David Slawson was so unimpressed with Martino’s allegation that he recommended, in an April 24, 1964, memorandum to J Lee Rankin, that the Commission not even bother to call Martino as a witness .
 In 1975, Martino told a Texas businessman that “the anti-Castro people put Oswald together” Martino claimed he had personal knowledge of the assassination . Martino said in 1975, “The anti-castro people [Oswaldo] put Oswald [O
 Anti-Castro Cuban exiles must have somehow “owned” Ruby . But I guess he did it for anti-Cuba exiles, who must've somehow ‘owned’ Ruby .
 He contacted Newsday reporter John Cummings and told him he had personal knowledge of who was behind the assassination . He asked him not to write about it until after he died, and asked him to do so .
 He told Cummings that he had met Oswald several weeks before the assassination in Miami . Cummings said he met Oswald in Miami, Florida, weeks before his assassination .
 FBI agent asked him to come to boat docked in Key Biscayne, Florida, to meet Oswald . FBI agent Connors introduced him to Oswald, he says .
 If Martino was close to death, his dementia would be in his failure to realize the obvious . Oswald’s presence in Dallas during the subject period would reveal Martino's lie . Oswald was in Dallas at the time of the assassination .
 If he wasn't lying and actually believed what he told Cummings, this would be an even stronger indicator of dementia . And if he wasn’t lying, it would be even worse .
 Cummings told Summers he felt Martino was being sincere in what he told him . Yet, in contravention of this, he apparently never wrote a story about Martino’s mea culpa . Cummings says someone told him Connors was in FBI counterintelligence .
 Martino's name rang a bell, but he had never met Lee Harvey Oswald . In 1994, he found a man named James J O’Connor, who told him that Martino’s name had a ring . He never met Oswald, but never met him .
 It turns out that O’Connor had met Martino, and that telling phony stories about Oswald were nothing new to Martino . Martino was a longtime confidante of O'Connor, who told him phony stories .
 Martino said he met Oscar Ortiz when he was in Cuba’s Principe Prison in 1959-1960 . After being requested several times by the Miami FBI to reveal his source, on May 11, 1964, he finally did so .
 Ortiz showed up unexpectedly at Martino’s house in Miami Beach in 1962 . Ortiz had escaped and was found in October of 1962 . Martino said Ortiz escaped and showed up at his home in October 1962 .
 Martino was unable to tell FBI agents how they could find Ortiz . Independent effort on their own turned up no one with Ortiz's name . Martino said Ortiz was a serial killer .
 Einspruch is struck by his lack of clear memory of what Odio told him about this whole affair . But anyone who has read an interview or deposition on the Odio matter will be struck by this, he says .
 When Warren Commission counsel Wesley Liebeler asked Odio, “Did you tell Dr. Odio?” Odio replied, "Yes, yes,” and “Yes.” Liebelers said .
 Einspruch didn't mention this in testimony before the HSCA, but suggested the exact opposite . He suggested the opposite .
 Einspruch expressed skepticism about whether Odio’s identification of Oswald was correct . He said he believed Odio to be a ‘truthful’ person who had not made up her story .
 "I can imagine many perfectly normal people, in the same circumstances, saying the same thing. I can imagine . I can . imagine many of them saying 'I'm sorry' and 'I don't think it's OK'
 It isn’t completely clear whether Odio, when she said, “Cuban exiles,” was referring to the two Cuban exiles who had come to her door with the American, or the exile community .
 Sylvia Odio’s credibility (in not wavering from her basic story, though she has been interviewed many times) is good, it is not perfect . If we believe her priest accurately recalled what she told him, it's not perfect—that is, if we believe
 It seems that the good reverend wasn’t really cut out for a life of celibacy .
 McChann had eyes for women, adult women . He was as uninhibited as today’s homosexual pedophiles among the Catholic clergy .
 He reportedly had several sexual liaisons with female members of his flock, including Sylvia . Sylvia was one of the most famous women in the world .
 Burton Einspruch told Warren Commission counsel Burt Griffin in April 1964 interview that he “did not believe affair with Father McChann was as serious as [Warren Commission investigators] had been led to believe by Mrs. Einsprch . Einsrruch
 One of the Cuban men called himself Leopoldo and the second Cuban man she identified as Eugenio Cisneros . McChann reported back that Sylvia had told him that in addition to the man introduced to her as Leon, one of the two men she met called himself
 She said she had never seen any of the three men before, yet to her priest she said she knew the second Cuban, Eugenio Cisneros . She said the second man was a Cuban .
 She said when the men came to her door, she asked them if they had been sent to her by “Eugenio” (the designated “war” name of Rogelio Cisneros [CE 2896, 26 H 349], to which they said
 Odio admitted to the Commission that she was actively ‘involved in this movement’ to “do something” to free her “father and mother in prison” in Cuba . Odio said she had called Eugenio in Miami concerning the purchase of arms for
 Cisneros confirmed to the Secret Service that Eugenio had come to Dallas to meet with her and other members of the anti-Castro community in 1963 .
 But saying she knew Eugenio from the anti-Castro movement and telling her priest that he was one of the two Cubans at her door are two very different things .
 Trial lawyers say things can get hopelessly garbled, sometimes beyond recognition, when one party tells a third party what a second party told him . No one knows better than a trial lawyer, like myself .
 The La Fontaines give a "noble reason" for Odio making up her story is perhaps the best reason why she would not have invented her story . Odio was telling the truth, and that she was not inventing her story, she says .
 The government’s belief that Oswald was associated with the anti-Castro group JURE would not instill in it any desire to go after Castro because of the assassination, the author says .
 Odio wanted to liberate Cuba and free her parents, but there is no evidence to support this theory . If Odio were to fabricate a story, she would have put pro-Castro Cubans at her door, not JURE or any other anti- Castro ones, at
 The main citation it gives for this does not clearly support its assertion . But the main citation for this is that it was cited by the government .
 This is not synonymous with her saying that he left New Orleans by bus . This was not the same as saying he left the city by bus, she says .
 The authors don't say how her making up this elaborate lie about Oswald coming to her door as a stranger would shield her from the alleged fact that she had earlier been in Oswald's presence at anti-Castro meetings .
 Anderson left the man off at a point where he could catch a connecting bus to the depot . Anderson said the man was dropped off at the end of the ride . Anderson left him off at an area where he was able to catch his connecting bus .
 Rogers said Oswald was carrying two suitcases, and the bus driver also said the passenger he picked up had two . One serious problem with Rogers’s statement is that Oswald was not carrying two suitscases .
 Oswald had no evidence that Oswald had any Fair Play for Cuba organization in Dallas . Oswald had never been found to have been involved in any organization that was linked to Cuba .
 Note also that Walthers said the group at 3128 Harlendale was only “possibly connected” with Oswald’s group . Walther: Oswald's group was only possibly connected with Oswald's .
 The address was the residence of Jorge Salazar, an anti-Castro Cuban exile . Salazar was a Cuban exile who lived in exile in Cuba .
 An FBI informant told the FBI three days after the assassination that Rodriguez was violently anti-Kennedy . Rodriguez confirmed the meetings at the house on Harlendale . Rodriguez said he was actually an admirer of Kennedy, being convinced he was a friend of the exiles and a foe of
 Two other FBI informants who knew Rodriguez said there was no evidence he had ever been antiKennedy . Two other informants said Rodriguez had never been anti-Kennedy before .
 Ellsworth said he was “able to ascertain that it was actually lookalike” who was at the house . Ellsworth: "Lookalike" was actually at the home .
 The idea of a stranger being a dead ringer and identical twin to another is very, very far out . We know many people resemble others, some closely .
 Hosty would say Ellsworth told him this if he didn’t, it's hard to figure out . Hosty says Ellsworth said this to him, but it's not clear why he did .
 Russell determined the man’s identity, John Thomas Masen . Ellsworth implicitly acknowledged Masen was the man, implicitly acknowledging Masen is the man . Russell determined Masen's identity, and when he confronted Ellsworth with Masen, he admitted Masen to him .
 Russell interviewed Masen in 1976 at his workplace as a gunsmith in Dallas . Russell saw there was a “resemblance” to Oswald . Masen was a gunshop owner and a gunmaker .
 Masen acknowledged attending a few Minutemen meetings and to having met General Walker . Masen said he met Walker and met him at a Minuteman meeting .
 Nixon acknowledges the key role he played in instituting the plot to overthrow Castro . The Cuba Project came to be known as the Cuba Project . Nixon's book, Six Crises, is out now .
 Nixon said he verified that CIA Director Allen Dulles had briefed Kennedy on the operation . Kennedy was advocating a policy he already knew was in existence but which his opponent, Nixon, could not talk about .
 On November 18,1960, President Kennedy was advised by Dulles and Bissell of the CIA operation to overthrow Castro . President Kennedy received the CIA's approval of the operation . The operation was part of a CIA operation that overthrew Castro .
 Between November 18, 1960, and April 17, 1961, D-day for the Bay of Pigs invasion, there were seven meetings with Kennedy where invasion plans were discussed .
 The invasion of Cuba and overthrow of Castro was primarily a CIA-sponsored project . The U.S. military was also involved . The Joint Chiefs of Staff signed off on the invasion plans .
 One of the two people directly in charge of the invasion planning was Marine Corps Colonel Jack Hawkins . Hawkins was a battle-scarred veteran of the Second World War and Korean War .
 Starting in May of 1960, U.S. military instructors, CIA contract agents trained the exile invasion force at their main training camp and six other smaller camps in the mountains .
 The report of a committee commissioned by President Kennedy to ascertain why the Bay of Pigs invasion failed throws both Haynes Johnson and Peter Wyden’s versions into question . Wyden's version of the failed invasion is questioned by the committee .
 Four B-26’s were lost to enemy T-33 action . In all, a total of 13 combat sorties were flown on D-day, in the course of which four of them were lost .
 The committee was unable to get the testimony of any of the brigade leaders, since they were all in Castro’s custody . It should be noted that conflicting reports about what occurred during the Bay of Pigs invasion are almost the norm .
 The testimony the committee did get wasn’t that supportive of the conclusion it reached . Further, the testimony from the committee was that of the committee’s conclusion .
 "We called again for air support. Later on, there were some more tanks coming in, so we called again," he said . "There were some tanks coming into the area, and we called for air help."
 On April 14, 1961, the brigade force embarked from Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, for the Bay of Pigs . “Frank,” the American leader of the camp, gave the brigade leaders a slightly more ambiguous promise .
 Frank Frank was a colonel in the American army, per CIA Director Allen Dulles . Frank was an American army colonel, according to Dulles' CIA director .
 It is not known whether the denial contained the assertion that “Bender” wasn’t even at Camp Trax at the time the statements were made .
 The exiled leaders know that the U.S. government was behind the invasion, the exiled leader says . The information cannot be ignored, but it cannot trump the overriding sense of the exile leaders' knowledge of the invasion itself .
 Leaders of Cuban Revolutionary Council were being held in a deserted house at abandoned airfield of Opa-Locka outside Miami . They were being flown to Cuba to establish their provisional government once the invasion succeeded .
 Cardona requested a conference with Kennedy at the White House when it became clear that the brigade's small beachhead could no longer hold out against Castro’s forces . President Kennedy recommended to President Kennedy that he see the Cubans .
 Most of Brigade 2506 was being trained at Camp Trax in the Guatemalan mountains . Felix Rodriguez, who later went on to become a CIA agent, had a slightly different perspective .
 A December 8,1960, CIA Special National Intelligence Estimate foresaw no development “likely to bring about a critical shift of popular opinion away from Castro,” yet this estimate, along with a similar assessment made on March 10, 1961, was never furnished to the president .
 Even after the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy never completely came to believe in the unlikelihood of an internal insurrection by the people against Castro . What is remarkable is that Kennedy himself never completely believed in an internal uprising by Castro .
 Although it is well written, it makes incredible assumptions, the authors are untroubled by the lack of support for these assumptions in the record .
 Waldron’s book furnishes readers with something important that has never appeared elsewhere . Waldron's book is published in New York City, New York .
 Waldron starts out on page 2 of his book with either an intentional misrepresentation or a rather serious oversight . Waldron indicates elsewhere in his book that he had read Russo’s book, but he didn’t read it .
 Waldron leaves the word “contingency” out of the express title of the plan . He presents it as if the invasion was definitely going to take place, in December of 1963 he says .
 Waldron, as he does so many times in the book, cites no basis or authority for this assertion . Waldron: "I'm not sure what I'm doing here, but I'm sure I'm not going to believe it"
 Waldron then, like virtually all conspiracy theorists, proceeds to start talking in absurdities . Waldron: "I don't know what conspiracy theories are going on" Waldron says, "I'm not a conspiracy theorist, I'm a conspiracy expert"
 Waldron had interviews with Enrique Ruiz-Williams, a Bay of Pigs veteran and leader who worked closely with RFK in anti-Castro effort . Waldron: "The one new element that Waldron brings to the issue is the fact that he had several interviews with Ruiz
 Ruiz-Williams told Waldron that he had enlisted someone close to Castro to kill Castro, supposedly on December 1, 1963, at which time the U.S. invasion would begin . He said that he, presumably working under RFK’s instructions, had enlisted .
 Almost throughout his book, Waldron talks about the coup leader, and in one way or another, he talks about him . Waldron: The coup leader is not just by role, but because of his identity, assumes considerable importance .
 Ruiz-Williams identified the coup leader to Waldron but no one else, and this is Waldron’s main claim to fame . One begins to wonder if this is so . One of Waldron's main claims to fame is that he identified the leader of the coup to
 It would seem that the coup leader’s role would be more important than his identity, and if we make that assumption, then Waldron may lose his claim to fame .
 It seems hard to believe that Cubela met with a CIA officer in Paris on the morning of the assassination to discuss what device the CIA would furnish him to kill Castro . The CIA had someone else close to Castro who was scheduled to kill him nine days later .
 Waldron says he cannot identify the coup leader for security reasons . Waldron: "I'm not sure who's the leader of the coup" Waldron said he can't identify the leader .
 Waldron insists that this C-Day, December 1, 1963, coup leader was not Cubela . In any event, Waldron says this was not the coup leader .
 AMLASH, whom the HSCA and Church Committee wrote a great deal about and investigated thoroughly, was, per Waldron, really no one of importance . Waldron: "AMLASH" is not one of the most important organizations in the world .
 A former anti-Castro leader told Waldron, who had no visible bona fides, in a private conversation many years later . Waldron was a member of the HSCA and the Church Committee (and perhaps many in the CIA itself) Waldron is believed to have been
 Bolton told the Church Committee attorney a little lie, per Waldron . Bolton said he lied to the church committee attorney, according to Waldron. Bolton has been accused of lying to the committee's attorney .
 The document that announced the start of AMWORLD seems to contradict Waldron’s claim that Ruiz-Williams was at the heart of his C-Day . Waldron has a big problem with the document he announced is that its very language seems to undermine his claim .
 Waldron gets around this by saying that Ruiz Ruiz was under Artime . Williams, who fought alongside Artime at the Bay of Pigs, told him that “Artime was under me”
 Waldron offers no evidence other than RuizWilliams’s alleged word to him on this claim . Waldron offered no evidence of Ruiz Williams' involvement in the incident . Ruiz is accused of telling Waldron that he spoke to him about it .
 All of this is much to-do about nothing, which would be a much more apt title for Waldron’s book . Waldron's book is about nothing. If the reader hasn’t figured it out by now, it's all about nothing .
 It is common knowledge that the CIA had multiple plans to overthrow or assassinate Castro . The CIA planned to assassinate Castro in the 1960s .
 Waldron says all the other well-known attempts on Castro’s life or to overthrow him were subsumed by his C-Day . Waldron: All the other attempts to overthrow Castro were subsounded by his death day .
 Waldron knows he has to show the so what, and that’s what he tries to do in the other half of his book . Waldron: "I’m trying to do what I really want to do, and I’ve got a lot of respect
 Waldron makes one ludicrous assumption after another, never bothering to present a lick of evidence to support any of the assumptions . Waldron's other half was supposed to provide substance and justify all the words he writes about C-Day and the coup leader .
 The Mafia is accused of paying exile leader Tony Varona $200,000 for his assassination . He says the Mafia bought their way into the coup plan by paying Varona’s exile leader $200k .
 In one place in his book, Waldron finds himself in a situation that speaks loudly against the theme of his book . Waldron presents a CIA memo (one can’t be sure it’s legitimate since it looks like no U.S. intelligence memo I’
 He has no evidence the mob even knew there was any “plan” to buy into. Nor is he troubled by the fact that there was no evidence there was a ‘plan’ to buy in .
 The memo says it was a "bribe" to Varona to buy into C-Day, though there is nothing in the memo to indicate this . He simply boldly declares that “Johnny Roselli’s Chicago mafia family” paid the money, but there is no
 Waldron says Yarona told the mob about C-Day even though he himself was not a part of the project at that time . Waldron: Yarona was not involved in the project when he was in charge .
 JFK just found out about it shortly before he was killed . JFK found out of the situation shortly before his death .
 For the life of me, I was unable to find this out from Waldron’s book, though he tries, here and there, to explain it . Waldron's book is published by the same publisher as his book .
 The U.S. government, RFK, and the CIA were more interested in protecting the secrecy of the attempt on Castro’s life on December 1 than they were in bringing JFK's killers to justice, Waldron says .
 Authorities were so desperate to keep a lid on C-Day that they even exerted tremendous pressure on the Chicago and Tampa press not to report the planned assassinations on Kennedy in those two cities . The press, Waldron says, knew of threats on Kennedy’s life in these cities
 The United States government succeeded, Waldron tells his readers, the press remaining quiet . Waldron: The press remains quiet, the U.S. government succeeded . The U.N. government succeeds, he says .
 Waldron even informs us how the three mobsters planned the assassination . Waldron also tells us how he planned the murder of Robert Waldron .
 Certain agents of the operation would be kept compartmentalized from other aspects . A leak in one part wouldn’t jeopardize the other parts, so a leak would not be jeopardized .
 Waldron's book was supposed to be nonfiction, not fiction, so he would have to have a source for all of this other than his own silly mind . Waldron: "No editor of Waldron’s book was about to tell Waldron that his book is supposed
 Waldron claims in his book that Marcello, Trafficante, and Roselli conspired to murder Kennedy not only in Dallas, but also, as indicated, in Chicago and Tampa . Waldron also claims that Trafficante and Trafficante conspired in the assassination of Kennedy .
 This, per Waldron, aborted the scheduled attempt on Kennedy’s life in Chicago . Waldron: This aborted the planned assassination attempt in Chicago, Illinois .
 Bolden recalled that two of the four men had Hispanic names: Gonzales and Rodriguez . Waldron infers that Bolden remembers their names because these were probably the two who were detained .
 To make things worse, even the existence of the alleged four men is seriously in doubt . To make matters worse, there is even a doubt that the men are even alive .
 As indicated in a previous endnote, the HSCA could find no evidence to support Bolden’s story . Bolden's story was not supported by the evidence .
 He claims Marcello, Trafficante, and Roselli were determined to kill Kennedy in Tampa, Florida . Again, he claims, without offering any evidence, that he has no evidence to support his position .
 Three people had threatened to kill Kennedy when he came to Tampa, including a young man of twenty, who said he would use a gun, if he couldn't get any closer . Unbelievably, he offers, as support (which it is not, actually going in the opposite
 Waldron felt that this was enough to prove that the mob intended to kill Kennedy in Tampa . Waldron presented no evidence connecting the mob with any of the three men .
 The author is apparently too out of it to know that organized crime had hired one or more of the three men to kill Kennedy . Organized crime would not be drawing attention to themselves by openly threatening to kill JFK, he says .
 JFK learned of the threats on his life in Tampa and was very frightened, Waldron says . Waldron quotes an anonymous Florida law enforcement source who told him that JFK learned the threats .
 Waldron: Roselli, Marcello, and Trafficante still had plans to get JFK in Dallas . Waldron says they did, and he said they did . He says they planned to fly to Dallas .
 He doesn't know who killed JFK for the mob in Dallas, but said possibilities were Johnny Roselli and Charles Nicoletti . He doesn’t know who actually killed JFK .
 Oswald was innocent and just a patsy, Waldron said . Waldron ignored the mountain of evidence against Oswald . Oswald was just patsies, he said. Waldron totally ignored the evidence .
 Waldron presents no evidence that Yallee and Lopez were being set up by the mob or that the mob even knew of their existence . Waldron’s book, "The Mob," was published in October 2013 .
 Waldron’s fantasy that not only was Jack Ruby a part of the plot to kill Kennedy, but so was Jimmy Hoffa . It is Waldron's additional fantasy that Jack Ruby was a . part of a plot to . kill Kennedy .
 Ruby, who figuratively had trouble tying his own shoelaces, is depicted by Waldron as an important figure . Waldron refers to his “helping Trafficante, Hoffa and Roselli” and also being part of the CIA-Mafia plots to kill Castro
 Waldron's book is one of the longest ever written on the assassination . Waldron’s book gives the outward appearance of being a scholarly work . With an index and many citations, it gives an index .
 "The absolutely utter and total bankruptcy of the conspiracy movement in this country," he says . "To expose, as I believe I have, the ridiculous nature of a book like this demonstrates, more than with the average conspiracy book," he adds .
 Guevara told Goodwin that the revolution to Communism in Cuba was irreversible . Cuba was now out of the United States sphere of influence, and that too was irreversible, Goodwin said .
 Guevara said Cuba “didn’t want an understanding with the U.S., because they know that was impossible.” Goodwin wrote . Goodwin: Cuba didn't want an agreement with the United States, because it was impossible .
 CIA’s inspector general, Lyman Kirkpatrick, was assigned to do a “complete review” of the Bay of Pigs invasion . CIA Director Allen Dulles, in the old spy tradition of “walking back the cat,” assigned the inspector general to do
 No names were mentioned in Kirkpatrick’s report . Senior CIA officials who had been involved in the debacle were outraged, and tremulous .
 Dulles’s successor, John McCone, who received the report, ordered Kirkpatrick to give him the names of the twenty people to whom the report was sent .
 Most of the copies were retrieved and destroyed, and only a few were locked away in McCone’s office . Only a few copies of the book were kept in the office .
 In one curious conclusion, he says that “the intelligence on the Castro regime and on the internal opposition” was essentially accurate . But then fails to say why, if this was so, and in light of what happened, he never recommended that the invasion be aborted .
 Esterline told Bissell, “We can’t tell you in good faith that we can give you any reasonable expecta.” The report could have added that such an uprising made no sense, since Castro, despite his shift toward Communism, was still very popular
 The uprising predictions came mostly from overly optimistic Cuban exiles . They convinced the CIA that thousands of Cubans would turn on Castro once the brigade landed .
 Bissell ignored their advice and talked them out of their resignations . Bissell has been in charge of the White House since 2001 . Bissel is a former Cabinet member .
 Another investigation of the Bay of Pigs disaster was ordered by President Kennedy on April 22, 1961, just three days after the disaster ended .
 Kennedy appointed General Maxwell Taylor to chair a committee consisting of Taylor, the president’s brother RFK, Allen Dulles, and Admiral Arleigh Burke . Kennedy appointed Taylor to head the committee .
 The committee’s mandate was to conduct a reevaluation of “our practices ... in the areas of military and paramilitary, guerrilla, and anti-guerilla activity which fall short of outright war” with special emphasis on what went wrong at the Bay of Pigs .
 Committee should have been able to reach some commonsense conclusions as to why the invasion had failed . Nevertheless, the committee should have reached a common sense conclusion, he says .
 I’m unaware of any author of the various books on the Bay of Pigs, or any of the leaders of the brigade force, suggesting that the main reason they were defeated was because they didn’t have enough ammunition .
 Only the committee concluded that ammunition was in short supply was the main reason for the defeat .
 Castro’s forces greatly outnumbered the small brigade force . And then there was the little matter that Castro's forces greatly outweighed the small Brigade force .
 Ernest and Mary Hemingway were “appalled’ by the choice of the landing site,’s intelligence about the area was so bad that they were ‘appalled by’ the decision to use it . Even Ernest Hemingways and his wife, Mary
 The short life of the beachhead was not sufficient to trigger an immediate popular reaction, the report says . The report actually says that a longer beachhead may have triggered an uprising .
 There is no evidence that the people of Cuba, or any substantial percentage thereof, wanted to overthrow Castro in 1961 . But there is also evidence that there was a substantial majority of Cuba's people wanted to oust Castro .
 At least a hundred of the rebels were brought back to Miami weeks before the invasion . They were given fifty dollars a week to stay with friends or at motels until further notice .
 The CIA claimed rebel leaders had actually “sounded urgent warnings against an invasion attempt” until there had been a “softening-up campaign of sabotage” on the island, but they were overruled by their CIA leaders, who proceeded with far too much haste in
 The People’s Revolutionary Movement operated the most effective underground network inside Cuba, they said . They said that the People's Revolutionary Movement received no financial support and very little equipment . In that regard, they . said .
 The rebels were insistent on a strategy of small multiple landings instead of the single thrust the CIA decided on . Also, the rebels wanted to land on multiple landing sites instead of a single thrust .
 No matter how great the advisor’s previous reputation in the Pentagon, the State Department or in the White House itself, his opinions should no longer be accepted at face value .
 McNamara got up to leave during a discussion of how to get rid of Castro and said, ‘The only way to take care of Castro to kill him.” He is quoted as saying it was “etched on his memory” that “ McNamara�
 Exiles wanted an outright invasion of Cuba by U.S. forces, not anti-Castro Cuban exiles . They wanted to invade Cuba, not the overthrow of the Castro regime .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman is a favorite of the Far Right . General Lyman Lemnitzer is also a Far Right favorite . He is the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, a favorite Far Right figure .
 What resulted was one of the most nefarious proposed courses of action ever considered by the U.S. government . What resulted instead of a solution was a solution to a global warming crisis .
 Ike spoke of “perhaps manufacturing something” that would justify our invasion of Cuba . Eisenhower made the remark at a meeting in the Oval Office on January 3, 1961 .
 It wasn't an order or even a request by Eisenhower, the minutes of the meeting don’t indicate it was even discussed or considered . The minutes show the meeting was held in 1953 .
 Terror campaign could be pointed at Cuban refugees seeking haven in the U.S. The terror campaign could also be pointed toward Cuban refugees .
 We could sink a boatload of Cubans en route to Florida, real or simulated . We're not sure if it's true, but it's a good idea to try and get them to Florida .
 It is not crystal clear whether the Joint Chiefs were willing to sacrifice the lives of American sailors . There is no further discussion after this. The Joint Chiefs are not ready to sacrifice their lives .
 There is some circumstantial evidence that they may indeed have contemplated this . However, although this is unlikely, there is also circumstantially evidence that this is not true .
 In other words, when they wanted to indicate that a ship to be destroyed would have no humans on it, they did so . In other . words, this is when they indicated that the ship would not have no . humans aboard .
 Operations Northwoods, per se, was dead, Lemnitzer did not give up on an invasion of Cuba . Even the notion of a pretext for a war with Cuba would see another day . The idea of a Cuban invasion of the U.S. was still alive .
 Lemnitzer’s term as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff expired, Kennedy did not reappoint him . Shortly thereafter, when the rabidly right-wing Lemnitz was deposed, he was not reappointed .
 A Top Secret report to the Joint Chiefs of Staff on May 1, 1963, was again toying with using a pretext to go to war with Cuba . As late as 1963, as late as . 1963, with General Taylor now being chairman of the Joint . Chiefs of . Staff was
 One is to restrict U.S. action to attempts to isolate Cuba politically and economically from the rest of the American nations . Another is to wait for the opportunity to capitalize on a spontaneous revolt or to respond to a direct provocation .
 Nikita Khrushchev wrote to Fidel Castro in 1963 that if the U.S. had unleashed the invasion, no protest of ours would have stopped it . In a letter to Castro Castro, he said, “If North American imperialism had unleashed . invasion .” Khrush
 For the most part, the crisis was over, but important remaining issues kept tensions elevated . The crisis is over now, but there are still issues to keep tensions high .
 No formal agreement resolving the Cuban missile crisis was ever signed . Kennedy’s no-invasion pledge was only conditional, and no formal agreement was signed .
 Khrushchev was to remove the “offensive” Soviet weapons “under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision; and undertake, with suitable safeguards, to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems into Cuba, Kennedy said . Kennedy said in his October 27, 1962, letter to
 Kennedy said his no-invasion pledge was predicated on the U.N. guarantee . Kennedy said it was dependent on the United Nations to ensure the carrying out of the Soviet “commitments” to remove its weapons .
 He refused to allow the Soviets to remove forty-two IL-28 jet bombers from Cuba until his conditions were met . Later, he also refused to let the Soviets remove .
 The United States was willing to end the crisis without being guaranteed the on-site inspection it once demanded . Castro got none of his demands, but the U.S. ended the crisis .
 Kennedy’s no-invasion pledge was no longer in effect . However, because it did not get this . precondition, it did get this no .invasion . pledge preconditions, Kennedy's no-in-effected pledge is no longer .
 As late as May of 1963, the Soviet military still had a presence in Cuba . The Soviet military was still in Cuba as late as 1963 .
 The United States Senate Preparedness Subcommittee reported that 17,500 Russians, including 5,000 combat troops, were still in Cuba . The subcommittee reported that at least 17,000 Russian troops are still in the country .
 All strategic Soviet missiles and bombers with sufficient range to reach this country had been withdrawn, report says . U.S. intelligence agencies said they believed that all strategic Soviet missile and bomber missiles were withdrawn .
 Kennedy's pledge not to invade Cuba was heard in a tape recording of a meeting of anti-Castro Cubans . Kennedy set forth one method of verification : “The evidence to date indicates that all known offensive missile sites in Cuba have been dismantled.”
 The missiles and their associated equipment have been loaded on Soviet ships . The missiles were loaded in Soviet ships and are now being transported to Russia .
 One Nestor Castellanos, vehemently criticizing Kennedy for the U.S. government’s policy of “non-interference,” said, “We’re waiting for Kennedy the 22nd, buddy.” Another Nestellanos vehemently criticized Kennedy
 The HSCA said it “uncovered no evidence that linked Castellanos to the assassination,” adding that ‘we’re waiting for Kennedy’ was only a proposal to demonstrate against President Kennedy during his trip to Dallas .
 Only one allegation has ever surfaced that someone, among the exiles, spoke of a plot to eliminate Kennedy . That one was highly ambiguous and based on multiple hearsay . Despite all the bad blood and vociferous tirades against Kennedy by many in the exile community, only one allegation
 On November 26, 1963, an unnamed Secret Service informant advised the Chicago office of the Secret Service that he had heard that on the day before the assassination, one Thomas Mosley, while negotiating the sale of machine guns in Chicago to Homer Echevarria for use by the latter�
 The Secret Service conducted several surveillances of Mosley and Echevarria, but discontinued its investigation when President Johnson created the Warren Commission and gave the FBI primary investigation of the assassination .
 No evidence has ever emerged connecting Echevarria with Oswald or with the assassination in any way . More importantly, no evidence has been found to link him to Oswald or to the assassination .
 The Soviets complained to the United States that any U.S. support or “encouragement of such actions” violated the spirit of the missile crisis settlement . The Soviets, naturally, immediately complained .
 Kennedy authorized a statement that the U.S. would “take every step necessary” to stop raids against Cuba launched from the United States. Kennedy authorized the statement . The United States would take “every step” necessary, Kennedy said .
 U.S. Coast Guard planes flew daily patrols over the Florida Keys and the many islets of the Bahamas looking for armed anti-Castro exiles moving toward Cuba .
 Cuban exiles had to elude the restraining clutches of U.S. federal agencies . Once their main concern was Castro’s spies, they had to escape the United States . Now, they are in Miami, where they must elude federal agencies.
 Mongoose had lost much of its force and virility . Mongoose has lost some of its virility. Mongoose is no longer an easy way to get around the world .
 Mongoose was still alive, however, with the emphasis being stepped-up covert operations . The emphasis was to encourage dissident groups inside Cuba to rise up against Castro . Mongoose is still active, however .
 It was hoped that by the U.S. embargo against Cuba, economic conditions inside the country would worsen and foment discontent with Castro’s regime by the masses . It was also hoped by the United States embargo that economic conditions in Cuba would worsen .
 Luces purchased ship-to-shore radios for DRE boat crews and paid its leaders money for exclusive stories . Money was used to finance small raids, including air strikes, to damage Cuban installations and industrial complexes .
 Luce: Private help ended after the Cuban missile crisis . Luce says private help was stopped after the missile crisis in Cuba .
 Oswald apparently came into a little money and went to Mexico City, then went to Dallas, Fernandez said . Fernandez told her that Oswald apparently went into Mexico City and then Dallas .
 Oswald had gone to Mexico City on the night of the assassination . The authorities and the media did not know that Oswald was in Mexico City that night . Oswald was killed by the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 In 1975, Senator Richard Schweiker of the Church Committee sent a staff investigator in search of Fernandez but no such individual was ever found . Fernandez was never found .
 In 1978, the HSCA investigated the matter again and again looked for Fernandez . Fernandez was found in 1978 .
 He was never found, of course, because we didn’t know that Luce had concocted the name,” the implication being that Mrs. Luce concocted it . ‘We didn't know that he was concocted,’ the implication was that Mrs
 There's nothing in the record to indicate precisely how he reached this conclusion . Luce had told him this, or he had found this out in some other way, but there's nothing .
 It would be unusual for someone of Luce’s stature and reputation to simply make up a name and a story like this .
 The HSCA located in Miami three anti-Castro Cubans who were among the leaders of the DRE in 1963, including one of the founders, Juan Manuel Salvat Roque .
 The only member of their group in New Orleans who had any contact with Oswald was Carlos Bringuier, their delegate there who had the street confrontation with Oswald in August of 1963 . None of the group members knew of any member named Julio Fernandez .
 HSCA investigators contacted Bringuier, who told them he knew of no Julio Fernandez in his group . Investigators say Fernandez was not in the group .
 No member of his New Orleans chapter had ever had any contact with Luce Luce, he said . Luce's help to the DRE, he added, was her help to DRE .
 The HSCA closed the investigation by saying that it was unable to substantiate Mrs. Smith's claims . The investigation was closed by saying the investigation was inconclusive .
 Glazer’s raw notes of interview with Mrs. Luce by HSCA staff members on December 13, 1978 . Luce was interviewed by Glazer on December 14, 1978; Glazer's notes were raw .
 By October of 1963, Artime had established a three-hundred-man force at four guerilla training camps and bases, two in Costa Rica and two in Nicaragua, where the Nicaraguan president was a benefactor .
 Artime would later say that both President Kennedy and his brother RFK were responsible for his establishing the bases . Artime later said that both RFK and President Kennedy helped establish the bases.
 During the year of Artime’s operation, his group conducted four major operations against Castro . Two of which were infiltration missions, one was a shelling of a cargo ship, and a fourth was an unsuccessful attempt on Castro's life .
 Artime said his anti-Castro operations finally ended “when Bobby Kennedy separated from the Johnson administration,” which would be September of 1964 . Artime: "Bobby Kennedy separated" from Johnson administration .
 Dodd said the CIA was withholding information from the Warren Commission . Dodd: “You were not necessarily volunteering information ,” Dodd said . Dodd also said that the CIA had not necessarily volunteered information .
 In 1975, Richard Bissell, one of the key architects of the plan, told the Church Committee that he assumed President Kennedy knew because he believed CIA Director Allen Dulles would have told Kennedy in a “circumlocutious” conversation using “rather general terms�
 Bissell acknowledged that Dulles never told him he had told Kennedy . The evidence is not clear whether Dulles himself knew, and as we’ve seen, it’s not clear if he did .
 One of the curiosities about the plots to kill Castro is that they are almost always solely associated with the Kennedy administration . And when pressed by Sen. Ted Kennedy, Sen. Joe Biden, Sen.-Joe Biden, said the plots were almost always associated with Kennedy .
 William Harvey suggested that the idea may have originated with the Eisenhower White House . The Church Committee interviewed William Harvey on September 14, 1975 .
 At the time, Vice President Richard Nixon was the White House contact for CIA-Cuban operations . Vice President Nixon was vice president of the CIA .
 There is stronger evidence, however, that paternity for the plot started at the CIA, not in the Eisenhower White House . There is also strong evidence that the CIA was involved .
 Richard Bissell, the CIA’s deputy director for plans for plans who choreographed the Bay of Pigs invasion, initiated a CIA-Mafia plot to murder Castro in August of 1960 .
 On March 17, 1960, President Eisenhower authorized a covert CIA plan to organize, train, and equip anti-Castro Cuban exiles as a guerrilla force to overthrow Castro . It has been established that the plot to kill Castro originated in the Eisenhower White House .
 Houston testified before the Church Committee that the operation was described to the attorney general as an assassination attempt . Houston testified that Houston testified to the committee .
 Mobsters hated Castro as much or more than the CIA did . Mobsters think nothing of committing murder, but they hated Castro even more .
 Havana was a center of mob gambling operations rivaling Las Vegas that reportedly netted the mob in excess of $100 million a year . Castro had booted the mob out of Havana when he took over .
 Getting rid of Castro and returning to Havana were coterminous . So for the mob, getting rid of the Castro was important . The mob returned to its beloved Havana .
 RFK himself confirmed this type of reality, and the association between the CIA and organized crime, years earlier . RFK: "RFK confirmed this kind of reality"
 RFK first learned of the CIA's ties with the mob while working as chief counsel for the Senate Rackets Committee in the late 1950s . Adam Walinsky, an assistant to RFK when the latter was a U.S. senator, said RFK had told him he first
 Walinsky said RFK told him he went back and checked and “sure enough it was true” RFK. Walinsky: RFK said he went to RFK’s office to check out the story .
 Former CIA officer Samuel Halpern claims that all of the above is apparently wrong . He claims that the CIA had made a deal with this guy . The story is one of the most ridiculous stories ever told regarding this issue .
 RFK decided the Mafia could be useful in Mongoose operations . RFK ordered the CIA to assign a CIA case officer to meet with Mafia figures .
 The only use the CIA would have for the mob would be to kill Castro . In the first place, the only use would be killing Castro, the CIA .
 By 1962, the CIA was already in league with the mob to kill Castro, dating back to August of 1960, way before RFK was even attorney general . RFK is flat-out wrong to say that it was RFK who was behind the CIA’s efforts to kill
 RFK did not want the CIA to be involved with organized crime, so Halpern’s allegation stands out like a sore thumb . The great weight of the evidence is that RFK .
 If RFK did order the CIA to enlist the help of the Mafia, to believe that he and his secretary would call some lowly case officer on the phone and tell the case officer the name and address of Mafia people and where they could meet with them .
 The bottom line on Halpern’s story is that the CIA was against working with the mob to get rid of Castro, but RFK ordered it to do so against its will . RFK was the president of the United States in the 1960s .
 Why Max Holland would publish such unbelievable drivel from Halpern is unknown . Why he would publish this drivel is unknown.
 If Halpern could tell and actually believe a fairy tale like this, he has problems . He has problems.
 President Obama said he didn't want the CIA to deal with organized crime behind his back . That could be construed to mean that he didn’t want it to happen without his knowledge .
 RFK was referring to the fact that when he learned about the CIA’s plot to kill Castro, he told the CIA he was opposed to it, period, and never to engage in any operation like that in the future without his approval . Mankiewicz believes that RFK
 A memorandum confirming the oral briefing of RFK by Edwards and Houston was sent to RFK on May 14, 1962 . RFK was the subject of an oral briefing .
 The three-page memorandum to Kennedy was written by Edwards . It was presumably reduced to writing what Edwards and Houston had told Kennedy during their meeting .
 The memo states that “in August 1960 the undersigned was approached by Mr Richard Bissell... to explore the possibility of mounting this sensitive operation against Fidel Castro” with the help of organized crime . The memo says that in August 1960 “Mr Bissell’s was
 Maheu contacted Los Angeles mobster Johnny Roselli, who in turn enlisted Chicago mobster Sam Giancana . The operation took place at the Fontainebleau Hotel in Miami Beach, Miami .
 The source of the story was Washington insider Edward P Morgan, a former FBI agent and well-connected Washington attorney . Morgan is a well-known Washington attorney and former FBI officer .
 Pearson told LBJ personally on January 16, almost two months before the article came out . Pearson said LBJ told Pearson personally, nearly two months after the article was published . Pearson in turn said that LBJ had told Pearson that the story was untrue .
 Giancana arranged for Roselli and Maheu to meet a ‘courier’ (Florida mobster Santo Trafficante) with Cuban contacts, who eventually contacted a “principal” in Cuba to carry out the operation against Castro .
 After the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion in April of 1961, the project was terminated . The project was never completed .
 This person’s name was not published by the Church Committee or HSCA but he has been identified as James P O’Connell, who occupied the position at the time .
 It was decided at the meeting that the best way to kill Castro was by putting a poison pill in his food . Castro was killed by the poison pill, according to the meeting .
 The plan to kill Castro by poison originally involved using a cigar . Later in September in Miami, later in September, the plan was revealed in court .
 CIA asked Technical Services staff at the CIA to come up with a poison to eliminate Castro . The poison was found in the CIA's "Strangelove" in the book .
 There is no record that there was any attempt to pass the cigars on to Castro Castro . The medium of cigars soon gave way to other means .
 Later CIA plots to kill Castro included having a U.S. emissary, negotiating the return of captured exiles at the Bay of Pigs, giving Castro a gift of a poisoned diving suit, and placing an exploding seashell on the ocean floor where Castro went skin diving .
 Trafficante was Trafficante’s job to carry out the job and to see that the poison pills were transmitted to the Cubans . Per the former support chief and a 1967 report by the . inspector general of the CIA on the . Castro plot, Trafficante's job was to
 Former President of Cuban Senate Manuel Antonio deVarona recruited former president of the Cuban Senate . DeVarona was now one of the leaders of the FRD (Frente Revolucionario Democratico) or Democratic Revolutionary Front .
 Trafficante reportedly passed on poison pills to his Cuban contacts . The CIA actually furnished Trafficante with the poison pills . He reportedly passed them on to his contacts in Cuba .
 There is no evidence that the mob, or those acting at its behest, made any actual, overt attempt on Castro’s life as a result of its collusion with the CIA to kill Castro . The mob was not involved in any overt attempt to assassinate Castro .
 The mob struck out, either willingly (many suspect it never was really serious about such a plot) or because of what it perceived to be a mission impossible . It struck out either willingly or because it perceived it was impossible .
 As to the former possibility, Roselli told his mob friend Jimmy “The Weasel” Fratiano, “This whole thing has been a scam.” Roselli said. “Weasel’s Weasel,” he said .
 All these wild schemes the CIA dreamed up never got further than Santo Santo, Santo . Santo was the CIA's most ambitious attempt to get Santo to the top of the world .
 Richard Roselli testified before the Church Committee about his involvement in receiving poison pills and guns from the CIA in April of 1962 . He arranged for them to get into the hands of a team of assassins sent to Cuba who Roselli said had agreed to kill Castro .
 The CIA agrees Roselli never took a dime for his efforts . Roselli may simply have been reviving the scam on the CIA that his predecessor, Trafficante, had perpetrated .
 CIA Inspector General’s Report: “We do not know their identities nor what may have happened to them.” The report says it does not know the identities of Pearson's alleged victims . Pearson is accused of spying on the CIA .
 Roselli was convicted on May 23,1968, for violating the Alien Registration Act and served six months . Roselli served six years in prison .
 The sentence was served concurrently with a sentence from a conviction on December 2, 1968, for violating U.S. interstate gambling laws . In 1968, he was convicted of participating in a scheme to cheat at cards at the Friars Club in Beverly Hills .
 Deportation hearings were later initiated against him, and were pending at the time of his death in July of 1976 . Deportations hearings were also pending against him .
 J Edgar Hoover’s memorandum to his staff on May 10, 1962, about a meeting he had with RFK in his office the previous day, leaves no doubt that from the May 7 RFK-Edwards-Houston meeting alone, there was no ambiguity .
 Hoover wrote that “the Attorney General told me he wanted to advise me of a situation in the Giancana case which had considerably disturbed him.” Hoover wrote . Hoover: “The Attorney General said he was disturbed by the situation . Hoover wrote in his letter that the
 CIA hired private detective to approach Giancana with a proposition of paying $150,000 to hire some gunmen to go into Cuba to kill Castro . CIA had hired Robert A Maheu, a private detective in Washington, D.C., to offer $150K to hire gunmen
 I expressed astonishment at this in view of the bad reputation of Maheu and perhaps perhaps he felt he could demand such assistance . Or perhaps he thought he could . Perhaps he felt it could . perhaps he wanted such assistance. Or perhaps it was not necessary .
 A 1967 internal FBI document reads, “Roselli is using his prior connections with CIA to his best advantage”
 In May, 1966, when Bureau Agents endeavored to interview him, he immediately flew to Washington and informed his former CIA intermediary . The Bureau of Investigation interviewed him in May 1966, but he was never interviewed .
 Roselli would have had good reason to believe that his involvement with the CIA in the attempt to kill Castro might get him all types of favors . Roselli's involvement in the assassination attempt might have gotten him all kinds of favors, he says .
 Former FBI agent Robert Maheu was involved in the bugging of a Las Vegas hotel room carried out by one Arthur Balletti on October 31,1960 . The bugging took place in a hotel room in Las Vegas .
 Balletti was arrested by Las Vegas police and a subsequent investigation uncovered Maheu’s involvement . Ballett was arrested on suspicion of involvement in the murder of a woman .
 Since the electronic bugging fell under a federal wiretap statute, there was FBI jurisdiction and the bureau took over the case . The case was the subject of a federal investigation .
 Maheu told the FBI that he instituted the surveillance on behalf of CIA efforts to obtain Cuban intelligence . He said the surveillance was part of a CIA effort to obtain intelligence from Cuba .
 The FBI discovered that Sam Giancana was involved in the case and later learned of Sam Roselli’s involvement too . The FBI also learned of Roselli's involvement too and learned of his involvement too.
 Hoover said the Criminal Division of the Department of Justice wanted the CIA to “specifically advise whether it would or would not object to the initiation of a criminal prosecution” on the case against Balletti, Maheu, and a third party . Hoover: The Criminal Division
 This plan was merely a revival of the first plot and was going on at the very moment they were talking to him. It was going to be going on when they talked to him, he said . This plan is merely a revived plan, he added .
 Bissell, Helms and Harvey testified before the Church Committee that they did not tell McCone about the plot . McCone himself testified that he was unaware of the assassination plot .
 No clear and unambiguous evidence has emerged that JFK (or RFK) approved of either of the two CIA-mob plots or any of the various other CIA plots to kill Castro . At least one reporter has said that JFK knew of the CIA’s desire for presidential authorization to
 Edwards and Houston may have rationalized as warranting their not telling RFK . The only difference between the two plots is that the second one apparently did not involve the major mob figures Sam Giancana and Santo Trafficante .
 Johnny Roselli was ostensibly deeply involved in this second plot to kill Castro . But per the testimony of William Harvey and his assistant, the support chief, as noted earlier, he was not .
 Harvey delivered poison pills to Roselli in Miami on April 21, 1962, a little over two weeks before Edwards briefed RFK on the first CIA-mob plot to kill Castro .
 On June 21, Roselli told Harvey that a three-man Cuban team of assailants had been sent to Cuba to kill Castro . Roselli said a team of three men was sent to kill the Cuban leader .
 The Cuban team had decided to try and kill not only Castro but his brother Raul, as well as Castro’s chief revolutionary partner, Che Guevara . The team had also decided to kill Raul and his brother, Fidel Castro .
 Nothing panned out in Cuba, the Cubans claimed the ‘conditions” there were not right . Harvey terminated the operation once and for all in mid-February 1963 .
 Kennedy told Szulc that he was testing him because he was under pressure from advisors in the Intelligence community to have Castro killed . He said that for moral reasons the U.S. should never be a party to political assassinations, he opposed it on the moral grounds . Szul
 Tad Szulc was not the only person JFK was sounding out on the advisability of assassinating Castro . As it turns out, he was not only JFK was speaking out .
 Senator George Smathers told the Church Committee that JFK asked him if Fidel Castro would be assassinated in South America if he was assassinated in 1961 . Kennedy was one of JFK’s closest friends who had reveled with him on the Riviera and in Havana during his days in the
 In 1981, President Reagan, by Executive Order 12333 , tightened the ban, dropping the word political and adding that nobody “acting on behalf of” the U.S. such as a contract killer could assassinate anyone .
 RFK denies he signed off on the attempt to murder Castro . RFK denied that any such statement was ever made, says source of alleged statement was never made .
 I’m aware of only two public officials who have said or implied that RFK was behind or expressly approved of an attempt on Castro’s life . I'm not sure if RFK is behind or explicitly approved of a Castro assassination .
 Califano’s allegation is at odds with all other known recollections about the matter . It seems further improbable because he was way down the totem pole of power and influence at the time .
 In addition to Helms’s remarks challenging the accuracy of the memorandum, the above background provides further cause to question it . There's no corroborative evidence that RFK managed the attempts on Castro's life .
 The further unlikelihood is that RFK would make such a statement in the presence of several people . RFK was assassinated in 1968 . The assassination of RFK is unlikely to have happened before .
 Califano is first known to have made this serious claim in 1998, thirty-five years after the fact . Califano first made the claims in 1998 .
 The other public official is former secretary of state Alexander Haig, the only one I've ever heard flat-out accuse RFK of being behind attempts on Castro’s life . Haig is the only public official to say RFK was behind attempts to kill Castro .
 Haig worked under Califano and admits he never attended RFK meetings . Haig admits to never having attended any RFK meeting meetings at all .
 Haig is almost certainly passing on rank hearsay and it would seem his assertion is entitled to no weight . Haig's assertion is not likely to be true .
 Only one document has ever surfaced that, arguably, goes in the direction of RFK having knowledge of, and perhaps even urging, the assassination of Castro . To my knowledge, only one document . has ever been found that, perhaps, goes into RFK's thoughts .
 It was released by the ARRB in 1997 and discovered at the archives thereafter by Larry Haupanen, a professor at Lewis and Clark State College .
 Those who believe that the Kennedy brothers were behind the attempts on Castro’s life view it as a “smoking gun,” but when we look closely at the document we see that, by itself, it could never carry the day for that proposition .
 The four-page document refers to a meeting in the Oval Office attended by RFK, JFK, McGeorge Bundy, General Maxwell Taylor, CIA Director John McCone, General Lyman Lemnitzer, and Roswell Gilpatric .
 Ninety percent of Lansdale’s memorandum deals with a discussion of the “Guidelines for Operation Mongoose” The document was passed out to those attending the meeting .
 Mongoose was expressly an effort to overthrow Castro by aiding and abetting an internal revolution by the Cuban people . Mongoose, of course, did not deal with the murder of Castro, but was expressly .
 Ed Murrow had had a conversation with Mary Hemingway, says Ed . Murrow . "This was worth assessing firmly and pursuing vigorously," Murrow said .
 CIA had some invaluable assets which might well be committed for such an effort . If there are grounds for action, CIA has some valuable assets . CIA may be committed to such a mission in the future .
 Lansdale said he was referring to the assassination of Castro . Lansdale's words are not known for sure what he meant by his words .
 Killing Castro would do more than merely fraction the regime . It is not easy to draw a strong alternative inference, although one could say that killing Castro would help .
 I think most would agree it would probably end the regime for all intents and purposes . "Most would agree [would] probably end [Assad's] regime," she says . "It would end [the regime] in Syria"
 If Lansdale was talking about murdering Castro, why would he draw the comparison to Hungary? Why would he compare the country with Hungary? Lansdale says .
 The uprising in October of 1956 did not involve the killing of the existing Hungarian premier . The uprising occurred in October 1956 by the poor and working class of Hungary .
 The Hungarian revolution did not succeed in its effort to bring about a Soviet withdrawal from the country . Moreover, as we know, the Hungarian revolution failed to succeed in bringing about a withdrawal from Hungary .
 The Hungarian allusion by Lansdale, if anything, goes away from the inference of assassination, unless Lansdale was reading from a different history book than I . In any event, we know that Lansdale's object of Mongoose was only to overthrow Castro, not kill him .
 The issue to be resolved here is not what was on Lansdale's mind, but RFK's mind . It was Lansdale’s words in the subject paragraph that seemed to suggest assassination . Lansdale, more than RFK, was more likely to have said that .
 The subject paragraph was written by Lansdale after the fact, though we can assume he took some contemporaneous notes . We don't even know what RFK’s precise words were .
 RFK spoke of Castro’s heavy drinking “and the opportunities offered by the shrine to Hemingway,” those words don’t automatically conjure up assassination . But assuming he got it right when he says RFK .
 Opportunities is such a broad, generic term, the type one could use, without thinking, to in effect say, “Let’s see if there is anything we can do to exploit the relationship between Hemingway and Castro,” which doesn’t necessarily
 RFK was thinking in terms of asking Mary Hemingway to put poison in a drink of Castro’s, that is, ask her to commit murder, and in the process, most likely be discovered and put to death .
 No matter how many “CIA assets” there were whom Lansdale talked about, it would almost necessarily have to be Mary Hemingway, not they, who put the poison in the drink at the shrine . Lansdale’s "CIA assets" would probably have to
 He came to soak in the atmosphere of the fabled home and assure the widow that Cuba would take good care of it and its contents . Cuba will take care of the home and the contents, he said .
 It should be added that no CIA document has ever surfaced in which the use of Mary Hemingway to kill Castro was discussed .
 There is no way that this one document can begin to answer the question of whether JFK or RFK authorized the attempts on Castro’s life .
 Speculation has gone on for years about whether President Kennedy and his brother RFK approved of the CIA’s plots to kill Castro . No one has yet come up with any direct evidence that they did .
 It depends on just how “autonomous” the CIA really is in its covert actions . The CIA may be more autonomous in covert actions than the CIA, it says .
 The Village Voice somehow obtained a copy of the report and printed substantial portions of it in its February 16 and 23, 1976, editions . Although the report was never officially released, the Village Voice printed substantial parts of it .
 Dulles: "I would tell the President of the United States anything, yes. I would tell him anything"
 In all the voluminous writing on the assassination, it may be the only slight hint that at least one member of the Warren Commission had the state of mind of covering up part of the truth in the assassination .
 Marina Oswald was the first witness to testify before the Warren Commission . Marina Oswald testified before the Commission of Investigation into the CIA .
 Before her scheduled testimony on February 3, 1964, her lawyer had been negotiating with Life magazine to sell her story . He said he didn’t want the Commission to publish or in any way release her testimony before he sold the rights to her story, obviously feeling he would get less
 He said he wouldn’t expect the Commission to withhold release of her testimony beyond February 15 . The Commission was agreeable to this, he said, and the Commission is agreeable .
 Commissioner McCloy said that, really, there was “nothing spectacular” in what Marina had said . Where the problem arose is when McCloy says, ‘there was nothing spectacular’
 The first time the public learned about this was in an article in the Washington Post on November 22, 1974 . Harold Weisberg’s book, Whitewash IV, was being published that day .
 Weisberg had lost a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit trying to get the transcript of the Warren Commission’s January 27, 1964, executive session . National Archives declassified the transcript shortly thereafter .
 Levine wanted to be the author of Marina’s story for a book, according to her manager at the time . Levine was working with her lawyer, John Thorne, to sell Marina's story .
 By this time, no one in the U.S. government was giving any serious thought to the Soviets being involved in the assassination . This may have made it easier for Dulles to say what he did .
 Dulles’s reflexive response, undoubtedly conditioned by his many years at the CIA, was to try to prevent Marina from saying what she ostensibly wanted, whether Dulles thought Levine was talking her into it or not . Nevertheless, it is still quite disturbing that it was still quite
 After Dulles’s remark, Senator Russell said, “That [Marina saying Oswald was a Soviet agent] will blow the lid if she testified to that,” Russell said . Warren terminated the discussion by saying, ‘All right, and going on to other
 Neither the Warren Commission nor, as far as we know, thought Russia was involved in the assassination . Russell certainly could not be referring to blowing the lid off any true story that it was .
 His utterance appears to be simply an ill-chosen spontaneous response by someone who, in his involvement in both this case and the Cuban missile crisis, spoke with a surprising lack of knowledge, clarity, and common sense .
 Given what we know, it is certainly highly unlikely that President Kennedy ordered a reluctant CIA to try to murder Castro . President Kennedy is unlikely to have ordered the CIA to kill Castro .
 The CIA has been required to submit any proposed covert action to an informal National Security Council group . Dating back to the early years of the Eisenhower administration, the group is known to very few Americans and answering only to president .
 When I checked in 2000, I learned that the group was still in existence, but once again, under a new name, the Policy Coordination Committee . In 2000, it was under the new name of the Committee, which still exists today .
 The original group consisted of the president’s assistant for national security affairs, the undersecretary of state for political affairs, and the director of the Central Intelligence Agency .
 It was originally expanded to include the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . It was later expanded into a committee of heads of state and national security .
 Special Group was instituted in 1961 to oversee the CIA’s Operation Mongoose, the U.S. government's plan to overthrow Castro . Special Group members included Attorney General Robert Kennedy and Attorney General Maxwell Taylor .
 In February of 1962 Richard Helms took over Bissell’s job as CIA deputy director for plans . Bissell was the CIA's deputy director of plans .
 He told the Church Committee that when he became Bissell’s successor, the plot activities to kill Castro were presented to him as an ongoing project previously authorized . He admits to authorizing the assassination of Castro on his watch, though he did not know that CIA official William Harvey had given
 Helms told the Church Committee that he had no knowledge that President Kennedy directly ordered Castro’s death . Helms said he believes it was the policy at the time to kill Castro .
 On January 19, 1962, a meeting of CIA and Kennedy administration officials involved in the Mongoose project was held in Robert Kennedy’s office . The project was the work of the CIA and the Kennedy administration .
 Richard Helms’s executive assistant, George McManus, took notes of the meeting . George McMcManus took notes from the meeting, which was held at the White House .
 A report to President Kennedy by a committee headed by General Maxwell Taylor read in part, “There can be no long-term living with Castro as a neighbor.” The committee was formed by JFK on April 22, 1961, following the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 The CIA may have thought it didn't have to go to the Special Group to get approval of its plot to kill Castro . Helms testified he had “no knowledge that a Castro assassination was ever authorized” by the group, he said .
 JFK and his brother either ordered or gave their approval to the Castro death plots, since we know the issue of Castro’s assassination had reached President Kennedy . Perhaps JFK was trying to have it both ways: not authorizing assassination, yet not doing anything to ensure it didn’t
 When Thomas Beckett was proving to be an annoyance, as Castro Castro, the King said who will rid me of this man. The King said, 'who will rid him of this . man'
 One wonders how the desire to remove Castro from power was so great that some in our nation's leadership may have even thought that murdering him was permissible . It’s the practice of ‘plausible deniability,” particularly by “plausible deniability”
 The fact that we were in the midst of the cold war and feared the spread of Communism played a big part . Undoubtedly, the fact that . we were . in the . mid-century of the Cold War played a major part .
 Castro’s Cuba was the first and only Communist nation in the Western Hemisphere, and it was on our back steps, just ninety miles away . But what may have pushed these leaders over the top was the fact that Castro's Cuba was a Communist nation, just 90 miles away,
 The Church Committee on the doctrine of plausible deniability says it's an invitation to error . The doctrine is an abdication of responsibility and a perversion of democratic government, it says .
 The doctrine is the antithesis of accountability” . tThere is yet another wrinkle to the whole issue, this one going in the opposite direction of keeping things from the president .
 This one suggests that the president, at least President Eisenhower, was protecting certain people below him . The president, or Eisenhower, may have protected certain people from harm .
 Author John Ranelagh, after quoting the above, observes, “For him plausible denial was a presidential prerogative and he was not prepared—as he said—to let others carry the burden.”
 It should be noted that as of 1991, “plausible deniability” by a president may no longer be possible, at least with covert actions that he authorized . JFK’s knowledge and approval of the plot to kill Castro is not applicable to the issue .
 As we have seen, the evidence is ambiguous and contradictory as to whether President Kennedy authorized and approved of the CIA attempts to assassinate Fidel Castro . The resolution of this issue is beyond the scope of this book .
 JFK knew RFK knew what JFK knew, RFK did, and vice versa, but there is one piece of evidence that, if true, would arguably be incompatible with the notion of JFK’s having approved the plan to kill Castro . If true, the evidence would be incompatible
 RFK, in his war against organized crime, was trying to put them behind bars . The plots to kill Castro had JFK’s imprimatur, it seems unlikely that the plots had JFK's imprimature .
 RFK's original list of forty mobsters he told his organized-crime section at the Department of Justice to go after . Roselli, Giancana, and Trafficante were on RFK’s original list . RFK told organized crime section at Department ofJustice to go
 There is no evidence their names were ever removed from the list . It ended up expanding to include the names of twenty-three hundred underworld figures .
 The Church Committee found that although there was some CIA investigation of a possible Cuban connection in the assassination, for the most part the investigation was “passive,” responding to leads or requests from outside the agency, as opposed to making an affirmative effort .
 I am unable to understand, at least from what he goes on to say, how anything would have changed . But I'm not sure how much would have been changed, he says .
 The HSCA prefaced these words by saying that “Burt Griffin... told the committee” and then indented his words, which signified a quote . Griffin: "I told him that the committee ... told him"
 Griffin disavowed the words attributed to him by the HSCA . He felt that if the Commission had known about the plots to kill Castro it wouldn't have made any difference in the way it handled the investigation .
 I was about to ask him expressly if, despite his disavowal, he still believed it would have made a difference, and most importantly, if so, how, when he had to leave home with his wife to go to some engagement . If so, he would have been able
 When the judge got back to me on January 5, he gave me a phone number I had previously asked him for, and brought up several matters unrelated to what we had talked about, he said . The judge gave me the phone number he had previously requested, and gave it a number
 "Because he didn’t bring the matter up himself, I felt it would be indelicate of me to bring it up and continue cross-examining him on it," she said .
 The Warren Commission’s knowledge of the plots probably wouldn’t have had any effect on its investigation, he says . ‘I felt more confident, as a result of my having spoken to him a few days earlier, that the Warren Commission's knowledge of plots would probably
 CIA wanted to bleed him white through interrogation . He was killed the following day by the Bolivian military against the wishes of the CIA .
 Throughout 1957 and much of 1958, Castro’s forces had been headquartered in the Sierra Maestra mountains in the southeastern region of Cuba . Castro's forces were headquartered there throughout the years .
 The highly loyal and passionate rebels, less than five hundred in number, conducted very effective thrusts and incursions into Batista-held territory throughout Oriente province .
 In September 1958, the rebel forces swept down from the mountains and began their march toward Havana . Batista’s tanks, artillery, and far greater numbers of men in the Batista army were used against the rebels .
 He had started out as the doctor to the rebels’ wounded, but quickly emerged as its most respected combatant . He had been a doctor to rebels' wounded, before becoming a commander .
 The other column was led by Camilo Cienfuegos, who died after Castro had swept to power when his plane was lost at sea in October 1959 .
 Guevara, almost from the beginning, was the one special star of the revolution . He was beyond reproach and admired unconditionally by his fellow warriors . The revolution was born from humble beginnings to humble beginnings .
 Fidel Castro gave Cienfuegos the honor of being the first to arrive in the Cuban capital, on January 3, 1959, two days after Batista had fled . A CIA psychiatric study of Fidel Castro in 1961 said he was given the honor by Castro of being .
 Castro and Guevara entered Havana by tank to the delirious cheers of thousands of Cubans . Castro and Chevara arrived the following day, but it wasn’t until January 7 that they entered Havana .
 Cienfuegos’s disappearance at sea has remained a mystery throughout the years . There has been speculation, without any substantive evidence, that Castro was behind it . There is no substantive evidence that Castro is behind it.
 Major Huber Matos and First Lieutenant Manuel Artime were killed on October 29, 1959, the day after Cienfuegos’s disappearance at sea .
 Artime organized the Movimiento de Recuperacion Revolucionaria, the “Movement for the Recovery of the Revolution,” or MRR . MRR was the first underground movement against Castro’s new regime .
 If there is any credence to this, it would go in the direction of Cienfuegos, like Matos and Artime, becoming disenchanted with Castro because of the Communistic direction in which Castro’s government was going .
 Castro eschews cult of personality of, say, Mao or Stalin or Saddam Hussein . To this very day, Castro has far more billboards and paintings of Guevara on display in Cuba than he does himself .
 In Cuba’s two main museums commemorating the revolution, in Havana and Santiago de Cuba, Guevara is featured over all other members of the revolution . And in Cuba's main museums, in Cuba, including Castro, are also featured .
 He promoted the establishment of trade for goods between the Soviet Union and Cuba . Trade sustained the Cuban economy for years, until the collapse of Soviet Union in 1991 . Basically, he ran the Cuban economic, since his main interest had always been in the redistribution of wealth .
 Guevara quickly became restless, as governance and bureaucracy were not congenial to the revolutionary blood coursing through him . But he became restless and became restless .
 Guevara hoped to spread Marxism throughout Africa and South America . Cuba was merely a laboratory whose experience could be used to combat exploitation of masses .
 His whereabouts became the subject of international speculation in 1967 . The consensus was that he was somewhere in South America training guerrillas in revolutionary warfare .
 All Castro would tell the inquiring media was that Guevara was pursuing ‘revolutionary tasks” somewhere in the world . Castro would say that he would not reveal whereabouts of the guerrilla .
 Castro read the letter to five thousand Cubans assembled in Havana’s Chaplin Theater on October 3, 1965 . The letter was read by Castro in Havana .
 Guevara: "I feel that I have fulfilled the part of my duty that tied me to the Cuban revolution . I say goodbye to you, to the comrades, to your people, who now are mine"
 Cover-Up by the CIA and FBI in the Warren Commission’s Investi£ and children and children . Cover-up by the FBI and CIA was a cover-up of the CIA .
 Albida Albida, dressed in black in the front row, sobbed quietly as Castro read her husband’s words . Albida sobbed in front of the crowd at Castro's memorial service .
 There he was leading a band of fewer than twenty Cuban, Bolivian, and Peruvian Communist guerrillas to foment a revolution against the government of Air Force General Rene Barrientos Ortuno .
 Barrientos assumed power in November of 1964 after a military coup . He aligned himself with wealthy landowners in exploiting the campesinos and the rural poor .
 The CIA dispatched two agents with a background in guerrilla warfare, Eduardo and Felix I Rodriguez, to Bolivia to work closely with the Bolivian army in the effort to capture Guevara . On August 1,1967, the CIA dispatched the two agents to Bolivia . Eduardo
 He had gone there to study medical care among the poor during the CIA-backed attempt by Guatemalan rebels to overthrow the leftist president . The Guatemalan president Jacobo Arbenz Guzman was overthrown .
 Guevara had tried to organize Arbenz supporters in a “last-ditch resistance” to the successful coup . Gueevara had been trying to organize a ‘last-Ditch Resistance’ to the coup .
 On October 8, 1967, near the small Bolivian mountain village of La Higuera, Guevara was injured by gunfire from Bolivians and captured . On October 9, 1967 .
 His clothing torn and tattered, his hair matted and filthy, and blood oozing from his bandaged right leg, he was executed in a La Higuera schoolhouse on the orders of Barrientos .
 The only known picture taken of Guevara in custody on the day he died showed him standing next to his main CIA pursuer, Rodriguez . Rodriguez was the only known photo taken of him in custody .
 Rodriguez had been fighting to overthrow Castro for years . He was a member of the Bay of Pigs invasion force . Rodriguez had infiltrated Cuba before the invasion .
 Castro’s speech to the enormous throng that night, the transcript of which I have read, was as great a tribute to one human being by another as I have ever seen . Castro would repeat the tribute in print and orally many times through the years .
 Castro described Guevara over and over again as being someone of extraordinary— he must have used this adjective fifteen times if he used it once—courage, ability, vision, vision and intelligence, sensitivity, selflessness, compassion, and moral character, whose life was dedicated to
 In Guevara’s posthumously published ‘Bolivian Diary,” he laments about not being able to read or participate in executions without due process . The most common charge made against Gueevara concerns his authorizing and in some instances participating
 Guevara agonized over the justification of capital punishment . He ultimately accepted what was the “standing guerrilla practice” of executing traitors, informers, and especially cruel enemy officers .
 Guevara approved the execution of a fellow guerrilla, a young man named Echevarria, who began engaging in banditry and pillage in areas taken by the guerrilla forces . But there were other executions, after hesitation, such as that of fellow guerrilla .
 There are conflicting reports over whether Guevara enjoyed organizing the firing squads ordered by Castro of Batista’s main henchmen . One of the main problems was the Soviet Union's delays in economic assistance to Cuba and several broken promises .
 Castro began to be perceived as favoring China in the Sino-Soviet split that was raging at the time, whereas Castro was drifting closer to the Soviets . Also, because he was closer ideologically to Mao’s China (a more muscular, confrontational posture in bringing about a Marxist
 Guevara stopped in Paris to meet with famous Cuban journalist Carlos Franqui in 1963 . He met with him on his way back to Cuba from a speech in Algiers .
 He speculates that some of the peasants were put off by his group’s unkempt beards and torn clothes . The man speculates some of his group was put off because of their unkemped clothing .
 Bolivian's death has made him an international icon . His likeness appears on T-shirts, coffee cups, and even boutique clothing throughout the civilized world .
 Che Guevara is revered in La Higuera, a small village in the Spanish city . The name of his village is whispered to the sky or light a candle to his memory . Locals say if you whisper his name, you will find your lost goat or cow .
 After the Bolivian army executed Guevara, they put his body on top of a concrete washbasin for public display in the laundry room of the Our Lady of Malta hospital .
 Guerrillas buried him and a dozen of his fellow guerrillas in a mass grave near the town’s airstrip . They later buried him along with a dozen others . The guerillas are still at large .
 Argentine-Cuban team of forensic pathologists discovered his remains in 1997 . They returned them to Cuba, where his wife and family lived, for reburial . An Argentine-Cuba team of pathologists found his remains .
 The period of alleged house arrest was thought to be in late November of 1963 . The basis for the arrest was alleged to be Guevara’s possible involvement in an anti-Castro plot .
 Castro may have had the prescience to theorize why Bolivians didn't succeed . If his theory is correct, it didn’t work out for the Bolivian .
 Castro said Bolivian leaders had a “fear of Che even after his death” and removed Che’s remains so the area could not become a shrine now or at some time in the future . In his television address to the nation on October 15, 1967,
 Guevara’s remains were moved away from Vallegrande, he says . That, he said, was what he believed to be ‘the real reason’ why the remains had been moved away .
 The New Orleans DA’s office searched Shaw's elegant French Quarter carriage house . Shaw had been released on $10,000 bond . Shaw was arrested March 1, 1967 .
 Among a great number of items seized were three pieces of rope, one chain, five whips, two pieces of leather, one black hood and cape, and one black gown .
 Garrison released the list to the media the next day, obviously hoping that images of sadomasochistic homosexuality would attach themselves to Shaw in the public mind and prospective jury pool . Though these items had no relevance to the case, Garrison promptly released the media .
 Shaw's friends say similar items could be found in the homes of many Mardi Gras revelers . Shaw’s friends called foul, saying that similar items were found in many homes . Shaw's friend says similar items are found in other homes .
 Shaw, in his diary that night, wrote that these items were merely “residue” from previous Mardi Gras costumes . Shaw had, in fact, used many of them for the annual celebration over the years .
 Shaw also noted that the search party had left behind Greek and Japanese outfits that would not conjure up the image the DA was seeking . Shaw noted in his journal that the searching party left behind the outfits .
 We all know by now that J Edgar Hoover, for years, kept files on the private lives of many prominent, law-abiding citizens . Hoover kept files of many of the most prominent people in the country .
 If Shaw were conservative, he most likely would have voted for Nixon over Kennedy . Shaw also voted for Kennedy over Nixon .
 There is no credible evidence that Shaw was a friend of Ferrie’s or even knew him . Shaw was not a friend or even known Ferrie, according to CNN.com .
 Garrison’s office never called Garrison to the stand at Shaw’S trial . We can assume he never made that call because we know Garrison never called him to testify . Garrison's office didn't call Garrison to testify at Shaw's trial because he never did .
 David Ferrie’s grotesque and pathetic physical appearance, the one thing that those who met him agree on was his considerable intellect . Apart from his grotesque appearance, Ferrie's considerable intellect, he was a genius . Ferrie died in hospital on Sunday at the age of 84 .
 The Washington Post's George Lardner Jr. described Ferrie as “intelligent” and “well versed” on a “broad range of subjects,” he said . Ferrie was fluent in several languages and self-trained in psychology and medicine
 Ferrie considered the preoccupation by authors and writers with the Kennedy assassination “ghoulish” Lardner said . Ferrie's rooms showed he was also preoccupied with the subject .
 David Ferrie flew several firebomb raids over Castro's Cuba for the Cuban exiles . Ferrie helped Cuban refugees escape from Castro’s Cuba until federal agents confiscated his plane in 1961 .
 Ferrie, the teller of tall tales that he was, was almost certainly the sole source for these stories . But none of this was ever confirmed, and Ferrie was the only source for the stories .
 We know that one such story he told was untrue, therefore casting further doubt on all the others . We know he told one of the stories he said was untrue . It casts doubt on the other stories he told .
 Shortly after the Bay of Pigs invasion in April of 1961, Ferrie spoke to the New Orleans chapter of the Military Orders of World Wars .
 Ferrie said he was one of the pilots in the invasion . Ferrie was asked to leave the podium when his denunciation of Kennedy for not providing air support for the invading brigade became so harsh it was offensive to the audience .
 At Clay Shaw’s trial, Jim Garrison never issued a subpoena for any witness who could help him prove CIA complicity in the assassination, nor did he issue a subpoena duces tecum (a subpoena for documents) to help establish his claim . Clay Shaw's trial was held in
 Garrison tried to serve Richard Helms, director of the CIA, with a subpoena to provide a ‘true photograph’ of the “burly Cuban” taken in front of the Cuban (Garrison probably meant Russian) embassy in Mexico City in 1963 .
 He unwittingly revealed how much the Helms subpoena had only been a publicity stunt by not even referring to it in either of his two books on the case .
 Braniff sent the certificate along with a check to the United States government in Washington, D.C., requesting Dulles’s attendance as an out-of-state witness before the Orleans Parish grand jury on March 28 and 29, 1968 .
 Garrison wanted to compel Dulles to become a witness, “jurisdiction under the Uniform Witness Act” for this would rest “in the District of Columbia Court of General Sessions”
 Garrison never mentioned it in his two books on the case . But I have been unable to find any evidence of this . Garrison's two books have been published by the same publisher .
 It is highly unlikely Houston would refer to the subpoena duces tecum and not the subpoena for Helms’s testimony . Also unlikely that if he did, Houston, in his letter to the judge, would only have referred to the subpoenas .
 Garrison’s office—and you will never find this in any pro-conspiracy book—dropped the matter and never sought to have a proper court compel Dulles to testify . Garrison's office dropped the matter after Dulles’ testimony .
 Garrison had to know that the federal government would not voluntarily allow Dulles to come to New Orleans to be exploited by Garrison as a high-visibility publicity stunt . Garrison knew Dulles was not voluntarily allowed to come .
 Garrison also had to know that if, indeed, the CIA was behind the assassination, Dulles wouldn’t likely have any knowledge of it since he ceased being CIA director on November 29,1961, almost two years before the assassination . Dulles was in retirement on November 22
 Garrison called several Warren Commission witnesses, including one of the autopsy surgeons . He showed the Zapruder film, ostensibly indicating a shot from Kennedy’s right front, to the jury .
 One of the biggest frauds in the conspiracy movement espoused the Shaw-Ferrie-Oswald troika being involved with the CIA in the assassination is one Robert D Morrow, an electrical engineer by trade from Baltimore . Morrow was involved with anti-Castro Cuban exile groups in
 From 1960 to 1963 Morrow ran an operation in Baltimore to counterfeit $50 million in phony pesos to dump on the Cuban economy to disrupt it . Morrow says he ran the operation to counterfeit the pesos in Baltimore, Maryland .
 Morrow claims the operation was sponsored by the CIA through his friend, Cuban exile leader Mario Garcia Kohly, who he said was the American leader of the Cuban underground . Morrow says the CIA sponsored the operation through friend, exiled leader, Kohly .
 Morrow and Kohly were arrested by the federal government on counterfeiting charges in 1963 . Morrow served short jail sentences for counterfeiting . Kohly and Morrow were arrested on October 1, 1963, in federal court .
 Morrow claims a CIA executive officer asked him to modify four Mannlicher-Carcano rifles used by several ‘hit squads’ to assassinate Kennedy . Morrow says he was asked to modify the rifles by an executive officer in July 1963 .
 He said he delivered the rifles to David Ferrie in New Orleans and later learned they were for Ferrie's, Clay Shaw’s, and Carlos Marcello . The rifles were used in the assassination, he said .
 Morrow believes Ferrie and his associates set up Lee Harvey Oswald as “the patsy” for the assassination . Morrow believes that Ferrie set up Oswald as the "patsy" for the Oswald assassination .
 In 1975, Morrow contacted the Church Committee, which was investigating American intelligence agencies, particularly with respect to the assassination of President Kennedy . Morrow, being a patriotic citizen, contacted the committee .
 In his interview by a Church Committee investigator on June 26, 1975, and in his letter to the investigator on July 23, 1975 . He didn’t say one single solitary word about this absolutely fascinating story of his .
 He did say it was his ‘opinion’ that elements of the CIA may have been behind Kennedy’s assassination, but nothing at all about having firsthand knowledge of a CIA executive having him purchase the weapons that killed Kennedy .
 Morrow offered to testify before the Church Committee in 1975, but since it was obvious he had nothing to say, the committee denied his request . Morrow was denied the request by the committee .
 Tippit, Clay Shaw, and David Ferrie were involved in the assassination . He said he had purchased the weapons to kill Kennedy and that he had bought them .
 He also told them of his close association with Kohly in the anti-Castro movement . He also said he was close to Kohly during his time in Cuba .
 He said he had a film of a man who was a “dead ringer’s for Oswald training at a paramilitary camp in New Orleans . Also, tantalizingly, he said he has a film showing a man training with Oswald .
 Playboy , through the writer of the series, James McKinley, decided to check Morrow out . Playboy .
 He had no documents or photos linking Tippit, Oswald, Ruby, Ferrie, Shaw and himself . Oswald had no photos or documents linking him to himself or others .
 Morrow claims to have participated in adventures with Ferrie . Morrow was unable to describe Ferrie accurately .
 In addition to Morrow’s wildly imaginative reconstruction of events leading up to the assassination, a deathbed tape of Kohly has the Cuban saying that Castro had Kennedy killed, in direct contradiction of his claim that his men did it .
 No credible evidence has ever emerged that Lee Harvey Oswald or David Ferrie was associated in any way with the CIA or any other U.S. intelligence agency . No evidence has emerged that Oswald or Ferrie had any connection to the CIA .
 In a September 28, 1967, memo responding to written questions submitted by the Justice Department . The CIA reported back that Shaw had contact with a Domestic Contact Service representative in New Orleans seven times in 1949 .
 For the period 1948-1956, Shaw “submitted to the New Orleans office of the Domestic Contact Service information which was incorporated in eight reports. Shaw’s information was incorporated into eight reports .
 One dealt with an East German directory of firms engaged in such trade . Another dealt with a directory of East German firms .
 Another concerned the establishment of a Czechoslovakian Trade Exhibit . The exhibition was established in Czechoslovakia in 1961 .
 We know that the CIA knowingly withheld from the Warren Commission information that it had plotted to kill Castro . And we know that . The CIA knew about the plot, the CIA knew it was plotting to kill Fidel Castro, Castro's killer .
 CIA memo from September 28, 1967, memo to other U.S. federal agencies found to be authentic . CIA memo was published by the CIA in 1967 . CIA director: "I'm not sure there is any evidence that the CIA has affirmatively lied"
 Victor Marchetti has become a favorite of the conspiracy crowd since his 1975 interview in True magazine in which he spoke of the morning staff meetings he attended as an executive assistant to the deputy director in the office of Richard Helms .
 Garrison: "I know they didn’t like Garrison because there were a lot of snotty remarks passed about him" Garrison: 'I know Garrison didn't like Garrison. I know they hated Garrison'
 Shaw, a long time ago, had been a contact of the Agency. He says he was told by a staff member that Shaw was a contact . Shaw is a former member of staff at the National Security Council .
 The passages were deleted by the agency, but none of them were found to contain conspiracy theories . And unfortunately for conspiracy theorists, none of this was in the passages deleted .
 All of the areas of deletion are indicated in Marchetti’s book, and from the context none could possibly have dealt with the above matters . None of these areas were indicated in the book .
 Permindex was essentially a paper corporation with plans to build a thirteen-floor building in Basel, in which the exhibition would be housed, and an adjacent fifteen-story hotel . Oliver Stone’s Movie JFK planned to be housed in the same building .
 The project never got off the ground because of a lack of funding and press attacks on the dubious background of Giorgio Mandel-Mantello, who, per the Italian daily II Messaggero, was the founder of CMC .
 Permindex was accused of being involved in assassination attempts on French president Charles de Gaulle . Neither the corporation nor its chief executives were ever convicted of any crime .
 The following day, March 5, the same story, minus the CIA allegation, appeared in Rome’s more conservative newspapers, Corriere della Sera .
 Paese Sera never offered readers any evidence to support its naked charge . Shaw ceased to be a member of the WTC board no later than 1964 .
 As late as December 1, 1962, Shaw told “Who’s Who in the South and Southeast” that he was still a member of the WTC board . Shaw said he felt that the group was up to no good .
 Paese Sera claimed Shaw had organized Kennedy’s trip to Dallas . It should be parenthetically noted that as a measure of the paper's credibility, it claimed that Shaw had arranged Kennedy's trip .
 Shaw’s only reported response to the Paese Sera allegation was during an interview of him in Penthouse magazine in 1969 . Though much has been written about the allegation, Shaw's only reported answer to it was in a 1969 interview .
 The idea was to have one place where buyers coming into the Common Market area would find all Common Market countries represented in one center . The idea is to have all of the Common European countries represented .
 Imre Nagy was the last non-communist premier of Hungary . He was the head of the Hungarian state of power . Nagy had been the last Hungarian premier .
 Some of the other people involved were Italian senators, journalists, lawyers, and other responsible people . Some of those responsible people involved include Italian senators and journalists .
 The center was set up in the 1980s, but it was never fully completed . The center is now being run by a group of people who helped open it .
 It turned out to be either badly planned or badly organized . It closed very shortly, and that was the last I ever heard of it .
 Former CIA director Richard Helms writes that the Agency had no contact with or interest in Centrale Mondiale Commerciale . Paese Sera was responsible for another rebellion six years earlier, when it was sent in to quell it .
 Imre Nagy could not have met with Shaw in 1959 or 1960, having been executed in 1958 . This is confusing since Nagy's execution was in 1958, when Nagy was executed . Shaw was executed in 1959 and 1960 .
 Imre Nagy was a much more famous name than Ferenc Nagy . Shaw may have merely forgotten the true first name of the man he was told headed the company .
 Shaw’s description of the man as the “last non-communist premier of Hungary” is a description of Ferenc, not Imre Nagy . Shaw: We know from other sources that Ferec was connected, by way of Permindex,
 French foreign minister finally had to address the matter, telling the National Assembly in Paris that there was no truth to the story . Shaw’s story was immediately picked up by other news organizations, including Pravda, TASS, and Le Monde in Paris .
 It is not known whether Garrison somehow became privy to the Paese Sera piece when it was first published . Garrison is believed to have been privy of the piece in the past .
 Even if he had heard of it, he had already charged Shaw on March 1 for Kennedy’s murder .
 Garrison subpoenaed no CIA agents for the trial . Garrison never brought up the name CIA during the trial, and did not argue in his summation that the CIA was behind the assassination . Garrison did not say he believed the CIA .
 Garrison’s prosecution was the "epicenter of Garrison's prosecution" Garrison has been charged with murder, attempted murder and attempted murder .
 Garrison would have come to the conclusion of CIA complicity in the assassination without the clearly unsupported allegation by a small foreign paper that the WTC was a CIA front . Garrison’s imagination and all the alleged CIA contacts with David Ferrie would have led to his conclusion .
 Garrison told a journalist friend in New Orleans, David Chandler, that “the CIA did it,” referring to the assassination . Garrison said in late November of 1966, several months before the Paese Sera article was printed, “The CIA did . It was not the
 Paese Sera allegation appeared in the New Orleans States- Item on April 25,1967, long before the trial . But this seems unlikely since this article was published in the States-Item long before it appeared .
 Garrison started thinking of a CIA-Shaw connection because of the Paese Sera allegation, Garrison says . The “now interested” language goes in the direction of supporting Holland’s premise, Billings says . Garrison: "Now interested"
 Several questions about the import of the language have arisen, none of which the CIA has answered satisfactorily in FOIA requests from many people, including myself .
 QKENCHANT "was the name of an Agency project used to provide security approvals non-Agency personnel and facilities," a CIA official said .
 I found the April 7, 2003, response to me from the agency’s information and privacy coordinator, which comprised three documents, to be unhelpful . The agency responded to me with a response to the letter, which included three documents .
 One document said QKENCHANT was a “project for obtaining clearance, that is, Provisional Court Security Approvals... in connection with the acquisition of . . . The words that followed were redacted from the document .
 A letter from Harrelson to Denk said that Shaw had received “an initial ‘five agency’ clearance on 23 March 1949’ and that the QKENCHANT project did not begin until sometime in 1952 . I also received a copy of the September 18,
 CIA coordinator said agency felt it was satisfying my request and there would be no further response from it . In the letter to me, the CIA coordinator told me, "There will be no more response"
 I wrote the CIA on April 15,2003, saying it had not adequately answered my request, pointing out, for instance, that a document which reads “in all probability he was not cleared by that program, at least initially,” would not satisfy anyone .
 The investigation and trial of Shaw in New Orleans had demonstrated to all sensible people that Shaw had as much to do with Kennedy’s death as the man in the moon . Goss said it would not look good for Goss personally as well as the CIA to not furnish the requested
 Goss had Scott Koch, the CIA’s information and privacy coordinator, respond to his November 29, 2004, letter . Koch is the same section of the CIA to whom I made my original request .
 Koch’s February 14, 2005, response said, in effect, that his office, not that of the CIA director, handled such requests as mine . “Another review is unlikely to result in the release of more information," Koch said in 2005 .
 FOIA prevents us from treating one requester different from another . We understand that you are a recognized author, but the FOIA prevents you from being treated differently from another.
 The CIA refuses to release any further information on the matter, short of being forced to by litigation under FOIA . The litigation frequently goes on for many years, taking it beyond the publication date of this book .
 The CIA’s response to my request is compatible with the culture of the CIA to be its own worst enemy, and even when it is innocent, to act as guilty as it possibly can . Even when it's innocent, the CIA is accused of trying to be the most guilty
 CNN's John Sutter was able to get a small item of information here and there from the CIA throughout the years .
 The CIA moved its headquarters from Washington D.C. to Langley, Virginia, in 1961 . The CIA's public relations section says the CIA moved from Washington to Virginia in 1963 .
 The CIA once confirmed for me the death of one of its former agents, a former agent .
 Shaw also received a QKENCHANT clearance, which we don’t know to be a fact . The likelihood is that it would have also been on an unwitting basis .
 No one has pursued Shaw’s connection to the CIA as much as Jim Lesar . Lesar doesn’t even give a thought to Shaw doing clandestine work for the CIA in the gathering of intelligence .
 Garrison’s most serious attack on the establishment, and the one that got him in the most trouble by far, occurred his first year in office, 1962 . Garrison: "I’m not going to back down, but I’ve got a lot of respect for
 DA started using money from a DA ‘Fines and Fees Fund’ to pay assistants to conduct investigations of commercial vice in the Bourbon and Canal St. districts of New Orleans .
 The problem was that the money from the fund was only supposed to be used to “defray expenses” of the DA’s office, not to conduct investigations . The money was supposed to only be used for ‘defray’ expenses, not for investigations .
 Disbursements out of the fund had to be approved by a judge of the State Criminal District Court . Further, disbursements were approved by the judge .
 When Garrison took office, one of the judges refused to approve a disbursement from the fund for furnishings for Garrison’s office . One judge refused to OK a disallowment of the fund to furnishings .
 Garrison obtained approval of another judge by allegedly misrepresenting that the first judge had withdrawn his objection . Garrison obtained the approval of the second judge by misrepresenting his objection, Garrison said . Garrison said the judge went on vacation, Garrison obtained another judge's approval .
 All eight judges of the Criminal District Court adopted a rule on October 5, 1962, that no further disbursements from the fund would be approved without the concurrence of at least five of the eight judges . Because of this, all eight judges agreed to the rule .
 The judges ruled that they would not approve disbursements from the fund to pay for the vice investigations . The judges expressed doubt as to the legality under the state constitution of using money from such a fund for investigation purposes .
 Garrison was prosecuted and convicted by a judge from another parish of “criminal defamation” of the judges . Garrison was fined $1,000, and sentenced to four months in jail . Garrison is currently serving a four-month jail sentence .
 Garrison appealed and the Louisiana State Supreme Court affirmed the conviction . Garrison appealed the conviction and the conviction was upheld . Garrison was sentenced to life in prison without parole .
 In 1964, the United States Supreme Court reversed the conviction, holding that the Louisiana statute (La. Louisiana statute) was unconstitutional . The case was overturned by the Supreme Court in 1964 .
 Sullivan (376 U.S. 254) Sullivan is the author of the novel, "American Sniper" Sullivan . Sullivan's book is published in New York, New York and Washington, DC .
 Garrison’s adversaries in the anti-conspiracy community have questioned his sexual orientation and have sought to corroborate the allegation of his fondling a thirteen-year-old boy in 1969 . Neither has ever been confirmed and neither has any conceivable relevance to this case . Garrison's adversaries
 Author Patricia Lambert interviewed the boy (a young man at the time Lambert interviewed him) and his older brother . Lambert interviewed both the boy and his brother in the interview .
 The incident supposedly took place in a very dark slumber room at the Athletic Club . The incident is said to have occurred in a dark room .
 Supposedly Garrison approached the father of the two boys in the pool area and suggested that the father, his two sons, and Garrison go up to the room for a nap, all eventually lying in separate beds in the completely dark room .
 Garrison, in a bed next to the young boy, allegedly twice left his bed or reached over and lifted the blanket off the teen and “fondled” him, police say . Garrison is accused of fondling the boy, presumably on his private parts . Garrison allegedly twice
 No other allegation of a similar nature has ever been leveled at Garrison that I know of . Garrison was living in a fish bowl and had a great number of enemies who would have loved to destroy him, he says . Garrison is a national, even an international figure, and had enemies who
 Garrison, a married man with five children, had always had known heterosexual relationships, even after his divorce from his wife . Garrison had always been in heterosexual relationships with heterosexual relationships . Garrison is a married father of five children .
 Garrison did have such secret propensities, it stretches all credulity to believe that he would act them out in the very same room as the boy’s father and older brother .
 Garrison allegedly looked like he was “on drugs,” an observation that neither the older brother nor the father are known to have made . The victim’s explanation for this is not enough to overcome the nonbelievability of what Garrison allegedly did, he says .
 Lambert learned that the New Orleans grand jury wanted to take testimony on the matter . The boy and his family declined to testify out of fear of retaliation by Garrison . Lambert learned of the grand jury's request that the boy be testify .
 There is no credible evidence Garrison ever took any money from or was in any way beholden to or connected to organized crime . Garrison said Marcello was a “respectable businessman” when he told NBC he was a businessman .
 His getting a $5,000 line of credit in 1967 at the Sands Hotel in Las Vegas is meaningless since such lines of credit to non-organized crime figures are common . The Sands Hotel was allegedly owned at the time, at least in part, by organized crime .
 The casino manager, Mario Marino, is a former employee of Marcello's, “comping’s’ hotel bill during his stay at the Sands couldn’t possibly be less significant . Garrison's hotel bill was the result of a lawsuit filed by a former
 Las Vegas picks up hotel bills for people less important than the district attorney of New Orleans . Las Vegas picked up the bills for those less important to New Orleans DA's office .
 Garrison said he felt it was customary for casinos to pick up the hotel tabs of public officials . Garrison said that he feels it is customary for casino tabs to be picked up .
 In 1987, a ‘colleague’ of mob author David Scheim claims Garrison had lunch with two of Carlos Marcello’s brothers, Sammy and Joe Jr. Garrison was district attorney in the 1980s .
 Garrison admitted to a reporter from Life magazine that he knew Sammy Marcello twenty years earlier . The allegation has to be looked at in the proper context, but it must be considered in context .
 New Orleans is the only state in the Union that operates under the old Napoleonic code . It's the heart of the state's only state of the Union, New Orleans, which operates under that code .
 New Orleans is an interesting blend of Old World sophistication and parochialism . Raffish and fun-loving, New Orleans has a rich history of New Orleans .
 A relatively big city, it has a small-town atmosphere where members of the ‘in’ crowd, from correct as well as incorrect society, often have innocuously incestuous relationships with each other .
 During the Clay Shaw trial, Judge Edward Haggerty Jr. used to stop by for a few drinks almost every night at the Rowntowner Motor Inn, a well-known watering hole in New Orleans for men of various ethical stripes .
 The establishment was owned by Frank Occhipinti, a real estate developer in New Orleans . He was a business partner on some of his acquisitions with Carlos Marcello . The establishment is now owned by a big real-estate developer .
 Chandler failed to cite at least one source when he made such a sensational charge, which he failed to do . Chandler is accused of sexual assault in the wake of a sexual assault scandal .
 John Volz, who worked in the DA’s office at the time, told me, “I don’t know where Chandler got those figures.” He says Chandler got the figures .
 Aaron Kohn, who came from Chicago in 1953 to head the New Orleans Metropolitan Crime Commission, said he was astonished at this . Kohn came to New Orleans in 1953 .
 In Chicago, people were generally on one side of the fence or the other—honest or crooked . In Chicago people were either honest or crooked. In Chicago they were on either side of a fence or not .
 Garrison purchased for $65,000 a two-story home in New Orleans that had been originally built by Occhipinti . Garrison purchased the home for the first time in 1965 . Garrison bought the home in 1965 for $35,000 .
 Garrison bought the home from a lawyer, Peter Casano, who was a partner in a law firm with Frank Occhipinti’s brothers . Casano was a law partner in the law firm that worked with the brothers of the brothers .
 Vic Carona, an alleged bagman for Carlos Marcello, died in Garrison’s home in June of 1969 after suffering a heart attack . Carona is alleged to have died in the home of Garrison in 1969 .
 Carona was attending a political meeting at Garrison’s home that many people undoubtedly attended, and there is no evidence that Garrison even knew Carona personally . Nor do the attackers mention that Carona attended the political meeting .
 John Volz is, to this day, a highly respected New Orleans public figure . Volz: "John Volz" is a New Orleans native . He says he is proud of his work in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 As noted in the main text, he was an assistant district attorney under Garrison between 1963 and 1968 . He headed up the narcotics section under Garrison .
 After a year as an agent for the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, he returned to the DA’s office . He then became the United States attorney in New Orleans for thirteen years .
 Garrison: "There has never been any evidence that Garrison was ever on the take or that there was any fixing of cases in return for political or monetary support" Garrison: “There has been no evidence of any fixing in return .
 Garrison was tied in with Marcello and organized crime in New Orleans, many have said . Garrison is accused of being involved in organized crime . Garrison was convicted of murder in 1998 .
 Garrison says he never came upon “any evidence that [Marcello] was the Mafia kingpin the Justice Department” said he was . Garrison: Critics fail to take into account that he never pursued the link because he never believed organized crime had anything to do with the assassination
 Sheridan doesn't name these clubs or offer any citation to support his allegation . Sheridan doesn’t mention these clubs, but offers no citation for support . Sheridan also doesn't offer a citation for the allegation .
 The only official document I came across suggesting an association between Garrison and a known mobster is a 1967 CIA Inspector General’s Report . Garrison's association with a mobster may have been a connection to the mobster .
 This was around the same time that Roselli (a major Mafia figure who was part of the CIA-mob plot to kill Castro), through his lawyer, Morgan, was believed to have given the scoop that Robert F Kennedy “may” have authorized an assassination plot on Castro .
 Report: Roselli-Garrison contact in Las Vegas in March was 'particularly disturbing' Report: The Roselli and Garrison contact in March is 'especially disturbing' The report goes on to say “the Roselli’s contact was particularly disturbing”
 It lends substance to reports that Castro had something to do with the Kennedy assassination in retaliation for U.S. attempts on Castro’s life . Castro was reportedly involved in the assassination .
 We do not know that Castro actually tried to retaliate, but we do know that there were such plots against Castro . We do know there was a plot to retaliate against Castro, but it is not clear if he actually did .
 The source of this information was Roselli’s CIA handler, James O’Connell . Roselli's CIA handler James O'Connell provided the information to CNN .
 There’s no indication precisely when and where the contact took place .
 It is unlikely Roselli would have taken a chance on destroying his relationship with the CIA by doing anything to harm the agency . The CIA could be a big help to Roselli in the future, he says .
 Garrison may have asked Roselli if there was anything he knew that could help him . It's possible Garrison took a chance to ask Roselli to help him in his case .
 Garrison was not a mob-controlled politician or had anything to do with organized crime . Garrison had no connection to organized crime, but any other contact would have been out of character for Garrison . Garrison was a prominent figure in Washington, D.C.
 Garrison was charged in two highly questionable federal prosecutions involving alleged contact by him with small-time organized crime . Garrison was accused of having contact with organized crime in the 1990s .
 In 1971, he was charged with receiving bribes to permit illegal pinball gambling in his parish . He was also charged with getting bribes to allow gambling in the parish .
 The government’s case at the 1973 trial was built around Pershing Gervais, once a key investigator on Garrison's staff, and two taperecorded conversations between Gervai and Garrison at Garrison’S. home .
 Gervais said he was the middleman between the pinball operators and Garrison . He claimed payoffs to Garrison ranged from $3,600 to $4,400 every two months . He admitted skimming between $700 and $1,400 off the top .
 Gervais said he started working with the feds against Garrison in 1969 . He said he worked with the federal government against Garrison . Garrison was convicted of murder in 1999 .
 Garrison fired his own lawyers midway through the trial and took over his own defense . Garrison claimed he loaned Gervais $5,000 in his time of need when he left the DA’s office in 1967 . Garrison said he was merely paying him the money back in increments
 The government recorded Gervais, who was wearing a wire, giving Garrison marked money . Some of the money was later recovered from Garrison’s home pursuant to a search warrant .
 In a recording of a conversation during one such payment, there is a very vague implication that it was payoff money . Garrison: IRS agents were outside with monitoring equipment at Garrison's home .
 He was thereafter prosecuted by the federal government, in 1974, for income tax evasion— failing to pay taxes on the alleged payoff money he received .
 Bill Turner was a straight-arrow guy, says CNN's John Sutter . Turner worked briefly with Turner in 1975 on the reinvestigation into the assassination of Robert F Kennedy . Turner is a "straight-arrow" guy, he says .
 Bill was very confident he knew who he was, someone he had worked under in the FBI’s Seattle office in the 1950s . The identity of “Deep Throat” surfaced in 2005 .
 Herb Caen reported in his inimitable column in the San Francisco Chronicle way back on February 13,1978, “Ex-FBIer Bill Turner is certain that Watergate’s ‘Deep Throat’ was former Asst. Turner .
 Stone simply could not resist inserting other lines in his movie to make his viewers believe maybe the mob was involved . Stone's movie is about the mob in New York City, New Jersey .
 Beverly Oliver is a totally discredited figure who most likely fabricated her entire story . She says on film that she knew Jack Ruby, Ruby “was with the mob,” and Oswald was Ruby’s friend .
 NBC poll: 51 percent of the American people believed Stone’s version of what happened . Within two months of the movie, an NBC poll reported that 51 percent .
 The center was originally located in Dallas’s West End . Larry Howard and J Gary Shaw were listed as codirectors . Larry Ray Harris was in charge of research. Larry Howard was listed in charge .
 The center was believed to be funded primarily by the late Washington, D.C., attorney Bernard Fensterwald Jr., founder of the Assassination Archives and Research Center in the nation's capital .
 Jim Garrison originally suggested that Braden (the name Brading was using at the time of the assassination) was a part of the conspiracy . Braden was a member of the Brading family .
 Braden, an ex-con on parole with a very long rap sheet, was in Dallas on November 22, 1963, arriving from out of town the previous night . Braden stayed at the Cabana Hotel in Dallas that night .
 There has never been any evidence that Braden met Ruby that night or had any association with him . Both may have known Joe Dolan, a gambler and hoodlum who definitely had known Ruby since 1957 .
 Braden was a crude oil producer headquartered in Beverly Hills, California, who had come to town on oil business with the approval of his parole officer in Los Angeles .
 The man was confronted by officers who asked him for his identification . He found the third-floor pay telephone out of order and returned to the ground floor .
 When he presented his credit card to the officer, the officer said he’d have to take him in for interrogation . The officer told him he'd have to be taken into custody for questioning .
 Garrison, of course, smelled a rat in Braden’s story and had his investigators pursue the matter . Garrison: “I’m not sure what happened to Braden, but I’ve got a lot of respect for him,” he said .
 When you can be cleared of conspiracy in the Kennedy assassination by the likes of Jim Garrison, you must be clean . You must be clear of conspiracy by Garrison .
 Edgar Eugene Bradley should also not be confused with Leslie Norman Bradley, who, according to a March 3, 1967, secret CIA memorandum (declassified and released in 1992 under the JFK Act), was a “solider of fortune and freelance pilot who was arrested by the Cuban G-
 Author Peter Noyes alleges that Braden had mob connections, and suggests his possible involvement in the assassination . In 1959, Bradley was arrested in Havana for involvement in Nicaraguan revamp .
 The mob, or whomever he was in league with, never paid him too well . But if he was, the mob or whoever it was, he was never paid well .
 On February 10, 1964, Braden was arrested at a San Fernando Valley market in Los Angeles for shoplifting twenty-five dollars’ worth of groceries . He was arrested just a few months after the assassination .
 Garrison blames others, not the lack of credible evidence against Shaw, for his defeat in the courtroom . Garrison says federal officials sought to suppress the truth . Garrison: "federal officials sought the truth"
 Garrison tried to extradite Shaw for his prosecution of Shaw . Two other attempted extraditions by Garrison didn’t even deal directly with Shaw’s prosecution .
 New Orleans bar owner Gordon Novel is a favorite of many in the conspiracy community . Novel has alleged CIA connections with an alleged CIA connection to the bar owner .
 In 1961, there was a burglary of a munitions bunker owned by the Schlumberger Well Surveying Company . The bunker was located at a blimp air base in Houma, Louisiana, located around forty miles southwest of New Orleans .
 Novel volunteered to Garrison’s office the details of the burglary in 1967 . The ostensible purpose was to secure weapons for the antiCastro effort .
 Novel was subpoenaed by Garrison to testify on March 16, 1967, before the Orleans Parish grand jury on the Houma matter, which he did, but before March 22, when he was scheduled for his second appearance, he left the jurisdiction . Novel was scheduled to testify in March 16
 Garrison claimed that two women who later moved into Novel’s apartment found a hidden, undated letter from Novel to a “Mr Weiss” in which he says he feared Garrison's investigation might expose his ties to the Double-Chek Corporation in Miami, an alleged CIA
 Novel was arrested on April 2, 1967, in Ohio on a New Orleans warrant stemming from the burglary charge . In his April 3 bail hearing in Columbus, he told the court, “I used to do work for Garrison.”
 Garrison "had a sense of humor and often spoke tongue-in-cheek," Volz said . Volz: Garrison had a "sense of humor" and spoke tongue in cheek .
 Novel could have been referring to Seymour Weiss, an executive at Standard Fruit . Weiss was a leader of the anti-Communist movement in New Orleans .
 Novel filed a $10 million defamation action in Columbus, Ohio, against Garrison and $1 million against each of the fifty members of Truth and Consequences, a New Orleans civic group of wealthy Garrison supporters . Garrison supporters were helping to finance his investigation .
 Garrison asked electronics expert to see if his office was being bugged by the feds, Volz says . Volz: "Jim’s office was definitely bugged" Novel: Garrison's office was bugged . Novel says Garrison had a reputation of being good at bugging and
 Garrison lost interest in Novel and decided not to pursue his extradition . Volz confirmed to me that Garrison . Garrison's extradition bid was dropped .
 He said the burglary case against Novel was dismissed by his office in late July of 1967 . Novel was convicted of burglary in 1967 .
 The CIA, in response to a Justice Department inquiry on September 18, 1967, said, “Novel. . has stated he is or was a CIA agent.” The CIA responded to the inquiry, saying he was or was an agent .
 In 1967, Novel’s Columbus, Ohio, attorney, Jerry Weiner, said, “It's utterly ridiculous.” Novels’ lawyer said in 1967, ‘It’�s utterly ridiculous .
 Clay Shaw’s attorneys, Salvatore Panzeca, and William Gurvich, the former investigator for Garrison who was now helping the defense team, flew to Columbus, Ohio, to interview Novel .
 The other extradition case involved Sergio Arcacha Smith, who participated in the Houma burglary with Novel . Novel is being extradited from Houma, Louisiana .
 Unlike Novel, there is little question that Arcacha, though not a CIA agent, worked closely with the CIA in the preparation for the Bay of Pigs invasion . Arcacha headed the Cuban Revolutionary Council in New Orleans and the CIA coordinated the invasion effort .
 Arcacha had been a captain in Batista’s army . He was a military attache under his father, a general, at the Cuban embassy in Paris . Arcacha was a captain and was a general under Batista .
 An educated and highly intelligent man, he was, above all, a Cuban patriot . He wanted to return to his Castro-free homeland, he said . He was an educated, intelligent man who wanted return to Cuba .
 Garrison filed conspiracy-to-commit-burglary charges against Arcacha for the Houma burglary . Garrison sought his extradition from Dallas, where he was then living, in 1967 . Garrison: Arcacha should have been extradited from Dallas .
 Garrison’s extradition request for Arcacha reached the desk of Captain Will Fritz of the Dallas Police Department, a former law enforcement source says . Garrison's extradition request reached Fritz's desk, the source says, according to the source .
 Fritz personally interviewed Arcacha, who told him, as Novel maintained, that the Houma burglary was really not a burglary at all . Novel maintained that Arcacha was not a burglar . Arcacha told Fritz that no one had been hurt in the home invasion .
 The anti-Castro “burglars” could get the munitions they needed for the planned Bay of Pigs invasion . Arcacha said someone at the Schlumberger corporation gave a key to the burglars or left the door to the munitions bunker unlocked .
 Schlumberger never reported the “burglary’s” to the authorities, a virtually automatic occurrence if the burglary were legitimate . A strong piece of circumstantial evidence that they were is that the company did not report the burglary to authorities .
 The date of the ‘burglary’ has never been established, although most writers say it occurred sometime in early 1961 . The Schlumberger company, headquartered in Houston, did not report the incident to police .
 Garrison, Novel, and Garrison, say the burglary took place around three months after the Bay of Pigs invasion . However, Novel and Garrison say the incident took place in mid-July of 1961 .
 The CIA says it had “no knowledge of utilization of commercial storage facilities of the Schlumberger interests or any other commercial firm’s . The CIA said it had no knowledge of any use of the storage facilities . The U.S. government says it has no record of
 The only arms bunker in the New Orleans area used by CIA was the Belle Chasse Ammunition Depot, a deactivated Navy installation eight miles from New Orleans . Another CIA document says that questioning of four employees of the Office of Logistics has shown that .
 Although the U.S. was for all intents and purposes at war with Cuba in that the government was making every effort to overthrow Castro, it was a “secret war’s” war . The United States was trying to overthrow the Cuban government, but it was
 Connally followed Fritz’s recommendation, his office giving another reason . Texas’ office gave another reason (the extradition request was not substantiated by the proper documents) for the refusal to extradite Arcacha .
 Interstate extradition is only mandatory under Article IV, Section 2, Clause 2 of the federal Constitution . The person has been charged with a crime in the requesting state, but interstate extradition is mandatory under the Constitution .
 Omaha police arrested her on a material witness warrant and she was freed on a one-thousand-dollar bond . She was freed pending a hearing on April 25 . Omaha police say she was arrested on material witness warrants .
 Moffett returned to New Orleans to appear before the grand jury on April 18-20 . Moffett was arrested in New Orleans on April 10, 1967 .
 Moffett denied being at Ferrie’s apartment, saying she never even met Ferrie until 1965, two years after the assassination . Moffett denies being at the apartment and says she never had any contact with Ferrie .
 Moffett abandoned the effort when Moffett let it be known she was not at Feme’s apartment . Feme was not in the apartment, Moffett said .
 Moffett's defense wanted him to testify, but Garrison wanted Moffett to testify . Moffett was convicted of attempted murder in the 1990s . Garrison and his prosecution staff said Moffett should testify, not Garrison .
 Moffett was amenable to return to New Orleans to testify for the defense at Shaw’s trial . Moffett said she was not at Ferrie's apartment at the time of the shooting .
 She didn't want to be drawn into the horror story unfolding in New Orleans by becoming another victim of Garrison’s prosecutorial madness . But she obviously didn’t want to become another victim . Garrison is charged with the murder of two women in the 1990s .
 Just before opening statements in the trial on February 6, 1969, the defense requested a court order granting her immunity from prosecution so she would feel safe returning to New Orleans to refute the testimony of Perry Russo .
 The prosecutor, James Alcock, however, strenuously objected, saying the court never had the authority to give Moffett immunity . Moffett was granted immunity by the court, but the prosecutor says it never had it .
 Alcock made a statement that apparently didn’t satisfy Judge Edward Haggerty because of the implicit threat it contained . Alcock: “I’m not going to apologize for anything that I’ve done wrong.” Alcock’s statement didn
 Judge Haggerty avoided the whole issue by not granting the defense’s motion for a protective order of immunity . He could not count on DA's office to not find some reason to arrest Moffett, he said .
 Garrison charged Layton Martens, a friend of David Feme’s, with perjury for perjury for denying before the Shaw grand jury that he knew Gordon Novel . Martens denies knowing Novel but says he knew Novel .
 Garrison charged Walter Sheridan, former FBI agent and RFK aide, with “public bribery” for offering Perry Russo employment and residence in California if he cooperated with NBC . Sheridan and Richard Townley, a reporter for the local NBC affiliate, WDSU-TY in New
 Russo accused Sheridan and Townley of everything contained in the later, July 7 charges against them . Russo never appeared on the show, and at a June 20, 1967, press conference in Garrison’s office, he accused Sheridan, Townley .
 Sheridan and Townley may, indeed, have done this in an effort to stop the prosecution of an innocent man, Shaw, for Kennedy’s murder . Shaw was found guilty of Kennedy's murder, but was never convicted .
 Sheridan as much as admitted that at least some kind of offer to Russo had most likely been made when he told the national NBC audience on June 19, 1967, “In my conversations with Perry Russo, he has stated that his testimony against Clay Shaw may be a combination of truth,
 He says he wishes he had never gotten into this, but now he feels he has no choice but to go through with it . "I feel like I have to do it," he says .
 Conspiracy theorists depict Sheridan as someone who was determined to undermine Garrison’s investigation by any sordid means available to him . They connect him, by innuendo, with the U.S. effort to cover up the assassination, these theorists believe .
 Sheridan was out to hurt Garrison’s investigation, but the reason is that he knew, as virtually all reasonable people did, that the investigation and prosecution of Clay Shaw completely lacked merit . It certainly is true that Sheridan was . But the reason, obviously, is that the reason he
 On June 12,1967, he, Edward Baldwin, Judge Malcolm O’Hara, and Walter Sheridan met in the cocktail lounge of the Bourbon-Orleans Hotel in the French Quarter .
 He filed perjury charges against Kerry Thornley, who was with Oswald in the Marines, when Thornley denied in front of a grand jury that he had been with Oswald .
 Barbara Reid, a reputed voodoo practitioner, had told Garrison she had spotted Thornley with Oswald at the Bourbon House, a restaurant in the French Quarter . Reid said she had seen Thornley and Oswald at that time .
 Twenty dollars was the point at which a theft became a felony, Gurvich’s attorney said . Gurvich's attorney said, “At the time in Louisiana, twenty dollars was a theft ... which would have entitled any defendant to a jury trial .
 John the Baptist was a savvy criminal who thought he knew his constitutional rights . He thought he was going to be able to defend his rights in court . He was convicted of being a criminal who knew his rights .
 As New Orleans’s premier burglar, he had visited without invitation some of the finest houses in New Orleans to ply his trade . He had visited some of New Orleans's finest houses .
 Perry Russo invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination before the Strate to get Strate’s friend Pershing Gervais, a top investigator for Garrison, to get Perry Russo to change his story .
 Sheridan also offered to use his influence to get Strate’s conviction reversed and get him a new trial . Strate was convicted of attempted murder of Strate in 2008 . Sheridan also has offered to help change Strate's conviction and get a second trial .
 Strate told Sheridan he didn't want any money and didn't need Sheridan’s help on the Chicago case . Strate said he didn’t need any money from Sheridan . Sheridan said Strate wanted to keep the case in Chicago .
 Strate said he reported the matter to Gervais, who said it was a bribery attempt, and he should report it to Garrison, which Strate did . Strate says he reported it to him, and that he should have reported it back to Garrison .
 Strate suggests that the meeting was set up by Judge O’Hara, who may have had full knowledge of the bribery attempt that was going to take place . Strate’s story even more unbelievable is that he strongly suggests that Judge O'Hara set up the
 Strate’s story would require our believing RFK didn’t want to know if Garrison knew who the murderers of his brother were, but was willing to commit the federal crime of bribery to stop Garrison . Strate: RFK wanted to know who Garrison knew .
 Garrison did bring unsuccessful bribery charges against Sheridan and Richard Townley for trying to bribe Russo directly . Garrison did not add an extra count of Sheridan’s alleged bribe of Strate, most likely because he didn’t believe Strate .
 He would have been safe relying on his Fifth Amendment rights anywhere else in the country . And absent a grant of immunity, he would have used the Fifth Amendment in the U.S.
 Garrison got a judge to hold Cancler in contempt of court and to sentence him to six months in jail and pay a fine of five hundred dollars, or serve a year in jail . Garrison also got the judge to order Cancler to pay a $500 fine or serve one year in
 Of all the criminal complaints Garrison filed and grand jury indictments he secured in the Shaw case, remarkably, the only one he pursued all the way to trial was the Dean Andrews case .
 Garrison either dismissed all the other charges or let the charges die through lack of timely prosecution . With the exception of the Shaw perjury case, which was dismissed by the court, all the charges were dropped .
 Garrison wanted to set an example and thereby intimidate any prospective opponent into compliance with his wishes . Garrison’s main aim was to intimidate opponents into compliance, Garrison said .
 He believed the charges would help confirm his bigger charge that he was fighting a mammoth conspiracy designed to thwart and sabotage his investigation . Also, he believed he was trying to prove that he had been framed up by a massive conspiracy .
 A worried Gurvich went to prosecutor James Alcock seeking his intercession . Gurvich sought Alcock's intercession. Gurvich said he was worried .
 Such a law would be so bizarre that I couldn’t imagine it existing even in Louisiana, a very charming but quirky state in many ways . But such a law is so bizarre it would be too bizarre to even exist in Louisiana .
 Dean Andrews was convicted of three counts of perjury in August of 1967, yet testified for the defense at Shaw’s trial in 1969 . The conclu834 ENDNOTES sive proof that no such law existed in Louisiana at the time .
 Charles Spiesel and Vernon Bundy testify in Clay Shaw's murder trial . The transcript of the testimony is available in transcript form from the National Archives . Two of the main witnesses, Vernon Bundy, is not .
 Neither the archives nor apparently anyone else has come up with these transcripts . Neither of these transcripts has been found .
 Shaw’s lawyer, Irvin Dymond, did something quite unexpected under the circumstances, something that created the opportunity, at least potentially, of pumping oxygen into a dying man . Charles Spiesel, to the DA's relief, finally left the witness stand a thoroughly discredited figure
 Spiesel asked the judge to direct the court and jury to take the jury to the brownstone building where he claimed he heard conspiracy talk to kill Kennedy . The judge, Edward Haggerty, said the judge should direct Spiesel to go to the building in the French Quarter .
 Everyone involved in the trial, including attorneys, jurors, bailiffs, Shaw, and the judge, went to the corner of Dauphine and Esplanade in the French Quarter . Over the DA’s objection, Haggerty agreed to it .
 Others were hanging out secondand third-story windows to see what was going on in the streets below . Some were hanging from second and third-floor windows .
 Traffic had been terrible that day in New Orleans because it was the first day of the Mardi-Gras celebration . Traffic was particularly bad that day because of the first-day of the celebration .
 He testified that of the two apartments, the second one was either the one in which the party took place or similar to it . Resuming the witness stand after lunch, he testified that .
 Dymond points out differences between sketch and description Spiesel made of apartment before search . Spiesel had taken the judge and jury to the actual building he had taken them to .
 Garrison’s office called to the witness stand whose credibility the defense wasn’t able to hurt on cross-examination . A husband and wife team, Mr and Mrs. Garrison, were the only witnesses Garrison's office called . The defense was able to use their credibility on cross
 Mr Tadin called the DA’s office on the morning of February 27, 1969, the second-to-last day of testimony . The two men were called to the stand later in the day .
 According to the Tadins, their deaf, 16-year-old son took flying lessons from David Ferrie . The Tadins say their deaf son took the lessons from Ferrie.
 They claimed they saw Ferrie and Shaw emerge from a hangar in New Orleans in 1964 . They claimed that one day in the summer of 1964 they were at the Lakefront Airport, New Orleans, when they saw them .
 Mr Tadin allegedly asked Ferrie if he had a new student, Ferrie replied, “No, he’s a friend of mine.” Ferrie said . Ferrie: “I’m a friend. I’ve been friends with a
 Mr Tadin said he recognized Shaw because he had seen him riding around Bourbon Street in his car several times . Shaw was arrested on suspicion of vehicular manslaughter in New Orleans .
 The Tadins were obviously either lying or simply mistaken in their identification of Shaw . But the Tadins are obviously not lying or just mistaken in identifying Shaw .
 The Tadins were last-minute witnesses, Shaw’s defense had no opportunity to check their story out or prepare an effective cross-examination . Shaw's defense didn’t have an opportunity to cross-examinate .
 Tadin said he saw Shaw driving around in a Thunderbird, but said it was a light cream or white in color . Shaw’s attorney, Irvin Dymond, asked Mr Tadin to describe the car he saw him driving in, but he had the make right
 Dymond asked Tadin why he waited to the end of the trial to come forward with his story that allegedly happened five years earlier . Tadin's opening statement, in which he said that Shaw didn’t know Ferrie, caused him to want to set the record straight
 Tadin conceded that he followed the preliminary hearing back in March of 1967 and knew way back then that a contested issue was whether Shaw knew Ferrie . Dymond’s opening statement on February 6, three weeks earlier .
 The Tadins coming forward so late in the game has to be viewed as highly suspicious . Certainly the Tadins come forward so very late in their investigation into the case is highly suspicious.
 In 1964, Clay Shaw was not a suspect in the Kennedy assassination . Shaw was a controversial New Orleans figure in any way . Shaw's trial was held in New Orleans in 1969 .
 In an obvious slip, Tadin was talking as if he had seen Shaw with Ferrie at some time after he became a suspect in the assassination . Tadin said Shaw and Ferrie were seen together at the time of the shooting .
 One of the Tadins' lawyers told a reporter after the trial that one of the jurors had told him the jury did not believe him . The trial judge, Edward Haggerty, apparently did . The Tadins were found guilty of attempted murder .
 Perry Russo was the only witness presented at the trial who claimed to have seen Clay Shaw at David Ferrie’s apartment . Jim Garrison was also a witness in the trial .
 Perry Russo, the star witness who “had never heard of Oswald” before the assassination, was Garrison’s star witness . The star witness was around whom Garrison virtually built his entire prosecution of Clay Shaw .
 Russo was a staunch Republican, having supported Nixon and Goldwater . Russo reportedly was joyous when he learned of Kennedy’s assassination .
 On February 22, 1967, Ferrie was found dead in his apartment . Russo says he wrote a short letter to Garrison, which he mailed the next day . Russo: Garrison's characterization of Ferrie as being one of history's most important individuals .
 At Shaw’s preliminary hearing, his lawyer asked Russo how, if he had witnessed the conspiracy to murder Kennedy, he could possibly think that the information he had “might not” be important to Garrison . Garrison. March 16, 1967, was April 16, when the
 Russo says he became acquainted with Ferrie through a friend who was a member of the Civil Air Patrol in New Orleans at a time when Ferrie headed the group . Russo: Ferrie became a friend of a friend, who was part of the civil air patrol . Russo says Ferrie
 Russo said he had several contacts with Ferrie, who he described as “screwy but sharp in a brainy way,” in the summer and early fall of 1963 when he was living in New Orleans . Russo had only known Ferrie for around eighteen months at the
 Russo made no mention of Oswald or Clay Shaw or Clay Bertrand to Bankston, or to being privy to any conspiracy to murder Kennedy . Russo was not privy of Oswald, Shaw or Bertrand .
 Garrison suspected Ferrie of being involved in the assassination, Kemp says . Garrison suspected him of involvement in the murder, he says . Ferrie was a member of Garrison's staff .
 Russo said Ferrie had “a roommate, but he was just sterile as regards to politics” Russo said that Ferrie was “just sterile” in politics .
 Russo says Ferrie had “three Spanishspeaking friends” with him at his home when Russo visited Ferrie one time . Russo added that Ferrie’s three Spanish-speaking friends were with him when he visited him . Russo: Ferrie also had ‘three Spanish
 Ferrie, Oswald, and Shaw allegedly conspired to murder Kennedy . No mention of being present at Ferrie’s home when the alleged plotters conspired .
 Russo also gave an interview to a Baton Rouge television reporter named Carrick and at least one other reporter whose name he could not recall, probably the Baton Rouge representative of station WDSU in New Orleans . Later that same day, February 24, Russo gave a final interview with a Baton
 Clay Shaw’s lawyer, Irvin Dymond, asked Russo, adding them up, “So that then would be a total of three in addition to Mr Bankston.” At Clay Shaw's trial, Shaw‘s lawyer said, ‘So that
 Garrison dispatched one of his assistants, Andrew "Moo Moo" Sciambra, to Baton Rouge to interview Russo at Russo’s home . The next day, February 25, he did the next day . Garrison, with just cause, dispatched a reporter to meet Russo at
 Sciambra wrote a detailed 3,500word memorandum to Garrison on February 27,1967, about his three-hour interview with Russo . Russo was the subject of an investigation into the death of the astronaut in 1966 .
 Sciambra's memo says Russo told him Ferrie was a homosexual who was “in love” with a young man named A1 Landry . Russo said he saw Ferrie several times in the company of a few Cubans dressed in green fatigues .
 Ferrie started talking about how easy it would be to assassinate a president, Russo tells Russo . Ferrie told Russo that he could plan the assassination himself, Russo says . Russo: Ferrie talked about the assassination in the summer of 1963 .
 Ferrie himself admitted to FBI agents that he probably had said that Kennedy ‘ought to be shot’ because of failing to provide air cover during the Bay of Pigs invasion . Russo, like so at Clay Shaw’s trial, asked the prosecution to produce the alleged letter,
 Lead trial prosecutor James Alcock told Judge Edward Haggerty Jr. “We have not been able to locate it, your honor. Your honor. We have not found it.”
 Ferrie was identified by the DA’s office as a member of the plot who was scheduled to be the pilot of the “getaway” plane . A large picture of Ferrie also was also on the front page of the DA's office .
 Russo waited until Ferrie died, and was thereby unable to refute his nonsense, before he came forward with his story . iBut he also told FBI agents Ernest Wall Jr. and Theodore Viater in their interview of him on November 27 that he had also been accused of being “
 There's no credible evidence Russo’s story was anything more to what he had told Bankston and Kemp . Russo's story is not more than what he said, according to a CNN report . Russo was charged with perjury in a federal court last week .
 Garrison, Sciambra, and the New Orleans DA’s office got through with Russo . The small kernel of truth had blossomed wildly into a huge corn-drewed conspiracy involving Ferrie, Oswald, and Clay Shaw .
 Russo acknowledged receiving psychiatric "treatment" for “maybe two years or a year and a half” between 1959 and 1961 . Russo: “I couldn’t get off,” he said . Russo says he received psychiatric treatment for ‘maybe two . years or
 Russo claims to have seen Clay Shaw in Ferrie’s presence . He says he has seen Shaw inside a compact car at a service station and another time at the Nashville Street Wharf . Russo identified one of the photos as being of Clay Shaw .
 Russo claimed Shaw had on “dark pants that fit very tightly and the kind of pants that a lot of queers in the French Quarter wear.” But Russo didn’t know enough about Shaw to tell a good lie, he lied .
 Shaw had on a corduroy type jacket which was black with white stripes” and he wasn’t looking at JFK at all,” he said . Shaw’s jacket was black and white, with black stripes .
 Russo made it obvious that he was looking at all the young boys in the crowd, including staring at the crotch of one he struck up a conversation with . Russo told Sciambra, "Instead of looking at the boys, he was actually looking at them, he looked at them all
 Shaw always dressed “on the conservative side” and that day was no exception, he says . He adds he had never seen Shaw wear tight pants, and never noticed it .
 Russo co-ran the station with his friend A1 Beauboeuf . Russo forgot his story at Shaw’s preliminary hearing .
 Sciambra wrote that Ferrie introduced him to someone he called his roommate . Russo showed him the photo of Oswald to Russo . Russo was a friend of Ferrie, who was also known as a roommate .
 Russo said he was willing to put under hypnosis to have total recall on things like names, places, and dates . Russo said the name of Ferrie’s roommate “really rings a bell,” adding that if he were placed under hypnotism, he might be
 Russo described “Leon,” Ferrie’s roommate, as someone with “dirty blonde hair and a husky beard” Russo later called it a “bushy” beard . Russo described the roommate as having a ‘husky’ beard
 Russo's version of how he identified Oswald as Ferrie's roommate differed substantially from Sciambra's version . Russo’s version of what he said about Oswald differed substantially . At Shaw's preliminary hearing, Russo said Oswald was the roommate of Ferrie Ferrie .
 Russo testified that he was unable to identify Oswald for Sciambra until “a member of the district attorney’s staff” (Detective Charles Jonau) “sat with me for six hours” painting whiskers on a photo of Oswald, Russo testified .
 Russo answered, “No,” but had no satisfactory answer for his change of testimony . Russo: "No, but no satisfactory answers for his changed testimony"
 Ruth Paine said Oswald was clean-shaven when she saw him in New Orleans . She said she never saw Oswald with a beard . Paine says Russo would later testify he saw Oswald in 1963 .
 Sciambra should have realized, from the description of a bushy beard and the extreme dirtiness of Ferrie’s roommate, that the roommate could not possibly have been Oswald . Russo must have been telling a fairy tale, and the roommate must be telling a tale .
 Sciambra should have discontinued his interest in Russo at this point . Russo should therefore have stopped interest in the Russo family .
 The June 19, 1967, NBC special on Garrison’s investigation of Shaw reported that Ferrie's dirty, beatnik roommate had been determined, by witnesses, to be Lewallen .
 Anderson’s observation, made after he saw Oswald only twice (when Oswald placed the order and when he picked it up, and then briefly, cannot be given the same weight as that of Alba, who knew Oswald well, and saw him for much longer periods over a few
 Mellen doesn't tell her readers that Anderson saw Oswald for the first time on June 3, 1963 . In any event, what Mellen tells her readers is that Anderson .
 June 3 was a Monday, a workday for Oswald at the Reily coffee company, which was a few blocks away on the same street where Anderson’s shop was .
 Oswald’s job at the Reily company, as we know, was greasing heavy equipment . Oswald's job at Reily was greased heavy equipment, as well as being greased .
 Oswald's clothing would seem to be dirty when he appeared at Anderson’s shop, probably during the noon lunch break, although Alba said he never saw Oswald dirty . Anderson said Oswald's clothes were probably dirty during the lunch break .
 Ferrie's friend says he never heard him mention Lee Harvey Oswald . Martens, who had known Ferrie for five years, says Ferrie never mentioned Oswald .
 Oswald wasn’t the person who shared an apartment with Ferrie in September of 1963 . Oswald was living with his wife and daughter, June, on Magazine Street in New Orleans, New Orleans .
 Russo said nothing about seeing Ferrie, Shaw, Oswald, and Oswald together . Russo said he saw Shaw in Ferrie’s apartment and heard them plot the murder of JFK Kennedy .
 Russo had too much potential for Garrison to let him go, even though from these first five interviews of Russo, the bell had already been rung on the fact that he had absolutely nothing of any value to say about any alleged conspiracy to murder Kennedy . Russo's potential is too much for
 The same day of Sciambra’s memo, February 27, he interrogated Russo under sodium pentothal at Mercy Hospital in New Orleans, New Orleans . Russo was the subject of the memo . Russo died February 27 .
 Contrary to what is popularly believed, sodium pentothal does not compel the subject to tell the truth . It is not necessary to tell a lie .
 It decreases inhibitions in the subject, making him more likely to express repressed information . Rather than decreasing inhibitions, it decreases the subject's inhibitions .
 There is substantial disagreement over the merits and reliability of narcoanalysis . Most states disallow the admissibility of sodium pentothal-induced statements unless both the prosecution and the defense agree on it .
 The introduction of sodium pentothal into his system by injection into his right arm caused an adverse physiological response . This is why the statements Russo made were made while under sodium . Russo calmed down and gave his questioner, Sciambra, what he wanted to hear .
 In a transcribed interview with William and Leonard Gurvich on January 29,1971, he said, “My head started spinning round and round . . and I started getting violent and upset,” causing the doctors to physically restrain him . William said: “I started getting
 Russo's helping Garrison break the crime of the century . Russo's help is a perfectly reasonable prologue to the crime .
 He said he saw Oswald at Ferrie’s apartment, “sitting on a chair with his leg up cleaning a rifle.” The memo says Oswald was sitting on the chair ‘sitting in a chair .’ He saw Oswald sitting on his chair with
 Oswald never had a bushy beard and was always very clean and neat, not scruffy and dirty like Russo said . Russo, and Sciambra, were going to have to live with the fact that Oswald had a clean, neat beard .
 Russo could add incriminating details to the story, but he could not contradict what he had already said . Because that is the first story Russo gave, Russo could not add new details . If he were going to have any credibility, he would not contradict his first story .
 You can add but not contradict what you previously said in this game . Ferrie says he saw Clay Shaw, not just twice, as he told Sciambra two days earlier, but one other time at Ferrie's apartment .
 Sciambra says he then asked Russo if he knew Clay Bertrand, and Russo said he did, and he was a queer . Russo then said he knew Bertrand and that he knew him as a gay man .
 Russo said Ferrie had introduced him to Bertrand while he was at Ferrie’s apartment on Louisiana Avenue Parkway . Russo: Ferrie introduced Bertrand to him while at his apartment . Russo says Ferrie's apartment was at the time .
 Sciambra, not Ferrie, first mentioned the name Bertrand to Russo . Ferrie first mentioned Bertrand in Russo's first interview with Russo, Russo .
 Russo never mentioned meeting any gray-haired older man at Ferrie’s apartment, much less introducing him as Clay Bertrand . In Sciambra interview with Russo, Russo never even mentioned meeting an older man in the apartment .
 Russo was a friend, of sorts, to Ferrie, and Russo was entitled to know all about such things . After all, Russo was an important friend, Ferrie says . Ferrie: Russo was "a friend" of sorts to him, and he's "right to know
 Russo had dinner with Garrison and Sciambra at the Royal Orleans Hotel in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 He had no other witness to connect Shaw to the Kennedy assassination . Shaw was a witness in the case, but had no connection to the assassination .
 No prosecutor I’ve ever known would have arrested Shaw at that point for the most serious murder in American history . Even if Russo had been an excellent witness, unless there was a fear that Shaw would flee the jurisdiction, as was not the case here, Shaw would have been arrested
 He would have taken the matter to the grand jury, and by subpoenaing witnesses and putting investigators to work, he would have built a prosecutable case against Shaw .
 Garrison had Shaw placed under arrest for conspiring with Oswald and Ferrie to murder Kennedy . But instead, just two days later, Garrison placed Shaw under arrest .
 Prosecutor Sciambra and prosecutor A1 Oser took Russo to the office of Orleans Parish coroner Nicholas Chetta . Dr. Chetta's office is located in the Orleans Parish office of the coroner .
 Esmond A Fatter hypnotized and questioned Russo in the presence of a stenographer . Russo was questioned by Fatter, a New Orleans physician and hypnotist . Fatter is a hypnotist who hypnotized Russo .
 Russo hypnotized a friend before the friend had sex with his girlfriend . Russo is a self-styled hypnotist who hypnotizes others .
 The only new detail emerged from the hypnosis session was that Oswald and Shaw actively participated with Ferrie in the assassination discussion . Ferrie: "Oswall, Shaw and Ferrie actively participated"
 Russo said the discussion in Ferrie’s home took place on September 16, 1963 . Russo said it took place in the home of Ferrie in 1963 . Ferrie died in 1994 .
 Russo said there was a beer-drinking party at Ferrie’s apartment that evening . Four Cubans, two Americans, and Russo's girlfriend, Sandra Moffett, were also there, but were in ‘the kitchen’
 Garrison had Russo take a polygraph test before the next hypnotic session on March 12 . Garrison, the chief prosecuting attorney at the Shaw conspiracy trial, testified that the only witness against Shaw at the time of his arrest was Russo .
 Garrison did not rebut this testimony, even when this court confronted him with it . Garrison didn't rebut it, even though he was confronted by the court . Garrison was convicted of perjury in a federal court trial .
 DA's office posed as an insurance salesman posing as insurance salesman from Mutual of Omaha . For identification purposes, the DA’s office had Russo, posing as a salesman, knock on Shaw's door .
 Russo told his DA handlers that Shaw, who came to the door, was the man he had seen at the wharf and in Ferrie’s car and home . Russo said Shaw came to his door and said he was Ferrie's alleged killer .
 When Fatter asked Russo the leading question, “Is Clay Bertrand the same person you went to sell insurance to yesterday?” Russo did not say yes or no .
 "You will see the face of a white-haired man. So the heavy-handed Fatter proceeded to tell Russo, “You will ... see it," he told Russo .
 The test, on March 8, was administered by Roy Jacob, a polygraph expert for the Jefferson Parish sheriff’s office .
 The polygraph operator said that Russo’s test reflected “deception” on his part . With his answer of “yes” to the two questions of whether he knew Clay Shaw and Lee Harvey Oswald, the polygraph operators said . Russo's test reflected "
 Fatter put Russo under his hypnotic spell again, but this time he didn't use the imaginary TV screen as a technique . Fatter did not utilize the imaginary television screen .
 “When you get to the bottom of that staircase .. . you will be very deeply asleep,” he told Russo . “You will be deeply asleep.”
 Perry: "Now look up the hall, Perry, and about fifty feet up, I’d like for you to walk in front of that door. Now look up, Perry" Perry says . Perry says, "I’m not going to let it slide down the
 You needn’t worry about it because we’re all here and we're all going to take good care of you,’s dad says . "We’ll all go to good care," he says of his son, who is in a stable condition
 Russo said he went to Ferrie's apartment with Sandra Moffett and his friend Lefty . Russo repeated that allegation at Shaw’s preliminary hearing on March 15 .
 At Shaw’s trial, Russo, having learned that both Peterson and Moffett had denied, in the June 19,1967, NBC special on Garrison, being at any party at Ferrie's when Shaw and Oswald were in attendance, no longer included them as being at the party
 Russo then added a detail that had already been hypothesized and very well publicized by the conspiracy theorists . Russo would most likely have heard it in the media many times, and hence, Russo would have likely heard it many times .
 Ferrie assured Bertrand he would handle everything, including flying all the assassins out of the country . Ferrie said he would fly them out of country . Bertrand said Ferrie would fly the assassins .
 Clay Shaw was at the San Francisco World Trade Center on the day of the assassination . It had been reported in the New Orleans newspapers a week before the second hypnotic session . Russo added another nice little touch to his fairy tale .
 Ferrie told his co-conspirators that they’d have to “establish alibis” for themselves by being seen “in public” on the day of the assassination . Ferrie, he said, told them they'd have to establish alib
 Bertrand said he would “go to the coast on business” that day, per Russo . Bertrand: "I'm not going to go to the beach on business"
 Clay Shaw knew that he could only be seen in public in San Francisco, twenty-five hundred miles away . Clay Shaw was in public for the first time in his life .
 Wherever he'd be in New Orleans, even in the middle of Bourbon Street, he apparently believed he’d be invisible to others and hence have no alibi . He apparently believed that he wouldn’t be visible to others in the city .
 If a conspirator, say Shaw, needed to establish an alibi, the best way to do so would have been to stay at his desk at the Trade Mart in New Orleans, where everyone knew him, not go to a distant city where he was largely unknown . If the upcoming
 It was all nonsense, of course, but no matter, fringe conspiracy theorists were willing to buy any allegation of conspiracy, no matter how absurd . No matter, the conspiracy theorists are willing to believe any allegation, even though it's obviously fabricated, is nonsense .
 Garrison devotees have apparently never been troubled by the question of why Shaw and Ferrie would select Oswald, of all people, as their hit man . They had no way of knowing that the president would even come back to New Orleans, where Oswald lived at the time .
 Russo claims he heard Shaw say he would “go to the coast on business” to establish an alibi . Russo: Shaw received another letter from the First National Bank in Portland thanking him for having “accepted our invitation” Shaw was invited to speak on international relations
 He arrived in San Francisco by train on November 21, did not speak on November 22 because of the assassination . After spending a few days in Los Angeles, he spent the next few days traveling to Portland . He left San Francisco for Portland on November 23, and spoke at the Rotary
 On March 14, two days after Russo's last session with Fatter, Shaw’s preliminary hearing commenced, and Russo was the main witness testifying against him . Shaw was charged with attempted murder of Russo in March .
 Russo: "I never said I wanted to see President Kennedy killed" Russo says he never said he wanted to kill Kennedy . Russo says Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Oswald and Shaw did protest his presence in the room, he said . However, he added that they did protest Oswald's presence . He added that Oswald, Shaw and others did protest .
 Russo testified he never said one word during the entire conspiracy session . Russo frequently went to the window to see if Lefty Peterson had returned to drive him home .
 A preliminary hearing usually finds there is sufficient evidence to require the defendant to go to trial . Defense lawyers usually treat it like a discovery proceeding to learn what the prosecutor’s case is, and don’t even present a defense .
 Shaw's trial is not significant, with no witnesses being offered to rebut the charges . Shaw is charged with murder, kidnapping, sexual assault and other crimes against him .
 Judge: "This wasn’t a question of guilty or not guilty" Judge: “This was a matter of not guilty. This wasn't a question . It was a decision of whether to convict, not guilty,’s one judge says .
 After taking the attachment off Russo’s body, he proceeded to interview Russo . However, after taking off the attachment, he went on to interview him .
 He was asked if this conversation he heard at Dave Ferrie’s apartment sounded like a legitimate plot to assassinate Kennedy . He was then asked if it was a legitimate assassination plot .
 Two of Garrison’s lead detectives went to O’Donnell's office that day . O'Donnell was charged with the murder of Garrison . Garrison's lead detectives say he was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 O’Donnell, a seventeenyear veteran of the force, started to dictate the written report to Garrison, which he delivered the next day . Garrison, the New Orleans superintendent of police, among other officials, got copies of the report .
 Garrison asked Russo if what O’Donnell said in his report was true, Garrison said . Russo says Garrison said it was true in a meeting with Alcock, Sciambra and Russo .
 Russo admitted that O’Donnell’s report accurately reflected what he had told him . The ruse worked and Russo admitted he had lied to the reporter .
 Garrison tried to get O'Donnell fired, but he was unsuccessful . O’Donnell went on to testify on behalf of Shaw at Shaw’s trial in 1969 . Garrison was unsuccessful in trying to get him fired .
 Shaw jury's swift not-guilty verdict showed they rejected Russo’s fairy tale out of hand . Shaw jury acquitted Russo of all counts of attempted murder, murder and murder .
 Jury foreman Sidney Hebert: "The whole case rested on the testimony of Perry Russo. The whole case rests on Perry Russo," Hebert said .
 Garrison’s entire case had, indeed, been built around Russo's testimony that he heard Ferrie, Shaw, and Oswald conspire to murder Kennedy . Russo testified at the trial that on one occasion at a party in Ferrie's home in September of 1963, he heard .
 Russo himself, as we have seen, was devoid of all credibility . Garrison, during the trial, was unable to come up with one single witness to corroborate Russo’s fable .
 Garrison learned before the trial that one witness who Russo said was at Ferrie's house on the day in question, Lefty Peterson, said that Shaw and Oswald were not at the party . Sandra Moffett, Russo’s one-time girlfriend, said she never met Ferrie
 The reader should know by now how conspiracy authors handle inconvenient witnesses like Peterson and Moffett . Peterson is a prominent figure in the conspiracy movement . Moffett is a former FBI agent who worked for the U.S. House of Representatives .
 New Light on the Jim Garrison Investigation , they simply don’t mention Peterson and Moffett . Peterson, Moffett and Garrison were the subject of investigation .
 Russo said he needed truth serum and hypnosis to recall hearing three people plot to murder President Kennedy . Russo’s fable remains a myth among conspiracy theorists who still cling to the fable .
 For instance, a mother asking him to try to get her son away from the amorous advances of David Ferrie was a much more important event than a conspiracy to murder the president . The president could remember the former but not the latter .
 The conspiracy buffs can’t even make the argument that hearing a plot to murder Kennedy was such a traumatic shock to Russo’s psyche that he subconsciously suppressed it . Russo: Hearing a plot was so traumatic to Russo that he suppressed it. Russo: "I'm not
 Ferrie told Bankston, Kemp, and Sciambra about Ferrie’s talking about the possibility of killing Kennedy . That argument won’t fly because he said Bankston told the other three men that Ferrie had talked about killing Kennedy, they say .
 Russo admitted to one of Shaw's lawyers, Edward Wegmann, that he did not see Shaw in Ferrie’s apartment . Russo said he had been brainwashed by Garrison's office into saying he did see Shaw . Russo admitted on January 26, 1971, to Weg
 Russo gave a tape-recorded interview in the office of William Gurvich to Gurvich and two of Shaw’s attorneys, Wegmann and Dymond . Russo gave the interview on April 16, 1971 .
 His words of recantation, alone and by themselves, are worthless, since he had no credibility on this case from the very beginning . But his words alone and alone, alone, they are worthless . His words were worthless, but he had credibility from the beginning of the case,
 Russo's statements to Lambert and Posner do not appear, at least on their face, to be complete recantations . They apparently didn't ask him if he made his entire story about Shaw up .
 At least theoretically he could have meant that he told the truth about Ferrie, Oswald, and Shaw being together, but he believed Shaw was innocent . He recognized that his testimony and the rest of the case against Shaw was not enough to convict .
 Russo recantation only pertained to Shaw being present at any meeting at Ferrie’s house discussing a proposed assassination . It has to be noted that even Russo’re recantations to Shaw’�s lawyers and Gurvich only pertain to the meeting at
 Davy's 1999 book on the case, Let Justice Be Done, in which he defends the Garrison investigation, never mentions that Russo told him a different story from the one he told Shaw’s lawyers and Gurvich in 1971 . Davy doesn't do the natural thing and quote
 If Russo told Davy that his recantation was not real, it is inconceivable that Davy would not have spotlighted this in his book . Russo was Garrison’s main witness, and his case alone destroys Garrison's case . Davy: If Russo's recant
 Davy says Russo interviewed him on August 30, 1994, five years before publication of Davy’s book . Davy's book was published in 1994 . The Saturday Evening Post article that exposed Garrison's case was a cover story .
 Phelan’s article received wide circulation and contained extremely damaging revelations about Garrison’S case for the vast press corps covering the case . Phelans’ article received widespread circulation and had extremely damaging .
 Hundreds of reporters from around the world, including the Soviet Union, converged upon the Crescent City . Phelan writes in his article that when he arrived in late February he was only one of hundreds of reporters .
 There's a certain poetic justice here in that if Garrison had not given Phelan the Sciambra memo, there’s a good chance that Shaw's lawyers would never have learned of it and, hence, would not have used it to destroy Russo's credibility . Garrison,
 At the time in Louisiana, the defense had no legal right to discovery of the prosecution’s evidence, including witness statements . The defense was denied discovery of evidence in the case . The case was the first of its kind in Louisiana .
 Garrison’s office called a few days later to set up lunch with the DA at the New Orleans Athletic Club . Garrison's office set up the lunch with Garrison at the N.O. City Council .
 Phelan says he was interrupted by club members who complimented him on his new undertaking . But they never discussed the Kennedy investigation at lunch, he says .
 Garrison said he intended to go to Las Vegas for the weekend for a rest . Garrison told Phelan he was exhausted from the ordeal and said he was going to go for a break .
 For two days at the Sands Hotel in Las Vegas, the two talked for around ten hours on the case .
 Phelan wrote about his encounter with Garrison in the Post article and in a subsequent book, Scandals, Scamps, and Scoundrels . Garrison is a well-known figure in Washington, DC .
 What it took to learn what really happened in Dallas was imagination and evaluation . "What it took was imagination, evaluation and evaluation. What really happened was imagination," says author .
 Garrison told Phelan the case boiled down to a homosexual conspiracy masterminded by David Ferrie . Garrison said Ferrie masterminded the case, Garrison said . Garrison: Ferrie was masterminding the homosexual conspiracy .
 Kennedy was a virile, handsome, successful man, everything Ferrie was not . Kennedy was everything he was not. Kennedy was also a successful man. Ferrie is not .
 Garrison claimed Oswald and Ruby, as well as Shaw, were homosexuals and involved in the plot . Garrison said Oswald, Ruby and Shaw were homosexuals . Garrison claimed the plot was a cover-up .
 Garrison: "I’m going to give you something that no one knows about but my top people" Garrison said to Phelan: "No one knows [Phelan] about ... but my [top] people." Garrison said he was going to reveal something to P
 Phelan, his head spinning, drove back to the Dunes, where he was staying, thinking that millions of people had been speculating for weeks about what he had uncovered . He had it in his jacket pocket, and it was in his pocket .
 Phelan writes that the first document he looked at “was a long memorandum from Garrison’s assistant setting forth what Perry Russo had said in his first interview . The other was a transcript of what Russo had . said four days later , under hypnosis .
 The two versions, from the same witness, told two completely different stories . The witness's version of events was the same as that of a witness .
 In 1963 Phelan spent ten days in New Orleans with Garrison and wrote a laudatory piece in the Saturday Evening Post about Garrison’s cleaning up vice in the French Quarter . He chose not to confront Garrison with the gross .
 Garrison invited Phelan to his home that night, promising to have Sciambra there to explain everything . Garrison invited him to his house to discuss the situation . Garrison said he would not reveal what he had done .
 Phelan writes, “There were four of us in Garrison’s study when I questioned Sciambra—Garrison, Sciamba, a private investigator named William Gurvich, who assisted Garrison on his probe, and myself.”
 Sciambra asked why his report on Russo's first interview with him said nothing about an assassination plot . Russo is a former CIA operative who worked for the government in the 1990s . Russo was interviewed by the White House on Monday . Russo's interview with Sciambura was the first
 I told him I had read his report carefully and knew exactly what it was in it . "I told him he had read it carefully," he said of the report .
 Sciambra said he had been ‘awfully busy with a half dozen other things and had to sandwich in the report and might have forgotten’ to include everything . He added that he had to 'sandwiched in' the report .
 He said it seemed incredible that he would uncover testimony that might solve the crime of the century and then forget to report it . "It seemed incredible," he said. "That's incredible"
 Fatter asked Russo where he got the information he used in prompting Russo under hypnosis . Fatter also asked Russo if he knew where he was going to get the information from him . Russo said he was in the process of questioning Russo about his actions .
 Gurvich disputed Sciambra’s story that he had written the memo in a hurry and might have forgotten to mention the assassination plot . Gurvich said he had been writing a memo to discuss the assassination .
 Sciambra worked on the memo for days, rewriting and polishing it, he told Phelan . He said it was the most important report he had written in the investigation . Sciambras said he had worked on it for days .
 Sciambra, in his own words, gives the lie to his later allegation that he simply forgot to put in the memo Russo’s telling him about seeing Shaw in the apartment discussing the assassination plot, which, if true, would have been the third time Russo had seen Shaw
 Sciambra wrote, “The next picture that he identified was that of Clay Shaw.” The next picture, he identified, is that of Shaw. “Clay Shaw,” he wrote .
 The first time he pulled into Ferrie’s service station to get his car fixed was when he pulled up to get it fixed . He was the first person to pull up to Ferrie's service station .
 Shaw was the person who was sitting in the compact car talking to Ferrie . Shaw was in the car with Ferrie when she was talking to him . Shaw is also the driver of a compact car .
 At Shaw’s trial, Sciambra was trapped by the omission (in the memo of his interview with Russo in Baton Rouge) of any references to Russo telling him about seeing Shaw, Ferrie, and Oswald in Ferrie's apartment and hearing them discuss assassinating Kennedy .
 He testified that he didn't bother to mention it because he didn’t complete dictating the memo until sometime between March 4 and 7 . By that time he had already written about this conspiratorial meeting in an earlier memo, he testified .
 He claimed there was no need to mention it in the memo of the Baton Rouge meeting, even though he conceded this latter memo was a “detailed, seven-page memorandum” of the meeting . So, he claimed, there was . no need for mention of it in
 Sciambra got caught up in his lies more than once on the witness stand . Sciambura's lies were often repeated on the stand .
 He said he “burned’s notes of his February 25 interview of Russo “very shortly” after he dictated his memorandum of the meeting, he said . The interview took place on February 25 .
 He denied he had told Jim Phelan that he had included the alleged conspiratorial meeting between Ferrie, Shaw, and Oswald in his memo of his February 25 interview . But then he made the mistake of admitting he had asked him if he could see his notes of his interview of
 Conspiracy theorist William Davy, in Let Justice Be Done, goes on to allege that actually, when Phelan later interviewed Russo Russo, Russo told him about the Bertrand-Ferrie-Oswald assassination plot conversation he heard . Russo said that when Sciambra interviewed him
 Davy quotes Lane as turning the tables on Phelan by asking him about his crucial Sciambra-like omission . Lane allegedly told him that he was bucking a tight deadline and therefore that point might have been lost . Davy says he quotes the author as saying Phel
 There was no way for Davy to perform such verbal legerdemain with the Bill Bankston article in the Baton Rouge newspaper on February 24 (Russo’s very first interview on the case) or TV interview of Russo on station WAFB .
 Davy virtually ignores the Bankston article, not giving the date of the article and not mentioning Bankston’s name . He also ignores the fact that the article never quoted Russo as saying anything about Lee Harvey Oswald, Clay Shaw, or “Clay Bertrand”
 Davy simply ignores altogether Kemp’s TV interview (as well, of course, as that of the two other TV interviews) of Russo . Davy says Russo's interview with Kemp was in a different context .
 Jim DiEugenio was chairman and coeditor of Probe, a valuable bimonthly publication on what was new in the Kennedy assassination . He says Davy is a sincere conspiracy theorist who thinks rationally about the assassination from time .
 DiEugenio wrote a whole piece on Phelan’s connection to the FBI, adding that the “ Saturday Evening Post has had ties to the . FBI” also, as if the FBI was a corrupt, evil organization, and anyone associated with it must likewise
 DiEugenio's attack on Phelan to destroy his credibility in Garrison case is wrong on two grounds, one absolute and one conditional . He would have thought through the issue through, he would have seen that his attack was wrong .
 DiEugenio is willing to say that he believes the FBI murdered Kennedy, or Hoover ordered a cover-up for those who did . Phelan being an informant for the FBI would only have relevance if he believes Kennedy was murdered, or not the FBI .
 Phelan’s alleged association with the FBI doesn’t go anywhere unless the FBI had Kennedy murdered, or were accessories after the fact to his murder . In other words, the FBI may have had Kennedy killed, and the FBI did not have Kennedy murdered . Phel
 The absolute ground is that Phelan’s credibility is not at issue in the RussoGarrison story inasmuch as the subject documents speak for themselves . The absolute truth is that the documents speak out for themselves, and that the credibility of the author of the story is not
 Phelan was simply the first one to expose the fraudulence of the DA's case based on Russo’s statements, he says . Russo's statements were based on the statements made by the DA .
 Three documents show Russo had nothing of any value at all to say about the Kennedy assassination . Even if Phelan did not exist, the three documents show that Russo had no value .
 "Whatever he said of any value thereafter was invented by him or fraudulently induced," he said . Whatever he said was invented, he said, "It's not worth anything"
 Phelan called the FBI in Washington a month before he exposed Garrison to the Saturday Evening Post . The FBI memorandum from FBI Assistant Director Robert Wick set forth his findings in an FBI memorandum .
 Three-page memorandum says Phelan had information he wanted to pass along regarding Garrison’s investigation in New Orleans . However, the first paragraph of the three-page memo reads that Phelans had “called my office today and said he had information’
 Pro-Garrison conspiracy theorists have vilified journalists like Phelan and Hugh Aynesworth for their aggressive and biased reportage against Garrison and his case against Shaw .
 Garrison was prosecuting an innocent man, Garrison said . Garrison was innocent, Garrison knew he was going to be innocent . Garrison's lawyers knew Garrison was trying to protect him from prosecution .
 In the Garrison case, even if the media believed, indeed knew, that an innocent man was being prosecuted for murder, the theorists believe it was the duty of the Phelans of the world to shut up .
 Lisa Pease decries the mainstream media’s acceptance of the Warren Commission . She says the media didn’t have “the guts to stand up and say hey . . Here’S the real truth” about the assassination, she says .
 Shaw's Cadillac pulled up across the street from the registrar’s office where the Congress of Racial Equality was organizing a voter registration drive for black people in the area . The key witnesses testified at Shaw's trial that one morning in late August or early September of 1963, a large
 Shaw and Ferrie, they said, stayed in the car, and Oswald got in line to register . Oswald, Ferrie and Shaw said, "You can't go to the polls, you can't get to the polling place" Oswald, who was in a car, got in
 No documentary evidence has ever surfaced showing that Oswald, in fact, registered to vote . Oswald was a member of the Oswald gang in the early 1940s .
 The original statements of the Clinton witnesses to Garrison’s investigators in 1967 were not nearly as clear and tidy as their trial testimony . The Clinton witnesses' original statements to Garrison's investigators weren’t nearly as tidy as the trial testimony.
 Oswald came to his barbershop in an old and beat-up car, possibly a Nash or Kaiser . A Jackson barber said that a day or so before the CORE registration drive, he cut Oswald’s hair, and the car Oswald came in was an old Nash
 He said that a young woman was in the car with him, and he saw a baby bassinet in the backseat . He said he saw the baby in a backseat of the car . The baby was in a bassinet, he said .
 Clay Shaw identified Clay Shaw as the driver and Guy Banister as a passenger in the backseat . From photos shown him, he identified the driver as Clay Shaw . He said he was in the passenger seat .
 In a later interview, he identified Jack Ruby as the driver and said Shaw was in the front passenger seat and Guy Banister in the rear seat of the car . Jack Ruby identified Shaw as the passenger in the passenger seat, and Banister as the rear passenger .
 Marina also testified under oath to most of these things at the Shaw trial .
 Few people have questioned the integrity of the Clinton witnesses, but few, other than Garrison, thought there was any merit to their observations . Garrison: "There was no merit" to Garrison's observations. Few people thought there were any merit .
 A former East Feliciana Parish district attorney, Richard H Kilbourne, told author Patricia Lambert, “I said from the time I first heard about [the allegations] that I didn’t think there was a thing on earth to it and I still feel that way.
 Witnesses who did not identify Shaw, Ferrie, or Oswald ended up identifying one or more of them at the trial . For instance, witnesses who didn't identify Shaw or Ferrie were eventually identified at trial . Shaw and Ferrie are accused of shooting Oswald in 1968 .
 Assistant DA Andrew Sciambra writes about the difficulty of getting blacks who were at the voter registration drive in Clinton to identify Shaw, Ferrie, and Oswald from photographs shown to them .
 The key to solving the problem of what caused the Clinton witnesses’ improved memory very probably was a photograph . The New Orleans DA’s office showed to these witnesses, the Times reported .
 Author Patricia Lambert found an investigator, Anne Hundley Dischler, who worked for five months on the case on assignment to Garrison .
 Dischler saw the photograph but never had possession of it, saying the photo received special treatment . Dischlers says the photo was given "special treatment" for the photo .
 The photo, she discovered, had been shown to Clinton witnesses before she came aboard the investigation . The photo was shown to the Clinton witnesses, she said .
 Conspiracy theorists frequently include within the Clinton witnesses group one Henry Burnell Clark, who did not testify at Shaw’s trial . Clark did not, however, testify at the trial .
 In an affidavit in 1967, he said he saw a “tall man” in a business suit walking down the main street of Clinton . He said the man reminded him of a ‘movie actor’ he had seen on the screen .
 Clay Shaw identified, from photos shown him, as the man he saw . He didn’t say whether or not he saw anyone else in the car, but identified him as Clay Shaw .
 He said he saw a man with bushy, unusual hair that “stood up in all directions” on his head . The man says he saw the man on the main street with the unusual hair .
 He identified the man from photos as David Ferrie, but did not put Shaw and Ferrie together . Shaw identified Ferrie from photos, but didn't put him together . Ferrie identified Shaw as David Shaw from photos .
 Author James Kirkwood sought to interview Clark before the Shaw trial started in 1969 . Clark told Kirkwood, "Go ’way, man. Go 'way' man."
 Dischler said it looked like Clay Shaw was in the driver’s seat and Clay Oswald was the passenger . Oswald was also in the passenger's seat . Dischlers said it was not clear who was Clay Shaw or Clay Oswald .
 Garrison, understandably, did not use the photo at the trial and it has never surfaced . Garrison's photo has never been found . Garrison was convicted of sexual assault in 1998 .
 The HSCA did a very thorough job of investigating many aspects of the assassination, but the Clinton witnesses, apparently, were not one of them .
 The HSCA used the wrong adjective, “credible,” in assessing the statements of the witnesses, it would seem . By saying the witnesses were telling the truth “as they knew it,’s not ‘credible’, the HSC
 The House Select Committee apparently felt about the witnesses was “honest,” which is not synonymous at all with ‘credible,’ which means worthy of belief . That perhaps the correct word to describe how the committee apparently felt was ‘honest”
 This is remarkable, and a bad reflection on the HSCA, since, as we shall see, the Clinton witnesses had virtually no credibility . As we will see, as well as Clinton witnesses, we will hear from Clinton witnesses . We will find out that Clinton witnesses have virtually no
 There is no indication in the HSCA’s brief writing on the incident that the committee ever became aware of the earlier statements and affidavits of the witnesses to Garrison’�s investigators, which contain much confusion and myriad inconsistencies .
 The HSCA had never spoken to Anne Dischler, a key figure they had never even spoken to . Lambert took it further, locating the key figure in the organization's search for the missing woman . The project is now in the hands of the National Security Council .
 Two outside investigators were part of the original investigation in 1967 . Dischler and Fruge, a Louisiana State investigator, were the two outside investigators of Garrison's .
 During a two-day interview at Dischler’s home in Eunice, Louisiana, in 1994, Lambert pore over all her notes, important parts of which were never incorporated into any known, surviving report or affidavit . Lambert: "The truth is that there is
 Most revealing in Dischler’s notes was the statement of a black man who was the chairman of the Clinton chapter of CORE at the time of the incident . Corrie Collins, a CORE chairman, was chairman of Clinton chapter CORE .
 The other man was identified as Winslow Foster, an employee at a nearby hospital . Dischler was able to positively identify one of the men as a hospital employee .
 Lambert learned from Estus Morgan’s widow, Nellie Louise, that her husband “wore blue jeans” most of the time . One of his friends was Winslow Foster, a friend of the late Morgan's .
 Lambert learned from Dischler that as soon as the Morgan-Winslow names were mentioned in her investigation, Garrison took her and Fruge off the case . Garrison took Lambert off the investigation after she learned of the names .
 Prior inconsistent statements like this by Clinton witnesses were the norm in this case . Clinton witnesses have been inconsistent statements from Clinton witnesses .
 William Dunn, also black, identified Clay Shaw in the front passenger seat of the black Cadillac, and Thomas Edward Beckham, also in the passenger seat . Dunn identified Shaw as one of the suspects in the January 17, 1968 murder .
 Dunn, who was working for CORE at the time of the alleged incident, said there were one or two other white males in the car, whom he could not identify . Dunn said he was not sure if the other white men were in the vehicle .
 In a January 21, 1969, affidavit, he identified Oswald and David Ferrie as being the only two other people in the car with Shaw . At Shaw’s trial, he recalled seeing Oswald in the registration line and said there “maybe” was one other person in
 Palmer and Manchester were unreliable and impressionable people, or whether they simply fabricated their story . Whether Palmer or Manchester were honest or fabricated their stories is not clear .
 Palmer’s first formal interview was fraught with improbabilities . For instance, Palmer was given a formal interview with CNN . Palmer's interview with the White House is a first of many .
 Palmer told investigators from the New Orleans DA's office that he saw Oswald and Clinton the first week of October 1963 . As previously indicated, Palmer said he saw the men in the early weeks of that week .
 Oswald left New Orleans for Mexico City on September 24 or 25, 1963, and was in Dallas from October 3 until his death on November 25,1963 . Oswald's death in Dallas, Texas, was November 25 1963 .
 He said they were conspicuous because they were the only two whites in the otherwise all-black line . He says they were very conspicuous because of their presence .
 At a minimum waiting time of five hours, it had to be one of the slowest lines ever . The line had a minimum five hours of waiting .
 Morgan and Oswald just happened to be interested in getting a job at the very same place, the East Louisiana State Hospital . He then says that when he spoke to them separately around 4:00m., they both just happened .
 Oswald, a neat freak, normally wore a shirt and tie and regular shoes . Oswald was known for his neat-keit style of clothing . Oswald's funeral was held in New York City .
 I’m not sure how the political and social orientation and extremism of Palmer and Manchester have any relevance to the story in this case, as some anti-conspiracy theorists have implied . I'm not sure if the political, social orientation of Palmer or Manchester has any relevance .
 Palmer and Manchester putting Oswald in the company of David Ferrie would not seem to help their right-wing cause at all . Indeed, placing Oswald in company of Ferrie seems to not help them right wing .
 Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw were poor blacks, and it is not known whether there was any built-in fear of Palmer and Manchester in the small southern town that made it more likely that the blacks would “go along” with their conclusions .
 As an example of racism in rural Louisiana during this period, author Adam Fairclough writes that “CORE workers and the blacks mho associated with them became perpetual objects of unfriendly police protection .
 He was unable to identify David Ferrie as the man seated in the passenger seat, only saying the eyebrows in the photo of Ferrie he was shown “looked like the type of eyebrows” the man in the car had .
 At Shaw’s trial, Palmer now added that ‘the hair’ of the man in the car was also ‘similar’ to that of Ferrie . Palmer now said ‘The hair” of ‘Ferrie’ was “similar�
 The problem is that on cross-examination he conceded he didn’t get a good look at the two men in the car . “I just saw the back of them. I just saw them," he said .
 Banister, indeed, does bear a vague facial resemblance to Shaw, but he was of average height and his gray hair had much black in it, as opposed to Shaw's gray hair .
 Palmer knew Banister, having served in the army with him in 1943 while stationed in Orlando, Florida . Palmer saw him as late as 1960 at the state legislature in Baton Rouge . Palmer said the man in the car was not Banister .
 Manchester says he remembers seeing a black Cadillac parked close to the registrar’s office around ‘the time of the civil rights demonstrations,” but did not remember any voter registration line at all . Manchester says in the affidavit that he also remembers seeing black Cadillac .
 Manchester said that “from pictures I have seen in the paper of Clay Shaw, resembled Clay Shaw quite a bit.” Manchester said .
 Manchester says he can’t be certain whether he walked up to the car . Manchester also says in the affidavit that “I can be sure’s sure” about whether he did it .
 Manchester’s doubts vanished like shadows before the sun at trial in 1969 . He testified he definitely walked up to the car and spoke to the driver for “maybe two minutes,” the driver told him he was “a representative of the International Trade Mart in New Orleans
 He testified, “I walked over and asked the driver would he please identify himself.” He testified that he asked him to identify himself .
 In his earlier affidavit, he could not identify the passenger in the front seat of the car . He said only that “all that I can remember about the man is that he was not as well-dressed as the man on the driver’s side .
 In his affidavit and at Shaw’s trial, he made no reference to seeing Lee Harvey Oswald that day . Shaw made no mention of seeing Oswald in his affidavit or trial testimony .
 Kilbourne, the former East Feliciana Parish DA, said that “Manchester was completely unreliable.”
 Miss Goldie Moore, Clay Shaw’s personal secretary from 1946 to 1965, told the Orleans Parish grand jury that in 1963 Shaw drove a black Ford, and that the Ford was registered to the Trade Mart . Inconveniently for Manchester and all the other Clinton witnesses, Miss
 She said she had never seen Shaw at any time drive a large black Cadillac . Shaw said she never saw Shaw drive a black Cadillac before .
 Cobb said Shaw and he were extremely busy during this period . Cobb said the only workday during the entire period that he was not in contact with Shaw was September 25, 1963, in his hometown of Hammond, Louisiana .
 Shaw says even on that day, a “representative” of the Trade Mart reached Shaw in Hammond, Hammond . Shaw says the incident occurred on the same day as the incident .
 Shaw confirmed that the only day he missed work during the subject period was the day in late September when he went to visit his ill father . Shaw recalled his secretary calling him that day .
 She immediately became his personal secretary and remained so for nineteen years, until his retirement in 1965 . She remained with him, until he retired in 1965, and became his secretary . She was married to his wife, who died in 1966 .
 Clinton and Jackson, Louisiana, for weeks and months on end after the assassination . over the world .
 Garrison’s investigation of Shaw in 1967, four years later, came to light . Garrison's investigation was the result of an investigation into Shaw's actions . Shaw was found guilty of sexual assault, but never charged with anything . Garrison: Shaw should not have been charged with sexual assault
 At the Shaw trial, some of the Clinton witnesses were asked why they hadn’t told anyone . They responded that if the authorities wanted to know, they could have asked them . Some of the Shaw witnesses said they didn't tell anyone .
 If anyone should have reported his sighting to the authorities, it was John Manchester, the town marshall and a deputy sheriff . John Manchester was the first person to report the sighting .
 In his testimony before the HSCA he said he saw Oswald in Clinton on the subject day of the assassination . He said he recognized Oswald as the person he had seen in Clinton just a few months earlier .
 Manchester conceded that he knew the FBI, and Warren Commission thereafter, were investigating Oswald's participation in Kennedy’s assassination . Manchester conceded he knew he knew that the FBI was investigating Oswald .
 I pressed him to give me the names of those people he had mentioned this to, but beyond a stammer or two, he couldn’t come across .
 Conspiracy theorists simply don’t address the issue . As is the custom of most conspiracy theorists, they simply don't address it .
 One of the most laughable things in the world is a joke, insulting to anyone's intelligence . But one did step up to the plate, and his effort was laughable .
 In his book Let Justice Be Done, conspiracy author William Davy says Oswald told him he wanted to get a job at a state hospital . The Jackson barber, Edwin McGehee, said he referred Oswald to the home of Reeves Morgan, a state representative .
 Morgan said he told Oswald that he’d have a better chance to get the job if he registered to vote in the area . Morgan: "I told him that he'd have a . better chance of getting the job" in the . area if he registers to vote .
 Rarick’s findings were printed in a right-wing newspaper based out of Shreveport called The Councillor . The inference is that he must have contacted the newspaper, which printed his findings .
 Apparently no paper in Clinton or Jackson was interested in such a story, nor, for that matter, was any newspaper in New Orleans, Baton Rouge, or Shreveport .
 Only a right-wing rag (the periodical of the racist White Citizens’ Council of America) had an interest in it . The story was never checked out by anyone and it did not wend its way, as virtually all small but important stories eventually do, into the national
 We would expect Davy to trumpet this discovery of his by giving readers the date the article was published in the Councilor . The fact that Davy didn’t know how to spell the paper’s name is some evidence he never saw the paper .
 The Councilor didn't start publishing until 1965, so there couldn’t possibly have been an article in it not long after the assassination, as Davy suggests . Another reason why I’m not going to look for that back issue of the Councilor is that the Council
 If there ever was such an article, Rarick had to have spoken to the Councilor well over a year after the assassination, again making it a ridiculously long time to wait before telling any member of the media of Oswald's presence in Clinton in 1963 .
 Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw were in Clinton during the incident in question . The likelihood that Oswald and Ferrie were in the Clinton area is less than remote .
 As we know, no credible evidence has ever surfaced connecting these three acting together under any circumstances . No credible evidence of any connection has surfaced between the trio .
 Garrison: Shaw, Ferrie and Oswald were right wingers associated with U.S. intelligence . Garrison says Shaw and Ferrie were right-wingers . Garrison: Oswald was a right winger associated with United States intelligence .
 If it started in 1965, 1978 would be the fourteenth year of publication . 1978 would have been the year 1978 .
 There was no claim by any of the Clinton witnesses that the three men they identified at the trial as Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw engaged in any mischief or effort to derail the registration effort, even that argument fails .
 Conspiracy theorists say Oswald was seeking a job at the East Louisiana State Hospital located between Jackson and Clinton . Oswald was advised it would be good if he first registered to vote, conspiracy theorists say .
 This is the very same mental hospital that Rose Cherami was taken to in the early morning hours of November 21, 1963, after she was struck by a car while hitchhiking near Eunice, Louisiana, about eighty-five miles southwest of Clinton . So we know that Oswald
 Receptionist at the hospital testified at the Shaw trial that she had directed Oswald back to the personnel office . A clerk in personnel said she had seen an application in the files with the name “Oswald, Harvey” on it . Aline Woodside told author Patricia
 No one in personnel at the hospital remembered seeing Oswald, giving him an application to complete, or interviewing him . No one remembers interviewing Oswald or seeing him .
 Clinton witnesses were unable to corroborate their story with any kind of physical or documentary evidence was a hallmark of the Clinton witnesses . Clinton witnesses said they had no physical evidence to support their story .
 Henry Palmer told Anne Dischler and Francis Fruge that Oswald actually registered to vote . Palmer testified before the HSCA that he did not permit Oswald to register to vote because Oswald had no proof he lived in the area . Palmer said Oswald signed the register and registered .
 Palmer told Oswald's signature had been erased and another name written over it . Palmer told Dischler and Fruge that Oswald’s signature was erased . Oswald's name had been written over by another name .
 Palmer said he had no idea who could have erased Oswald’s name or taken the page . Palmer told Dischler and Fruge the page was “missing,” and said he didn’t know who had erased Oswald or taken it .
 His allegedly going to the little hamlets of Clinton and Jackson, Louisiana, in late August or early September 1963, to work in a hospital and register to vote is totally incompatible with what we know was going on in his life around this time, and hence, unworthy of serious consideration .
 There were other post-trial prosecutions of leading Shaw trial participants . There were also post-Shaw trial prosecutions of other trial participants of Shaw .
 In December of 1969 New Orleans police arrested Judge Edward Haggerty, the presiding judge at the Shaw trial, during a raid on a hotel stag party . In addition to the two unsuccessful federal prosecutions of Garrison in 1971 for bribery, and in 1974 for income tax invasion , in December of
 Garrison overcharged Haggerty with solicitation of prostitution, public obscenity, and resisting arrest, but he was acquitted on all charges in February of 1970 . Garrison was also charged with resisting arrest and soliciting prostitution in 1970 .
 In August of 1970, Perry Russo and another man were arrested for burglarizing a New Orleans residence, stealing property valued at eight thousand dollars, and being in possession of a stolen safe-deposit key . Garrison’s office declined to prosecute the burglary and theft charges .
 Rose Cherami gave various ages during her life, so there is no way of knowing, absent her birth certificate, how old she really was .
 Her Texas death certificate lists her date of birth as October 13, 1923, which would mean she was forty-one at the time of her death on September 14, 1965 . She died in 1965 .
 Cherami's first arrest, for vagrancy, in San Antonio, was in February of 1941 . Cherami was fined $3.50 for her first arrest in February 1941 .
 If she was thirty-four in 1963, she would have been eleven or twelve years old at the time . She would have had to be eleven or 12 years old in 1963 .
 Though possible, it is improbable that she would have been arrested and fined for the crime of vagrancy at that age .
 Victor Weiss’s statement over the telephone to HSCA staff member Jonathan Blackmer on July 5, 1978, is that Weiss had no contact with Cherami before the assassination .
 Weiss did not say that Bowers said Cherami had told him this, but there is a chance there was a third party . Bowers could have heard about Cherami's alleged statement from some third party, Weiss said .
 In any event, Bowers was a logical person to interview, and at the bottom of Blackmer’s report of his telephone interview of Weiss in the “Recommended Follow-up” section, he wrote, “Contact Dr. Weiss”
 Magruder, wrote to New Orleans DA Jim Garrison that Cherami told him Cherami that Kennedy was going to be killed . Weiss told him, before the assassination, Cherami had told him that Kennedy would be killed, he said . Weiss was a member of the New Orleans police
 Garrison detective Frank Meloche interviewed Weiss . Weiss said he didn't recall whether Cherami’s story about Kennedy about to be killed “was told to him before or after the assassination,” the implication is that someone else told him this .
 Magruder confused the details or chronology of what Weiss had told him several years earlier . The likelihood is that he simply confused the facts and chronology . Bowers was the victim of the murder of Bowers .
 Weiss said he did question Cherami about her statement, and the indication is that she repeated it to him . This is particularly likely since Weiss said she repeated the statement to him, Weiss said . Cherami is accused of lying to Weiss about her comments .
 Fruge never indicated how this was verified or by whom . He never mentioned this information in his testimony before the HSCA, which he would have been expected .
 Walt Brown writes in his publication, JFK/Deep Politics Quarterly, that “not a single scrap of paper has yet been found to verify Fruge’s claim that Cherami's alleged employment with Ruby had somehow verified .
 Francis Fruge, from 1965 through 1967, was put ‘on loan’ from his job with the Louisiana State Police to Jim Garrison’s office in the investigation of Clay Shaw for allegedly conspiring to murder Kennedy . Clay Shaw was accused of conspiring to kill Kennedy .
 Fruge told the HSCA that while working for Garrison, he went back to the Silver Slipper and interviewed the proprietor of the house of prostitution, one Mac Manual . He interviewed Mac Manual, one of the owners of the prostitution house .
 Manual remembered the incident at his place involving Rose Cherami . Fruge said that Manual remembered that incident . Manual said that he remembered incident involving Cherami and Manual .
 There is no indication in Fruge’s testimony that Manual knew the identity of these two men . Manual is accused of killing two men in the 1990s .
 The FRD was created in May 1960 with the CIA’s assistance, guidance, and financial support, memo says .
 Arcacha, along with Banister and several New Orleans business and political figures, founded the short-lived Friends of Democratic Cuba in New Orleans in January of 1961 . Arcacha and Banister founded the New Orleans group in 1961 .
 The group’s purpose was to collect money to aid Cuban exiles in their fight against Castro . It folded after only one month . The group was set up to collect funds to aid exiles .
 In the various references to Arcacha in assassination literature, he is invariably referred to as a very involved political activist . He is not the type who would be routinely driving from Miami to Louisiana as a professional pimp for prostitutes . However, what does mean something is that in . the various
 Whenever Arcacha is mentioned in context other than his anti-Castro activities, it’s as a businessman, such as in public relations and the tourist business .
 The HSCA suggested it may not have believed this particular part of Fruge’s testimony . It is worth noting that in a nuanced way, it may have believed it .
 Claims is just not the word one uses when one has confidence in an allegation . Claims is not a word used to refer to an allegation, it is a word of confidence in the allegation .
 Arcacha feared Garrison might somehow try to improperly implicate him in the assassination . Arcacha's Dallas lawyer, Frank Hernandez, employed a certified Texas polygrapher to test him .
 Arcacha said that he had never met Lee Harvey Oswald, that he did know David Ferrie and Guy Banister . He said he had met Clay Shaw once in the coffee shop of the New Orleans International Trade Mart, but Shaw never expressed any interest in the idea .
 Arcacha says he never discussed killing Kennedy with anyone and had no prior knowledge of the assassination . Arcacha said he never talked about killing JFK with anyone .
 The polygrapher said Arcacha answered all of his questions truthfully, and was also a suitable polygraph subject . Arcacha was a suitable subject for the polygraph, according to the test .
 HSCA reported prior instances where the FBI found tips by Rose Cherami to be “erroneous in all respects,” she did give one tip that was verified . The FBI has not confirmed the tip .
 Cherami told the FBI she had information about a heroin deal operating from a New Orleans ship, the HSCA says . Cherami is accused of telling the FBI that she was aware of a heroin operation from a ship .
 At no time did any federal agent or other law enforcement officer expressly attempt to tell her what she should say in regard to the number of shots fired or to force any other opinions .
 In her testimony before the Warren Commission eleven days later , she said the federal agent she spoke to on the afternoon of the assassination was a Secret Service agent . When she told him she heard “from four to six shots anyway,” he responded, “Mrs. Robertson�
 Hill never suggested to anyone whom we know of that anyone tried to influence what she said she heard . The previous month Hill was interviewed by Mark Lane, and there’s a hint in her testimony that Lane tried to implant the notion of pressure and influence in her mind .
 Apart from the fact that she is incoherent on this matter, it makes no sense that anyone would have told Hill this . Hill's comments are incoherent, but she's incoherent .
 Louie Witt’s testimony before the HSCA in 1978 as to his position at the time of the shots not only is incorrect, but makes no sense at all . Witt's testimony is undoubtedly the result of a failure of memory after fifteen years . Louie Witt testified to the H
 DeLoach’s memo of the conversation says that “I stated we had attempted to ascertain the identity of an individual by the name of Clay Bertrand, but to no avail.”
 FBI report of February 25, 1967, shows that neither was furnishing firsthand information . FBI report: Neither was providing firsthand information to the FBI .
 The second informant would have been reliable if he had been the source of the information, but he was not . He was not reliable, the second informant was not.
 The same FBI report reads, “Aaron Kohn, managing director, Metro876, advised on February 24 he had received information that Clay Bertrand and Clay Shaw was one and the same.” Kohn said he received information from the FBI that he believed Shaw and Bert
 Garrison and his staff could easily be exposed as liars and absent any credibility on cross-examination . But either these people never, or it was very obvious to Garrison that not only were the witnesses lying, but they could be exposed .
 If witness denied, under oath, Garrison would have prosecuted him for perjury, he would have been prosecuted for perjury . Garrison: "We know what we would have done if he had told Garrison this"
 Garrison did not call one witness to the stand at Shaw’s trial to testify that he or she knew Shaw as Bertrand or had been introduced to Clay Shaw as Clay Bertrand . Garrison didn't call one single witness to testify in the trial .
 Garrison did, however, call a witness who, although her story wasn’t too believable, at least did not appear to be some nut like most of his other witnesses . Garrison did call the witness, but it wasn't too believable .
 Jesse Parker was a former hostess in the Eastern Airlines YIP lounge at Moisant Airport, New Orleans’s international airport . Jesse Parker is a nicely dressed, respectable, middle-aged woman who was a good hostess .
 She testified that on December 14, 1966, two men (one of whom she identified as Shaw) entered the lounge . One of the men, Shaw, was Shaw, she testified .
 Shaw signed the name “Clay Bertrand” in the guest book . The guest book was signed by Clay Bertrand, his wife says .
 She said she remembered Shaw “because I admired his pretty gray hair” and because he was so tall . She also said she admired him for his "pretty gray hair"
 Parker’s story doesn’t hold up the idea that Shaw was part of a plot to kill Kennedy in 1963 . Shaw used the same alias he had used when he conspired to murder the president in 1963, he says .
 The signature “Clay Bertrand’s” in the guest book is the last one on the page, meaning it could have been easily added at any time after the day in question . Second, why would Shaw, who apparently, per Mrs. Shaw, apparently,
 A homosexual prostitute, William Morris, while behind bars in Texas in 1967, told a DA investigator William Boxley that in June of 1958 he was introduced to Clay Shaw as Clay Bertrand at the Masquerade Bar, a homosexual hangout . Parker, did not .
 After a few drinks, he said, they went to a nearby apartment for paid sex . He said they had sex with each other for a few hours before going to another apartment .
 Clay Shaw entered Morris’s apartment by mistake and he was with Jack Ruby . But Morris went on to tell Boxley that one night in 1960 in New Orleans, Clay Shaw had been with Ruby . Shaw was with Ruby at the time .
 His testimony could not be conclusive, but he said he was fairly sure his signature was the last on the page when he signed the book . He said he did not see Clay Shaw, whom he had known for over ten years, in the room when he was there .
 Parker admitted knowing from the media that a big issue was whether Shaw was Bertrand, but she never contacted the authorities . Further, though Parker admitted she knew from media that the media had been looking at the case, she never called the police .
 She was not a publicity-seeking character, one who was more likely to have made up her story . Of course, the flip side of this is that she was not, like many of Garrison’s other witnesses, the .
 Garrison’s prosecution of Shaw that can’t be trusted, this raises a question . Since there is absolutely nothing about Garrison's prosecution that can be trusted . This raises the question .
 Prosecutor James Alcock sought to introduce Parker’s supposedly truthful lie detector test results into evidence . But since the results of lie detector tests are legally inadmissible, the court did not permit the results to receive .
 Photographic blow-ups of the guest book signature as well as Shaw’s handwriting and signatures from a post office receipt and several letters Shaw had written in 1966 . Shaw pointed out in detail to the jury the many differences in style, size, and proportion, letter by letter,
 McCarthy, in a wide-brimmed hat, “made a slow walking-from-the-hip Mae Westian entrance down the center aisle” to the witness stand . McCarthy is accused of sexual misconduct in the federal court of sexual assault .
 Her teacher happened to have his office next to her law office, adding that the man had written “three books on the subject” of handwriting . When asked if it had been at a formal school, she replied it had not, that her teacher had written three books on handwriting
 She said it was “highly probable” Shaw had signed the guest book . She said she had formed the opinion that Shaw had done so . Shaw was charged with attempted murder in 2010 .
 When asked, on cross-examination, what equipment she had used, she responded, “I will show you,” whereupon she dug down into her purse and removed a pair of binoculars .
 Milton Brener, a former New Orleans assistant district attorney, closely monitored the Garrison trial . Brener: Garrison trial should have been a miscarriage of justice .
 In his book on the case he writes that there was “another expert who examined the guest register, though he was not called to testify.”
 Gilbert Fortier, one of the best-known examiners of questioned documents in this part of the country, had examined the book and known specimens of Shaw’s handwriting . Garrison”s request for the book .
 Fortier examined the questioned guest book, Fortier conferred with Garrison Garrison . Garrison said Fortier had asked Garrison to respond to the question . Garrison: "It's not a mystery. It's a mystery."
 The fact that Garrison, desperate to prove all of these points, never called any of them to the stand is conclusive proof their credibility was so bad that even Garrison couldn’t accept them . Garrison ended up calling to the the stand one nightmare witness for the prosecution after another .
 June Rolfe told Garrison’s office in March of 1962 that “in the early 60s,” she “saw Clay Shaw in a light-colored Thunderbird with the top down in the French Quarter” in the early 1960s, she said .
 Clay Shaw told DA's office that David Ferrie introduced him to Clay Shaw at a bar in the French Quarter in 1960 . Shaw was 17 when he was introduced to Ferrie, then 17, in 1960, at the time of the incident .
 Kimble asked him to accompany him and Shaw on a plane flight to Canada to pick someone up . Kimble never indicated that he was anything more than a casual acquaintance . Ferrie: "In late '61 or early '62"
 Ferrie and Shaw stopped, en route, in Nashville, Louisville, and Toronto before arriving at their destination in Montreal . Ferrie piloting and Shaw "in the back of the airplane reading books and sleeping"
 Kimble didn't specifically say whom they picked up in Montreal, but the implication was that it was a Mexican or Cuban who appeared with Shaw the next day for the return flight . Kimble said it was the same person who picked up the plane in Montreal . Shaw was the last person
 Kimble also said he heard “people introduce Clay Shaw as Clay Bertrand” though he never explained what his association with Shaw or Ferrie was . Kimble never explained why he was associated with Shaw, Ferrie or Bertrand .
 Kimble worked for the FBI and CIA in the past and had been paid by check or cash, he says . Kimble says he had worked for CIA and FBI and worked for check and cash . He says he was paid by checks or cash .
 Garrison didn't do so, but a classic conspiracy theorist like William Davy repeated Kimble’s story to his readers as if it were completely factual . Garrison didn’t do so. But Davy, a big supporter of Garrison, did not.
 Garrison set forth several other witnesses, none of whom had been good enough for him to call to the stand nine years earlier . Garrison wrote a memorandum to HSCA staff members Jonathan Blackmer, Cliff Fenton, and Gaeton Fonzi . None of these witnesses were good enough
 Oswald was at a party at Clay Shaw’s home in Hammond, Louisiana, in the summer of 1963, an inmate at the federal penitentiary in Atlanta, told a member of Garrison's staff that Lee Harvey Oswald was there .
 Shaw had introduced Girnus to Oswald in New Orleans as someone who was interested in buying guns . Shaw had also been introduced to Oswald as someone interested to buy guns .
 Shaw told Ferrie to kill a man who was going to be a witness against Shaw on a case that could send him to the penitentiary . Shaw would pay Ferrie $10,000 up front and $15,000 later to kill the man . Ferrie and Shaw told
 Whalen wanted no part of the deal but pretended to be interested and Shaw gave him $300 in spending money . Shaw also gave him a $300 gift card to buy a new book .
 The next night they met at Shaw’s apartment and Ferrie boasted that he had set up the assassination of President Kennedy . Ferrie told Whalen of a meeting that he, Shaw, Oswald, and Ruby had had in Baton Rouge before the assassination .
 David Logan said he met David Ferrie at a party in the French Quarter in 1961 . Clay Shaw, whom he already knew, was at the party . One David Logan told Assistant DA James Alcock of the incident .
 He said Shaw was sadomasochistic, and that during a sexual encounter with Shaw after dinner at Shaw’s home, Shaw whipped him . He declined to whip Shaw when the latter asked him to, he said .
 Shaw “wasn’t discreet at all” about his sexuality, he said . Shaw was a “regular patron” at a place where a woman ran a male and female prostitution business . He was a regular patron of a place at the corner of Toul
 Kirby J Hensley of North Carolina, a man, Broshears said, who could neither read nor write, could not write . He was a man who could not read or write, he said .
 In 1964, he served six months in prison in Illinois . He found work in a carnival for a short time, and eventually, to “escape my problems,” he said, went down yonder to New Orleans .
 David Ferrie was 30 years old and almost penniless in New Orleans . Ferrie met Ferrie at a homosexual bar in the Quarter . He holed up in a hotel near the Continental Trailways bus depot that had no name .
 Broshears says Ferrie spent several nights in the hotel with him, and gave him handouts to live on . An admitted homosexual, he says he was given handouts by Ferrie to live off .
 Broshears said Ferrie confided to him only when intoxicated . Broshear said he would confide to him about his part in the conspiracy to assassinate Kennedy .
 Ferrie told Broshears he was waiting in Houston for “two of the assassins” to fly in from Dallas . He was to fly them to South Africa, which did not have an extradition treaty with the U.S., so they’d be safe there .
 Two assassins who shot Kennedy from the grassy knoll decided to fly on their own from Dallas to Mexico . But instead, these particular two assassins, who had shot Kennedy, decided to go straight to Mexico instead .
 Ferrie told him that the main people behind the assassination were Shaw, Hale Boggs and Kent Courtney, a financier from New Orleans, and Richard C Lauchli, a businessman from Illinois .
 Broshears told Jaffe that “at that time the whole thing didn’t really mean too much to me.”
 "David admitted being involved with the assassin," Broshears said on July 8, 1968, on a local TV show in Los Angeles . Ferrie told Broshearars that he was involved in the assassin's assassination .
 He was committed to Gulfport Psychiatric Hospital, a federal mental institution, for close to half a year . It resulted in his being arrested for threatening the life of the president .
 Garrison didn't dare call Garrison to the witness stand because his credibility was so transparently nonexistent . Garrison didn’t dare call him to the stand because of his credibility . Garrison’s credibility was nonexistent .
 Leemans says DA’s office offered him $5,000 to appear with Garrison in response to NBC special . He says DA's office offered $2,500 to appear, but he says it was false . Garrison says he's a self-acknowledged small credibility
 Leemans was probably lying about the monetary offer from Garrison’s office, says Garrison . National Archives received a copy of an affidavit of his from the National Archives that had been previously been unable to locate .
 Two weeks before the Shaw trial started on January 21, 1969, Leemans reappeared from the Shaw stage for a year and a half . Two weeks later, he reappeared, but apparently not for an encore .
 Leemans didn't say in his affidavit whether or not the story he told Garrison about Shaw and Oswald was true, only that Garrison hadn't offered him a bribe to tell it .
 Part-time itinerant preacher nicknamed “Slidin’ Clyde’s Clyde” because he was such a slippery, disreputable character . Then there was Clyde Johnson, a slippery-disreputable preacher nicknamed 'Slid' Clyde'
 Johnson had run for governor of Louisiana in 1963 . Like so many of these types who like to put their name on a ballot, Johnson ran for governor .
 Garrison called Garrison’s office on March 30, 1967, to report that during his campaign for governor, a man he identified as Clay Shaw decided to support him . Shaw appeared to be a Republican who hated Kennedy for, among other reasons, withdrawing air support for the Bay of Pigs
 Clyde said Jack Ruby and Lee Harvey Oswald (introduced to him by Shaw as Jack and Leon) showed up in the hotel room . Clyde said Ruby and Oswald were introduced to him as Jack, Leon .
 Clyde thought they might be talking about him so he picked up his gun, until he heard the words “coming down from Washington” and “the pressure is on,” which convinced Clyde he was safe . Clyde thought the words were coming from Washington .
 Clyde saw Shaw give Ruby and Oswald each a thick envelope and Shaw gave him an envelope with fifty $100 bills in it . Before the evening was over, Clyde saw him see Shaw give the men $100 in an envelope .
 Alcock alluded to the Baton Rouge hotel fairy tale as one of six overt acts committed by Shaw and his co-conspirators to carry out the conspiracy . Shaw's trial is set to begin on Monday . Alcock: "I'm not sure what happened to Shaw, but I
 The trial had ended several months before Johnson was killed in July . Johnson was found dead in July after being shot by police officers .
 Former mental patient who went by the name Julius Caesar offered his services to Garrison . Other kooks who offered their services included a former mental patient known as Julius Caesar . Garrison has a history of mental patients .
 Aynesworth also recalls Annie Patterson, an American woman who was a prisoner in a Mexican jail . Patterson was an American prisoner in Mexico .
 Clay Shaw had been there too, says Clay Shaw . Clay Shaw was also there at the time of his arrest, says the author .
 "Slight little guy from Houston, a piano player,” showed up in New Orleans with his story . “A piano player’s story is a story of his life,’ he says .
 This was at a time when Aynesworth was still on good terms with Garrison, before he wrote his May 15, 1967, expose of Garrison’s fraudulence in Newsweek .
 Aynesworth was present when the piano man “proceeded to relate how he knew that Ruby and Oswald were longtime gay lovers’s longtime lovers,” he said .
 He went into great detail, naming names of clubs he said he had played at when Ruby and Oswald dropped by . He said he played at clubs in Dallas, Dallas, even in Houston, Texas .
 On December 23, 1966, the New Orleans DA’s office summoned Clay Shaw to its office . Shaw was charged with attempted murder in 1966 . Shaw's trial was the first of its kind in New Orleans since 1966 .
 Shaw said he had “almost” met Oswald the day in the summer of 1963 when Oswald was passing out leaflets in front of Shaw’s Trade Mart . Shaw says he wasn’t Oswald, but he had almost met him .
 A ‘commotion’ occurred during the incident attracting the police and TV crews, but by the time he, Shaw, went outside to see what was happening, Oswald was gone . Shaw’s diary, he told Sciambra a ‘comotion” occurred
 Shaw's diary says Sciambra asked him if he had ever heard of Clay Bertrand, or if he knew David Ferrie, and Shaw said no to both questions .
 Sciambra's memo says Shaw told him he had never talked to Lee Harvey Oswald and did not know him . Shaw said he did not talk to Oswald and said he never knew him, the memo says .
 Oswald asked permission from Dauenhauer for permission to distribute leaflets in front of the Mart, but Oswald went ahead and did it anyway . Oswald said he had been told he shouldn't be allowed to distribute the leaflets . Oswald was told he should not do it, but he did it
 Shaw also told Sciambra he did not know Dean Andrews . Shaw also said he didn't know Andrews, and asked Sciambura what Andrews did for a living .
 Shaw told Sciambra he was retired from the Trade Mart and was now primarily a playwright . Shaw said he was currently translating a play from Spanish to English for the La Petite Gallery Circle Theater in New Orleans .
 Garrison doesn't allude to any of the strong and clear language he claims Andrews used, which he put in book and Stone put in his movie . Garrison says Andrews used the strong language he says he used in his book, Stone's movie, Garrison says .
 Garrison: "I arranged a lunch with Andrews at Broussard’s Restaurant" Garrison says he arranged to meet Andrews for lunch with him . Garrison: “I arranged to lunch with Andrew at the restaurant.”
 The New Orleans Retail Credit Bureau says no one by the name of Clay Bertrand or Bertram has been found . A search of the bureau's records found no one in connection with the case .
 Garrison's last day in office was March 30,1974, several months before the case was dismissed . Garrison says it was he who, aware of Andrews’s bad health, had the case dismissed .
 Garrison joined with Andrews’s attorney in the petition to the Louisiana Supreme Court to reverse the conviction and order a new trial . Garrison deserves much of the credit for the dismissal of the conviction .
 He told the Shaw jury that three ‘swishes’ came into his office to discuss their legal problem . The Shaw jury is expected to hear testimony from the jury .
 Oswald and a Mexican came in, Oswald and Mexican came out of the room . Oswald didn't know whether or not there was any connection between Oswald and the homosexuals . Ten to fifteen minutes later they left, Oswald left, and as they walked out the door .
 Andrews refused to say why Oswald came to his office, only saying that Oswald had “consulted” with him and paid him no fee . Andrews said he did not pay Oswald a fee .
 Dean Andrews’s doctor at the Hotel Dien Hospital told the FBI that during the first four days of his nine-day stay at the hospital, he was seriously ill and under heavy sedation . The FBI says the FBI has not been able to reach Andrews .
 The doctor said he did not believe Andrews was capable of using a telephone during that period . Andrews was not believed to have been using a phone during that time .
 Andrews [no relation] by SA Richard Bucaro on December 5,1963) But this cannot be true, at least for two of the four days, since Andrews telephoned the Secret Service that day .
 Andrews said Bertrand has always favored November 23, a Saturday . Andrews: Of the two days that he has called Bertrand called, he has always preferred November 23 .
 On November 25, he first reported the alleged Bertrand phone call when he telephoned Special Agent John Rice of the Secret Service from his hospital bed . He first called Rice from the hospital bed on November 25 .
 Rice claims Bertrand called him on Saturday between 6:30m. and 9:00m. Bertrand claimed to Rice that he called him Saturday morning . Rice says Bertrand was in contact with Rice at 6.30m to 9.00am .
 The only record of Andrews’s medication on November 23 was a statement from Thelma Massarini, the medical records librarian at Hotel Dien Hospital, that at 6:00m. November 23, Andrews took his medication .
 At 8:00m. he received sedation in the form of phenobarbital, and he complained of pains in the chest . He was sedated at 8:30m. and complained of chest pains .
 He stuck to his story of Oswald coming to his office, he said that the Bertrand phone call now seemed “like a dream” to him . He said that Bertrand's phone call was “a dream’ to him.
 JFK called Sam “Monk” Zelden, president of the New Orleans Criminal Bar Association, to ask him to assist him in his defense of Oswald for Kennedy’s murder . The only reason he felt the telephone call was not a dream is that he called Sam
 Oswald called Zelden the following day, November 24, a Sunday, since when he called him that it had just come over television that Oswald had been shot . That would have been the day after Oswald was shot .
 Zelden said he told Andrews he wasn’t interested but he’d think about it, and right around that time he heard Oswald had been shot and told him this . Zelderen: "I’m not interested"
 Eva Springer told the FBI that Andrews had called her at around 4:00m. on November 23 and told her a man named Bertrand had employed him to represent Oswald in Dallas . Eva Springer said Andrews told her he was employed by Bertrand in Dallas, Texas .
 She advised that the name of Clay Bertrand was unknown to her and that she searched the office files but could find nothing on Bertrand . She said she found nothing in the files of the office .
 Oswald looked “vaguely familiar” to him when he saw Oswald on TV, he said . Oswald “may’ve visited Andrews’s office,” he recalled . He did recall Andrews mentioning on various occasions that an individual named Oswald had been to
 The FBI report doesn’t say whether Davis heard Andrews talking about Oswald before or after the assassination . Davis by FBI SA Regis Kennedy .
 If before, it's unclear what reason Andrews would have for bringing Oswald up to Davis so often .
 Andrews said the call allegedly received by him from “Bertrand” was a “figment of my imagination” Andrews said he has no memory of talking to Sergeant Davis or calling his secretary Eva Springer about his representation of Oswald .
 The transcript of Eugene Davis’s testimony at the Shaw trial is not at the National Archives . No one seems to have a copy of it, assuming it still exists, so whether or not he expressly denied calling Andrews about a bill of sale on an automobile is not known .
 The victim’s mother asked him to get a lawyer for her and he called Andrews . Andrews did . Andrews called the victim's mother and asked her to call the mother .
 Aloysius J Habighorst was the New Orleans police officer who fingerprinted Shaw on the evening of March 1, 1967, in the Bureau of Identification room at the N. Orleans Police Department . Shaw was fingerprinted on the night of his death .
 Habighorst testified outside the presence of the jury on February 19, 1969, that the personal information he typed on the back side of the fingerprint card included Shaw’s alleged alias, Clay Bertrand . He said Shaw then signed the card .
 The DA's position was that by Shaw signing the fingerprint card, he had confessed, in writing, to being Clay Bertrand . The DA’s position is that by signing the card, Shaw had confessed to being Bertrand, the case was solved .
 Habighorst had gotten the name Clay Bertrand from Shaw’s arrest report . But it was clear to the trial judge, Edward J Haggerty, that he was flatout lying .
 Habighorst’s credibility was thoroughly destroyed by several witnesses, including fellow members of the New Orleans Police Department .
 Habighorst had testified that Shaw’s attorney, Edward Wegmann, was present in the booking process . Shaw's attorney was definitely present when Shaw signed the fingerprint card, he testified . Shaw was sentenced to life in prison without parole .
 Captain Louis Curole, who was at the jail that night, supported Wegmann’s testimony . He added that it was a general rule at the New Orleans Police Department that lawyers were not allowed in that room, and he had forbidden him to go there .
 Curole testified that the defendant’s arrest report, including aliases, is always sent to the Bureau of Identification room at the time of the booking process . There would have been no reason or need for Habighorst to ask Shaw if he had an alias . Even worse,
 Shaw testified at the hearing that he never told Habighorst his alias was Clay Bertrand . Shaw testified that he signed his name to the fingerprint card, the card was blank, which New Orleans police officer John Perkins said was normal .
 Sergeant Jonas Butzman, a New Orleans police officer who was assigned to be with Shaw throughout the booking and fingerprinting process, said he was present when Habighorst fingerprinted Shaw and the name Clay Bertrand was never used .
 Haggerty refused to allow Shaw’s fingerprint card, with the name Clay Bertrand typed in as an alias, into evidence . He showed absolutely no favoritism to Shaw at the trial, refusing to let him testify .
 Captain Curole's not allowing Shaw’s lawyer, Wegmann, to be present in the Bureau of Identification room during the alleged question by Habighorst violated his constitutional rights under the United States Supreme Court decisions in Miranda Arizona and Escobedo Illinois .
 Haggerty shot back, “The jury is not hearing it, that is the main thing. That's the jury's main thing," he said . The jury will not hear the evidence, he added .
 Judge Haggerty sustained the defense objection to the admissibility of the fingerprint card and Habighorst’s testimony with respect thereto .
 Alcock’s immediate motion for a mistrial was denied, whereupon Alcock said he would appeal . Alcock says he will appeal .
 Haggerty said that was fine with him, though the DA’s office never did . The DA never did, though, though he said it would be fine with that .
 Jim Garrison attempted to quantify the extent of the involvement of Guy Banister and David Ferrie in the anti-Castro movement . Jim Garrison was the author of the book, "David Ferrie" and "Guy Banister"
 Carlos Quiroga was an anti-Castro Cuban exile who was heavily involved in the movement . He was a close associate of Sergio Arcacha Smith’s, the head representative of the Cuban Revolutionary Council in the early 1960s .
 Ferrie bought them with his own money because he wanted to be active, and yet he just made a flop of himself by saying, ‘Oh, I can get this and I can't get that’ and he never did get it . Ferrie: 'He bought
 The Cubans here, on account of Ferrie, didn’t want to get along with Arcacha. Because the Cubans . didn't want to be along with Ferrie. Because of him, they didn't like him .
 Cubans are not interested in the president's appearance . Besides, his own appearance was not appealing to the Cubans around here .
 On July 18,1961, Arcacha wrote a personal letter to World War I air ace Captain Eddie Rickenbacker, chairman of the board of Eastern Airlines, requesting a “60 or 90 day leave with pay” for Ferrie . Ferrie could have more time to
 Arcacha told Rickenbacker that after “the effort of April 17 failed... the morale of the Cubans in exile and the Underground within Cuba fell to zero.” He said that after the effort to defeat the Cuban government in Cuba failed, “The morale of Cub
 Quiroga gave no indication that Banister was actively involved in the anti-Castro movement . But he conceded he never saw Banister in 1963 . Arcacha had moved out of the Newman Building in 1962 .
 In the first place, Quiroga said, the camp was only in existence “for a short time.” The “camp’s” was only “a short time” in existence, he said .
 Cuban exile by the name of “Peneque” was the commandant of the camp, he said . “There were only about 14” Cubans being trained there .
 Four of the 14 left the camp because a Castro spy was discovered in their midst and they got afraid, Quiroga paid for Greyhound bus tickets for the four to Miami . Four left because a spy was found in the camp .
 Everyone agrees that the cache was meant to be used in the anti-Castro effort, and that it wasn't . But they don't agree on what happened to the cache .
 Quiroga declined to take a lie detector test, but when asked to do so a few days later, he declined . At first, he said he readily agreed to take the test .
 Garrison’s office intended to ask Quiroga at a later date to take the test, but it is not known if someone did, and if so, it is unknown if someone took the test . The last page of Garrison's interview says that his office intended .
 Garrison made every effort imaginable to connect Oswald, Ferrie, and/or Shaw to each other . 1397 ever knew each other: And god knows Garrison .
 Oswald’s address book had entries written and hand printed by Oswald in Russian . But actually, the page did not have a “P.O.” before the number “19106,” but rather two Russian letters that were Ds in English .
 Garrison made much of his discovery, claiming to the media that he personally had deciphered the numbers and they were a code for Jack Ruby’s unlisted phone number in Dallas, WH 1-5601 . Garrison claimed to have decipheted the numbers .
 A Study in the Abuse of Power, explains: “First ... it was necessary to unscramble the numbers by selecting the nearest digit, then the farthest digit, and so on. The next nearest digit was then the next farthest . digit .
 Garrison said the only other numbers on the dial that add up to 13 are 9 and 4, conveniently forgetting 8 and 5 . Garrison said that the other two numbers add up with 13 are 8 and 4 . Garrison: The only other two other numbers that add together are 9 .
 Clay Shaw's defense team pointed out that with Garrison’s type of arbitrary juggling of numbers, any number could be converted into any other number . Clay Shaw: With Garrison's type of juggling numbers, it could be easily converted into other numbers . Garrison: "I’m
 The New Orleans court ruled in favor of Garrison, but the latter ended up electing not to present the evidence at Shaw’s trial . Shaw was found guilty of attempted murder, but Garrison won't testify .
 The only inference is that as far-out as Garrison and his case were, even he came to realize that the five-digit numbers in Shaw's notebook and Oswald's address book were nothing but a coincidence . Garrison: "The only inference that can be drawn is that the numbers in
 Lee Odum came to New Orleans in 1966 hoping to promote a bullfight there . Odum was actually a person in Dallas, Texas, who tried to promote the event .
 The manager of the hotel where he was staying, the Roosevelt, gave him Clay Shaw’s name as a good person to contact about his venture . Clay Shaw's name was given to him by the manager of his hotel .
 PE 8-1951 was the telephone number of a Fort Worth television station, Garrison said . Garrison failed to say that number was the number of the station's number .
 Although the subject photograph did not depict Ferrie in the company of Shaw, at least the conspiracists came up with a photograph . The subject photograph does not depict Shaw .
 Conspiracy theorists have alleged that they have seen photographs of Ferrie with Shaw, or Oswald, or the three of them together, or some other combination thereof . None of these photographs or films has ever surfaced .
 I can assure you that if any conspiracy theorist had seen such a photograph or film, he would have seized it at gunpoint and run off with it . It would soon appear in papers throughout the country and on the cover of all subsequent conspiracy books .
 No one, not even conspiracy authors, takes these allegations seriously . The proof is that no reference is made to them in virtually all conspiracy books on the assassination .
 The author is not relying on the allegation in any meaningful way to make his case of a conspiracy in the assassination . Even the occasional book that does, mentions the allegation very briefly, and it’s obvious from the context that the author doesn’t rely on it .
 Louis Ivon told me that only he had the conversation with David Ferrie in the hotel room “a day or two” before Ferrie’s death . In telephone conversations with Ivon on May 31 and December 20, 2000, he said only he told me only
 Contrary to the movie JFK, he said neither Jim Garrison nor anyone else was present . He said neither Garrison nor others were present .
 Oliver Stone attributed Ferrie's statements to Stone to Ferrie in the movie . Ferrie says Stone said Ferrie told Stone: "I'm not going to believe anything you say"
 Ivon says he didn't know if Ferrie was talking about his teaching Oswald in their Civil Air Patrol unit . Ivon: "I taught him everything,” but he didn’t know if that was true or not .
 Garrison doesn't quote Ivon as telling Garrison that Ferrie had admitted knowing Oswald to him . In Garrison’s own book, On the Trail of the Assassins, he doesn’t say that . In fact, Garrison says he doesn't believe Ivon told him that Fer
 By 1967, the belief that Ruby was connected with organized crime was a part of the American vernacular . Ruby had “silenced Oswald for the mob” was a popular phrase .
 Ivon, who until 2000 continued to work as an investigator under then DA Harry Connick Sr., said he handwrote a page and a half memorandum of his hotel room conversation with Ferrie and turned it in .
 David Ferrie was also dragged into the assassination by one Richard Giesbrecht . Ferrie died in a car crash in the aftermath of the attack . David Ferries was also involved in the assassination .
 In a 1967 feature article in the Canadian magazine Maclean’s Reports, Giesbrecht, a Winnipeg salesman, claimed that around 2:45m. on February 13, 1964, he was seated at his table in the Horizon Room lounge at Winnipeg's International Airport sipping
 Two men gave the impression of being homosexual, at an adjacent table at a restaurant . The conversation was overheard by a man at a nearby table . The man overheard the conversation .
 One of the men, he said, had “the oddest hair and eyebrows I’d ever seen’s ever seen.” Another man said he saw the man with the “oddest” eyebrows he had ever seen .
 Giesbrecht, a Mennonite, was only able to hear bits and pieces of the conversation over the airport’s piped-in music and the muffled shriek of engines coming through the nearby twin-panel windows . He concluded that the two men were discussing
 From the conversation, Giesbrecht said he “got the impression that a man named Isaacs was to have been the assassin or one of them, but that he had taken on Oswald to do the dirty work . Isaacs is believed to be the assassin, but not the
 The man with the funny hair and eyebrows wondered how much information Oswald had passed on to his wife or, for that matter, anyone else . He wondered if Oswald had told his wife about Oswald's whereabouts .
 Giesbrecht noticed that he was being stared at by an ‘ugly’ man with a “flat, fighter’s nose” sitting alone across a corner of the lounge . He got spooked and sought out the Royal Canadian Mounted Police at the
 Geisbrecht immediately turned around and went in search of a telephone . The incident took place in the early hours of Sunday morning . Geisbrocht was the first person to call the police station in Germany to report the incident .
 He started to call the RCMP but when he saw the man had followed him and was only a yard away, he lost his pursuer in the crowd . He hung up the phone and eventually left the airport to call a bank of phones .
 Dick Russell postulates that perhaps ‘Isaacs’ was one Harold Isaacs, who in 1963 was a research associate at MIT’s Center for International Studies in Boston, which some claim was a CIA think tank . Some claim that Isaacs was an avowed Communist .
 Oswald’s cousin, Marilyn Murret, was a well-traveled woman who had taught school in many gradelevel subjects in several countries, including Japan and Singapore . Russell points out that Oswald's New Orleans cousin taught in many countries including Japan .
 Isaacs had worked as an editor for a radical leftist paper in China that supported the Communist uprising of Mao in China . Murret’s and Isaacs’ paths had crossed since then .
 Russell tosses out the possibility that Isaacs met Oswald through Marilyn Murret . Russell then tosses the possibility of Isaacs meeting Oswald through Murret, Russell says .
 If Isaacs was supposed to kill Kennedy, maybe it was his friend Marilyn Murret who suggested that he, Isaacs, could get her cousin Lee to do the job . Lee was Lee's cousin .
 Russell, trying to show Murret was with the CIA (and hence would not likely be conspiring with a Communist) managed to mislead his readers twice in one short sentence . Russell was trying to make the point that Murret would not have been conspiring with the Communist .
 The FBI was merely reporting what a news columnist told the FBI he “believed” but hadn’t yet confirmed . He said the “linked” language was in “the FBI’s statement ,” when actually the FBI was reporting what the
 Russell deleted the word "Communist" before the word “apparatus” in the FBI report . Russell blithely deleted the words “Communist” before ‘apparatu’ in the report . The FBI report was published in 1996 .
 Professor Harold Isaacs was designated by Ferrie and his co-conspirators to kill Kennedy . But somehow somehow the connection between Marilyn Murret, a CIA agent, working hand in hand on the plot to . kill Kennedy with Isaacs, a radical leftist and supporter of Mao .
 "There is no end to the silliness of the conspiracy theorists," author says . "The answer is always no. I’ve asked this question so many other times in this book"
 Garrison’s office got in touch with Giesbrecht and expressed “extreme interest” in what he had to say . Garrison's office has expressed ‘extreme interest in’ in the allegations, Garrison said . With the help of two articles written about Gies
 Garrison himself spoke personally to Giesbrecht and said he wanted him to testify at Clay Shaw’s upcoming trial, which he was more than willing to do . Garrison: “I want Giesrecht to testify in Clay Shaw's upcoming trial.” Gies
 The most effective debunker of looney allegations in the Kennedy assassination is, ironically, Jim Garrison . Garrison. Garrison is a good debunker . Garrison has been a key figure in the investigation into JFK's assassination .
 Prosecution called perhaps the worst group of witnesses ever called by any prosecutor in a criminal case . This is so because we know he called to the witness stand at Shaw’s trial . The jury acquitted Shaw of murder, but the jury convicted him of murder .
 A witness couldn't make the cut even with Garrison, you know he had to be super goofy . Garrison is known for his goofy sense of humor .
 Garrison did not call poor Richard to the stand at Shaw’s trial, obviously feeling he would hurt the prosecution . Giesbrecht's story may have been proved that Ferrie was proved to be somewhere other than Winnipeg on February 13, 1964 .
 Garrison was contemptuous of Giesbrecht’s story that he didn’t devote one single sentence or word to him in his book, On the Trail of the Assassins, and he is very rarely mentioned in other conspiracy books . Garrison was so contemptuous he didn't
 Ferrie said he didn't see the second man's face because the latter’s back was to him . In his November 1967 interview, he said that in the conversation between Ferrie and the other man at the airport, he didn’t see the other . Ferrie
 Giesbrecht's response to Ferrie's story was a strange and inappropriate comment . He didn't see the second man’s face, he said, in the context of the story .
 An agent from the FBI’s Grand Forks, North Dakota, office did indeed interview him .
 Nelson said he at no time made the remarks Giesbrecht attributed to him . Nelson said the interview took place on February 27,1964, and Nelson said that he did not make the remarks . Nelson: "I'm not sure what happened to me"
 He said he contributed no information to the interview and offered no opinion . He said no comment was made in the interview .
 His participation in the interview consisted solely of asking direct, pertinent questions . The interview was conducted solely to ask direct questions .
 Eladio “Yite” del Valle was a Cuban congressman and Havana city councilman during the Batista years . He later became a Florida-based militant anti-Castro exile . The body of David Feme was found by Miami police in his Cadillac parked in
 He had been shot through the heart and his head split open from a machete-like blow . The victim was shot in the head and split open after being hit in the heart . He was killed in a car crash in 2010 .
 Ferrie and del Valle never knew each other, but no evidence has ever emerged that they did . Ferrie died in a car crash at the hands of a car bomb in the 1980s . Del Valle's death was the first of its kind in a decade .
 At the time of del Valle's murder, Garrison’s office reportedly was reportedly trying to locate him in its everwidening investigation .
 Conspiracy theorists have unsuccessfully sought to connect with Ferrie and JFK’s assassination . Dr. New Orleans Dr. Dr. Martin Ferrie was murdered in 1960s .
 Ferrie became friends with Alton Ochsner at his New Orleans cancer clinic . Ferrie was a cancer patient at the clinic, and became a friend with Ochner .
 A fifty-one-year-old widow who lived alone, she was found murdered in her St. Louis home . She was found dead at her home .
 Two follow-up homicide reports shed no further illumination on the case . Her body was nude and there was no sign of a struggle or forced entry into her apartment .
 Two ex-marine brothers, Dan and A1 Campbell, did various investigative jobs for Guy Banister, though the time Dan did is not clear . A1 and Dan Campbell did various jobs for Banister before .
 Dan Campbell told the New Orleans DA’s office that it was in the summer of 1963 . Dan Campbell said the incident happened in 1963 . The DA's office said it was a summer of '63 .
 He told author Anthony Summers that it was his brother A1 who brought him into the Banister operation . And he said it was A1 that brought him in the operation .
 Dan Campbell told the New Orleans DA’s office in 1969 that he did not know Clay Shaw or David Ferrie . In any event, Dan Campbell said he couldn't place Oswald's face with Oswald's .
 Brother A1 said he worked for Banister around 1958 and 1959, and again around 1962 and 1963 . He never told the New Orleans DA’s office or Summers that he had ever seen Oswald in Banister's office . A1 never told Summers or Summers .
 No one but a conspiracy theorist like Anthony Summers could get excited enough about Dan Campbell’s statement to devote even one word to him .
 Part-time detective claimed to be an ordained American Orthodox Catholic bishop . He was also a part-time police officer .
 He had been charged with murder in Houston in January of 1952 and was arrested in Dallas in Dallas, but the charge was dismissed in August of 1957 . He was charged in Houston, Texas, in 1952 and in 1957 .
 He told HSCA investigators in 1977 that the FBI had moved David Ferrie’s body from its original grave, and that John Dean, of Watergate fame, had framed New Orleans DA Jim Garrison . He also said John Dean had framed Jim Garrison, and John Dean framed New
 On January 5, 1966, he told an associate in his Catholic Orthodox church, that he, Ferrie, and Oswald used to live together . Ferrie and Oswald lived together in the late 1960s .
 When he heard this, he said he ‘flipped’ and started putting two and two together together .
 Martin says Ferrie once told him he taught CAP cadets how to shoot weapons . Ferrie and Martin used to be friends, and Martin says he and Ferrie were friends .
 Oswald had a foreign-made rifle in Ferrie’s home that was similar to the one he used, he says . Ferrie says he saw a similar rifle in his home two years earlier . Oswald used the rifle in the home of Ferrie .
 He surmised that perhaps Ferrie had taught Oswald how to shoot the rifle he used to kill Kennedy . Oswald used the rifle Oswald used could have even belonged to Ferrie, he said .
 It was his idea that Ferrie may have hypnotized Oswald and planted a posthypnotic suggestion that he kill Kennedy . He also knew Ferrie was an amateur hypnotist and knew that he may have planted the suggestion .
 Before talking to the FBI, Martin had reported what he knew about Ferrie to station WWL-TV in New Orleans and to a Major Trosclair of the New Orleans Police Department .
 Ferrie had been communicating with Oswald concerning the distribution of some unidentified literature . On Sunday, November 24, he called an assistant district attorney he knew, Herman Kohlman, and also gave him this information . He added that he believed Ferrie was communicating .
 Garrison himself conceded that Ferrie couldn’t have left for Texas until some time on November 22 after the shooting in Dealey Plaza, thereby foreclosing his being scheduled to be a getaway pilot . Garrison confirmed Ferrie was seen in New Orleans after 12:30m.
 Ferrie had been working as an investigator assisting attorney G Wray Gill in his defense of New Orleans Mafia chieftain Carlos Marcello . He was charged with illegally re-entering the U.S. illegally after being deported .
 The case went to trial in New Orleans, and coincidentally, Marcello was acquitted of the charges on the day of the assassination . The trial went to New Orleans and Marcella was acquitted .
 The FBI confirmed from telephone records that Ferrie made a call from Coffee’s home in New Orleans to a skating rink in Houston around 6:30m. The FBI said Ferrie called from Coffee's New Orleans home to a Houston skating rink around 6.30m .
 The three men checked into room 19 at 4:30m. on November 23 and left . Two detectives from the New Orleans Police Department immediately went out to the airport to check on Ferrie’s plane .
 The group drove to NASA’s Manned Space Craft Center in Houston, Texas, and then drove to Galveston, Texas . They checked in to the Driftwood Motor Hotel at 11:00m. and left at around 10:00 a.m. the following morning
 The FBI’s check of the Alamotel registration records showed that the three men checked out between 8:00 and 9:00m.m. on November 24 . The three men are believed to have checked out of the hotel at the time of the incident .
 After spending the whole day in Houston on November 23, there is no evidence in any of the records that they spent another full day there before leaving for Galveston on the evening of the twenty-fourth . After spending a whole day there, they left Houston and headed to Galvest
 Ferry and his two friends checked in at 11:00m. on November 23 and 10:00am on November 24 . Ferry and friends checked out around 10:30am on Nov. 24. Ferry and two friends were staying at the Driftwood Motel .
 Ferrie and his attorney appear at the New Orleans DA’s office at 4:30m. on November 25 . This would be much more consistent with the rest of the evidence, including the return of Ferrie to New Orleans . Ferrie has been charged with attempted murder in
 Wall’s show in Dallas had suspended its performance out of respect for President Kennedy . Wall had gone to Galveston in the late afternoon with his partner, Joe Peterson, to stay overnight at the home of Thomas McKenna and his wife .
 Wall lived with the McKennas when he first came to Dallas . Wall had lived with them when he moved to Galveston, Texas .
 Wall was the president of the Dallas office of the American Guild of Variety Artists . He testified before the Warren Commission that Ruby called him to determine whether or not AGVA had met with him .
 We know whom Ruby called in Galveston, and it was not Ferrie . We also know who Ruby called . Ruby called Ferrie, but Ferrie did not .
 Conspiracy theorists can’t help but feel this is a very suspicious circumstance . Ruby placed a call to a city where Ferrie also happened to be . This confirms Garrison’s “propinquity” theory is not indigenous to him .
 Gill told the police that Jack Martin had been the source of the allegation against him . Gill told him that the police wanted to ask him ‘some questions’ about the assassination .
 When he arrived in New Orleans that Sunday, November 24, he noticed all the people and cars around his apartment and suspected the police were inside . He said he feared the police would be inside .
 Ferrie hung up and spent the night at a friend’s home in Hammond, Louisiana . Ferrie hangs up and spends the night with a friend .
 The next day, November 25, Ferrie went to Gill’s office and then, accompanied by Gill, surrendered to the DA . Ferrie was interrogated by several members of Garrison's staff, including First Assistant DA Frank Klein and Garrison .
 Garrison found it suspicious that Ferrie drove to Texas on the day of the assassination to go ice-skating . Garrison: Ferrie had to drive through inclement weather, especially in a rain storm . Garrison says Ferrie's trip to Texas was suspicious .
 FBI and Secret Service concluded there was no foundation for Martin’s allegation that Ferrie may have been involved in the assassination . Martin was released from prison days later and never charged with any crime .
 Garrison accepted the FBI’s conclusion and his own . Garrison doesn’t say it in his book, there have been references through the years in the conspiracy literature and in the movie JFK that Ferrie .
 Beauboeuf: "I suggested we go deer hunting, not duck hunting, in Alexandria, Louisiana, in 1994" He says he suggested that he and his wife should go hunting in Alexandria .
 "I had plenty of relatives in the area from whom we could borrow rifles if we needed them," he says . "We were able to borrow rifles from our relatives," he adds .
 No such library card of Ferrie's, we know, was found in Oswald’s possession at the time of his arrest or at any other time . We know that Ferrie was not in Oswald's possession .
 When the FBI interviewed Ferrie on November 25 and 27, 1963, he himself brought up Martin’s allegation and said that the allegation was untrue and that his library card was in the custody of the New Orleans Police Department following his arrest .
 We know that Ferrie left New Orleans for Houston with two of his friends around that very same time on the night of the assassination . Ferrie and two friends were in Houston at the time of the shooting .
 Mrs. Garner’s story is indirectly supported (but not as to the date of its occurrence) by a statement made to the New Orleans DA's office in 1968 by a neighbor of Oswald's, Mrs. Johnson .
 Ferrie had come by her house after the assassination inquiring if her husband (who apparently worked at the library) had any information regarding Oswald’s library card, which he did not . She said that Ferrie asked her husband if he knew anything about Oswald's card .
 The FBI report of its interview of Martin on November 25 carries no hint of recantation . Martin was interviewed by the FBI in November 25 .
 Martin merely said that the charges he had made against Ferrie were only ‘suspicions” on his part . Martin said that he had no evidence to support them .
 He suggested that the FBI should investigate Ferrie because he “could’t be involved in Kennedy’s death . He went no further; indeed, he suggested that Ferrie should be investigated .
 It’s possible this could have been sloppy writing by Secret Service agents who wrote the report, being influenced in their characterization of what Martin told them by the FBI .
 He could just as well have admitted doing so, but it’s not clear from the record that he did . Since it was all drivel, he could have admitted it .
 He has a scene where Martin and Banister return to Banister’s office after a hard night of drinking . Martin was killed in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Martin slurs back, “You may not like this, chief, but you’re beginning to act paranoid.” The chief slurs back: “I’m not paranoid. I’ll act paranoid,” he slurs back. Martin slurs .
 Martin had seen Oswald, the presidential assassin, meeting in Banister’s office with his two co-conspirators, Ferrie and Shaw . Banister, cursing and in a state of rage, takes his revolver out and strikes Martin hard in the temple .
 The only problem with this physical confrontation between Banister and Martin is that it almost assuredly had nothing to do with Banister suspecting Martin of looking into his files for incriminating evidence on the Kennedy case .
 Martin called the New Orleans Police Department from his home around 8:45m. and reported being beaten . Martin, after being pistol-whipped by Banister, called the N.O. police .
 Martin then went to Charity Hospital and received treatment,” then went home and called the police, police said . Martin went to the hospital, received treatment and went home, police say .
 Police took Martin to the Baptist hospital, where his injuries were photographed . Martin was taken to the hospital where he was treated for his injuries .
 Jim Garrison claims that one day in his office in the autumn of 1966, which was three years later, Martin, apparently for the first time, told him that Banister had actually beaten him over Martin’s allegedly snooping into his files . Garrison, in On the Trail
 Garrison thought the incident was important enough to devote several pages in his book to, including the second page of his book . No record has ever surfaced of this alleged interview of Martin by Garrison by Garrison .
 Even assuming, for the sake of argument, that Martin did tell Garrison this, we know that Martin has no credibility . But even if Martin did say Garrison this to us, it's not a lie .
 Martin's story to the police on the evening of the incident would be the more reliable, he says . Martin had told many contradictory stories about the assassination and had already been found by the authorities to be unreliable .
 Garrison's corroboration for Martin’s version of events was only partial and came from a totally discredited source, Delphine Roberts, Banister's secretary . Garrison said that Roberts was the secretary of Banister, and that she had been a friend of Martin .
 In 1978, long after Garrison’s version of the event (as allegedly told to him by Martin) was out, Roberts, who knew Martin, told the HSCA that she saw the whole event, and that Martin was behind a railing where files were kept .
 Banister walked in and the two exchanged words, whereupon Martin punched Banister . Banister then drew his gun and beat Martin . Martin was killed .
 After Martin left the office bleeding, Banister looked up the Oswald file, which was in her desk because she hadn’t “mounted and indexed” it yet, she says . Banister says she looked up Oswald file after Martin left bleeding, then looked up it .
 Banister told her many times that he believed there had been a conspiracy to murder Kennedy, she said . Banister also told her that most Americans still believe there was a conspiracy .
 Lewis was a protege of Martin’s and actually lived with him for awhile, vigorously competing with his mentor as to who could be the most unreliable . Lewis lived with Martin for a time .
 Garrison says the ‘Martin and Lewis’ show was literally all he had when he started his investigation . Garrison: “When he started this investigation the “Martin and . Lewis” show is literally all that he had. Garrison: "It's all he has.
 The same month Martin told Garrison about seeing Ferrie and Oswald in Guy Banister’s office, Lewis said he saw them at Mancuso's restaurant . Oswald was introduced to a man Carlos introduced to him as “Lee Harvey”
 When he failed a lie detector test, he said he made the story up because he thought it would please Garrison Garrison . He said he thought he made it up to please Garrison . Garrison said it was a good joke .
 Bob Guzman, a New Orleans private eye who knew Lewis, described him as an “uneducated, completely incompetent, detective-happy” individual . Guzman: Lewis was an ‘incompetence-happy, incompetent, individual .
 Lewis said when he got a twenty-five-dollar check from Banister for his part-time work, he immediately proceeded to buy a seventeen-dollar shoulder holster . He said when Lewis got a .25-dollar . check from . Banister, he said, "immediately
 He then purchased a plastic pistol from Woolworth’s department store . He then started to flash the holster and plastic gun around town .
 Only good things could be expected to flow from an investigation that had such a distinguished ancestry . The investigation is expected to yield good results for the public .
 In 1968, Lewis and Martin authored two affidavits in which they suggested that British spy master Kim Philby was behind the Kennedy assassination . The affidavits suggest that Philby, assisted by the influence he exercised over Robert Kennedy, and through international intrigue involving Cuba, Guatemala, and France,
 Garrison and his two assistants suggested to the audience that Oswald was a U.S. intelligence agent . Garrison and two assistants believed Oswald was an intelligence agent, Garrison said . Garrison said Oswald had been a United States intelligence agent. Garrison said he believed Oswald to be a CIA agent .
 Oswald's alleged connections with the CIA and FBI have been discussed earlier in the main text . Oswald’s alleged connections to the FBI and CIA have also been discussed in this article .
 ONI offers a brief summary of what ONI had heard from other sources as to the facts of the assassination . It includes misinformation such as Oswald’s rifle being found “on a back stairway” in the Depository Building .
 The document also contains the curious statement that Oswald’s half brother Edward J Pic “is said to be wild and crazy,” a characterization I had not heard before . Oswald's half brother is said to have been “wild and crazy”
 ONI came up when the HSCA investigated an allegation by a former Marine navigator named Larry Huff that on December 14, 1963, he was on a flight with ten to twelve military investigators that left the Kaneohe Bay base in Hawaii for Tachikawa, Japan . The
 Investigators went there to investigate Oswald’s stay at Atsugi . Investigators went to Atsugai to look at Oswald's stay there .
 He says he dropped the investigators off, returned to Hawaii, then went back to Japan in the latter part of December to bring the investigators back to Hawaii .
 Huff claims investigators showed him their report, which was classified “Secret, for Marine Corps Eyes Only,” and the report’s conclusion was that Oswald was incapable of committing the assassination alone . Huff claims that the report was classified and concluded Oswald was unable to commit the assassination
 HSCA was able to confirm flights from Kaneohe Bay to Tachikawa . Committee could find no documentary support, or support of any other kind, for mission Huff claimed .
 Lt. General Carson A Roberts was in charge of the base at Kaneohe Bay at the time .
 He said he knew of no military flights or investigations by military or civilian personnel connected with the assassination of President Kennedy that emanated from his base . The base commander said he did not know of any military flights from the base .
 Intelligence Division of Marine Corps headquarters told HSCA that his office conducted no such investigation . Also, Lieutenant Colonel Bill Brewer said his office wouldn’t have had jurisdiction to do so .
 ONI: Only investigative request had any bearing on the assassination was death of Martin Schrand . Schrand served at Cubi Point Naval Air Station in the Philippines at the same time Oswald had in 1958 .
 Huff’s story sounds fictitious on several grounds, the Marine Corps is a branch of the U.S. military, not the United States Navy, although it still falls under the Department of the Navy . Huff's story is based on the fact that there is no Marine Corps in
 If such a mission had taken place, all types of documents would have been generated, and they were not . The mission would have generated all kinds of documents, but not all of them .
 Huff's wife, not Huff, contacted the HSCA about his story, which he then reiterated . Huff said his wife contacted the agency about the story . Huff reiterated the story, and Huff reiterated it .
 Huff, a military friend of Huff’s at El Toro Marine Base, had a mental problem in the past, he says . Huff, whom he liked, had mental problems, he said . Huff was a good friend of the Marine, a friend says .
 The report’s conclusion that Oswald was “incapable” of committing the assassination alone sounds ludicrous on its face, not being the type of conclusion that any responsible investigative team would reach .
 The only person who put Oswald in Banister’s office for the HSCA was his secretary and purported mistress, Delphine Roberts . The defense at the London trial didn’t dare put Roberts on the stand, though she was eager to testify .
 In 1960 she tried to have a flagpole erected in a square in New Orleans, she said . Fidel Castro came up to her booth where she was soliciting support .
 Castro and his number-one man, Che Guevara, walked by the booth in early 1961 or 1962, she said . Castro and Gueevara walked by in early 1960s or 1962 .
 There is no known record of Castro coming to the U.S. after his visit here in April of 1959 . Castro visited the United States in April 1959 .
 Delphine believed that Franklin Roosevelt’s wife, Eleanor, was a Negro . She was a member of the white supremacy southern group White Citizens’ Council . The two of them had gotten the United States into the United Nations (not even in existence)
 The HSCA concluded it could not rely, without corroboration, on Delphine's word about Oswald being in Banister’s office . The decision was made after a thorough thorough investigation into the death of Oswald, who was killed in 1963 .
 Oswald came to the office “several” times and went right into Banister’s office, Buras says . But when Buras reinterviewed her the following month, she told him that she had interviewed Oswald for a position as an investigator for Banister
 Roberts spoke of seeing all types of people in Banister’s office, including David Ferrie, but said nothing of seeing Oswald and Shaw there . Garrison was desperately trying to connect Oswald with Ferrie and Shaw in 1967 .
 Joseph Newbrough Jr. worked with Banister as a private investigator from 1958 until Banister’s death in 1964 . He told the HSCA that he had never seen Oswald except in the media .
 Banister, Ferrie, and Martin were “steady” customers, but could not recall ever seeing Oswald in the restaurant . Jack Mancuso’s Coffee Shop owner said he did not recall Oswald ever in the shop .
 Nitschke said he never saw Oswald in Banister’s office, only in the media . He said he did not see Oswald in his own office, but in the press .
 Higgenbotham told a DA investigator during a series of interviews on April 12,16, and 17,1968, that one time he was kidding Banister about sharing a building with people passing out leaflets on the street, and Banister said, “Cool it.”
 Higgenbotham worked for Banister in 1960-1961, and Oswald wasn't even in New Orleans during this period . Oswald wasn’t even in the New Orleans area during that period .
 The information Higgenbotham furnished the DA’s office, possibly because he was facing a charge of marijuana possession, was further suspect . The information he provided to the DA's office was suspect, perhaps because of a drug charge .
 He said a fellow gay told him Oswald was a “hustler” on Royal Street . For instance, Eddie Porter, told him that Oswald was on the street, he said .
 Stone has said that in addition to Perry Russo, O’Keefe was a composite of two other men, each of whom was a homosexual hustler . David Logan and Reverend Raymond Broshears were homosexual hustlers, he said .
 We all know that when we expect more of someone, we become more disappointed when that person fails . We are disappointed when someone fails to live up to our expectations .
 Joan Mellen's 2005 book about Jim Garrison and Clay Shaw case, A Farewell to Justice, is a classic of American jurists . Joan Mellens' 2005 book, "A Farewell To Justice," is about the case of Clay Shaw and Garrison .
 Clay Shaw had as much to do with the Kennedy assassination as the actor Clark Gable did, says Garrison . Garrison was right, and Garrison was correct . Garrison's book is the equivalent of a Flat Earth Society press release .
 All the discredited witnesses, even mental cases, who had made bizarre allegations years ago in the Shaw case, were actually telling the truth . Even those who had been rejected by Garrison himself 'and not called to the witness stand'
 In other words, the culturally genteel English professor who doesn’t have one day, one hour of experience in law enforcement was able to look back, over thirty years later, and, in effect, tell Garrison and his legal staff that she knew more about the case than
 She doesn't expressly say this, but this is precisely her point, if we’re to believe the essential theme of her book . She doesn’t explicitly say this .
 In this regard, she also clearly and deliberately misleads her readers . In this same regard she also deliberately mislesleses her readers. In this case, she clearly misled her readers in this regard .
 Mellen "taken the stories of all the wackos in the Shaw case, embrace and embellish them, and present them all over again" She "virtually never presented any of the evidence previously gathered by the official record"
 There have been several pro-Garrison books before, every one of them lacking credibility, but hers is the very worst . The author's book is the worst, but she is the best, she says .
 Even William Davy’s Let Justice Be Done is not as bad as Mellen’�s book, which is saying something . Mellen's book is not the worst of the book, but Davy's book isn't nearly as bad .
 Mellen doesn't tell her readers, of course, why Garrison would have never dreamt of calling Martin to the witness stand .
 As noted in the main text, Lynn Loisel, one of Garrison’s chief investigators (who didn’t know Martin as well, apparently, as Ms. Loisel) wrote, “I’m not sure what happened to Martin,” she said
 Garrison: "Anything that he said, 99 percent of it was checked out to be false, you know, made" Garrison believed his story, but Bundy became one of Garrison's star witnesses at the trial .
 His second reason or excuse was even more absurd, saying that the rules of evidence in our American court system restricted what evidence he could present . He did not elaborate on what he meant to the Times .
 Even poor Rose Cherami comes across as a completely truthful witness . Mellen’s readers would never know that Cherami changed her story every time she told it .
 Dean Andrews himself admitted that his story was a lie, but if you read Mellen’s book, his whole story was the truth . Dean Andrews admitted that he lied, but Mellen's book shows that he did .
 She actually claimed that Jack Martin wasn’t even who he said he was, or whom everyone, including Mellen’s hero, Jim Garrison, and Oliver Stone thought him to be .
 Joseph Martin was really Joseph J Martin, a former CIA agent . Martin worked for the CIA between November 1950 and June 1958 . Martin retired on disability when he retired from the CIA .
 Mellen says Carl John Stanley, aka “Most Reverend Christopher Maria Stanley,” who knew Jack Martin, told the FBI that “John J Martin” was an alias of Jack Martin . Mellen: The FBI says the FBI received a tip from Stanley .
 Mellen claims that the New Orleans Martin never actually retired from the CIA, as the CIA said that Joseph J Martin did, and was continuing to work for the agency in New Orleans on its plot to murder Kennedy .
 The real Joseph J Martin, after he left the CIA, became an alcoholic who was mentally disturbed and even expressed a dislike for John F Kennedy . The height and weight of the two men were close enough . Since it turned out that the real Martin was an alcoholic .
 Joseph J Martin lived in Washington, D.C. (his wife was a secretary for a Washington law firm), and New Orleans Jack Martin (born in Phoenix, 1915) were different people .
 A CIA employee, one B Soles, handwrote on the bottom of a CIA report on the matter . “Not identical,” a CIA employee wrote on bottom of the CIA report .
 IVlellen accepts without questioning that Oswald was innocent of killing Kennedy; that he, Ferrie, and Shaw were all CIA operatives; that they conspired to murder Kennedy . She also accepts that Oswald wasn't even a leftist, only posing as one, and that he was working
 Mellen also charges that the CIA and FBI joined together to subvert Garrison’s investigation and prosecution of Shaw . Mellen says the CIA tried to keep Garrison from proving that they, in fact, did have Kennedy murdered .
 Mellen was filching the identity of CIA agent Joseph Martin, she apparently thought John was close enough . The middle initial, J , that the Reverend Stanley gave for Jack Martin’s alias John Martin, was the same as the real middle initial used for John Martin .
 She also claims that the CIA had nine CIA “plants” in Garrison’s office, or infiltrating his investigation . She presents no credible evidence that any of the nine were in fact CIA operatives .
 She also alleges that the FBI installed a wiretap in Garrison’s office . Garrison's office was raided by the FBI, she says .
 The CIA closely monitored the trial, but did not help the defense team, Mellen says . Mellen: The agency did not, contrary to Mellen, help the prosecution .
 Shaw’s lawyers wanted to talk to “someone in government who could steer them” to the true facts of the case, lawyer says . Shaw's lawyers felt he was innocent, but were confused by the smoke screen Garrison was raising, attorney says .
 An overture was made to the CIA on September 18,1967, by Herbert “Jack” Miller, Walter Sheridan’s lawyer . Sheridan's lawyer made the overture to the agency on behalf of Sheridan .
 The CIA contacted its office of general counsel on September 18, 1967, saying, “We have been authoritatively advised that Donald P Norton has falsely claimed affiliation with CIA” The CIA asked the general counsel’s office what to do with the request .
 Garrison never called Norton to the stand at Shaw’s trial, proof that he believed his tale was patently untrue . Garrison believed Norton's tale was untrue, according to Shaw's trial testimony .
 Alfred Moran, a member of the board of Shaw’s Trade Mart in New Orleans, allegedly forged Clay Bertrand signature . Moran's signature was reportedly on the same page of the guest book at the Eastern Airlines VIP lounge at New Orleans International Airport .
 Hunter Leake, a CIA agent working out of the New Orleans office, spoke to Moran at a cocktail party, Mellen says . Moran told Leake that Shaw was Bertrand, the CIA agent says . Leake says Moran said Shaw was Shaw .
 On November 30, 1967, CIA General Counsel Lawrence Houston wrote to the head of the New Orleans office giving his approval to Leake’s request . Leake's request was approved by the CIA on November 30 .
 Moran has in the past always been most helpful and cooperative with the CIA, Houston wrote . Houston wrote, “We believe in this case an exception might be made to the caveat on discussing the Clay Shaw case”
 Clay Shaw used the name Clem Bertrand ... so we assume they were two different people . It makes no sense for Clay Shaw to use the name 'Clem Bertrand' Clay Shaw .
 Houston goes on to say that if Shaw and Bertrand were two different people, this fact could be furnished to Shaw’s lawyer, Irvin Dymond, without Leake or the CIA being involved . Houston says this information could have been furnished to Irvin .
 The CIA established a policy of not helping Shaw’s lawyers and getting involved in the case . The New Orleans station did monitor everything that was happening and sent its reports to CIA headquarters .
 Walter was the source for Mellen’s assertion that the FBI had asked former FBI agent Raymond Beck to spy on Jim Garrison . Walter was also the source of Mellen's assertion that Beck had asked the FBI to spy .
 I got the sense in reading Mellen’s book that she was the counterpart of Gerald Posner . Mellen's book was published by the same publisher as Posner's own .
 Posner's credibility far exceeds Mellen's, Posner’s . Not in terms of credibility, since Posner has far more credibility than Mellen . Mellen is a former White House adviser .
 Posner and his publisher tried to convince their readers that he had solved the mystery of the Kennedy assassination that the Warren Commission couldn't . Mellen, if we’re to believe the thrust of her book, solved the case that Garrison was trying to prove, he says .
 Both the Warren Commission and the FBI, and Garrison and his staff of investigators, were helpless in trying to prove their respective cases . In other words, Garrison was helpless in proving his case .
 The Warren Commission had to wait for close to thirty years for Posner to come along and figure everything out for it . Posner had to prove everything he couldn’t. Garrison had to . wait for over thirty-five years, when the trail was so cold there was ice
 Perry Russo put Oswald, Shaw, and Ferrie together, or any two of them together, no problem . For instance, if Garrison and his staff couldn't find anyone other than Russo to put Oswald and Shaw together, it would be a problem .
 Mellen came up in 2002, over thirty years later, with a witness whose brother, a lawyer, told him that his client, a contractor, said he saw all three of them together .
 Back then, a subpoena to the contractor would have eliminated all the hearsay. I know it’s multiple hearsay, but back then a subpoena . Back in the days, the contractor had to be subpoenaed, but not subpoenas .
 Mellen also came up with a witness who told her that he worked at a parakeet stand at the Old Pontchartrain Amusement Park . Ferrie and Oswald came by the stand to throw a few nickels at the stand, which they didn’t .
 Mellen found a witness who saw Shaw and Ferrie together in a lawyer’s office just days before the assassination . Mellen: Shaw, Ferrie were seen together at a lawyer's office days before his assassination .
 She found a witness who had a document with Ferrie's and Shaw’s signatures on it . Ferrie and Shaw signed the document together, she says .
 The CIA was very reluctant to get involved in the Garrison case . There is evidence that the U.S. Justice Department decided at one point to be involved in Shaw's New Orleans trial .
 When autopsy surgeon Pierre Finck testified that some army general was in charge of the autopsy, Justice Department’s Carl Eardley immediately dispatched fellow autopsy surgeon Thornton Boswell to New Orleans (Dr. Finck)
 He said he spent a part of the night at the United States attorney’s office reading the transcript of Finck's testimony . The transcript was read by the U.S. attorney's office .
 Boswell is clear about going to the U.S. attorney’s office but also says he “met somebody, some lawyer in another firm that night” Boswell could have been referring to one of Shaw's lawyers . In testimony before the ARRB, Boswell
 Mellen: Shaw and Ferrie were working and conspiring with the CIA in the CIA’s plot to murder Kennedy . Ferrie has to borrow four hundred dollars to make a needed flight to Dallas before the assassination .
 Garrison couldn’t come up with anyone other than Perry Russo to say that Clay Shaw was Clay Bertrand . Garrison: "I'm not sure who's Clay Shaw or Clay Shaw really is Bertrand"
 The committee couldn’t come up with any credible witnesses stating that Oswald knew Guy Banister . But Mellen found several witnesses .
 Mellen can’t find some already well-known nut in the Garrison case to rely on or tell her what she wants to hear . She comes up with more obscure nuts, the most important of whom is a roustabout named Thomas Beckham .
 Beckham had nothing to volunteer to the Warren Commission so his name doesn’t appear in its volumes . Beckham’s name doesn't appear in the volumes of the book .
 His name appears in virtually none of the books written on the Garrison-Shaw case, including Jim Garrison’s book . And his name is rarely mentioned in the case .
 Beckham wasn’t left out because no one knew of him, but no one before Joan Mellen wanted to diminish or contaminate whatever they published on the case with anything he had to say . Beckham wasn't left out of the story .
 In 1977 and 1978 Beckham told the HSCA much of the same fabricated story he told Mellen when she caught up with him in 2002, and the committee predictably never published one word of it or even alluded to it . Beckham's story was never published by the committee, even though
 "Tommy" was a protege of Jack Martin . Mellen says “Tommy’s good strong voice, picked up a dollar or two singing and yodeling, being a Bourbon Street barker, and calling out bus departures .
 He said he wanted to be an ordained priest in the Catholic Church . He said that he had “taught me, you know, how to read.”
 Beckham agreed and paid five dollars for his ‘ordination’ papers, sent to him by someone in Toronto, Canada . Beckham agreed to pay for the five-dollar fee .
 Beckham admitted he was committed to mental hospitals in Louisiana, Missouri, Louisiana and New Orleans . Beckham admitted to being committed to a mental institution "three times" Beckham was also committed to Charity Hospital mental ward in New Orleans and Charity Hospital .
 The U.S. government tried to recruit Tommy Martin, but he failed to pass muster with the alcoholic Martin . Martin was the subject of a federal investigation into his alcoholism .
 In other words, the CIA is thinking about murdering Mao and Khrushchev, and one of its top candidates to do so is Tommy . Tommy. Tommy .
 He is also taught how not to leave a paper trail, how to walk without giving away who you are and how to use guns .
 Tommy didn't tell the almost childishly gullible Joan Mellen what happened next . Tommy didn’t tell her what happened to him .
 Mellen writes that “this revelatory and never-before-seen document reveals how military intelligence, the Army, and the CIA, working in concert, had set up a scapegoat . Only you, Joan, were privileged enough and important enough to see it .
 David Beckham's role in Kennedy's assassination is a mystery, says the former footballer . Beckham was a major role in the assassination of the president, according to a report . He says he wants to know how Beckham fit into the assassination .
 Beckham attended meetings where assassinating Kennedy was discussed, Mellen says . Beckham told Mellen that in the summer of 1963 he had attended several meetings where assassination was discussed .
 Even Jack Ruby showed up at some of the conspiracy-to-murder-Kennedy sessions . There was always a representative of organized crime present .
 Just before the assassination, Tommy says he was sent to lawyer G Wray Gill’s office . Tommy says Tommy was in the office at the time of the assassination . Tommy was killed by the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy in 1963 .
 He is told to fly to Dallas and deliver it to a man at the Executive Inn whom he will recognize as having met at the “United Catholic Mission Fathers” in New Orleans . He is then told to deliver the document to Dallas .
 When Tommy, on the day of the assassination, tells a New Orleans member of the Ku Klux Klan, A Roswell Thompson, that Tommy’s friend, Oswald, “did it,” Thompson said, ‘No he didn’t.” When
 I thought you said that “ United States military intelligence, the Army, and the CIA, working in concert,” were behind the assassination. “Working in concert” was what you said .
 Beckham told the HSCA in 1977-1978 and Mellen for her 2005 book . Beckham's story isn't what he told the Orleans Parish grand jury in 1968 when Garrison was preparing for his prosecution of Clay Shaw . Beckham’s story isn’t what Garrison told the
 The most reasonable inference is that Beckham was in Mississippi, not New Orleans, during the period just before the assassination when he was supposedly flying to Dallas for the conspirators . Indeed, though it is not crystal clear, it is the most reasonable .
 In the summer of 1963, if he was in New Orleans it was to visit his parents now and then, not to be a regular attendee of plots to murder Kennedy . Kennedy was visiting his parents not to attend plots to kill Kennedy .
 Beckham lied before the grand jury about his education and whether or not he was living in New Orleans in 1963 . Beckham feared Garrison might prosecute him ‘for criminal conspiracy” to kill Kennedy, she says .
 At the grand jury, Beckham testified he was not in Dallas in 1963 in which case he could not have been a courier for the conspirators as he later told the HSCA and Mellen he was . Beckham only being in Dallas once in his life, in 1966 .
 He also said he had only met David Ferrie once in his life, and had never met Jack Ruby, Clay Shaw, or Lee Harvey Oswald . He said he never met, at any time, Jack Ruby or Clay Shaw .
 Mellen claims Blakey and the HSCA are part of the cover-up . Mellen says Blakey is now part of a 'cover-up' that has been revealed .
 Because of “his own complicity in Castro’s planned assassination” and ‘his acquaintance with the people” who murdered his brother, the judge said . Because of his own complicity, he was complicit in Castro's planned assassination .
 He knew who murdered his brother, but because he was their acquaintance . He made an “active effort to sabotage Jim Garrison’s investigation and ... to assist the CIA in its coverup” of the assassination, he says .
 Of course, despite the blizzard of citations Mellen throws at those checking her work, she has none to support these wild charges . Mellen has no citations to support the wild charges against her .
 According to you, he had just gotten $8,000—at least the equivalent of $25,000 today . Today, he would have gotten $9,000 . According to your story, he'd gotten $7,000, $8K .
 Tommy made ends meet by riding a stripped-down motor bike inside a drum with the centrifugal force holding him up . Mellen: Tommy joined a carnival and joined a motor bike in a drum .
 Tommy was just trying to make his way in the world. But hey, life’s a struggle, and Tommy was a struggle . Life's a struggle for Tommy, but he's a good guy .
 Mellen doesn’t tell her readers that even Jack Martin, who was, per Mellen, Beckham’s mentor and someone she claims was credible, thought that Beckham, the hero of her book, was of bad character and a liar .
 An investigator checked with Jim Garrison, Garrison told him that Beckham had nothing of any value to tell his investigators during the Shaw case . Garrison said Beckham told him he had nothing to tell investigators .
 In 1992, author Gus Russo tracked Beckham down to where he was living in Louisville, Kentucky . Author Gus Russo found Beckham in 1992 .
 Russo said Beckham acknowledged to him being what most would call a flimflam artist . Russo: "Beckham basically acknowledged to me being ... what most people would call an artist" Russo said about his encounter with Beckham: "Most would call it a flamamist"
 They were filled with bogus diplomas from every major university, he was selling them and cheap trinkets, like whoopee cushions, for a living . He was selling the fake diplomas for $100,000 .
 He told me he not only recorded but wrote three Number One hits, which he named . ‘From Jack to a King’ was one of the hits,’ he said .
 By the way, Mellen won’t be learning anything new from the foregoing Russo reference in this book . Mellen will be learning nothing new from this reference .
 In it, though he admitted he only attended school through the third grade, he acknowledged that he held himself out to others as being a licensed physician for the state of Maryland and as having a certificate in psychotherapy .
 He advertised himself in a local newspaper as T Edward Beckham, DD, PhD, having received his PhD from an English university . He even advertised himself as 'T Edward Beckham' Beckham .
 He told the HSCA he was “an ordained priest of about four different Catholic denominations,” as well as having an “ordination” in the Episcopal and Baptist churches .
 Mellen had the same information about Beckham that would cause any rational and well-intentioned person to disregard Beckham . Mellen decided to make Beckham the centerpiece of her book .
 Mellen’s book doesn’t deserve the space. I could give many examples of Mellen's book, but it doesn't deserve to be published .
 In five interviews before he said under sodium pentothal that he was present when Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw conspired to murder Kennedy, he never said a word about this, period . Russo’s credibility was destroyed (among many other ways) by the fact that in five
 Mellen has Shaw telling New Orleans police officer Aloysius Habighorst that his alias was Clay Bertrand, even though she had to know that a court hearing clearly established that he was lying when he told him this .
 Mellen has to know this is a lie, and the only document she cites, apparently to prove this allegation, refers to Banister and a QKENCHANT clearance, but has no reference to Clay Shaw . The only document cited to prove the allegation is a QENCHANT
 Mellen ignored all the evidence that proved that Shaw never signed the guest register in the Eastern Airlines lounge at Moisant Airport . Mellen said he did, despite the fact that Shaw did, and said he signed the register .
 Dallas DA Henry Wade believed that Oswald had been to Ruby’s Carousel Club, and Oswald used Jack Ruby as a personal reference for a job . Though she had to know this was not the truth .
 The allegation of the source on whom Mellen relies for the Ruby reference contains its own refutation . Mellen's claim of a source on which Mellen relied is refuted by the source .
 Orvie Aucoin, a cameraman for Channel 12, WVUE-TV in New Orleans, told an FBI source that Garrison’s “ace in the hole” at the upcoming trial of Shaw was a “certified photostatic copy”
 Mellen said Cherami yelled, “POW,” as the shots rang out over the television set . Mellen: Cherami was yelling, ‘POW’ as shots were fired over the TV set .
 The Zapruder film of the assassination was released in 1941 . There is undoubtedly more footage of the shooting in some network archives, and with audio .
 If the assassination was televised, Rose Cherami must have been the only person in the whole country who was watching a TV set at the time .
 When Garrison prosecuted Shaw for perjury after Shaw’s acquittal, Shaw sought an injunction in the federal courts to prohibit the prosecution, and secured the requested relief . As set forth in the main text, this is the case of Garrison .
 Judge Herbert Christenberry was openly scornful of Garrison’s conduct . Garrison was acting “in bad faith,” justifying the issuance of the injunction .
 A group of New Orleans businessmen funded part of his investigation of Shaw . One of the reasons for his finding bad faith, which took up only two pages in his twelve-page opinion, was the fact of the fact that he found bad faith .
 Christenberry found no impropriety in the group’s contribution, but did infer that perhaps one reason for Garrison's perjury prosecution of Shaw was that if he succeeded he would be giving the group something for its investment .
 Oswald listed three personal references, one of whom was Jack Ruby . One of the members of the group testified at the hearing that he obviously expected results for the money cation Oswald listed .
 Mellen doesn't give Aucoin’s full allegation, knowing that if she did, it would disprove what Mellen wanted her readers to believe . But she doesn’t give the full allegation to her readers .
 Dischler had all the opportunity in the world to criticize Lambert's handling of the Clinton witnesses and story . But she doesn't write one word of criticism about Lambert handling the Clinton story .
 She did tell Lambert that she was “ashamed” to be part of the book ‘False Witness’ ” “ and that she is “appalled” by the book, she said .
 Mellen doesn’t tell her readers that Dischler, who was a minister at the time, was never mentioned to me by you . But just before the “ashamed” and “appalled” language, Dischlers wrote, “The
 Christenberry's decision clearly shows that the Truth or Consequences issue was very secondary and subordinate to the main reason for his injunction . But any reading of the decision shows that . Christenbury’s decision .
 The main reason, and the one he spent five-sixths of his opinion writing about, was that Garrison’s investigation of Shaw was “baseless” and therefore he “was not prosecuting Shaw in good faith,” referring to the way Garrison handled Shaw
 The perjury prosecution was a “continuing harassment” of Shaw without any justification, Shaw says . Shaw was convicted of perjury in a perjury case . Shaw says the perjury prosecution is a ‘continued harassment’
 Christenberry said without “direct federal court intervention,” there was no reason to believe that it would not continue . Christensberry said that without ‘direct federal . court intervention’, it will not continue.
 Christenberry uses adjectives like “appalling” and “inexcusable” to describe Garrison’s conduct . He also accuses Garrison of using drugs and hypnosis on Russo to “concoct” a case against Shaw .
 Readers of Mellen’s book would get no sense of what I have just written. But readers of Mellens’ book would have no sense at all of what he wrote .
 The perjury charges were dismissed by Christenberry not on the merits, but on the technicality that the Truth or Consequences contributions were illegal . Mellen implies, Mellen strongly implies, the perjury charges are not on merits . The perjury charge was dismissed on technical grounds that Truth
 Nowhere does Mellen mention Christenberry's severe denunciation of Garrison’s conduct, nor its serving as the main basis of his injunction .
 Mellen deceived her readers into believing Christenberry issued his injunction because of the impropriety or illegality of the Truth or Consequences contributions . She also deceived them into believing that it was the only reason why he dismissed the perjury charges, another lie .
 Christenberry calls Garrison's actions “appalling” and “inexcusable” He calls Garrison’s treatment of Shaw an “outrageous” way .
 Mellen had read her own hero’s final summation in the case, she would have seen that even he never believed Shaw was guilty . Mellen: "If Mellen . had read . her hero's final . summation, even he believed Shaw . was guilty"
 He only told them that they were there to decide whether Shaw was guilty or not guilty . Instead, he told them, as if they didn't already know, that they had to decide .
 If prosecutors believed in their case that little, there would be a lot more defendants out on the street, prosecutors say . Prosecutors believe in their cases that little , there would have been more defendants .
 For anyone writing a book about the Shaw case, Shaw’s trial has to be the most important event of the whole saga . Shaw's trial has been the most significant event in the history of the case .
 She seems to have picked up what little she had on the trial from newspapers and other sources .
 I wish I had the luxury of dismissing a terrible book like this by saying it’s beneath any commentary by me, but since I’m writing a book about the assassination, I can’t . The book is published by Simon Cowan, a Pulitzer Prize winner
 Despite its literary affectation of many citations, many citations are worthless since they are only citations, for the most part, to silliness . I’ve treated Mellen’s book with about the same lack of respect as I treated the charges of Judyth Baker, but
 The Kennedy assassination has already been polluted beyond tolerable limits by nuts and quacks, phony stories . "The Kennedy assassination is already polluted beyond tolerance limits by nut and quack stories," says author .
 Garrison, who was building his whole case on motive, then engaged in a disconnect . Garrison: "I was building my whole case based on motive," Garrison said . Garrison was trying to build a case for motive, but then engaged a disconnect, he said .
 Garrison said the assassination was a “100% CIA” operation . Garrison had alluded to the military-industrial complex in this interview . Garrison said in Stone’s movie, though the CIA was complicit in the murder, the main group that made the decision to kill Kennedy was
 1,000 U.S. military personnel on duty in Vietnam were returned home by the end of December 1963 . The Vietnam War ended in 1963 .
 The troop strength at the end of December was reduced by around 800, not 1,000 . Kennedy had agreed to a slight increase in our military presence in South Vietnam, the month before .
 The 1,000-troop withdrawal was only important as a signal of intentions anyway, anyway . The withdrawal is only important for the U.S. military, but it's important to show intentions .
 The important question was whether the remaining 15,000 American troops in Vietnam would be coming home by the end of 1965 . The question was still whether the U.S. troops would be returning home .
 "Planning" for programs is tethered to the provisions of paragraph 6, which, as indicated, were the same as the draft under Kennedy . But more importantly, paragraph 7 of the draft did not contain the “possible” language .
 There are ambiguities lending themselves to different interpretations in paragraphs 6 and 7 of both the draft and final version of 273 .
 The nature of our involvement, if any, in the coup of Diem remains unclear, but one thing does not . Although the nature of this is unclear, one thing remains unclear is that it does .
 I should never have given my consent to it,” he says . “I should never given my permission to it.” implies not direction or even complicity, but acquiescence .
 LBJ was not known for parsing his words and we can probably assume he did not mean what he said about JFK murdering Diem literally . The remark is further support for the belief that the Kennedy administration was not as clean as it could have been .
 There is no question but that President Kennedy and all of us who advised him bore a heavy responsibility for these happenings . The public display of our disapproval of Diem and his brother was public, he says .
 It has been argued that the so-called Gulf of Tonkin incident in August of 1964 militates against the contention that LBJ did not want to go to war in Vietnam . This argument does not appear to have any merit .
 USS Maddox was fired on by three North Vietnamese torpedo boats in the Gulf of Tonkin in 1964 . None of the torpedoes struck the Maddox, though none struck .
 Aircraft from nearby aircraft carrier Ticonderoga destroyed one of the torpedo boats and damaged the other two . Aircraft from the nearby United States aircraft carrier .
 The Maddox and Ticonderoga were in international waters about 28 nautical miles off the North Vietnam coast conducting covert operations at the time of the attack .
 This attack on the Maddox is not in dispute and North Vietnam never denied the attack . In 1997 General Nguyen Dinh Uoc, the director of the Institute of Military History in Hanoi, said that the assault was instituted by a local North Vietnamese commander .
 The Johnson administration did nothing to retaliate against the actions of the Ticonderoga aircraft .
 No one could possibly claim that the Gulf of Tonkin incident reflected any desire by LBJ to go to war . So far up to this point no one could say that LBJ wanted to go war .
 The “LBJ wanted to go to war” proponents make their argument with a second alleged attack, again by three torpedo boats, on the Maddox in the late morning of August 4, 1964 .
 One has to say ‘alleged’ because such an attack was never confirmed to anyone’s complete satisfaction . Such an attack never happened to anyone in the U.S.
 Freak weather effects and overeager sonarman may have accounted for many reports . Freak weather may have contributed to many reports of missing people .
 Sharp called Air Force Lieutenant General David A Burchinal of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and stated he had no doubt that a second attack on Maddox had, indeed, taken place . Sharp continued to investigate and said he had 'no doubt' that the attack had taken place at 5
 On LBJ’s authorization, at 10:43m., U.S. aircraft from the Ticonderoga and Constellation started flying sixty-four sorties against North Vietnamese patrol boat bases .
 First U.S. bombing of North Vietnam in what was to become the Vietnam War . It was the first United States bombing of N Vietnam .
 It was estimated that twenty-five North Vietnamese patrol boats were damaged or destroyed . 90 percent of the oil complex was destroyed .
 Congress gave President Johnson the authority to go to war in Vietnam if he so chose . In other words, Congress gave him the power to go on the war .
 Historian Robert J Hanyok concluded that during this second incident, NSA officers misinterpreted NorthVietnamese intercepts in an apparently honest mistake that there had been an attack .
 The documents were doctored to provide evidence of an actual attack, he says . He says midlevel NSA officials at the NSA discovered the errors very shortly thereafter but covered them up and doctored documents .
 Hanyok’s report also concluded that neither President Johnson and his advisers nor top NSA and Defense Department officials knew of the deception .
 Congress ultimately signed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which authorized war with North Vietnam . If Hanyok is correct, this deception played a part in Congress ultimately signing the resolution . The resolution authorized war against North Vietnam.
 No one disputes the first attack on the Maddox, which alone could have contributed substantially to the resolution . So the deception could not have been more serious, although, as indicated .
 Hanyok says the NSA's intelligence officers “deliberately skewed” the evidence passed on to policy makers in LBJ’s administration to lead them to believe that NorthVietnamese ships had attacked American destroyers on August 4,1964 .
 NSA intercepts of North Vietnamese communications never passed on to policy makers, Hanyok says . 90 percent of NSA's intercepts were not passed on by policy makers . The NSA intercepted North Vietnam communications on August 4 .
 The corollary argument, shorn of its political allegation, has also been made that the incident was provoked or staged to enable Johnson to get congressional resolution authorizing war .
 William P Bundy, assistant secretary of state for Far Eastern affairs, said he was in the process of drafting a similar resolution for the Johnson administration before the Gulf of Tonkin incident occurred . Bundy explained this was routine and normal contingency planning to prepare for the reality that “things might take
 No evidence has surfaced in over forty years that the Gulf of Tonkin incident was provoked or staged . But there is one reality that clearly demonstrates that everything was on the up and up, at least as far as Johnson and his advisers were concerned .
 Taking Charge contains transcripts of conversations between LBJ and his advisers during the Tonkin incident . The book Taking Charge was edited with commentary by presidential historian Michael Beschloss . It was published in 1997 .
 From the moment LBJ first discusses the incident through his working out how to resolve it, he clearly is dealing with new information and an evolving situation not of his making . As the transcripts reflect, from the . moment of the . incident through the . conversation, LBJ clearly clearly is
 McNamara: "Mr President, we just had word by telephone from Admiral Sharp that the destroyer was under torpedo attack" McNamara says . McNamara was in the middle of the attack .
 McNamara: I think I might get Dean Rusk and Mac Bundy and have them come over here and we’ll go over these retaliatory actions and then we ought to— LBJ: I sure think you ought to agree to that . McNamara says he may get Dean
 "Unidentified craft" is thought to be from unidentified craft . The craft is believed to have come from unidentified aircrafts .
 We thought that the unidentified craft might include one PT boat, which has torpedo capability, and two Swatow boats, which we don't credit with torpedo capability . We don’t credit the boats with torpedo capabilities, although they may have it .
 In 1995, McNamara, on a visit to Hanoi, spoke to GeneralVo Nguyen Giap .
 Giap convinced McNamara that no second attack on the Maddox had ever happened . Giap was the North Vietnamese vice premier for defense during the Gulf of Tonkin period . McNamara reported that Giap had convinced him that .
 If McNamara had been part of a deliberately provoked or staged Gulf of Tonkin incident, he hardly would have made any concession suggesting that the second attack never took place and was not therefore real . McNamara would hardly have suggested that the attack never happened .
 If the Gulf of Tonkin incident that led to the resolution had been provoked or staged, it would seem that with the nation and the whole of Congress behind him, that would have been the opportune time, politically, for LBJ to have sent combat troops to Vietnam . The
 It wasn’t until March 8, 1965, seven months after the resolution was passed, that he finally sent U.S. combat troops to Vietnam . He decided to embark on a major ground war in Vietnam in July .
 Cold war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union was an almost natural progression for two world powers whose ideologies of capitalism and communism could hardly be more starkly conflicting . The Soviets, led by the tyrannical Josef Stalin, had ominously spread their hegemony over much of Eastern
 It didn’t help the North Vietnamese cause that there was an unprovoked attack on American soldiers the previous month . The United States position, from the end of World War, is clear .
 On February 7, 1965, an American compound as well as an airfield near Pleiku, South Vietnam, came under attack by Communist guerrillas . The attack was the first time the U.S. Embassy in Vietnam was attacked .
 The United States saw great significance in the timing because that day, McGeorge Bundy, President Johnson’s special assistant for national security, was in Saigon . Bundy was in the U.S. during the Vietnam War .
 The United States began sustained bombing raids on North Vietnam in the fall of 1968 . In response, the U.S. bombed North Vietnam . The bombing raids continued until the fall 1968 .
 In 1997, Lieutenant General DangVu Hiep, a former deputy of the North Vietnamese army’s political department, said the attack was “a spontaneous attack by the local commander,” and had not been directed by Hanoi .
 George Kennan is usually thought to be the conceiver of this strategy, one which required no birth since it was inevitable .
 He was part of the small staff that reopened the American embassy in Russia’s capital city in 1933 . He returned to Russia in 1944 as the right-hand man of the American ambassador to Russia, Averill Harriman .
 On February 22,1946, he sent the State Department in Washington, D.C., one of the most celebrated cables in U.S. history .
 If the adversary has sufficient force and makes clear his readiness to use it, he rarely has to do so . Thus, if the adversary is prepared to use such force, it will not be necessary to use .
 In the ensuing years, Kennan’s words, of course, presaged the American posture toward the Kremlin, most notably in the Cuban missile crisis sixteen years later .
 Kennedy won a Pulitzer Prize in the category of biography . Kennedy's book was a best seller and won a bestseller . His biography won the Pulitzer .
 Linguist Noam Chomsky says Kennedy would not have withdrawn from Vietnam unless victory (by South Vietnam) was assured . Chomsky concludes that Kennedy would have withdrawn if South Vietnam was assured of victory .
 He rejects the position of Ken O’Donnell and Dave Powers, others who agree with them, by noting that most of them took their positions ‘postTet’ The Tet offensive convinced nearly everyone that the Communists were as strong and determined as ever and there was no end
 Chomsky says the ‘Camelot memoirists’ felt they had to do what they could to separate JFK from the widening disaster in Vietnam . Chomsky: To save Kennedy’s image, they felt they needed to separate him from the Vietnam disaster .
 Chomsky cites examples of Kennedy loyalists changing their earlier positions on the war . Chomsky cites some examples of JFK loyalists' earlier positions .
 Fletcher Prouty couldn’t even claim authorship for his military-industrial-complex assassination theory . The wacky, right-wing right winger couldn't even say authorship of his military industrial-industrial complex assassination theory.
 Unless it's a coincidence, his articulation sounds very much like an ironical borrowing from the other end of the political spectrum . Unless it’s a coincidence it sounds like a borrowing from another end of political spectrum.
 Joesten supported Moscow’s attempt to deflect suspicions right after the assassination that Oswald, a Marxist, must have killed Kennedy at the behest of the Soviets . The book, published by pro-Soviet American publisher Carl Aldo Marzani, was published in the spring of the
 Between Prouty and the Christchurch newspaper staff, it would be safer to go with the paper’s version, not the prouty's . The Christchurch paper has little credibility, and it's safer to trust the paper's version .
 The reference only appears in Prouty’s book and didn’t make it into the movie, which only said the paper came out before 2:00m.
 X doesn’t bother to tell Garrison why the plane trip was “strange,” unless you want to accept X’s cryptic statement that they were in the air “to get their perception out of the way” as an explanation .
 The plane turned around over the Pacific nine hundred miles west of Honolulu when news of the shooting was received via Teletype at 12:40m. The plane returned to Honolulu and then departed for Washington .
 The cabinet members’ remarks of grief and sorrow to the news media when they landed forty minutes after midnight at Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland never had any significance as far as the assassination and its alleged cover-up .
 Either Salinger and the six cabinet members were in on the conspiracy to murder JFK, or the conspirators arranged to have them up in the air at the time .
 Stone didn't tell his audience why Salinger and the cabinet members were en route to Tokyo . Stone, of course, didn’t tell the audience why he and Salinger were on the way to Japan .
 It was their boss, John F Kennedy, not the alleged conspirators, who sent them there to set things up for his scheduled visit to Japan in February for political and economic talks . The Kennedy family was not involved in the alleged plot .
 A variation of a conspiracy theory that a great number of people were involved in a conspiracy to kill the president and cover it up has more arguable merit than the bulk of the conspiracy community . David Phinney, who leans toward the conspiracy theory, has come up with a variation of
 He says they were ‘unwitting allies’ in the conspiracy . In other words, he says, they were allies in the . conspiracy .
 He analogizes the situation to a wartime situation when a commander gives an improper order and the troops below carry it out without questioning it . The situation is similar to that of a commander giving an improper orders, he says .
 Even Phinney sees the weakness in his theory, which, admittedly, is better than others . But even Phinny sees the weaknesses in the theory .
 When it was all over, some people unwittingly carried out the conspiracy would look back at their conduct and say, “Hey, there really was no valid reason for my having to do” The answers to which would lead back to the actual conspirators .
 A large number of people would sense that what they were doing was clearly counterintuitive . At some point at least some of them either wouldn’t do it or would start to talk, a situation that would begin unravel the conspiracy .
 In any event, though some conduct could be engaged in that might not arouse suspicion in the “unwitting” spear carriers, other conduct unequivocally would .
 Troops will carry out orders without questioning them, but they have to be the type of orders they have no reason to question in which they make the necessary assumption that the orders were predicated upon information they were not privy to . True, troops will not question orders they carry out
 The orders were to go into a village and kill all civilians, including women and children, even though they are unarmed . But say the orders were not to kill civilians, but to go in and kill them .
 Judge Advocate General Corps lawyers suppressed critical evidence favorable to the defendants . The lawyers for the soldiers who killed the civilians were ordered to suppress evidence that proved they were merely following orders from their superiors .
 Even if there were, it would have been sexless and would not have excited the intellect and concern of millions the world over who sense the dark hand of powerful forces behind Kennedy’s murder .
 It is virtually unheard of for any conspiracist to make the accusation that a second gunman in the shooting of the president was some other misfit like Oswald, acting alone .
 Almost without exception, the coconspirators are well-known groups such as the CIA, FBI, mob, and so on . The CIA and FBI are among the most likely to be behind the attack .
 The first mention in a Dallas newspaper of President Kennedy coming to Dallas was a front-page headline story (“President to Visit Dallas, 3 Other Texas Cities Soon”) in the Dallas Times Herald on September 13 .
 RFK’s statement to the media on September 7, 1964, was just for public consumption . RFK's statement was for the public, not for the media, but for public .
 The one time occurred at a newsstand at O’Hare airport in Chicago at the height of Jim Garrison’s investigation in New Orleans .
 RFK told Mankiewicz to keep current with the matter for him . RFK said he didn't know when RFK asked him to keep up with him .
 Mankiewicz said RFK was with RFK at an outdoor rally at San Fernando Valley State College . RFK won the California Democratic nomination for president in 1968 .
 Lifton wrote that RFK came to San Fernando Valley State College in early June of 1968 . Lifton was present when RFK visited the college in June .
 Lifton recalls the “sense of anger and betrayal” he felt over RFK’s answer . Lifton: RFK's answer was “betrayalistic” and “insulting” Lifton says he felt ‘anger and betrayal
 Lifton said that Patricia Lambert, a conspiracy theorist at the time, was also present that day and heard RFK say the same thing . Lifton also said that Lambert was present and said RFK told her the truth .
 "We know, from the newspapers and magazines, that this never happened," he says . "And we know from this period, that it never happened. And we know," he adds .
 Mankiewicz, himself, traveled with RFK, has no recollection that he did . RFK was assassinated in 1968, but RFK's widow has no memory .
 A later posting on McAdams’s Web site from Clark Merrill dated March 7,1995, seems to have finally clarified the matter . Clark Merrill, a Clark Merrill associate of McAdams, wrote a post on his Web site .
 There was a “good gap” between RFK’s speech and the election on June 4, she said . She said there was a "good gap" between the time of RFK and June 4 .
 Merrill found two newspaper articles covering RFK’s speech on March 25, an AP story and one from the London Times . Both agreed that RFK had said he would not reopen the case . Merrill found a new date to check out .
 RFK did say what Mankiewicz recalls, but it was at some other event, and he is conflating it with RFK . Another possibility is that RFK said what he remembers was at another event . RFK may have conflated the two events .
 RFK was indeed interested in conspiracy allegations in the death of his brother . RFK biographer Evan Thomas writes that “although he would deny it,” he was interested in the conspiracy allegations .
 Thomas offers as support for this assertion his interview with Walter Sheridan’s widow . Thomas says Sheridan's widow asked him to interview her about Sheridan .
 Sheridan, an RFK loyalist who had gone to work for NBC when RFK became a U.S. senator, traveled to New Orleans for the network to cover Jim Garrison’s investigation of Clay Shaw for JFK's murder . Sheridan was an NBC loyalist .
 Sheridan’s widow told Thomas that her husband regularly kept RFK informed on the New Orleans probe . Sheridan's widow said her husband, from New Orleans, regularly informed RFK on the probe .
 Mankiewicz told me, “If anyone would know if such a meeting took place, I would, and my memory is good.” He said he would if he knew if it took place .
 Oswald's federal income tax return for 1956 showed a reported income of $772.46 . Oswald’s federal income . tax return was reported to have been from 1956 to 1956 . Oswald's income was reported at $772 .46 .
 In 1964, the IRS told the Warren Commission, “We have not located a 1957 return for Oswald.” The IRS said in 1964 that Oswald’s return was not found .
 Oswald’s federal income tax return for 1958 showed a reported income of $980.09 and his return for 1959 was $996.31 . Oswald had reported income from 1958 to 1959 . Oswald's income from 1959 was reported at $996 .31 .
 Adams of the TEC said he had interviewed Oswald for a job as a warehouseman . Adams said he believed Oswald had been sent out of the organization . Adams was a member of the National Security Council .
 Adams told the FBI that the TEC had no record of having sent Oswald to the A1 Semtner Drug Depot . However, Adams said that the drug depot had no records of Oswald's visit .
 No indication in the FBI report that Hamilton gave any date for the interview of Oswald . Hamilton gave no date for Oswald interview .
 Hamilton contacted the TEC on September 23, 1963, and asked it to start referring applicants to his company . Hamilton said he recognized the name of Lee Harvey Oswald as someone who had applied for a job sometime “during the period” between September 23 and the day of the assassination
 Hamilton was unable to identify a photograph of Oswald being the person he interviewed . Hamilton was able to identify the photograph as Oswald's .
 Oswald was always on good behavior in job interviews, where he consistently impressed interviewers with his appearance and demeanor . Oswald would not have come across this way in interviews, according to the book . Oswald was not the only person to impress interviewers .
 Oswald stayed at a Dallas home during the week of October 7-14, 1963 . The landlady, Mrs. Mrs. Johnson, was a Dallas resident of the same week .
 Oswald never took his revolver to work with him because he thought that if he was stopped while leaving the building after he shot Kennedy, having a revolver would make him look guilty . An opposite inference, though not as likely, is that Oswald didn't take his revolver with him .
 If he did this much thinking, he’d probably realize that an unfired revolver wouldn’t be that incriminating . But if he did, he would probably realize . An unfired gun wouldn't be incriminating.
 Unless he became an immediate suspect, the likelihood is he wouldn’t be searched on his way out of the building . Further, that unless he becomes an immediate . suspect, he wouldn't be searched .
 He could anticipate that in due time, everyone in the building might be searched, but he had to know that before such a sealing of the building and a search of all employees was organized, he’d easily be far away by then .
 If he had really prepared the shooting of Kennedy, arming himself for his escape would have been a more likely thought, says author .
 The Trial of Jack Ruby by John Kaplan and Jon Waltz is the best and most comprehensive book on the Ruby trial . The trial of Ruby was the trial of President Richard Nixon in the 1920s .
 Like virtually all the books on Jack Ruby and the Ruby trial, as opposed to those on the assassination of Kennedy, it has no source notes for citation purposes . But curiously and exasperatingly, like virtually all of the books, the book has no sources notes .
 The FBI furnished the Dallas DA’s office with evidence that Jack Ruby had received psychiatric help at the age of ten, his brother said . Earl Ruby told the Warren Commission that Joe Tonahill, one of Jack's defense attorneys, told him that the FBI had furnished the FBI
 Jack Ruby could receive psychiatric attention without anyone in his family knowing about it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Ruby was convicted of attempted murder in the 1980s . He says the lead prosecutor, Bill Alexander, said, “This is the first time I’ve
 Earl Ruby negotiated with a photo-journalist named Billy Woodfield for Woodfield to interview his brother and write a series of articles to be sold to newspapers . Ruby's brother was charged with rape and sexual assault in the 1980s . Ruby was convicted of sexual assault and sentenced to life
 The articles, sympathetic to Ruby, contained nothing significant that was not already known . The articles contained nothing that was already known about Ruby . Ruby is the world's most famous cartoon character .
 Ruby’s $30,000 was divided up between Belli and Belli, who received $11,000, and several other lawyers . Woodfield and his associate, Larry Schiller, took about $15,000 from the approximate $45,000 realized from the sale
 Ruby may have done better with Jake "the master" Ehrlich, the lawyer whose legal cases the TV series Sam Benedict was reportedly based . Ruby may best have chosen another colorful and flamboyant San Francisco attorney .
 Though not quite as well known nationally as Belli, he had more of a background in the criminal law . Belli is a well-known judge in New Jersey .
 Ehrlich told UPI on Tuesday, November 26, 1963, that Ruby’s sister, Eva, had called him and asked if he would be willing to represent her brother . Eva asked him to represent Ruby's sister, and he agreed .
 Ehrlich said he said he was definitely interested in Eva's brother's role . He said he told Eva that since her brother was already represented by a lawyer, Tom Howard, it would be best if she had Howard call his San Francisco office . Howard's office is located in San
 Jack Ruby had two built-in problems working against him, one because of existing law . The other possibly because of a miscalculation on the part of his lawyer, Melvin Belli . Jack Ruby's lawyer was not the best lawyer in the world when Ruby was killed .
 The law at the time entitled prosecutors to excuse any prospective juror for cause if he said he had a conscientious objection to the death penalty . Jurors who have no such objection are more conservative and hence more likely to vote not just for death as punishment, but a conviction .
 Belli's defense of Ruby was based on a technology that he felt less intelligent people would not comprehend . Belli’s purported decision to pick an intelligent jury was wrong, Belli said .
 This may have been true as a general proposition, but one should be careful not to extend principles beyond the limits of their logic . This may be true as well as being true, but it's not always true . This is not always the case, and it's important to be careful
 Several Dallas trial lawyers commented that the Ruby jury was the “smartest’s they had seen for a murder case . The Ruby jury is the "smartest" they have seen in a murder trial, they said .
 The jury included an accountant, research analyst, two engineers, a bookkeeper, two salesmen, a secretary, and a corporation vice president . The prosecution itself was very happy with the jury, the prosecution says .
 Ruby appellate lawyer Elmer Gertz: The composition of the jury “was a sure recipe for disaster” The jury would be “utterly unsympathetic to Jack Ruby, his occupation, his derivation, his crime,’s crime.”
 It is remarkable how even an essentially shrewd man such as Belli could deceive himself . Belli was a shrewd businessman, but he was not shrewd enough .
 Ruby would have been better off with a jury ‘of his peers,” those more a part of the gritty, unbuttoned, and freewheeling life of the city . Ruby's jury should have been more a jury of his peers instead of a jury .
 Belli pointed out that there were precious few of those kind of people to pick from on the jury panel . On the other hand, Belli said there was precious little of that kind of person to choose from .
 Sixty-two prospective jurors were dismissed for cause by the court on a motion of the prosecution’s (virtually all because of their * objections) In the United States Supreme Court of Witherspoon Illinois , the court held that a mere conscientious objection to the death penalty
 Only if he said he would, all cases, automatically vote for life imprisonment could be excused . The juror was excused only if he agreed to vote for the death penalty .
 A juror who said he was opposed to the death penalty, but could nevertheless vote for it in some egregious cases, could no longer be disqualified for cause . In other words, the juror no longer must be disqualified from the jury .
 Thousands of death penalty verdicts around the country were reversed and remanded for a new trial on the issue of penalty . Witherspoon's ruling was retroactive, and thousands of death sentences were reversed .
 Witherspoon had been complying with the ruling during jury selection in death penalty cases . "No death penalty verdict I secured was reversed because of Withersoon," he says .
 Each side was allotted fifteen peremptory challenges . Judge Brown gave the defense an extra three challenges . Each side had 15 challenges .
 The alleged remark by Ruby that he had first thought of killing Oswald two days earlier was testified to by Sergeant Patrick Dean on March 6, 1964, and was the most devastating to Ruby’s case, showing premeditation . Ruby's alleged remark that he thought of shooting Oswald two
 Sorrels’s testimony was on May 6, 1964, almost two months after Griffin accused Dean of lying . Griffin was working on the Ruby part of the Warren Commission investigation we can assume he had spoken to Sorrel's before Dean's testimony and already knew his position .
 Wade took the matter up with the Warren Commission’s general counsel, J Lee Rankin . Rankin is the general counsel of the commission . Wade says he has been in contact with Rankin since 2004 .
 Wanda Helmick, an eighteen-year-old carhop who worked for Ruby’s close friend, Ralph Paul, at his Bullpen DriveIn in Arlington, Texas, told the Warren Commission that around eight or nine o’clock on Saturday night, the night before
 The conversation sounds like it could very well have occurred, but there are several things working against her . The conversation is not likely to have occurred .
 Helmick said she got off work at 5:00 a.m., this means that to hear this conversation, she would have had to have been sitting around the restaurant waiting for a ride home for almost six hours, which would seem to be rather unlikely .
 The first time she heard any reference to a gun was not Saturday night but the next day after Ruby shot Oswald, after the shooting, she again overheard Paul talking over the phone . A smaller problem is that just three days before her Commission testimony she said she heard Paul talking about a gun
 Paul told the person to whom he was talking that he had spoken to Ruby the previous night, that Ruby had made little sense . Ruby had mentioned something about a gun, and she concluded this must have been the conversation she overheard the night Paul asked Ruby if he was crazy .
 Donald Wanda Helmick was interviewed by the FBI on July 21, 1964; but see also CE 2823, 26 H 264, FBI interview of Helmick on June 9, 1964 . A further problem for Mrs. Helmick may have been her husband .
 Paul told the Dallas Morning News in 1968 that “in the course of the conversation [presumably the longest one, the nineminute conversation on Saturday evening] he started talking about Oswald. But Paul said in 1968, “In the course [prespresentially the longest
 Ruby’s alleged psychomotor epilepsy was of the petit mal type, which is characterized by a momentary loss of consciousness, as opposed to the grand mal type . Ruby's alleged epilepsy was characterized not only by a temporary loss of conscious but also by violent convulsions
 Ruby told Melvin Belli he shot Oswald because he wanted to save the president’s widow the trauma of appearing in the Oswald trial . Ruby told Belli that Ruby shot Oswald to stop the trial of Oswald . Belli's book Dallas Justice: Ruby wanted to prevent the president's
 Tom Howard, the local lawyer, had been talking about that from the start and, whether he unconsciously planted the idea in Ruby’s mind or simply reinforced a glimmer that was already there, I don’t know. Whether he was already thinking about that, or whether
 Conspiracy theorists have maintained that Oswald killed Oswald to save Mrs. Mrs. Oswald . For years, conspiracy theorists maintained that killing Oswald was a plot to save her life .
 Kennedy from having to come back to Dallas to testify at Oswald’s trial was a lie, he says . Kennedy was not allowed to return to Dallas, Texas, to testify in the trial of Oswald .
 Ruby’s lie, they say, was to cover up the real reason he killed Oswald, to silence him for the mob . Ruby lied about the killing of Oswald, the FBI says . Ruby's lie was to hide the truth behind the murder of Oswald and silence the mob,
 There can be little question that even if he did, it did not accurately reflect what happened . But there can't be a doubt that he did . Even if he didn't, there's little question about what happened, it didn't accurately reflect .
 Dallas Secret Service head Forrest Sorrels interviewed Ruby in the fifth-floor jail . Ruby had no contact with his first lawyer, Tom Howard, before he had contact with him .
 Ruby said “when he read an article about Mrs. Ruby,” Ruby said when he read about her, “he read it about her’s life. Ruby said he was shocked when he found out about her death.
 Kennedy had to go to Dallas for the trial . He thought why should she be brought down here and have to go through the ordeal on account of that no good son-of-a-bitch, that he had seen... a letter to little Caroline,” he said .
 Howard said the business about saving Jacqueline a trip couldn’t possibly have come from Howard . Howard said he was concerned about Jacqueline's trip to New York .
 If he had been retained, he obviously would have instructed Ruby not to talk to Hall, or at a minimum would have sat in with him during his interrogation .
 It appears that if the Howard story is true, what most likely happened is that Ruby told Howard the same story he had already told Sorrels, and Howard told Ruby it was a good defense and to go with it . Ruby, if he ever did ever write such a note to
 A former president of the American Board of Psychiatry, he was a qualified electroencephalographer . He was a highly qualified electrocephalographer.
 To eliminate the possibility of any bias, prosecutor Bill Alexander had flown to Wisconsin to meet with him before the trial . Alexander brought along three electroencephalograms from a different person, one of them Ruby, though not telling Forster which one was Ruby .
 This type of thing is typical in high-visibility criminal cases, where defense attorneys vie with each other to become the lawyer of record on the case . Defense attorneys are competing to be the lawyer who becomes the attorney of record .
 In the Charles Manson murder case, over two hundred lawyers came to visit him, including Mel Belli . Belli offered to represent Manson without payment of a fee .
 He testified that if a person had recall of his activity, then he was not having a psychomotor seizure at the time he engaged in the subject activity . Perhaps more tellingly, he testified .
 Forster told the jury that someone with that level of recall could not have been in the throes of an epileptic seizure at the time . Ruby's statements made during and shortly after his shooting of Oswald in the form of a hypothetical question, Forster said .
 Belli, on cross, couldn't budge Forster with his argument that “confabulation” may have allowed Ruby to fill in the blanks of his amnesia . Forster said that confabulation is not a phenomenon of an epileptic seizure .
 Alexander flew to Chicago to show Mackay Ruby’s EEGs . Alexander, who obviously did his homework and prepared well for the trial, prepared well .
 Ruby’s EEG did not indicate psychomotor epilepsy, according to Dr. Mackay . Ruby's mother testified that her daughter Ruby had been diagnosed with epilepsy . Mackay testified that Ruby's epilepsy was not a result of epilepsy .
 The issue of Ruby’s sanity came up again in a sanity hearing in Dallas on June 13, 1966, before Judge Louis T Holland, who had replaced Judge Brown on the Ruby case . Ruby's sanity was re-examined in 1966 .
 Ruby and his family had succeeded in having Joe Tonahill removed as Ruby’s attorney in a Dallas court hearing on May 24, 1965, in which he and his brother Earl were hurled bitter charges of financial profiteering against each other . Ruby's brother Earl and Tonah
 Tonahill said Ruby was insane and, hence, not qualified to judge who should defend him . He said Ruby is insane and should not be judged as a judge .
 Earl Ruby conceded that his brother was currently insane but said that he was sane at the time he signed an affidavit shortly after his conviction in 1964 stating that he no longer wanted Mel Belli or Tonahill to represent him . Earl Ruby said in an affidavit he did not want Mel Bell
 Tonahill asked Earl Ruby if he did not think his brother being represented by Kunstler “would be detrimental to your brother’s public image” because of Kunstlers' past representation of persons accused of Communist ties . Ruby's brother was represented by the same
 Kunstler was so far to the left, and radically so, that he said the assassination of President Kennedy was a positive or good thing . He said somewhere (I vaguely recall in a high school classroom) that he thought the assassination was a good thing.
 The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals agreed to hear Ruby’s appeal from his murder conviction . The sanity hearing will decide not if Ruby was insane at the time he shot Oswald, but if he was mentally competent enough to fire Tonahill .
 At the June 13, 1966, sanity hearing, a Dallas jury of seven men and five women found Ruby to be sane . The jury deliberated less than fifteen minutes after hearing testimony from four of Ruby’s jailers and a jail doctor that Ruby appeared to them to be of
 One of the jailers testified he caught Ruby cheating in a game of gin rummy with him . The jailers said he caught him cheating in the game . Ruby was sentenced to life in prison in 2008 .
 Ruby’s lawyers did not offer any opposing evidence or question the five witnesses . Ruby and his family were opposed to the hearing . Ruby's attorneys did not question the witnesses .
 Ruby himself took the stand and denied that he was insane or had ever claimed to be . Indeed, Ruby himself has denied he is insane or that he is . Ruby was convicted of murder in 2008 .
 Prosecutor Bill Alexander, in his brief address to the jury, said he almost feels sorry for Jack Ruby .
 Belli would later write, "After the verdict, I was standing amid a cluster of reporters when Judge Brown broke away from his own interviewers and pushed his way through to me"
 There were tears in my eyes, some of them for this fundamentally humane and decent man who had been a prisoner of his community’s prejudices . There were also tears in tears for this fundamental humane man .
 A perfect example of the Dallas Citizens Council manipulating the direction of the city to promote its image was in the area of race relations . The council manipulated the direction to promote the city's image, the council said .
 The council decided that resistance to integration would be deleterious to the city’s image . Though racial antipathy existed among many Dallasites in the ultra-conservative city, the council decided to let it happen .
 Ruby voluntarily took the stand and told of his fears that there would be an attempt in future years to link him as a conspirator with Oswald in Kennedy’s murder . Ruby's fears that he would be linked to Oswald in the future years led to his arrest . Ruby was arrested
 Belli did try to mitigate the damage he probably knew he had already caused . Belli's final summation to the jury was the first time he had tried to apologize for his actions .
 I have been treated graciously here from the high to the low, from the taxicab driver to the waitress to the pauper, the Rabbi and the Reverend; all individually have treated me graciously .
 Earl Ruby and two of Jack’s appellate lawyers, Elmer Gertz and Phil Burleson, went to visit him at the county jail . A day or so after Ruby's conviction was reversed, Earl Ruby visited him in the jail .
 Gertz wrote in his book, Moment of Madness, that “Jack shuffled in, almost furtively.” The president of the U.S. Senate in New York City, New York, was assassinated in 1992 .
 Gertz returned to visit Jack with another appellate lawyer, William Kunstler, who had come into town . Within days, Gerttz returned with another Ruby appellate lawyer . Jack and Jack had been married for more than a decade .
 "If you only would have believed me all along you would have found some way to check out what I said," he said . "I don't believe you," he says of his apology .
 Phil was in on the conspiracy all along, and he was very instrumental in the frame-up they planned, he says . Phil was very involved in the framing-up, and that I was in the assassination .
 Don't be fooled by his working on the briefs, now that has done all the dirty work, he put himself in a position to make every effort that he is on our side . Don’t be fooled, he worked on briefs, he said .
 Earl, they are going to torture you to death, and you will witness your own family being put to death . Earl, Earl, will be tortured by the torturers, and will witness his own family be executed . Earl: "They will torture me to death. I'm not
 Earl, Earl, I know what I am talking about, and I'm sure you think I'm crazy, Earl says . Earl says he knows what he is talking about . Earl: "I'm sure I think I’m crazy."
 If you know your family is gone, then you know all is lost and you can’t save anything . If you’ve lost your family, you know you can't save anything, says CNN.com.com .
 Russia is much closer to Johnson, because of what is happening to the Jews in the U.S. Then they will understand what kind of person Johnson is, and then they may be able to save Israel . Then you tell the Russians how Egypt has been using them all along, but
 You may have lost your family by now, but there is nothing you can do about it now, and you can save millions of people who are doomed to be slaughtered . You can also save millions from the slaughter of thousands of people .
 Ruby was taken to Parkland Hospital on December 9 . Initial diagnosis of his condition was pneumonia . Ruby was diagnosed with pneumonia .
 He remained hospitalized there until his death less than a month later, on January 3, 1967 .
 The Army-Navy Surplus Store was closed in August 2004 . Corey Roberson, Linda Wilson’s cousin, told me he was operating a foam rubber supply store at that location now .
 I asked Corey if he would get in touch with her for me because I had some more questions, none of them heavy, to ask her . I gave him my phone number to give to her, saying she should call me collect . She should call her collect .
 Marina used to babysit Corey, 31, when she was at her babysitter's house . Corey made every effort to get Marina to talk to me, but he could never get her to do so . Marina refused to talk, but Corey never told me she refused .
 Even my suggestion that he tell her I would set forth my questions in writing didn’t help, he said . Even my suggested that he told her he would write her a letter .
 I told Corey, as I’m now telling the reader, that there’s nothing intimidating about me. I told him, "I’ve never been intimidated," he said . He said, "There's nothing intimidating" about him .
 "I definitely don’t feel there’s anything intimidating about me. Maybe those whom I have prosecuted were intimidated by the fact that they knew I had done my homework and was very prepared," he said . "Other than that, I definitely don't feel intimidated about me
 Marina’s curt remarks to me when I first met her in Dallas showed anything but intimidation . Moreover, as indicated in the main text, as . indicated, she said, ‘Marina’’�
 I never spoke to Marina after December 5, 2000, and although I have her unlisted home number , I never invaded her privacy by calling her there . In any event, I never called her again .
 Photostatic copies of Torbitt’s manuscript began circulating in the conspiracy community in 1970 . It has acquired a certain cachet in conspiracy lore, I can only imagine because of the mystery of who the author was .
 It can't be because of the quality of the document itself, being unimaginably bad . It can’t be because it’s because the quality is the same as the quality .
 Other than a foreword and introduction, “Nomenclature of an Assassination Cabal” is the whole book . Indeed, other than a . foreword, it is the book .
 No author is listed on the cover, and only the foreword and introduction are copyrighted . The foreword is copyrighted .
 The book names more groups (FBI, mob, NASA, Nazis, exiled czarist Russians, Defense Intelligence Agency, Defense Industrial Security Command, Free Cuba Committee, American Council of Christian Churches, etc.) and people (from LBJ and RFK’s assistant Walter Sheridan down to
 Torbitt names these groups and people completely willy-nilly, without telling his readers how he came by his information or even why he says what he does . The problem is that he names people and people willy nilly without telling them how he got the information .
 He just names people, fifty-seven on one page, and wanders aimlessly back and forth from subject to subject . "He just names . People," he says, "and names people"
 "I did learn a few things from Mr Torbitt, of which I am duly appreciative," he says .
 The Warren Commission did not find that Lee Harvey Oswald killed President Kennedy . President Kennedy was killed by Oswald in November 1963 . President John Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Conspiracy theorists in the Kennedy assassination have several problems with their “It’s not a coincidence” argument .
 In seeming defiance of the law of probabilities, coincidences are remarkably common . One is that, in seeming defiance to the law, coincidence is remarkably common. Another is that coincidence is remarkably rare in the world .
 There are too many coincidences in the Kennedy case, but when they finally get around to setting forth what they perceive to be a suspicious “coincidence,” either it isn’t a coincidence or, if it is, it can b z proved that it is
 The conspiracists maintain this may be no coincidence at all since the man in the doorway may be Oswald . Many conspiracists to this day flat-out declare it is Oswald, and the conspirators are framing him for Kennedy’s murder .
 We know that the man on the steps was not Oswald but a coworker named Billy Lovelady, who identified himself as being the man in the photo, as did coworkers of his who were with him at the time .
 Marina told the Warren Commission that Marguerite Oswald would only be tired and very sick after talking to her . Marina said to the Commission that she was sorry that you will devote your time to questioning her, because you will only be sick .
 "I am very much ashamed to have this kind of relationship to my mother-in-law," she said . She said she was 'very much ashamed' to have a relationship with her mother .
 Robert Oswald told the Commission, “She is rather persistent to the extent that ... we have never really gotten along.” Robert Oswald . Robert Oswald: “We have never got along. We have never gotten along"
 Marguerite Oswald died at age seventy-three of cancer in a Fort Worth hospital on January 17, 1981 . Oswald died of cancer at age 73 .
 John Johnson: "She was alone and estranged from her family and had to make all the decisions concerning her own case and welfare" Johnson: “She was separated from her . family and made all the . decisions concerning . her own . own case .
 Robert never knew his mother was in the hospital and near death . And it wasn’t as if he never knew that his mother had been hospitalized .
 The common consensus is that Marguerite was a quirky woman and had an overbearing personality, making her difficult to get along with . She was found to be a quirky and overbearing woman .
 Since I never knew her, I am not in a position to weigh in on this issue . Since I didn't know her, it's not clear how much of her life was in the past .
 Robert Oswald failed to meet his burden of proof in explaining to his readers why this type of conduct by him was justified . But I think I am in a position to say that if Robert never showed his mother the ordinary respect and dignity of being with her and helping her in her dying days
 Parents who are much worse than what he writes about Marguerite very often receive warmth and compassion from their children near the end of the story .
 Marguerite did the best she could to take care of her three sons and loved them, particularly Lee . "Marguerite is that with her usually menial wages, and raising three sons all by herself, she did the most she could."
 The account was opened with a deposit offl.OO and additional deposits on December 14,1951, and January 10,1952 . The account opened with deposits of $1.5 million .
 Robert expected Marguerite to say, "Yes, I do have enough money. But if it was the truth that she didn't have the money, as it almost assuredly was, what did Robert expect her to say? Robert asked her to tell him she had enough money .
 Marguerite told the Warren Commission, “I have always been broke, and I mean broke.” She said she was “always broke,” and ‘always broke’
 The evidence is clear from the literature that Marguerite worked hard virtually all of her life . The evidence from the . literature is clear that Margueite worked very hard, she says .
 This reflects that the belief that Kennedy and what he stood for were very special was international . This, of course, reflects that . The belief that . Kennedy and . what he . stood for was very special is international, he said .
 Theodore Roosevelt was forty-two when President William McKinley’s assassination in 1901 elevated Roosevelt to the presidency . Roosevelt was 42 when McKinley was assassinated, Roosevelt became president .
 The investigation of the assassination by local and federal law enforcement agencies commenced within minutes after the shooting in Dealey Plaza . As is shown in the main text of this book, this book is shown .
 Their interviews of witnesses and reports became what is known as “CDs,” for Warren Commission documents . They appear in volumes 22 through 26 of the Warren Commission volumes . Their interviews are known as "CDs," and appear in collections 22 and 26 .
 These documents were the basic support documents for the Warren Commission’s investigation of the assassination . The Warren Commission investigated the assassination of President Kennedy .
 I asked the man I call “Mr CD” Bill Drenas of Lowell, Massachusetts, to furnish me with some additional information about the CDs . He knows more about these documents and their provenance than anyone else .
 Many of these CDs, or portions thereof, are reproduced in the Warren Commission volumes as “CEs,” or Warren Commission exhibits . Many of the CDs are reproduced as ‘CEs’
 It would be easy to say that the Warren Commission only put the most important CDs into its volumes as CEs . But any assassination researcher will tell you that there are a great number of important CDs that for whatever reason never made it into the volumes .
 Volume 22 through 26 of the Warren Commission volumes includes the corresponding CD number from which the CE came from . It should be noted that the “ Contents” section at the beginning of each of . each of the . volumes, wherein all the CEs for that volume are listed,
 For clarity, tightening, and mostly to help expedite finding a CE in the volumes, I do not give the page number of the CE that I am quoting from . Only the page numbers in the Warren Commission volume on which the quoted material appears .
 The first fifteen volumes are almost exclusively the sworn testimony of witnesses . The only other things included in these volumes are sixty-one affidavits and two statements .
 The testimony of witnesses in volumes 6 through 15 was taken for the most part by a Warren Commission assistant counsel . The testimony was taken in offices throughout the country, mostly Dallas, mostly .
 Volumes 16 through 18 contain all the Warren Commission exhibits that arose out of, and are referred to, in the testimony of witnesses in the first five volumes . Volumes 17 and 18 include all the exhibits from the first four volumes .
 These CEs only have a number, for example, CE 460, and give no express indication of the witness from whose testimony the CE arose . The CEs are only given a number and a number of witnesses .
 Any exhibit arising out of the testimony is named after the witness who testified . Commission "deposition exhibits" were marked as exhibits during the witnesses’ testimony and placed in volumes 19 through 21 of the Warren Commission volumes .
 Volumes 22 through 26 of the Warren Commission volumes contain, as indicated, “support documents,” CDs that became CEs . The Warren Report was published in its one-volume Warren Report, published in 1996 .
 In the previous paragraph I said that the three-digit number at the beginning of the document refers to the agency or group that “normally” generated the document with that number .
 A document whose three-digit designation would outwardly indicate that it was generated by an agency or group might have been generated by another agency . But very frequently this is not so—a document whose 3,000-plus digit designation would seem to indicate it was created by that agency or
 Flowever, the compilation includes non-assassination books also—indeed, books that only have a chapter or two on the assassination . Flowever also includes books that have only had chapters on assassination .
 Fie told me that more than 2,000 books had chapters on the assassination . Fie said more than 1,000 of the books have chapters about the assassination chapters .
 71 percent of the television audience said that Oswald was part of a conspiracy . Eighty percent voted guilty, 20 percent not guilty, and 71 percent said Oswald was a conspiracy.
 In an interview following the vote, I commented that national polls at the time showed that 85 percent of the American people believed there was a conspiracy in the assassination . After the audience (certainly a representative sample of the 16 ENDNOTES national population) watched only four and a half hours
 Bonnie Williams testified that “at the time I couldn’t see too much of the sixth floor because the books at the time were Four Days in November 23 stacked so high. The Warren Report , part I, June 25, 1967,7, CBS Television Archives .
 According to some witnesses, Greer himself felt he did not react instantaneously, and hence blamed himself for the president’s death . Indeed the limousine doesn't appear to start speeding up until Z frame 367, when Hill is finally aboard the car .
 Fie told the FBI that at the time of Tippit's murder, he and his friend, William A Smith, were seated inside his brother Billy Burt’s house located at the corner of Ninth and Denver streets, about a block and a half from the murder scene
 Oswald-was-proceeding-west witness is a man with the last name of Clark who worked at the Tenth Street Barbershop near the corner of Tenth and Ewing, seven blocks east of Patton .
 THSCA investigators concluded Oswald was at Beckley for five minutes, an inordinate length of time . Investigators concluded that Oswald was “in a hurry ... all but running,” Roberts said .
 Even if Bowley is correct, and Tippit was killed at 1:10 or earlier, it would be irrelevant, since we know Oswald killed him . Of course, even if . Bowley was correct, he would have been irrelevant .
 Warren Commission counsel asked Fritz in his April 22, 1964, testimony . Fritz was a member of the Warren Commission . Fritz testified before the commission in 1964 .
 Flowever, other testimony indicates that the heart and lungs were not removed until the latter stages of the autopsy . Flowever says the heart was removed during the autopsy, but the lungs and heart were not until the last stages of autopsy .
 The difficulty of finding the bullet that entered Kennedy’s upper back is reminiscent of the much longer search for a bullet to the back of President James A Garfield, shot by Charles Guiteau on July 2,188F . While Garfield lingered near death for eighty days, his
 Five witnesses, four of whom knew Ruby, testified that they saw him on the third floor of police headquarters at City Flail sometime earlier, between 5:30 and 8:00 that Friday evening . Four of the witnesses said they saw Ruby on the floor of the building .
 Marina appeared in a number of joint television appearances with McMillan to promote the book .
 Ruby responded, “Oooh la la, Folks Bergeresl ” Labro told him, and Ruby responded . Labro saw, just about exhausted Ruby’s acquaintance with the French language .
 Three Dallas TV technicians say they saw Ruby near City Hall at various times between eight and eleven o’clock Sunday morning . Ruby's TV truck was parked on Commerce Street between 8 and 11am .
 The HSCA was unable to find the test or any report of it . It concluded that the Dallas Police Department may have withheld this information from the Warren Commission . The Dallas police department may not have reported the test .
 The rumor was based on the observations of Detective Wilbur J Cutchshaw, who saw three men pushing a WBAP-TY camera into the basement two to three minutes before the shooting . The rumor is based on a witness to the incident .
 Mrs. Vada called Martin and when she found out Mrs. Robert and Vada’s home that day, she called Martin . Martin called the couple back to Robert's home and said he was 'surprised' by the news .
 Flowever: "The evidence is very substantial that Gordon Shanklin lied under oath not only at the FBI oversight committee hearings, but before." Flowever, the evidence is "very substantial," Flowever says . Flowever.
 J Edgar Floover wrote a memorandum to the United States attorney general stating that on July 3, 1975, he and Deputy Associate Director James B Adams met in his office with a reliable informant who requested that his identity not be revealed to third parties .
 Floover learned for the first time from the informant that Oswald had left a threatening note at the Dallas FBI office prior to the assassination . Oswald's visit and note were not properly reported to FBI headquarters following the assassination, according to the informant . Oswald had visited the FBI office before the
 Floover proceeded to tell the attorney general about the extensive investigation he personally oversaw into the charges . He then told him about the investigation into the case .
 One wonders how much a revelation about Lee contributed to her dissipation . Flosty’s affidavit that Shanklin knew *One wonders if Lee's revelation about her .
 Fie writes: ‘Judgments were made back then that seemed rational and reasonable.’ She says Ford now acknowledges that he made ‘judgments that seemed reasonable’ Fie says .
 Two almost universally accepted misconceptions were responsible for the public’s desire to have the assassination records disclosed and for the very enactment of the JFK Act .
 Marina Oswald testified on February 3, 1964, which was the very first day of the Warren Commission hearings . Warren told newsmen outside the hearing chambers in Washington, D.C., that as Mrs. Oswald had been seen as a witness, she had been a victim of the assassination .
 It wished them to he held there for the benefit of the American people, it said . The U.S. wishes them to be held there .
 Conspiracy theorists believe a document will refute the official finding of the Warren Commission that Oswald killed Kennedy and acted alone . Oswald was killed by Lee H. Lee III, the president of the United States, in 1963 .
 On April 20, 1965, the Cedar Rapids mayor who had served as the catalyst for the relaxation of the National Archives’s seventy-five-year policy, was rewarded by a letter from the White House .
 The Dallas Police Department did not turn over many of its JFK documents to the Warren Commission . It furnished all those requested by the Commission, though it furnished all the documents .
 Under the JFK Act, all congressional records on the assassination, including, most importantly, the records of the FISCA that had not been published in its twelve volumes were now subject to release to the American public .
 The Review Board expanded the definition of an assassination record to include “all records, *Under Section 3 , the JFK Act also compelled the release of assassination records of “any State or local law enforcement office that provided support or assistance” in the investigation .
 Dallas Police Department had two radio channels to communicate with policemen . Each frequency was on a different frequency . The Dallas police department had two different radio channels .
 FISCA chief counsel G Robert Blakey had substantial misgivings about the benefits of such a conference . Blakey: "FISCA is not a good idea of a conference"
 The HSCA asked Barger if he would review the work of Weiss and Aschkenasy, and he agreed . Barger reported back that the new analysis had validated his work and removed much of his uncertainty .
 House Representative Robert W Edgar of Pennsylvania asked McLain whether, considering his duties that day as a motorcycle officer, it would have been common for him not to be on channel 2, which Chief Curry was using to handle the motorcade traffic .
 The FISCA conclusion is in conflict with its own finding that 80 percent of witnesses in Dealey Plaza heard three shots and 10 percent only two . The conclusion, if believed, also was in direct conflict with that finding . The report also found that 80% of the witnesses heard three
 McLain emerged from a room with Bowles after hearing the tapes . McLain said committee members had not played the tape for him Friday in Washington, but instead had shown him photos of a motorcycle, which he identified as his .
 TDallas Police motorcyclist Bobby Joe Dale says he has a copy of the subject channel 1 tape . Dale: The sound of the motorcycle engine on the tape “clearly sounded like that of a three-wheeler’s .
 The film sequence ends before McLain’s motorcycle gets much farther north on Houston than the crosswalk at Main and Houston . The question of his exact position at the time of the shooting is still unresolved .
 Hughes film clearly shows that the presidential limousine had already turned the corner onto Elm before McLain started north on Houston, increasing the distance, by around 20 to 30 feet, that McLain would have had to make up .
 Hughes film indicates McLain would have had to have seen not the dark blue presidential limousine, but the black Cadillac Secret Service follow-up car or the steel-gray Lincoln vice presidential car .
 In the summer of 1979, Steve Barber, a twenty-year-old musician from Shelby, Ohio, who describes himself as a “progressive rock-jazz drummer,” picked up a copy of the July issue of the girlie magazine Gallery after learning that as part
 The HSCA’s ‘best estimate’ as to the time of the first shot in Dealey Plaza as indicated from transmissions on the channel 2 clock was 12:30:12m., and on the . channel 1 clock, 12.30:47 m.
 The odds were now only 1 in 100,000 that the CBA was correct in concluding that the impulse sounds, described as being gunshots by the FISCA, were recorded one minute after the Kennedy assassination .
 Thomas became interested in the Kennedy assassination after seeing Oliver Stone’s 1991 fictional epic JFK . Thomas believed that the shot from the grassy knoll (number three in the FISCA's sequence) was the one that killed JFK .
 Thomas, in his article, did not acknowledge Mack’s earlier discovery, but Mack said this was not intentional . Mack satisfied that Thomas was “unaware” of his earlier discovery at the time he wrote his article . Mack said Thomas was unaware of Mack's earlier discovery
 The first of the /wt-assassination simulcasts is known as the “Decker crosstalk,” which I discovered on channel 1 in September, 1980, and it occurred about a minute after the shooting .
 The HSCA says films that support its position, in reality refute it . So ironically, the two films that the HSCa says support its . position, actually refute it. So ironic, the . two films .
 The authors write that Humes explained that he was in a hurry, that the family was waiting for the body . This is somewhat misleading .
 The bootlegged autopsy photographs are second-generation copies of the originals obtained by Robert Groden when he was a photographic consultant for the FISCA in 1978 .
 The best examples of this are the Robert Croft photo (approximately frame 161) and James Altgens photo of Kennedy and Connally as the presidential limousine is proceeding north on Elouston Street .
 She even reported calls received by other operators on her watch . Yet she reported receiving all types of other calls that apparently were much more important for her .
 The HSCA referred to the drawings as “a crude representation used as a worksheet primarily to assist in the preparation of the report and was not necessarily an exact representation of the wound . The Warren Report, part II, June 26, 1967,ll, CBS Television Archives .
 The president's upper body (not his head) would be hunched forward at a slightly greater degree than the downward angle of the bullet . If we take the upper end, 18 degrees, as being accurate, since the angle of declination of the . bullet was around 17V2
 In a letter to Captain Stover, dated December 5, 1963, Secret Service agent Robert I Bouck noted, after a recount, that there were actually twenty-one sheets of color transparency film, not sixteen (and eighteen sheets of black-and-white photographs, not twelve)
 No date for the changes is noted, but it must have been November 22 . The new numbers were on the final typed memo of that same date .
 David claimed that the slides and prints showed a round, Yh to %-inch-diameter hole in the right front temporal area of the president’s head, just below the hairline, and that the 16millimeter film showed a gaping wound in the back of the
 Flere: "I find it completely predictable that one or more photographs ended up missing, misplaced, or expropriated by people through whose hands they passed" Hundreds of people from various official investigative agencies have examined and worked with the photos throughout the years . Flere says he doesn't
 Robert Groden, the chief photographic expert for conspiracy theorists, must have himself either directly stolen or made copies of some autopsy photographs . Groden was working as a consultant to the photographic panel of the FISCA, while he was working on the O J Simpson civil trial .
 It was labeled “President Kennedy’s brain,” or words to that effect . Yrtacnik said it had wooden pegs through it marking the paths of the bullet .
 Panel members noted “an oblong area of blue discoloration” was “within the bullet track” of the bullet that entered the rear of the president’s head . Panel members said it was virtually eliminated the likelihood that it was a second bullet having the
 Shaw’s postoperative report and subsequent interview by the Warren Commission do not mention any “significant undermining or abrasion” on either side of the wound . The second and by far the most logical interpretation of the oval entrance wound is that the bullet was out of alignment
 He took approximately ten seconds of film as the presidential motorcade was driving through and emerging from the underpass . The president's motorcade passed through an underpass in the area .
 Senator Russell made a motion that his dissent to the singlebullet theory be formally acknowledged in a footnote in the Warren Report . This is the session in which Senator Russell moved a motion to formally acknowledge Russell's dissent .
 It has to be noted that six of the seven Commission members kept their regular jobs during the entire Warren Commission period . For example, Senators Russell and John Sherman Cooper didn't stop being United States senators .
 Ford was a member of the Warren Commission, not the nuts-and-bolts staff . If he was the sole author of the single-bullet theory, surely he would find a minute or two over a year to respond to someone who was potentially going to tamper .
 The bottom line is that no bullet is visible in any of the Murray-Alien photographs . No bullet was visible in the photos .
 Liu told the HSCA that Rosemary said to him that “she recalls stopping because she saw the bullet hit Kennedy’s hack , not because she heard the sound of the shot . Liu said that Rosemar stopped because she remembered seeing Kennedy's bullet hit .
 Olson and Turner realized that f/'W' illis was right about snapping slide number 5 at the sound of the first shot . Then there must have been a second gunman, since Kennedy was still hidden from Oswald's view by an oak tree at the time of Z202 .
 The possibilities give hope to conspiracy theorists who are certain the head snap to the rear was caused by a shot from the president’s right front, not from his rear . The Warren Commission concluded that the president was shot from his right front .
 As the bullet tumbled and plowed into one of the ribs, removing 4. centimeters (l 3 A inches was destroyed during the actual assassination) It exited at a point compatible with the exit wound in Connally’s right chest .
 This so-called jet effect was first enunciated in 1969 by William H Hanson in his book The Shooting of John F Kennedy: One Assassin, Three Shots, Three Flits—No Misses . It was most prominently advocated in 1976 by Nobel Prize-winning physicist Luis W Alvarez
 A mathematical formula involving energy, momentum, weight, and speed of the bullet, as well as the momentum lost upon impact, was used in a reference to the HSCA’s physical scientist .
 Film 3 would then be rewound and film 1 would be run through the printer exposing film 3 again . Film 1 (the wound surrounded by black) would then expose film 3 (film 1) to film 1 (film 3) and film 2 (film 2) would expose film
 Fie then goes on to discuss “the problem of registration,” keeping each frame in the same relative position . Fie discusses ‘problem of registration’ in the video .
 Fie writes that “it was easy ... to describe the process of rotoscoping and optical printing, but it would have been impossible for anyone to have been able to maintain perfect registration of the wound .
 A declaration by Harvey F Oswald, one of Lee's paternal uncles, dated October 25, 1939, attested to by Naomi Drake, the deputy registrar, that Lee was bom on October 18,1939, at French Hospital . Such a declaration is allowed in lieu of a
 Anyone who happened to be near any one of the bases from which it operated would have been able to see it land and take off . At one base at Giebelstadt in West Germany, pilots had often noticed a long, black limousine parked at the end of a runway
 Ele. Ele found Schrand lying in a pool of blood on the concrete, about six feet from his riot gun . Ele. Schrand was found lying in an apparent suicide attempt .
 The Government cannot establish a prirna facie case solely on a defendant’s unsupported confession . In the prosecution of a criminal case, the prosecution can't establish a prirna facie case on a confession .
 Marina said in a 1988 interview, “In behavior, he was capable of acting like a wild dog.” Marina also said that in behavior, she was “capable of acting . like a . wild dog .
 Conspiracy theorist Sylvia Meagher points out that the advertisement was for a $12.88 Carcano that was 36 inches long, weighed SVi pounds, and had a catalog number C20-T750 . Meagher says the $19.95 Carcano was sent to Oswald was 40
 HSCA photographic expert Cecil Kirk discovered yet another first-generation print just a few days before he testified to the panel . The panel pointed out that when a camera lens projects an image of our three-dimensional world onto a two-dimensional sheet of film negative, the result can make
 Pickard made no scientific analysis of the photos before rendering an opinion . Pickard had less than one hour to prepare for his public comments on the show .
 The bag found in the Depository was actually 38 inches in length . The 40V5-inch rifle, disassembled, measured 344/5 inches . She also thought the bag might have been about 27 to 28 inches long .
 Warren Commission counsel measured the length of the package to be 37/2 inches . Paine indicated he thought the package was about thirty inches long .
 The source of Captain George Doughty’s directive was Dallas police chief Jesse Curry . Curry pointed out to the FBI man the area where the palm print was: 80 1 .
 Much of the film Alyea claims he shot was broadcast unedited over WFAA-TV the weekend of the assassination . But this part of the footage has never been found .
 If he in fact saw Fritz pick up the shells it probably was after the crime scene photos had been taken . In any event, if he was in fact seeing Fritz pick them up, it was probably after the photos were taken .
 The disturbance of a crime scene before the crime-lab people arrive is unfortunately almost as common as bad debt . TOn the other hand I have to admit that the disturbance .
 Wright left the bullet on the stretcher, told Tomlinson not to let anyone touch it, and went to look for a federal officer to take charge of it . Wright left it on a stretcher and went for the federal officer .
 Wright, or some third party, or was simply speaking loosely, was never explored . Wright or some other third party may have been involved .
 Dr. Chad Zimmerman to author dated April 30, 2005, unnumbered 11; . Letter from Dr. Zimmerman .
 FBI reported results of its tests as inconclusive due to the wide variety of absolute values obtained each time a sample was tested, Guinn said . Guinn: FBI reported the results of the tests as "incomprehensible"
 Guinn: “I wish I could put a number on it, as we often can do, that is, calculate a probability, but we really don’t have the background information to make a numerical calculation in this case .
 The widths of the land and groove impressions vary by approximately /too inch . The individual microscopic marks on the Lester slug did not match up with those on the two testfired bullets .
 She also claims that two days before her testimony, there was an attempt to break into her house at night while her husband was at work . She says she also claims there was a break-in at her home two days earlier .
 Sergeant "Bud" Owens is seen holding Tippit's service revolver in his left hand and a man's leather wallet in his right . Myers tracked down some silent WFAA-TY film footage .
 WFAA-TY cameraman Ron Reiland said it was Tippit's wallet . Reiland narrating the silent footage for his viewers, says it was the wallet .
 Police could have brought Tippit’s wallet from the murder scene to either Methodist Flospital or Parkland Hospital . Several officers went to the hospital where the body was brought into the emergency ward .
 There appears to be no conclusive way to determine what shirt Oswald was wearing at the time of the assassination . Oswald's shirt is believed to be the shirt he was wearing when he was assassinated .
 Roffman offered still frames from a news film shot by WFAA-TY cameraman Malcolm O Couch as evidence that Baker actually entered the Depository earlier than the Commission estimated . The still frames were used as evidence Baker entered earlier than expected .
 Dallas deputy sheriff A1 Maddox said, “When you came out of the jail on the Flouston Street side [of the Dallas Criminal Courts Building], you’d hear jets coming over sometimes in the afternoon.”
 President Kennedy's line of sight and line of fire to President Kennedy could have existed only for less than a second before the fatal round because of vertical obstructions .
 Moorman loaned her two photos to the EISCA’s photographic panel for examination . The E1SCA published the second photo, the assassination one, in three of its volumes . The first one had no evidentiary value .
 Mary Moorman told Gary Mack she took two other photos that day on Elm, one each of police officers she knew . Gary Mack knows Moorman well, and Moorman says she took the photos of two other officers .
 It was also suggested for a time that the discarded light-gray jacket found near theTippit murder scene was Vaganov's, until it was discovered that the six-foot twoinch Vaganova wore 36-inch sleeves .
 Apparently it was an open secret that ‘they’re going to kill Kennedy and asked Hemming and everyone else like him to please do the job, but Hemming said no . I wish Hemming had said no to Noel Twyman .
 Oswald was also checked into his fifth-floor jail cell earlier on the twenty-second, or when he made a phone call authorized by Captain Fritz . He was escorted up to the fifth floor jail to make it because of the increased privacy he would have there, as opposed to the third
 Fie said sometimes an employee would buy his lunch from the catering truck during the morning break . Fie added, however, that sometimes employees would buy their own lunch .
 Oswald told Fritz Fritz that he saw Bill Shelley in front of the building during his interrogation . Oswald had told Fritz that on his way out of the . building, he saw Shelley in . front, Fritz wrote in his notes .
 Judyth remembered and would try to tell the world a far different story . But thirty-five years later Judyth would try and tell a different story.
 Clay Shaw started paying for their trysts at nice hotels in the city . Clay Shaw learned about their lack of money forcing them to make love in such places .
 The staff of CBS's 60 Minutes gave Judyth’s story long consideration before deciding not to do it . Judyth's story will not be aired on 60 Minutes .
 Mary Sherman worked on their research project in Ferrie's and Sherman’s apartments in New Orleans . Mary Sherman and Ferrie Ferrie worked on the project in their apartments .
 It fits the modus operandi of virtually all mainstream (as opposed to fringe) conspiracy theorists like Aguilar, Anthony Summers, Flenry Flurt, John Newman, and others . And, like the previous one, it fits the same pattern of conspiracy theorists .
 Koepke assured his readers that “all the members of Mensa supported” his investigation of the assassination of the president of the United States .
 There is much, much more of a belief in a conspiracy in the assassination of President Kennedy than in the murder of his brother, Robert, on June 22 .
 When I say “evidence” of a conspiracy, this is not the same as saying there mas a conspiracy . When I . say ‘evidence’ of a . conspiracy, I said, “This is not a conspiracy. This is the same thing,”
 David David said that he didn’t believe Pitzer committed suicide . The FBI report said the bullet exited “near left temple,” Walt Brown reports in his JFK/Deep Politics Quarterly that in August of 2002, pursuant to a request from Pitzer’s son
 Armstrong told me about them in Tulsa, Oklahoma, years ago and sent me a copy of his chronological poster, which I assume he put together with conspiracy theorist Jack White, who had included many of the photographs in his earlier videotape, The Many Faces of Lee Harvey Oswald .
 Armstrong doesn’t tell readers that Lionel Slater Jr. told the FBI in 1963 that Oswald worked at Pfisterer “about 1956” (CE 2230, 25 H 130, . on November 25, 1963). Armstrong doesn't tell his readers that Slater Jr., a
 Fie asserts that the FBI, having taken the originals, never gave him a receipt for the records . Fie adds a further improbability, asserting that the original documents were taken from the FBI .
 Armstrong is certain that the Oswald at Stripling in 1954 must have been Flarvey Oswald, the Russian refugee impersonating Oswald . Armstrong believes the FBI was definitely a co-conspirator with the CIA in framing “Oswald” using the double-OSWald
 Armstrong found two former students who claim they went to school with Lee Flarvey Oswald at Stripling in 1954 . Armstrong: Oswald lived across the street from the school in a duplex at 2220 Thomas Place .
 If not, Lowery explains why he waited over thirty-five years to finally tell it to Lowery . And if not, why did he wait over 30 years to tell Lowery? Lowery says .
 Her married name in 1963 had been Thompson and she worked as a waitress at Austin’s Barbeque in Dallas, Texas .
 Slawson visited the Mexico City CIA headquarters in April of 1964 with fellow assistant counsels William Coleman and Howard Widens . The two men were assistant attorneys for the CIA at the time .
 A former CIA officer told the HSCA he had seen CIA surveillance photos of Oswald taken in Mexico City . I have found that when people say some of the things some say some, they are not true .
 J.hcre are two other Mexico City allegations, indirectly related to the issue of imposture, that deserve only scant attention . J.Hcre is alleged to have been involved in the creation of a group of prostitutes in Mexico City .
 The grand conspiracy theory of controlling the autopsy and making changes at Bethesda Naval Flospital was not necessary, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Autopsy report and photographs were immediately sent to the White Flouse . The autopsy report and photos of the victim was immediately sent home .
 The report contained what was supposedly told to the FBI agent, as opposed to the actual testimony of Flyman Rubenstein . Rubenstein’s version of the testimony was published in the book, but I’ve opted to use Flyman's version .
 Ruby often wore a hearing aid to avoid the World War II draft, Fie says . Ruby served as a bouncer in several Chicago clubs and often wore hearing aids . Ruby is believed to have been in hiding from the draft .
 Dallasite Ken Flolmes is an assassination researcher who specializes in historical, non-evidentiary details of the assassination saga . He is also a Dallasite, Dallasite .
 Ruby’s Carousel phone number was still available in 1991 . In 1991, Flolmes called the local telephone company on a whim and asked if that number was available . Ruby's Carousel cards are still available .
 A former employee at the Carousel told the FBI that during the three-month period he worked for Ruby in 1960, Ruby had instructed the bartenders and waitresses not to charge police officers for anything .
 Dallas police officer Joe Cody said, “When people from out of town would come in, he'd charge them $1.50 for a beer when he’d only pay 9 V 2 cents.” Cody said .
 Among other phone calls Ruby made to shady characters during the pre-assassination period was one to Murray W “Dusty” Miller on November 8, 1963 (the same day that Ruby spoke to Barney Baker for the last time), at the Eden Roc Flotel in
 A longtime friend of Ruby's and Me Willie’s, Meyer Panitz, was living in Miami at the time . Panitz told the FBI that McWillie called him and told him their mutual friend, Ruby, was presently in Miami Beach .
 The FBI located the source of the rumor, one Wiam Fluffman, who worked at a boat fueling dock in Key West .
 An Italian writer, Gino C Speranza, described it in an American magazine .
 The source for this high number was always thought to be Joseph Valachi . Valachi is thought to have been the source for the high number of people killed .
 Valachi had been serving time on two drug trafficking convictions at a federal penitentiary in 1962 . Valachi was convicted of drug trafficking in 1962, serving time for two drug convictions .
 He was sharing a cell with Vito Genovese, the head of the Mafia family Valachi was a member of . He was serving time on his own narcotics conviction .
 In an interesting book on the Chicago mob, The Outfit: The Role of Chicago’s Underworld in the Shaping ofModern America . Author Gus Russo suggests that at least JFK's father, Joe Kennedy, felt his son needed the mob to win the election .
 Joe Kennedy had turned to Touhy, an old friend, to set up the meeting, Flersh says . Touhy had in turn asked Robert McDonnell, a mob attorney, for help .
 McDonnell told Flersh that he gave Touhy the name of a local politician to set up arrangements for the meeting . McDonnell told him that Touhy's name was given to him by a politician . McDonnell says Touhy told him he would meet with Touhy if he could .
 In 1988, People magazine writer Kitty Kelley said she was Kennedy’s link with the mob . She said she set up about ten meetings between Kennedy and Giancana, one of which, she believes, was at the White Flouse .
 In 2005 a federal court ordered the CIA to disclose the CIA budget for 1963 . Steven Aftergood, a senior research analyst at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington, D.C., said that .
 Joannides’s predecessor, CIA agent Ross Crozier, filed a threeor four-page summary report to JM/WayE, the CIA station in Miami, each month from September 1960 to November 1962 .
 One cannot be guilty of any serious crime unless they have “mens reaf a guilty and reprehensible state of mind.” But unwitting is synonymous with innocent, since one can’t be found guilty of a serious crime .
 I And Morley hasn't spelled out for our edification how Joannides or anyone else used the DRE, without its knowledge, to get Oswald to murder Kennedy . The DRE was used to get Kennedy to kill Kennedy .
 Fabian Escalante, the retired head of the Department of State Security under Castro, made the accusation . We know that *He does let someone else make the accusation in just one sentence . The former Secretary of State of State under Castro says he's not sure what happened .
 In a February 9, 2005, letter to me, Morley rejected the notion that the DRE hated Kennedy as much as Castro . Morley: “The DRE vehemently opposed Kennedy’s Cuba policy,” something that a great number of Cuban exiles also did
 Gaeton Fonzi, a former HSCA investigator, says he saw Maurice Bishop with Oswald in Dallas . He says an anti-Castro militant named Antonio Veciana Blanch had dealings for many years with a CIA agent named Maurice Bishop . Frida Ghitis: Fonz
 Fonzi was positive Bishop was CIA agent David Atlee Phillips . Even after Veciana saw Phillips in Washington D.C. and told him he was not Bishop, he refused to give up .
 WAVE expecting priority message, concerning maritime exfiltration of headquarters asset, in exit pouch which presumably will arrive next 22 Nov. WAVE expects priority message to be sent next 22Nov. It is expected to arrive in a pouch on Nov. 22 .
 In April and May of 1962, he had checked himself into the psychiatric ward of the YA hospital in Westwood, California, and in December of 1962 . In December of that month, he says the CIA was having him infiltrate the KGB, and the KGB wanted him to talk Oswald
 Two mechanics, Flenry Wiggins and William Branch, were in the vicinity at the time of the two shots . Wiggins and Branch were mechanics .
 White House decision to cancel trip could have contributed to decision . Unknown associates of unknown associates of Vallee’s still at large could have played a role .
 Medgar W Evers, a black field secretary of the Mississippi NAACP, pulled into the driveway of his Jackson, Mississippi, home on June 12 . Evers was a black thirty-seven-year-old field secretary .
 In 1997, I was working for Sy Hersh and ABC on the adaptation of his book, The Dark Side of Camelot . "The Dark Side" is based on the book .
 Fie was sent to Mexico City because Mann was requesting an FBI investigation of the Alvarado allegation . Mann requested an FBI probe of the allegation .
 The plan was drafted by McNamara's and Rusk’s own departments, he says . He keeps from them from them the fact that the plan is drafted by the government .
 Waldron had interviews with Enrique Ruiz-WIlhams, a Bay of Pigs veteran and leader who worked closely with RFK in the anti-Castro effort . Waldron: "The one new element that Waldron brings to the issue is the fact that he had several
 Waldron gets around this by saying that Ruiz Ruiz was under Artime . Williams, who fought alongside Artime at the Bay of Pigs, told him that “Am ime was under me,” along with three other exile leaders .
 Varona told the mob about C-Day even though, per Waldron, he himself was not a part of the project at that time . But okay, let’s assume that Varona said that .
 Fie doesn't know who actually killed JFK for the mob in Dallas, but said possibilities were Johnny Roselli and Charles Nicoletti . Fie says he doesn’t know who killed JFK .
 Waldron presents no evidence that Vallee and Lopez were being set up by the mob or that the mob even knew of their existence . Waldron’s book, "The Mob," is published by John Defterios .
 Exiles wanted an outright invasion of Cuba by U.S. forces, not anti-Castro Cuban exiles . They wanted a outright invasion by United States forces (Bamford, Body of Secrets, 82) Exiles were anti-Cuba exiles, but not anti
 We could develop a Communist Cuba terror campaign in the Miami area, in other Florida cities and even in Washington . But it gets much worse. We could also develop a terror campaign against Cuba in Washington, D.C.
 The source of the story was Washington insider Edward R Morgan, a former FBI agent and well-connected Washington attorney . Morgan is a well-known Washington attorney and former FBI officer .
 No clear and unambiguous evidence has emerged that JFK (or RFK) approved of either of the two CIA-mob plots or any of the various other CIA plots to kill Castro .
 Castro eschews cult of personality of Mao, Stalin or Saddam Hussein . He eschews the cult of personalities of Mao or Stalin . Castro has far more billboards and paintings of Guevara than he does of himself in Cuba .
 There he was leading a band of fewer than twenty Cuban, Bolivian, and Peruvian Communist guerrillas to foment a revolution against the government of Air Force General Rene Barrientos Ortufto .
 There are conflicting reports over whether Guevara enjoyed organizing the firing squads ordered by Castro of Batista’s main henchmen .
 J Edgar Floover, for years, kept files on the private lives of many prominent, law-abiding citizens . We all know by now that he kept files .
 On March 7, 1968, Garrison, pursuant to the federal Uniform Witness Act, also had his office secure a certification from an Orleans Parish judge, Matthew Braniff, stating that former CIA director Allen Dulles was a “necessary and material witness” in Garrison’s investigation
 Shaw ceased to be a member of the WTC board no later than 1964, when the WTC closed its operations in Rome . Paese Sera' s accusation was immediately picked up .
 "I mas able, however, to get a small item of information here and there from the CIA throughout the years. I mas able to get some of the information I have been able to obtain .
 Garrison never prosecuted or apparently even investigated major organized-crime figures in New Orleans . Author Patricia Lambert’s suggestion that “Garrison’�s underlying, perhaps unconscious, motivation” for his prosecution of Shaw is “the possibility that he was driven to pursue Clay
 All of Carlos Marcello’s gambling casinos and most of his pinball machines were in Jefferson Parish (adjacent to Orleans Parish), over which Garrison, the DA of Orleans Parish, had no jurisdiction . TAll of the gambling casinos are in Jefferson .
 Garrison was accused of having contact with organized crime . Garrison was charged with two felonies in the 1990s . Garrison is accused of being involved in organized crime in the 1980s and '90s .
 Herb Caen reported in his inimitable column in th z San Francisco Chronicle way back on February 13,1978, that Watergate’s ‘Deep Throat’ was former Asst. Asst . Turner .
 Novel feared Garrison’s investigation might expose his ties to the Double-Chek Corporation in Miami, an alleged CIA front that recruited pilots and saboteurs for the Bay of Pigs invasion . Two women who later moved into Novel's apartment found a hidden, undated letter from Novel
 Schlumberger is accused of violating the federal Neutrality Act . Authorities say the company violated the act by violating the act .
 The particular statute involved in this case is 18 USC § 960, enacted by Congress on June 26, 1948 . It prohibits any American citizen from helping in “any military or naval expedition or enterprise to be carried on from against . . any foreign state ... or people with whom the United
 Moffett abandoned the effort when Moffett let it be known she was not at Ferrie’s apartment . Ferrie was not in the apartment, Moffett said .
 Garrison charged Layton Martens, a friend of David Ferrie’s, with perjury for perjury for denying before the Shaw grand jury that he knew Gordon Novel . Garrison charged Martens with perjury .
 Zachary A Strate Jr. was convicted in Chicago of mail fraud and conspiracy to commit mail fraud in an investigation headed by Walter Sheridan for the Justice Department . Strate told a completely improbable story to the Orleans Parish grand jury in August of 1967 .
 Ferrie admitted to FBI agents that he probably had said that Kennedy “ought to be shot” because of failing to provide air cover during the Bay of Pigs invasion . Ferrie himself admitted to the FBI agents when they interviewed him in November 1963 .
 Clay Shaw’s attorney, Irvin Dymond, asked the prosecution to produce the alleged letter, but they were unable to do so . I But Russo, like so so, like like so *
 Russo waited until Ferrie died, and was thereby unable to refute his nonsense, before he came forward with his story . He also told FBI agents Ernest Wall Jr. and Theodore Viater in their interview of him on November 27 that he had also been accused of being “a worsh
 Lee Harvey Oswald’s friends are mystified by the ill-kempt, unshaven picture drawn of him in the Garrison investigation . New Orleanians who knew Oswald when he last lived in New Orleans say they're mystified .
 Ruth Paine said Oswald was clean-shaven when she saw him in New Orleans . She said she never saw Oswald with a beard . Paine: "I never saw him grow a beard. He was clean shaven then"
 Fie said he saw Oswald at Ferrie’s apartment, “sitting on a chair with his leg up cleaning a rifle.” Oswald was sitting on the chair, per the memo . Fie: Oswald was “a sitting on his chair and his leg
 Fie told Sciambra he saw Clay Shaw not just twice, but one other time at Ferrie’s apartment . Fie added that he saw the man he identified as Shaw, not just once, but twice, in the game .
 The relationship would later sour when Garrison gave an exclusive interview to the Saturday Evening Post . Life began to see that Garrison had nothing. Garrison would later say he had nothing .
 If a conspirator needed to establish an alibi, the best way to have done so would have been to stay at his desk at the Trade Mart in New Orleans, where everyone knew him, not go to a distant city where he was largely unknown . Shaw: "If a conspir
 Goldie Moore testified at Shaw’s trial that on May 10, 1963, officials in Portland, Oregon, who were interested in building a trade mart wrote to Shaw about their plans .
 The defense destroyed Russo’s credibility on his allegation of being present when Shaw, Ferrie, and Oswald supposedly conspired to murder Kennedy . Russo never mentioned anything about Lee Flarvey Oswald, Clay Bertrand, or Clay Shaw, in interviews .
 Davy says Russo interviewed him on August 30, 1994, five years before publication of Davy’s book . Davy: Russo interviewed Davy in 1994, but it was probably around the time of the other interview . The Saturday Evening Post article that exposed Garrison's case was
 Russo had said four days later under hypnosis . The other was a transcript of what he had said . Russo's interview with the FBI is published on CNN iReport .
 Fie testified that he didn't bother to mention it because he didn’t complete dictating the memo until sometime between March 4 and 7 . He had already written about this conspiratorial meeting in an earlier memo based on what Russo had said under sodium pentothal .
 Andrew Dunn said he was sitting in front of a barbershop across the street from the Registrar of Voters when he saw the black Cadillac drive up with four people in it . Dunn: "I don't think it's OK. It's not OK"
 A New Orleans *Fm not sure how the political and social orientation and extremism of Palmer and Manchester have any relevance to the story .
 As an example of racism in rural Louisiana during this period, author Adam Fairclough writes that “CORE workers and the blacks who associated with them became perpetual objects of unfriendly police protection .
 April 15, 1978, edition of the Councilor says “it has never had to print a retraction, nor has it ever been sued for libel in its 14 years of publication” If it started in 1965, 1978 would be its fourteenth year of publication .
 Arcacha feared Garrison might somehow try to improperly implicate him in the assassination . Arcacha’s Dallas lawyer, Frank Hernandez, employed a certified Texas polygrapher .
 Jesse Parker was a former hostess in the Eastern Airlines VIP lounge at Moisant Airport, New Orleans’s international airport . Jesse Parker is a nicely dressed, respectable, middle-aged woman who was a good hostess .
 One David Logan said he met David Ferrie at a party in the French Quarter in 1961 . Clay Shaw, whom he already knew, was at the party, was also there .
 Ferrie told him that the main people behind the assassination were Shaw, Flale Boggs, the United States representative from Louisiana, Kent Courtney, a financier from New Orleans, and Richard C Lauchli, a businessman from Illinois .
 Eladio “Yite” del Valle was a Cuban congressman and Havana city councilman during the Batista years . He later became a Florida-based militant anti-Castro exile . His body was found in his Cadillac parked in a shopping center .
 Before talking to the FBI, Martin had reported what he knew about Ferrie to station WWL-TY in New Orleans and to a Major Trosclair of the New Orleans Police Department .
 Fliggenbotham worked for Banister in 1960-1961, and Oswald wasn't even in New Orleans during this period . Oswald wasn’t even in the New Orleans area during that period, though he continued to have some social contact with Banister .
 The information Fliggenbotham furnished the DA’s office, possibly because he was facing a charge of marijuana possession, was further suspect . The information he provided to the DA's office was also suspect .
 This fact alone renders Mellen’s book devoid of any credibility, and I won’t dignify it by putting any of her allegations, and my response to them, in the main text . I will not dignify the allegations by using any of Mellen's allegations
 Mellen also charges that the CIA and FBI joined together to subvert Garrison’s investigation and prosecution of Shaw . Mellen says the CIA tried to convince the media that Garrison's charges that they were behind Kennedy's murder were wrong were wrong .
 Mellen was filching the identity of CIA agent Joseph Martin, she apparently thought John was close enough . The middle initial, /, that the Reverend Stanley gave for Jack Martin’s alias John Martin was the same as the middle initial given for John Martin . But because Mellen
 Martin, a paragon of mental stability himself, thinks Tommy, who can't read or write, isn’t all there . Tommy was arrested for impersonating a priest . Martin thinks Tommy isn't all there, and believes Tommy is not there .
 TBeckham says David Ferrie asked him if he wanted to be an ordained priest in the Catholic Church and run a ‘Church’ that was being set up called the United Catholic Mission Fathers . The church was actually being used to solicit funds for the anti-Castro effort
 Fie is told to fly to Dallas and deliver it to a man at the Executive Inn whom he will recognize as having met at the “United Catholic Mission Fathers” in New Orleans . Fie tells the man to deliver the letter to Dallas .
 In the ensuing years, Kennan’s words, of course, presaged the American posture toward the Kremlin, most notably in the Cuban missile crisis sixteen years later .
 The issue of Ruby’s sanity came up again in a sanity hearing in Dallas on June 13, 1966 . Judge Louis T Flolland, who had replaced Judge Brown on the Ruby case, was replaced by Judge Brown .
 There are too many coincidences in the Kennedy case, but when they finally get around to setting forth what they perceive to be a suspicious “coincidence,” either it isn’t a coincidence or, if it is, it can be proved that it is truly
 The account was opened with a deposit of $1.00 . Additional deposits were made on December 14,1951, and January 10,1952 .