 Our summary of the Cuban missile crisis gives you the facts & information you want to know . If the world ever came close to a nuclear world war then that would have to be the time of the crisis . The crisis was the time when the world was at risk of a nuclear war .
 The Soviet Union was willing to go nuclear in defense of the Cuban island . The U.S. was ready to pounce on Cuban territory and on the other the Soviet Union would go nukes .
 World spared from witnessing another bloody battle which would have been much worse than the wars fought before it . But as the course of events unfolded the world was spared from a bloody battle .
 President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev are the two men responsible for averting the war . The two men are said to have averted the war with the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 The whole scene began when the Soviet Union conceived the idea of deploying intermediate range missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union was behind the decision to deploy the missiles .
 The Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev thought this to be an appropriate idea so that they could have the United States within their range and thus reduce the risk of a potential attack on the part of the American government .
 The Union lacked such long range missiles that could target the United States from their homeland . This was otherwise impossible because of the lack of such long-range missiles . The U.S. would not be able to target the U.K.
 Fidel Castro welcomed the plan of the Soviet Premier with arms wide open . Fidel Castro felt the constant threat of another armed attack on the island .
 The work began in 1962 when the Union started to build their missile installations in Cuba in a very secretive manner and at great speed . Hence the work began .
 reconnaissance photographs captured under construction sites in Cuba . However they got caught red handed when they were caught red-handed .
 EX-COMM reached to a consensus to deploy a naval quarantine around the waters of Cuba . On hearing the news, the American president set up the EXM who reached to the consensus .
 Any launch from Cuba from Cuba would be considered as a war on the United States . Following this the news was made public .
 President Kennedy demanded them to back out of the plan . With the navy preventing further Soviet Union approach President John F Kennedy demanded the plan be reversed .
 The next few days were hair raising for the global community . U.S. Naval Blockade was the first time a U.N. ship had been sent under water .
 The U.S. continued two hourly low level reconnaissance missions to keep a check on the situation . The mission was part of a U.N. mission to monitor the situation in the region .
 The Soviet Premier proposed to remove the missiles based on the guarantee that the U.S. would not attack Cuba . After which the Soviet Premier suggested to remove missiles . The Soviet premier proposed to replace the missiles .
 The next day a U2 was shot down with a follow up letter from the Premier asking the American government to remove their missiles from Turkey in exchange . The Premier asked the U2 to remove missiles from the U.S. from Turkey .
 As a strategic move the U.S. Government decided to ignore the second letter and settle for the first deal .
 Khrushchev announced he would take back the missiles to Soviet territory claiming that he would trust the U.S. not to attack Cuba . Resolution as a result of the decision was made to take the missiles back .
 0 2583 .push; DMCA Write For Us © 20132022 Globerove .