 In that sentence he told us the entire story of Cuba, and Castro . <ref></ref>}} .
 In that sentence he told us the entire story of Cuba, and Castro Castro . + On the night of the concert I put on my black lace-up boots with high heels .
 'I put on a black leather minidress with all this corset stuff on the back and front,' she said . 'Then I put on an all-in-a-piece dress with a corset on the front and the back'
 Official biographies are essentially hagiographies . Many detractors portray a wild and irregular life typical of a the worst element of his class .
 The most accepted biography is that of Geyer 2002 . Geyer, Georgie Anne 2002 Guerrilla Prince .
 A new series of biographies by Norberto Fuentes, a former propagandist for the Cuban Government, are attracting attention . The series includes biographies of Fidel Castro and others .
 This violence also extended overseas to his involvement in the 1948 Colombian Bogotazo . Bowden, Mark Bowden wrote Killing Pablo: The Hunt for the World's Greatest Outlaw .
 In ] Castro organized a group of revolutionaries to return to Cuba and overthrow Batista . Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution in 1959 . Castro returned to Cuba to join the revolution .
 "We walked into his flying black Mercedes-Benz and flew to the place with the concert," he said .
 We went to the mosh pit at the front of the stage and jumped up and down as we listened to Good Charlotte . We were there for the first time to see the band .
 It is a sad and only too real description of the hijacking of the resistance against Batista by communist activists including Castro himself . In the mountains the guidance of the bandit ] and and and a few communist ] who had been placed in the Sierra for some time under the direction of
 Some local ] in the remote Sierra Maestra region joined in to became the nucleus of the critical scouting and picketing force of ] who screened the better armed Castro main force . Some local . members of the . nucleus of . the . critical scouting . force of . ] . The
 The support of revolutionary groups in Cuba and overseas was critical . The support and guidance from revolutionary groups was critical, he says .
 Military attacks against Batista's army were having some success . By 1958, military attacks against the Batista army had some success against the army .
 Transaction Publishers, New Brunswik, New Jersey ISBN 0878555765 . The revolution was gaining national support .
 Castro maintained a position of diplomatic neutrality amongst various revolutionary factions . He was able to assume the position of director of the revolution . Castro maintained neutrality among various revolutionary groups .
 Other officials feared the influence of known communists in Castro's camp including Guevara . Castro himself repeatedly stressed that he himself was not a communist .
 Desperate crowds of weeping daughters and shrieking mothers were clubbed with rifle butts as they pleaded for their family members to be spared . Tens of thousands of thousands were sent to concentration camps .
 Castro regime came to power by deception and terror, an exiled opponent says . Castro regime has been described as a state of war against the Cuban people, he says .
 Executions, labor camps, forced re-locations and exile, and the imposition of a repressive military police force to exercise control over civilian society."''''''"Ziva"" 6-8-08 Human Rights Advocacy and the Role of the Media.
 Castro sought close ties with anti-American Communist states, and became dependant on aid from Moscow . As a result, Castro sought to become dependent on Moscow's support .
 In his speech, he stated:+− +−I recall when they kept me in a punishment cell, naked, with several fractures on one leg which never received medical care; today, those bones remain jammed up together and displaced .
 He has not been seen publicly since July 2006, when he underwent intestinal surgery, and is presumably no longer alive as of December 2009 . The communists running Cuba have no incentive to risk challenge to their power by announcing that he passed away .
 After a long absence from the public eye, he was purportedly shown in photographs in June 2010, released by the Cuban State News Agency .
 In August 2010, Associated Press had a story of a purported Castro speech to the Cuban parliament . The Associated Press published a purported speech in August 2010 .
 The fact remains there hasn't been a reputable, independent account of Castro being alive in nearly a year . Castro was reported to be alive in September 2013 .
 Other authoritarian regimes, such as North Korea and Nazi Germany have engaged in ""body-doubles"" and actor/impersonators to hide the death or incapacitation of despots in the past .
 In that sentence he told us the entire story of Cuba, and Castro Castro . - Ronald Reagan . "On the night of the concert I put on my black lace-up boots with high heels," Reagan said . Reagan: "In that sentence, he . told us . the entire