 No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission . The author of this article has not been allowed to reproduce any of the book's contents .
 Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the Palgrave Macmillan division of St. Louis-based St. Paul's College of Medicine . Palgrave is the world's leading academic imprint .
 Macmillan® is a registered trademark in the United States, United Kingdom and other countries . MacMillan is the brand of Macmillenius, a British company that has sold more than 1,000,000 books worldwide .
 Palgrave is a registered trademark in the European Union and other countries . Palgrave, Palgrave and Palgrave are a registered trademarks in the EU and elsewhere .
 A catalogue record of the book is available from the British Library . B74 2007 327.1—dc22 2007014791 is available .
 It places the individual decision maker at the heart of the foreign policy decision making process . It places individual decision makers at heart of foreign policy .
 The book starts with a discussion of the role of leaders and then proceeds to situate these individuals in the context of advisors and bureaucracies, as well as domestic and international constraints .
 Each chapter is organized around puzzles and questions to which undergraduate students can readily relate to . Each chapter includes puzzles, questions and questions .
 This text assumes no prior knowledge of either international relations or foreign policy analysis . Quite the contrary, this text assumes that the author of this article does not know any prior knowledge about international relations .
 The focus is on explaining concepts and theories rather than on authors and literature . Hence, the focus is to explain concepts, theories and theories .
 The book’s focus on the individual decision maker makes it easy for students to identify with the problems inherent in foreign policy making .
 Case studies that help explain the concepts are drawn from a variety of countries and time periods . Case studies include non-crisis as well as small state foreign policy making .
 Most of the concepts discussed in this book have been developed in the context of the study of U.S. foreign policy . The book is written in response to questions about foreign policy in the United States .
 Their applicability to other countries has been tested only infrequently . They have only been tested infrequently in the past .
 This book does not test the applicability of these concepts in a systematic way . Instead, it suggests the value of a comparative approach to foreign policy analysis .
 This text reflects my perspective on foreign policy analysis first and foremost, but it is also the product of the many people who assisted me along the way . This text is the result of a series of interviews with CNN iReport .
 David Pervin, who first persuaded me to take on this project, has thanked David for his support .
 David was instrumental in the initial conceptualization of the book and provided important feedback on early chapters . David was also instrumental in conceptualizing the book .
 John Ishiyama convinced me that it was a worthwhile endeavor and served as an important sounding board for my ideas . John is a good friend of the late Sen. Ed Rollins . He says he's proud of his work in Japan and is proud of it .
 "His insights and his questions have helped me write a better book than would have been possible without our many conversations," he says . His insights have helped him write the book .
 His insistence shortened the road to the completion of this project . His insistence that the project be completed is a pre-lude to the project .
 "I owe a great debt to these and many other individuals who have shaped my thinking about foreign policy analysis," he says .
 Last, but not least, 1 want to thank my spouse, John, and my daughters, Fasika and Bedelwa . Fasika says she wants to thank John and his family .
 "Maybe now that the book is done, we can travel without the laptop coming along," she says . Maybe now that's done, she can travel with the laptop .
 Chapter Preview Explains what distinguishes foreign policy analysis as an approach to the study of international politics . Explains why foreign policy is a key part of foreign policy .
 Explains the difference between foreign policy options, decisions, behaviors, and outcomes . Explains how foreign policy decisions affect the U.S.
 Explains difference between individual, state, and system levels of analysis . Explains the difference in state, system levels and analysis levels . Also explains the difference between state, state and system level levels .
 Explains the value of studying foreign policy comparatively and the basics of the comparative method . Explains how to study foreign policy in the context of a country's foreign policy .
 L. eaders have made many puzzling foreign policy decisions across the years . The U.S. has made some of the world's most baffling decisions .
 Many decisions have plunged countries into major crisis or war . Although some of those decisions turned out to be of little consequence and have been largely forgotten, many have been left undone .
 Both reporters at the time and historians who wrote about them later found puzzling decisions . Consider the following decisions, which both reporters and historians found puzzling .
 Saddam Hussein knew that the United States was more powerful and much better armed than Iraq . The U.S. was better armed and more powerful than Iraq, Saddam Hussein said . Saddam Hussein was more than a million strong in Iraq .
 Iraq had, in those days, one of the stronger militaries in the region, it was no match for a superpower . Iraq had a strong military, but was unable to cope with the threat of a superpower.
 Soviet Union and the collapse of the latter’s economy to worry about his invasion of a small neighboring state. Soviet Union . Soviet Union. The collapse of its economy .
 A meeting with the American ambassador to Iraq, career diplomat April Glaspie, reinforced his assessment . The ambassador is a career diplomat .
 Saddam Hussein may have interpreted this to mean that the U.S. would not take action if his military attacked Kuwait . Saddam Hussein could have interpreted it to mean the United States would not attack .
 Neville Chamberlain made a fateful deal with Adolph Hitler of Germany during the infamous Munich conference of 1938 . Decades earlier, Neville Chamberlain, prime minister of Britain, made the fateful deal .
 Britain would not object to Germany’s seizure of the Sudetenland, a portion of Czechoslovakia bordering on Germany and with a German-speaking population, as long as Hitler promised he would respect the sovereignty of the remainder of Czechsoslovakia . Hitler promised to respect
 It was a multiethnic state, home to Czechs and Slovaks as well as German, Hungarian, and other smaller ethnic minority groups . It was also home to the Czechs, Slovaks and Czechs .
 Chamberlain returned home confident he had made a deal that would preserve the peace in Europe . Chamberlain's deal was important consideration in a time when the memory of World War I and its toll in human lives was still fresh .
 He thought that meeting personally with Hitler had allowed him to judge the latter’s character and trustworthiness .
 Nikita Khrushchev of the Soviet Union made a decision to build launching sites for nuclear missiles in Cuba in the early 1960s . The Soviet Union soon found himself embroiled in a crisis in Cuba .
 American U-2 spy planes photographed the launchpad while it was still under construction . The launchpad was built in the 1960s and 1970s .
 The discovery came on the heels of the Bay of Pigs fiasco . American-trained Cuban exiles had attempted, and failed, to topple Fidel Castro, Cuba’s communist leader .
 President Kennedy was presiding over a military buildup that would give the U.S. clear superiority in strategic weapons . The Cold War was still in full swing, and President Khrushchev could not ignore it .
 The possibility of being able to reach U.S. soil by placing missiles in Cuba was quite tempting . Under those circumstances, the Soviet Union did not yet have the capacity to launch intercontinental missiles .
 The United States had missiles close to Soviet soil in Turkey . In addition, the U.S. had missiles near the Soviet-held territory of Turkey .
 Khrushchev may have concluded that placing missiles in Cuba was comparable to placing them in the U.S. in the Soviet Union .
 Each of these leaders made a decision that was, certainly, puzzling, puzzling . Each of them made decisions that were, certainly in retrospect, puzzling.
 Saddam Hussein stumbled into a war with a coalition of countries headed by the U.S. that he could not win . That became a prelude to another war a little over a decade later, a little more than a decade after .
 Iraq suffered the economic consequences of the destruction during and the sanctions that followed the war of the early 1990s . In the interim, Iraq suffered from the effects of the war .
 Often, such decisions are deemed “irrational,” and the leaders who made them are judged to be crazy or just fools . But such decisions can be deemed irrational, and leaders are judged as fools .
 Being dismissive of such policy choices and the leaders who made them may be tempting, it does not help us understand these puzzling decisions very well .
 There are on occasion leaders whose rationality may be questioned, but there are far fewer such individuals than those who are commonly labeled irrational . There are more people who are often labeled irrational than those labeled irrational.
 We must also begin to ponder what motivates these leaders, what they understand about the situations they face, and what factors made their decisions turn out to be “bad ones.” We can't assume that, but we must also start thinking about the reasons behind these decisions .
 It can be difficult to accept that Saddam Hussein was not crazy, Chamberlain not naive, and Khrushchev not a fool . Chamberlain was not naive and not crazy. He was a fool, Chamberlain was naive, Chamberlain wasn't crazy .
 Commonsense notions of rationality demand that each of these leaders should have known better . Each leader of the U.S. House of Representatives should have been more rational .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says it's difficult to maintain this attitude . Sutter: "Knowing what that leader knew at the time of the decision, it becomes a little more difficult"
 We might disagree with the goals Saddam Hussein or Khrushchev pursued, but we can make the argument that these leaders consistently pursued their goals . We might judge Chamberlain too preoccupied with preserving peace, but in each case, we can argue .
 A COMPARATIVE INTRENTENTION. purpose in mind and make choices designed to achieve those predetermined ends. Purpose in mind is to achieve that predetermined ends .
 You may share the goals and yet be convinced that different policies would better achieve those objectives . Or you may share those goals but disagree with the goals of different policies .
 rationality does not guarantee a desirable outcome, because the outcome is dependent on the reactions of other actors . The outcome is in part dependent on other actors, such as the reaction of other people .
 Foreign policy decisions are judged to be good or bad in hindsight . All too often, foreign policy decisions can be judged in the wrong way . The U.S. should not be judged as good or good in hindsight, says David Cameron .
 Such evaluations are often based on the knowledge that the decision led to a desirable or disastrous outcome . Such evaluations can be based on a decision that led to the outcome of that decision .
 Just as good decisions do not guarantee a good outcome, flawed decisions don't inevitably lead to bad results . "Good decisions don’t guarantee good outcomes," says the author of the book .
 Foreign policy decisions can be evaluated without resorting to hindsight . The advantage of judging foreign policy decisions in this manner is that they can be judged without resort to hindsight, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Process-oriented judgments are likely to overestimate the degree to which leaders make reasonable decisions, says John Sutter .
 Leaders engage in sound analysis on the basis of a very narrow and skewed perception of the world . Process-oriented evaluation would lead us to judge the decision as a reasonable one. When leaders engage in a sound analysis, a process-orientated evaluation would be more likely .
 Process-oriented assessment is better at helping us understand why a policy maker, or group of policy makers, arrived at a specific foreign policy decision rather than at judging whether that decision was good .
 "That's still valuable because it helps us achieve a greater awareness of the problems and pitfalls involved decision making. That is still valuable," says the author of the book, "but it's still relevant because it's important to understand the problems involved in decision making"
 Frequently, relevant information may be classified or the necessary records may not exist . The information may not be available .
 This does not make analysis impossible, but it does mean that we sometimes need to infer process variables from the available information, rather than knowing for sure . This is not always the case for analysis .
 A skilled analyst can often make very effective use of available information . A skilled analysts can often use available information to make an effective use .
 In sum, there is no easy way to define good foreign policy decision making . The U.S. should be careful not to rely on foreign policy decisions to make, says David Cameron .
 When we judge that leaders should have known better, we are voicing the expectation that, given the responsibilities of their positions, we may expect them to transcend the narrowness of their own time and place to view the world from multiple perspectives .
 The study of foreign policy involves more. So far, the focus has been on leaders and decision making, but the study involves more . The study has focused on leaders, decision making and foreign policy .
 At the heart of the study of foreign policy is the desire to understand countries’ actions and behaviors towards other countries and the international environment generally .
 The study of foreign policy has focused primarily on the quest to maintain and enhance a country’s power and security . Traditionally, the study has focused mainly on maintaining and enhancing a country's power .
 It centered on questions of averting war when possible, deciding to fight if necessary, and ensuring the integrity of the country’s borders . It also centered on whether the U.S. should be able to avoid war when it was possible .
 Increasingly, economic relations between countries have gained attention . The relationship between the two countries has been growing in popularity .
 Since the end of the Cold War, globalization has become an important process that highlights the interconnectedness of the world’s economies . globalization has been an important part of the process since the 1980s .
 This has had a greater impact on countries with economies that, in earlier eras, were less connected to the international economy . This has been particularly true for countries that have been less connected with the global economy .
 Economic issues have had a higher priority on the foreign policy agenda much longer than trade . For those countries that rely heavily on international trade, economic issues have been a priority for foreign policy .
 In addition to the increased diversity of issues on the foreign policy agenda, there is also an increasing variety of actors who engage in foreign policy making .
 Traditionally, investigations of foreign policy looked primarily at states and leaders . This is not the case for the first time since the Cold War .
 This is still largely the case, although there has been increased recognition of, and interest in, the foreign policy roles of decision makers who were not traditionally associated with international diplomacy .
 Investigators are increasingly interested in public diplomacy, or a government’s diplomatic efforts that target citizens, the press, and other constituencies in other countries rather than their governments . They also occasionally look beyond the government to study citizen diplomacy and the efforts and effects abroad .
 Other countries engage in public diplomacy to influence the perceptions citizens in other countries have of their society .
 The Reverend Jesse Jackson negotiated with Syria’s government for the release of a U.S. Navy pilot Lt. Lt. Peter Jackson . An example of citizen diplomacy is the Reverend's 1984 negotiation with the government .
 Foreign policies of countries, large and powerful, drive the course of world history . The foreign policy of countries such as China, Russia and Ukraine drive history, says CNN's John Sutter .
 At times, countries and their leaders have pursued wise policies that have yielded peace and prosperity . At times the policies have led to peace in the world, the author says .
 Sometimes they have made choices that have been destructive of both themselves and others . Yet at other times, they have also made destructive choices, as the previous examples show . This is not the first time they have chosen to do so, as it has been shown .
 What drives the study of foreign policy is the quest to understand why leaders make the choices they do, and how and why domestic and international constraints and opportunities affect their choices, the author says .
 Leaders do not exist in a vacuum; they are surrounded by advisors and a bureaucracy, influenced by domestic constituencies, and dependent on the power their state can project in the international arena . After all, leaders do not live a vacuum .
 Untangling the relative impact of these various factors on foreign policy is no easy matter . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's leading nations since 2001 .
 Untangling the relative impact of various factors on foreign policy decision making may not be an easy matter . But it need not be impossible task, either, but it can be, either .
 Next, we will investigate where to look for explanations and discuss a framework that helps to organize the various factors or “causes” of foreign policy . We will also discuss how to look at where to find explanations .
 We will turn our attention to the benefits of studying foreign policy comparatively . Subsequently, we will focus our attention on the benefits and costs of foreign policy .
 So far, the descriptors “choice,” “decision,’ and “behavior” have been used interchangeably in connection with foreign policy . The descriptors are used in the context of foreign policy decisions .
 Instead of invading Kuwait, he could have pursued a variety of other strategies to achieve his objectives, such as amassing troops on the border to underscore a threat, or some other form of coercive diplomacy .
 He could have gone to the Arab League or the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to address his grievances .
 He could have called for a summit meeting with the leaders of Kuwait, possibly with the aid of a neutral third party . The summit could have been held with the help of a third party, a neutral neutral party .
 If the term options refers to a range of possible choices, decision refers to the option that was chosen, i.e., the choice . The term "choose" is used to refer to the choice of the person who made the decision .
 Not all of the options listed in the previous paragraph would have been equally attractive to Saddam Hussein . Saddam Hussein would not have chosen the other options in the past .
 We must learn more about how he viewed the world and Iraq’s role in it, as well as domestic factors . To understand how he evaluated different options, which options he would have rejected out of hand, we need to learn .
 It may also be helpful to learn more about his personality to gain insight into his perceptions of the international political environment and motivations behind his actions .
 Foreign policy decision making is often the task of not one person but of groups of individuals . We may need to understand the predisposition and worldviews of multiple individuals before we can fully understand foreign policy decisions .
 The outcome of actions depends not just on the decision taken by the leaders of one country, but also on how other actors in the international environment react to those actions . To figure out why states undertake certain foreign policy behaviors, however, it is often necessary to dig into the decision making process
 Much can still happen between the making of a decision and its implementation, which means that the observed foreign policy behavior is not always exactly what the decision makers intended . In sum, much can still be said to be a result of the making and implementation of decisions .
 The argument that Saddam Hussein should have known better than to think he could get away with invading and annexing Kuwait implies a focus on the relative power of states, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Iraq was, at the time of the invasion, was a well-armed regional power, but not as powerful as the U.S. Iraq was not as strong as the United States. Iraq is now a major regional power .
 U.S. should have known that it could not hold on to its newly acquired territory if the United States chose to flex its muscle, says President Obama .
 Despite popular wisdom to the contrary, the United States could have decided otherwise . The U.S. could have chosen otherwise, says President Obama .
 Bush could have decided that preventing Saddam Hussein from extending his reach was a good enough solution . Bush could not have decided preventing Hussein from expanding his reach in Iraq .
 The United States could have chosen to do nothing and stay out of disputes between Arab countries . The U.S. ambassador to Iraq had suggested to Saddam Hussein that the United States should not intervene in Iraq .
 Bush's decision to push Iraq out of Kuwait was not a foregone conclusion . Bush’s decision was not foregone . Bush: “I’m not sure what I think about the Iraq invasion.”
 Knowing what a state is capable of is only one ingredient in predicting the outcome of a conflict . Even very powerful states often do not use all the resources at their disposal, says author .
 outcomes require that we understand foreign policy decisions and behaviors of not just one country but of two or more countries in interaction . The outcomes require us to understand the decisions and behavior of not only one country .
 Students of foreign policy focus less frequently on outcomes than on options, decisions, or behaviors . Foreign policy students focus on options and behaviors rather than outcomes . Students focus on international relations in the field of international relations .
 The good outcome is not due to the way another actor chose to react to what may have been a rather poor decision . Such thinking leaves no room for the possibility that the good outcome was due to another actor's reaction .
 Even great decisions may not lead to desirable outcomes, because decision makers do not control how the leaders of other countries will react to their decisions . However, strong insight into the personality and motivations of leaders of countries is likely to improve the odds of a desirable outcome, author says .
 That won't always guarantee good outcomes, but it gives us the best odds for achieving them . That won’t always guarantee a good outcome, it will give us a good chance at achieving them, it says . It's not always guaranteed good outcomes but it's given us the
 Leaders are quick to take credit for foreign policy successes and the public is quick to blame them for failures . But leaders rarely make foreign policy alone, and foreign policy is not always successful alone .
 Advisory systems play some role in foreign policy decision making and implementation . Advisory systems and government bureaucracies may be organized differently in different countries, but they always play a role .
 Domestic constituencies may vary in influence, depending on the attentiveness of a public to foreign affairs or the structure of government in a specific country . Domestic constituencies are likely to have different influence on foreign affairs .
 The world beyond the borders affects the possibilities for foreign policy action, says John Defterios . He says the world beyond borders will affect the possibilities of foreign policy .
 Foreign policy behavior is rarely caused by one person or one thing alone . It makes sense to investigate various factors separately before thinking about their interaction .
 After analyzing various factors separately, we can then assess their relative contributions to foreign policy behavior, taking into account also the possible interactions among these different explanatory factors . We can assess the relative contributions of these factors and then take into account the interactions .
 The strategy is to initially analyze different factors that influence foreign policy making in isolation . It will then attempt to integrate these into a comprehensive explanation . Foreign policy is generally purposive or goal-directed behavior .
 First, it's possible to group the different factors into categories that have something in common . Second, it is possible to put together categories of factors that have a common effect .
 Iraq was the strongest actor within the region, even if on a global level it was no match for the United States . The second explanation focuses on the relative power of states in the world and sometimes also in specific regional subsystems .
 It assumes that the U.S. had an interest in maintaining the relative balance of power among the states of the Middle East . But it also was simultaneously not particularly focused on that region at that time .
 Iraq’s decision to invade Kuwait was a response to an opportunity provided by the American lack of attention . The U.S. did not respond to a lack of interest in the situation, the author says .
 In this view, leaders and their personalities, perceptions, and motivations are less important . Leaders and personalities are not more important than personalities and perceptions .
 The emphasis is on understanding the incentives and constraints the international environment places on the behavior of states . Rather, the emphasis should be on understanding what international environment puts on state behavior .
 Relative power alone does not explain the relationship between the U.S. and the two small states . But relative power alone doesn't explain the relationships the United States has with these small states, the author says .
 The example of Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait also shows that the constraints imposed by being a small and weak country are generally enduring factors affecting that state's foreign policy . The example shows that being a weak country is also a factor affecting its foreign policy, the author says .
 Kuwait’s smallness makes it vulnerable to belligerent neighbors and need more powerful allies . Kuwait is small enough to be vulnerable to its neighbors and needs more allies .
 Opportunities, on the other hand, are often dependent on specific circumstances that may be temporary . They present a window of opportunity that may in time close. Opportunities often depend on the circumstances of the situation .
 Saddam Hussein acted upon just such an opportunity, convinced that the U.S. would stay on the sidelines . Saddam Hussein, Iraq’s leader, acted upon such a opportunity, says John Avlon .
 "The window closed rather rapidly as the United States leadership quickly refocused its attention. In fact, that window closes rather rapidly," CNN's John Sutter said .
 The previous explanation makes certain assumptions about the motivations of leaders, namely that leaders will take advantage of opportunities when they present themselves . Note that the previous explanation was incorrect .
 It is quite conceivable that a different leader, who had a different personality or was differently constrained by domestic political institutions or public opinion, might have decided not to act as it did . The risk of the U.S. acting in the way it did was not worth the potential gains,
 We can never know if Iraq would have invaded Kuwait if there had been a different leader in power in that country in the early 1990s . It is at least plausible that another leader might have decided against such a move .
 Even authoritarian countries there often is lively debate among leaders and advisors as they seek to define the best policy for the country . Even in authoritarian countries, even in authoritarian nations, debate is lively .
 Domestic political institutions and public opinion may also play a role, depending on the nature of the political system . In addition to domestic political institutions, public opinion will play a part in the outcome of the election .
 The motivations of individual leaders on the one hand and the opportunities and constraints presented by the international environment on the other can be seen as competing, but also as complementary . The two explanations -- the motivations of individuals and the constraints of international leaders -- can be readjusted to each other,
 Leaders make decisions in context of environment that presents them with problems, opportunities, and constraints . This is certainly appropriate, but it must also be noted that leaders make decisions within the context of an environment . Leaders must also make decisions based on context of challenges, opportunities and constraints, she says
 The individual level of analysis focuses on leaders and decision makers in an effort to explain foreign policy . The individual levels of analysis focus on leaders, decision makers .
 It assumes that individuals shape the course of history, because it is their choices and decisions that drive events . It assumes individuals shape history, and their decisions and decisions are their own responsibility for history .
 The first focus leads to the study of personality traits, beliefs, and values as the factors that explain foreign policy decisions . The second focus focuses on personality traits and beliefs .
 Insight into the personality, character, beliefs, and values of the individual enhances our ability to gauge what motivates us to make decisions . Insight into a person's character, belief, beliefs and values can help us gauge a decision maker's motivation .
 Students of personality and other enduring qualities of leaders suggest that the answer is most often affirmative . We explore further in chapter 2 of this chapter .
 The second focus leads to the study of the perceptions and how these influence foreign policy decision making . The focus of the study is on perceptions of foreign policy .
 The individual’s perceptions, or the process by which a person makes sense of events and situations in her or his world, are specific to that situation or event .
 Students of perception, framing, and problem representation do not negate the importance of personality . They are more interested in how policy makers make sense of—or define—specific decision making situations, they say .
 Individuals often do not make decisions alone but instead work together with others in a group or in a bureaucratic setting . Furthermore, individuals often work together in a bureaucracy setting .
 Group interactions are often classified at the individual level of analysis . Focus tends to be on understanding the dynamics of interpersonal interaction rather than on the group as an undifferentiated unit .
 Group decision making, as well as other aspects of the advisory system and bureaucracy, is the subject of chapter 4 . The group decision making is the topic of chapter 3 .
 State level analysis focuses on factors internal to the state as those that compel states to engage in specific foreign policy behaviors . The state level of analysis is focused on the state's foreign policy policies .
 At this level of analysis, the emphasis is on how factors internal to the state influence the behavior of that state on the global stage . At this stage of analysis it's important to focus on how external factors influence the state's behavior .
 The relationship between leaders and the domestic environment is much more complicated than this simple characterization suggests, as we will see in chapter 5 . Of course, the relationship between leadership and domestic environments is more complicated .
 System level analysis focuses on comparisons (and interactions) between states . Finally, the system level of analysis is focused on comparisons and interactions .
 This level of analysis asks questions about the relative power of states . It also asks whether states should be able to exert power in order to protect themselves .
 Relative attributes may change across time as a country’s economy yields more wealth or as it attains technological or military capabilities . Relative attributes of a country's relative attributes may vary across time .
 Changes in relative capabilities of states may create opportunities, but they may also serve to increase the constraints on states . Changes may also create opportunities for states, but also create constraints on how states operate .
 An increase in military capacities may embolden a state, while an increasingly interdependent world economy presents constraints . The rise in military might embolden states, while the world's interdependent economies present constraints .
 The system level of analysis makes certain assumptions about the political interests of countries, among which is first and foremost the idea that a state’s power is central to its ability to maintain the integrity of its borders .
 The definition of political interest, sometimes called national interest, is not necessarily straightforward . However, the definition of national interest is sometimes not always straightforward .
 Remember that the U.S. response to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait was not a foregone conclusion . The United States response to the Iraq invasion was not foregone . Remember that .
 Saddam Hussein may have calculated that the U.S. would decide it was not in its interest to intervene . In fact, the United States may have decided not to intervene in Iraq .
 The systems level of analysis can provide insight into the capabilities of states and explain outcomes, but it cannot explain foreign policy decisions or behaviors very well, as we explore further in chapter 6 .
 On the dividing line between the state and system levels of analysis sits the two-level game . On the divide line is the state level of analysis and the system level .
 Foreign policy decision makers try to satisfy domestic constituencies and international imperatives simultaneously . Foreign policy decisions often require a delicate balancing act . This concept describes the fact that .
 Countries that have similar industries that are internationally competitive will try to preserve access to as many markets as possible . On the other hand, countries with similar industries will want to preserve their access to international markets .
 Decision makers are caught between the international principle of free trade and the interests of their constituents, who may lose their jobs as a result of international competition . Decision makers may be caught between trade and their constituents' interests .
 Adhering to the internationally accepted principles while not antagonizing domestic constituencies can be tough . The U.S. should not antagonize domestic constituencies, says President Barack Obama .
 Much has been written about the merits of studying international politics at different levels of analysis . Much of the debate has been focused on how to understand international politics .
 Some scholars have staked out clear preferences for one or another level of analysis, while others understand them to be complementary . Some scholars believe that the two levels of analysis are complementary .
 We might classify causes into different categories, such as deep, intermediate, and precipitating causes . We might categorize causes into categories such as 'deep' and 'intermediate' causes .
 Archduke Franz Ferdinand was assassinated by a Serbian nationalist during a visit to Serajevo . The rise of nationalism and class conflict preoccupied leaders in many European countries at the time .
 The Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires were particularly vulnerable to unrest and nationalist secession . Germany had only recently become a unified entity and was rapidly expanding its industrial base .
 Russia was trying to expand its industrial capacity and modernize its military . But it faced increasing turmoil domestically . Russia was facing increasing turmoil domestic .
 Many of the states of Europe were at the center of turmoil in recent years . A changing balance of power among them made conditions for conflict favorable for conflict . The conflict was the result of a changing power balance in Europe .
 Around the turn of the twentieth century, this Goncert of Europe began to disintegrate as Germany strengthened itself economically and militarily after its unification in 1871 .
 To counter this rising power, Britain, France, and later Russia allied themselves . Germany responded by establishing closer ties with the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires .
 Despite these circumstances, war was not inevitable; the leaders of Europe still had options . Leaders of Europe had options, even if these leaders perceived themselves to be hemmed in by their agreements .
 Different decisions could have been made, and a different outcome might have resulted . Different decisions were made in the aftermath of the shooting .
 In the final analysis, the decisions made by leaders are the key to understanding international politics . Hence, in the final . analysis, leaders are key to the understanding of international politics.
 This does not mean that the domestic and international environments are irrelevant. This is not the case for the U.S. President Barack Obama to win the White House in 2016 .
 The changing balance of power in the period leading up to World War I certainly created a situation in which a crisis might be more difficult to manage than in a more stable and predictable international environment .
 Note that what we earlier termed the deep cause of the war corresponds to the system level of analysis . Note that this corresponds to a system level analysis of the analysis .
 A political assassination could be interpreted as a threat to the integrity of the state . Domestic nationalism and class conflict prevalent in European countries at the time created a context in which a political assassination was interpreted as an attack on state .
 Austrian leaders knew that their own multinational empire was vulnerable as well as their own . The Austrian leader knew that his empire was at risk as well .
 "This certainly colored their perceptions and interpretations of what, from historical distance, looks like a relatively minor event," says CNN's Tom Charity .
 An intermediate cause corresponds to the state level of analysis . Note that this intermediate cause is not the same as a state level analysis .
 The state and system level causes created a tense environment in which such a decision became more likely . The environment did not unequivocally determine either the decisions or the outcome of the outcome .
 Leaders reacted with their own assessments and decisions . In turn, other leaders reacted to their assessments and reactions .
 Note that the decisions of leaders in reaction to the assassination correspond to the individual level of analysis . Note that leaders in . reaction to . the assassination respond to an individual level . analysis .
 Foreign policy analysis is to gain generally applicable knowledge about how foreign policy decisions are made, why leaders make the decisions they make, why states engage in specific kinds of foreign policy behaviors . It's also to assess opportunities and constraints presented by the international system .
 Focus on what makes each event unique gives us little general knowledge . However, focusing on the unique nature of each event makes it difficult to understand .
 One task of foreign policy analysis is to move beyond intuitive knowledge to explicit knowledge . Foreign policy analysis must be done beyond intuitive and explicit knowledge, says David Frum .
 Making knowledge explicit helps us reexamine our assumptions, question the lessons we have derived from our experiences, says author .
 Decision makers often interpret the lessons narrowly, fail to reexamine their gut reactions, and compare previous and current crises only superficially . Decision makers should re-examine the lessons they learn from their own experiences, says David Cameron .
 Leaders may make analogies on the basis of superficial commonalities while ignoring significant differences between situations . Leaders may also ignore significant differences in situations such as those in the U.S.
 Leaders are prone to fight the last war, often-heard saying . Leaders are often prone to fighting last war . President Barack Obama is a strong contender for the presidency .
 Chamberlain hoped to avoid repeat of the seemingly automatic sequence of events that had led to war in 1914 . Chamberlain may have appeased Hitler because he wanted to avoid a repetition of the sequence of the events that led to the war .
 Those with knowledge of history may still be condemned to repeat it . Chamberlain faced a very different kind of threat, Chamberlain's actions were disastrous . Those who know history should gain deeper insights that can be derived from a more comprehensive analysis of such historical events .
 He judged that he should avoid the kind of rigid attitudes that had sent Europe into war so quickly in 1914 . Since he wished to avoid the outcome of that previous event, he wanted to avoid that outcome .
 Additional observations help decision makers reexamine the lessons they have intuitively gleaned from past experience . Additional observations can help re-evaluate the lessons learned from past experiences .
 Such a reexamination can move decision makers beyond simple comparisons to a more generalized understanding of crises and, ideally, a better understanding of how to best manage a crisis .
 This can help guide the state’s foreign policy decision makers so they do not stumble into a war when they wish to preserve peace . It can enable them to understand the personalities of other leaders to facilitate productive negotiations .
 Chamberlain was not the first decision maker to think that, after meeting with another leader in person, he could trust that individual . Chamberlain was the first leader to think he trusted another leader after meeting him .
 Politicians are often astute judges of character, but their intuitions have their limitations when judging people from different countries and cultures . Politicians often judge people in highly formal situations for only a short period of time .
 Understanding the peculiarities of the personalities of specific leaders can facilitate more useful and productive diplomacy . Understanding the personality of leaders can also be useful, productive diplomacy, experts say .
 A quest to understand why such decisions were made, who or what explains behaviors as well as outcomes, and—if the outcomes were unfavorable—what could have improved the likelihood of a better result .
 Causes are the factors that contribute to various foreign policy options being considered in a decision process, that compel decision makers to choose a specific decision as—in their view—best suited to achieving the desired outcome, that explain specific foreign policy behaviors . Causes contribute to the occurrence of an outcome,
 The effect (or the set of options considered, the decision, the behavior, or the outcome) that we seek to explain is called the dependent variable . The effect of the options considered is called a dependent variable. The effect is the decision or the behavior of the outcome .
 The effect, or dependent variable, would not have occurred if the independent variables had not been present in the study . The study was published in the U.S. National Institute of Health and Human Development .
 In addition, the dependent variable would have taken a different shape if different independent variables had been present or if the independent variable had been of different relative strength . In addition to the dependent variables, the independent variables would have had different relative strengths .
 Each of these was a decision that was followed by behaviors that carried out the decision . Each of the decisions were followed by behavior that carried them out .
 Each of these was also preceded by a set of possible options that were considered and out of which a choice was made . Each of the possible options was also considered before being made .
 Each of these decisions was widely perceived as puzzling, and need of an explanation . The outcomes were not what the leaders intended, but what they intended .
 These examples reflect the emphasis of foreign policy analysis on explaining option selection, decisions, and behaviors .
 Although the terminology of independent and dependent variables may be unfamiliar to you, thinking in terms of causes and effects is not . Think in terms terms of cause and effects, think about the relationship between causes and consequences .
 The limited comparison, combined with Chamberlain’s desire to avoid war, biased his thinking in favor of appeasement, he says . Chamberlain's wish for war was also biased, he writes .
 Foreign policy analysis and social scientific terminology . Factors that contribute to the occurrence of foreign policy decision, behavior, or outcome . Causes Independent variables Independent variables Foreign policy .
 Foreign policy analysts are in a position to produce such generalized knowledge and make it available to decision makers . The urgency of the situation would have made it difficult to carry out extensive research projects at that moment .
 On the basis of such comprehensive data, it would be possible to make general statements about, e.g., whether democracies are less likely to initiate war than nondemocratic countries .
 It would not be possible to make fine distinctions between how democratic various countries are . However, it would be impossible to say how democratic countries are, he says .
 We could create a finer-grained scale, but we would inevitably lose some information about the nature of democracy in each country . The scale would be a better way to measure democracy in a democracy state .
 It is possible to make finer distinctions between the nature of democracy in each country, for example. It is also possible to compare the nature and nature of each country's democracy .
 Small-N comparisons use descriptions that can be nuanced and rich in detail . Rather than using categories or numerical indicators to summarize our assessments of specific countries, we use descriptions of small-N .
 We hope that our findings apply also to foreign policy problems we have not studied, including those that have not yet occurred. In other words, we hope that . Our findings may also apply to other foreign policy .
 An alternative strategy is to evaluate what might have happened if some aspect of the historical circumstances of a historical situation had been different, says CNN.com.com .
 Historical events happen only once, and it's tempting to conclude that they were bound to happen because they did happen . History is only one of many things that happens only once . Historical events are bound to have happened because they happened .
 To avoid thinking in such deterministic terms, it can be useful to think about counterfactuals in our efforts to evaluate the multiple factors that influenced a specific foreign policy decision, behavior, or outcome .
 Hitler could have been stopped if Chamberlain had taken a firmer stand in 1938, he says . Chamberlain's actions could have prevented Hitler being stopped in 1938 .
 The answer to these questions hinges on interpretations of Hitler’s personality . Hitler's personality is key to understanding the meaning of his personality, says historian .
 He might have decided to contain his ambitions after facing stronger pressure from the more powerful countries in Europe, he says .
 It is possible that diplomacy could never have contained his desire to create a strong German empire . However, it is also quite possible he wanted to create an empire in Germany .
 A careful assessment of Hitler’s character would be necessary to evaluate the likelihood of either result . Hitler's character is critical to evaluating the outcome of either outcome .
 It assumes that individual decision makers, alone or in groups, make foreign policy decisions . The author of this article assumes that individuals alone or groups of people make decisions .
 It assumes that foreign policies are usually determined by the complex interplay of multiple factors . Foreign policy decisions are usually made by complex factors such as multiple factors, such as foreign policy .
 It may seek to understand what options decision makers had and why they made the decisions they did . It may also seek to explain the foreign policy behavior of states; or why certain outcomes occurred .
 Foreign policy analysts think in terms of independent and dependent variables . Foreign policy analyst: Foreign policy is dependent on independent and independent variables .
 Foreign policy decisions Foreign policy behavior Foreign policy outcomes Levels of analysis Individual level of analysis . National interest Two-level game Crisis Independent variable Dependent variable Large-N comparison . Counterfactuals Study Questions Study Questions 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
 There are a number of excellent essays on the history of foreign policy analysis as a field of study .
 George, King, Keohane, and Verba, Designing Social Inquiry: Scientific Inference in Qualitative Research. George, “Case Studies and Theory Development”
 Czechoslovakia ceased to exist when on January 1, 1993, it split into Czech Republic and Slovakia, two sovereign states, as a result of what was widely touted as a “velvet divorce” because the dissolution took place with 3.3.5.6.5
 In 2003, the U.S. went to war with Iraq, part to topple Saddam Hussein . The United States went to Iraq in 2003 to topple Hussein . Iraq is now a major ally of the United States .
 There was no question the United States had the military capacity to be successful in this effort . The reconstruction effort has, as of this writing, has proven more difficult than anticipated .
 This definition of rationality is generally accepted by rational choice theorists . The definition of rational choice theory is accepted as a form of rationality .
 Foreign policy analysts define rational decision making in a more global manner . Many foreign policy analysts, including many who study foreign policy from a psychological or cognitive perspective .
 Such definitions make more comprehensive demands on leader’s knowledge and process by which various options are weighed and evaluated . Such definitions require more comprehensive knowledge of the leader, the leader and the process .
 Vesna Danilovic argues that the psychological or cognitive perspective misrepresents rational choice theory . She argues that such a view of the U.S. should not be taken seriously seriously .
 This book argues that the difference between rational and cognitive approaches lies in the aspects of the decision making process which are investigated . It argues that cross-theoretical communication is facilitated by adopting the rational choice theory definition of rationality .
 A Poliheuristic Perspective,” in Integrating Cognitive and Rational Theories of Foreign Policy Decision Making, ed. ed. “Theory and rational Theories” of foreign policy decision-making, is published in the New York Review of Science .
 “Good Judgment in Foreign Policy: Theory and Application, ed. A Framework for Analysis,” in . Good Judgment in foreign policy: Theory, Application, .
 George, Bridging the Gap; Nincic and Lepgold, Being Useful; Renshon and Larson, Good Judgment in Foreign Policy . Larson and Larson: Being Useful is a good judgment in foreign policy .
 Renshon, Welch, R. Welch and others have written about the importance of good judgment . The author says that good judgment can be judged by good behavior .
 See Knill and Lenschow, “Seek and Ye Shall Find”; Nye, Understanding International Conflicts. See Knills and LensChow, "Seek" and "Ye Shall Find" for more .
 Singer, “The Level of Analysis Problem”; Rosenau, The Scientific Study of Foreign Policy, Waltz, Man, the State, and War, see also Nye, Understanding International Conflicts; Rourke, International Politics; Kegley and Wittkopf
 Representative of an emphasis on perception and problem representation are works by Jervis, Perception and Misperception, and Sylvan and Voss, Problem Representation .
 Hudson, Culture and Foreign Policy is Hudson's work on foreign policy and culture . Hudson's book, Hudson, is published in New York, New York and Washington, DC .
 Snyder, Brack, Sapin, and Sapin: Foreign Policy Decision-Making . Ceorge: “Case Studies and Theory Development’s”
 Neustadt and May recognized that such a comparative understanding of history is useful not just for diplomats . Neastadt, May and May were able to work together in a group of historians .
 historical events to business students can serve individuals in different professions, believing that such skills can be used to help students in different careers .
 Such an investigation was undertaken by Lebow in his book Between Peace and War .
 Explains the value of studying leaders for understanding foreign policy making . Explains how important studying leaders is to understand foreign policy decisions . Describes the importance of studying foreign leaders to help foreign policy .
 Scholars accept without question that leaders shape the course of world politics . Scholars accept that world leaders shape course of politics .
 Others argue that individuals are constrained by their historical circumstances and that they are compelled to make certain decisions . Others argue individuals are to a considerable degree constrained by history .
 The most obvious example of such a scenario is when another country attacks or declares war . Such a scenario would be when another nation declares war or attacks, such as a war .
 Which course of action is chosen may depend on the relative might of the opponent and the likelihood of successfully resisting the attack, but it may also reflect a desire to defend one’s country against all odds .
 The Netherlands had stayed out of World War I, had a tradition of neutrality, and expected to stay out of WWII as well . World War II was expected to be the end of the war, and the Netherlands expected to remain neutral .
 On May 10, 1940, the Germans launched an attack that took the Dutch government by surprise . The Dutch government was surprised by the surprise attack .
 Dutch leadership decided not to surrender, despite the certainty of defeat, the violation of its sovereignty required active resistance . Rather than surrendering to the obvious outcome, the Dutch leader decided to resist .
 As this example illustrates, there are times when circumstances force a leader’s hand . This example illustrates how circumstances forced a leader's hand .
 Immediate surrender may theoretically have been an option for the Dutch leadership in 1940, but it was not realistic or feasible within the circumstances at that moment . The Dutch leadership did not want to surrender, but the circumstances were not ideal .
 Few circumstances provide leaders with such severe constraints; more often, there are options . However, few circumstances provide leadership with such constraints . More often than not, there is options, says President Obama .
 Leaders generally have at least some possibility of putting their stamp on history . This means that leaders generally have a chance to put their mark on history. This is especially true in the United States .
 Their impact may be small when circumstances severely constrain their options, or when they create their own opportunities . The impact of these opportunities may be bigger when they have a broader scope of options, say experts .
 Belgium, a small European country, became a colonial power . Consider the story of how Belgium became the country's first colonial power.
 Belgium had been highly dependent on international trade since it became an independent state in 1830 . It conducted its trade primarily with the surrounding European countries .
 It did not have a merchant marine or a tradition of overseas exploration, as the other European colonizers did . It was not the first time the country was colonized by Europeans .
 It did not, in other words, appear to be a country that was likely to be competitive in the nineteenth-century scramble for Africa .
 He traveled widely to visit other European countries’ colonial possessions and read extensively on the subject of colonial possessions .
 In his younger years, he had been quite blunt about his desire for profit,® but he had long since learned to cloak his ambitions in the rhetoric of humanitarianism . He had learned to cloak his ambitions into the rhetoric .
 Leopold had begun his quest by hosting an International Geographic Conference . Just short of a decade prior to the conference in Berlin, he had hosted a Geographic Conference in Germany .
 The meeting also created the first of a series of organizations that aided him in acquiring the land that became the Congo . Despite the facade of being humanitarian and scientific associations, all were controlled by the king .
 King Leopold II employed the famous explorer Henry Morton Stanley to map the Congo river basin . He concluded treaties with local African leaders, which ceded their land to the king’s associations .
 The king coUected vast amounts of intelligence on the interests of other European countries in Africa, which permitted him to craft his arguments for best effect .
 European powers gathered at Berlin agreed to Leopold’s territorial claims in the center of Africa, largely because they were under the impression that the Belgian king would permit free trade in the Congo .
 Leopold’s agents in the Congo did indeed originate from an assortment of different countries, but they served the sovereign and his desire for profit .
 Through meticulous study, geographers, explorers, and diplomats, the use of payments and payoffs; and a good dose of duplicity; . The use of payoffs, payments, and duplicity. The careful cultivation of geographers and explorers .
 The Congo remained his personal possession until it was transferred to the Belgian state in 1908, after an international movement exposed the extreme coercion and violence that had accompanied the acquisition of the territory .
 Belgian king worked tirelessly to buy a colony from another country . After a number of unsuccessful attempts to buy the colony, he decided to join the scramble for Africa .
 DomesticaUy there was not much interest in such faraway ventures, which many feared would be too costly for a small country . Domesticans feared such ventures would cost too much for small countries .
 The king was careful to cloak his activities in the decade leading up to the Berlin Conference . In order not to antagonize other powers, he was careful not to invite the scrutiny of the Belgian public .
 Behind the scenes, he steadily worked to claim a large part of central Africa . He worked to get his claims recognized by leaders of other countries .
 One example certainly not sufficient to answer this conclusively, but it does show that leaders can have an impact . One example is not enough to answer that question .
 The king's efforts overcame both an unfavorable international environment and unfavorable domestic opinion . The king’s efforts overcome both international and domestic opposition .
 Small states often lack the resources for a worldwide network of diplomatic representation . This is quite common for small states, which often lack a global network of diplomats .
 The Belgian king was able to manipulate the country’s smallness into an advantage . In this particular case, however, the Belgian king manipulated the country's smallness .
 The European powers assembled in Berlin in 1884-85 did not perceive the acquisition of the Congo by Leopold II as a threat to their own power or to the European balance of power .
 France would have objected if the territory went to Britain, and vice versa, because both countries would have perceived this as upsetting the balance of power between them .
 London Conference guaranteed Belgium’s independence and mandated its political neutrality after the small country broke away from the Dutch Kingdom in 1830 . It was in some ways a replay of the London Conference that had guaranteed Belgium's independence .
 The big powers tried to ensure that Belgium’s presence in the European political landscape did not upset the balance of power . Then, too, the big powers . Belgium's presence in Europe's political landscape was also sought to ensure it didn’t upset power balance .
 King Leopold II worked hard to create the impression that all would be welcome to enrich themselves in the Congo . Now, he has succeeded in creating the country's first African colony of Africa .
 European leaders assembled in Berlin thought Belgian administration of the territory would be in the interest of all . The Belgian government of the Belgian territory is in the interests of all, they thought .
 Clever diplomacy aided Leopold II in achieving his ends on the international stage . Clever diplomacy, based on extensive research, aided his ends .
 The other constraint, an unfavorable domestic public opinion, was perhaps easier to overcome at a time when the average citizen did not yet have the right to vote and when news was much slower to travel than in our era of instant electronic communications .
 King Leopold II's rule shares features with today’s nondemocratic regimes, which often control their countries’ media and thus the information to which their citizens have access . However, do keep in mind that today's nondemocracies often control the media .
 The Internet has made government control of the media less effective in some countries . Internet access is still scarce in many countries, especially beyond the capital city .
 Egyptian leader Anwar al-Sadat did not consult domestic public opinion before embarking on his journey to Jerusalem in the late 1970s .
 It was a bold move for the leader of an Arab country to make the decision to enter into negotiations with Israel .
 Sadat made this decision, which represented a radical shift in his country’s foreign policy, against the backdrop of a domestic economic crisis . Sadat's decision was made in response to an economic crisis in the country .
 He hoped that his overture would help bring an infusion of aid to Egypt’s economy . It did, and it did, with aid to the country's economy .
 His efforts to sell the changed policy to the domestic public were facilitated by the benefits the new policy brought in terms of aid .
 Neither the Belgian King Leopold II nor the Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat were elected leaders . Neither were Belgian or Egyptian leaders .
 The Egyptian public did not view peace with Israel as its foremost priority, but the benefits that flowed from Sadat’s decision facilitated acceptance by many, though not all, citizens of his country .
 Sadat’s leadership ended when he was assassinated by members of the Egyptian military in October 1981 . Sadat was assassinated almost exactly four years after his journey to Jerusalem .
 His peace treaty with Israel was only one of their grievances . Do note, however, that he also had a peace deal with Israel .
 The lack of accountability may make it easier for the leaders of nondemocratic societies to make unpopular decisions . But they cannot do so with impunity with impunity, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says .
 Leaders of democratic countries are not always wholly beholden to public opinion . Conversely, the leaders of democratic nations are often not wholly beholded to the public .
 They may be able to shape public opinion to a smaller or larger extent, depending on the public’s attentiveness to foreign policy and the centrality of the issue .
 Public opinion is a constraint irrespective of the domestic political system, although its weight can vary across situations and issue areas . Public opinion can be a constraint regardless of domestic political systems, experts say .
 'There is quite a bit of variability, a topic to which we return in chapters 5 and 6. Although it is possible to point to some commonalities in the constraints faced by, for instance, the leaders of small or developing countries'
 Despite such constraints, it is difficult to explain foreign policy decisions and behaviors without reference to leaders . The U.S. has been criticized for its lack of transparency in foreign policy .
 The perception (and perhaps even the creation) of opportunities, as well as the successful conduct of diplomacy depend on the foreign policy skill of individuals . The perception of opportunities and the creation of opportunities depend on individuals .
 An international crisis is likely to involve decision making at the highest levels even if the leader does not have a special interest in foreign policy . Nevertheless, an international crisis involves decision-making by the highest level .
 The degree to which constraints diminish the number of alternatives is mediated by the interest and attention a specific leader brings to foreign policy making . The degree of the constraints is therefore mediated by interest a leader brings, writes Andrew Hammond .
 King Leopold II started out with little opportunity and much constraint, but through his interest and effort he expanded his opportunities to take part in the scramble for Africa . King of Africa was King of the Orientation of Africa .
 The skill and experience of leaders is not always sufficient to ensure a desired outcome . outcomes depend not only on the accurate assessment of opportunities and constraints, but also on the interaction of the state's foreign policy .
 Foreign policy decisions that have the best possible chance of yielding desired outcomes depend on perceptive assessments of the opportunities and constraints presented by the international and domestic environments, as well as insight into the personalities of the relevant decision makers of other countries .
 It may not be possible to fully predict the actions of those decision makers, but it is feasible to develop sufficient insight to understand the predisposition of such leaders .
 Knowing how another country’s leader is likely to react to certain proposals and actions can help tailor messages and behaviors to increase the likelihood that desired responses are elicited and avoided .
 In sum, understanding leaders is a significant ingredient of successful diplomacy . Understanding leaders is key to successful diplomacy, says David Cameron .
 Not every leader will have the sort of ambition that motivated King Leopold 11 . Leaders’ Personality and Public Persona are key to their success . Leaders' personality and public persona are important to them .
 Leaders almost invariably have options when they make decisions . Not every leader will put his or her stamp on history in such a clear manner, but leaders have options .
 The story of how the king of a small country acquired a vast colonial empire illustrates some of the answers . The king of the small kingdom acquired the colonial empire .
 Individual decision makers must be understood within the domestic and international context within which they find themselves . They are not merely reacting to the pressures provided by that environment, they are reacting to that environment . Individual decisions must be made within the context within that context .
 They are best seen as agents with goals who actively seek to influence the world in which they find themselves . They are not only agents but also agents who seek to change the world .
 Leaders’ perceptions of specific events and the world are colored by perceptions of events, they say . One, it colors leaders’ perception of the world, the world in general . Another, it paints leaders with perceptions that the world is changing .
 Personality focuses on the enduring qualities of the person . It assumes that we can predict the actions and reactions of leaders once we understand the personality or character of that individual .
 Personality interacts with perception and cognition, which are discussed separately in chapter 3 . Personality also interacts with perceptions and cognition .
 Leaders’ personalities affect how they organize and organize the staff on which they rely for information and advice . Two, leaders’ personality affects how they use and organize their staff . Leaders' personalities affect their ability to communicate with their staff, and how they interact with them .
 In most countries, the entire government bureaucracy does not change when a new leader ascends to office . However, the leader’s immediate circle of advisors generally does consist of political appointees .
 The organizational structure of this group of advisors and the regulation of access to the leader are dependent on the latter’s preferences, which are in turn dependent on personality . The organization structure of the advisors is dependent on their preferences and personality .
 The advisory system and its impact on decision making are discussed in chapter 4 . Chapter 4 discusses the advisory system in greater detail .
 It is not easy to define the qualities that make a good leader, it's not easy . As discussed in chapter 1 in connection with the concept of good decisions, it is discussed in the first chapter .
 It's easier to determine the personality of a leader and predict what sort of leadership we might expect from that individual . It is easier to identify a leader's personality than a person's personality .
 A number of authors who have examined leaders and decision making have concluded that good leadership is often a matter of fit between the person and the circumstances . But this is not a very satisfactory guide, because it is difficult to predict the circumstances a leader may face during his tenure in office .
 Leaders often do not just respond to their environment but also seek to influence it . In addition, leaders often respond to the environment and influence it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Leaders frequently respond to and influence their environment"
 Some personalities may expend more effort than others in attempts to manipulate their environment . But the point is that the relationship between the person and the situation is interactive .
 He argued even as a crown prince that Belgium needed a colony to enhance its status among the states of Europe . In the end he acquired the Congo as a personal possession .
 Belgian state was not involved until much later and did not reap the economic benefits that were derived from the Congo . The Belgian state did not see the benefits of the Congo until later .
 It took a great deal of insight into the personalities of other countries’ leaders and the various people he employed for King Leopold II to achieve his ultimate objective .
 "He exploited this talent many times over with numerous other individuals," he said .
 He gained a lot of publicity for his supposed humanitarian and scientific ventures . He was also quite good at managing his own public relations .
 On the downside was the observation that the king was a “Machiavellian amoralist” who was prepared to use brute force to squeeze as much money out of a colony as he could .
 This observation about the king pre-dated not only his actual acquisition of the Congo but also his ascendance to the throne of Belgium .
 It was based on statements the king had made as a younger and less savvy crown prince, when he displayed his ambition in raw and unpolished form . The king made the statements in a statement he had made when he was younger .
 While some aspects of personality may be hardwired or stem from important childhood experiences, it would be problematic to use a person's early life for more than general tendencies, which may manifest themselves in later years .
 The attitude Leopold displayed as a young man toward colonies took on heightened significance only after an international movement exposed the atrocities that accompanied the rubber trade . The rubber trade was the most important source of wealth during the time the king controlled the Congo .
 Had the atrocities never been exposed, he might have been remembered as a humanitarian rather than an opportunist . The atrocities never led to him being remembered as an opportunistic rather than humanitarian .
 Some continued to portray King Leopold II’s involvement in the Congo as benevolent . In fact, some continued to depict him as a benevolent king .
 King Baudouin, the grandson of Leopold II’s nephew, painted his ancestor in this manner at the Congo's independence day ceremony in 1960 .
 His father, Leopold I, was tapped for kingship when Belgium emerged as an independent state . His father was an ambitious German nobleman who, as the result of a strategic marriage and his own political efforts, became king .
 King Leopold I had sought to enhance the status of the new Belgian royal family by arranging a politically expedient, but personally miserable, marriage for his son . The marriage was politically politically emotionally miserable .
 Leopold II’s only son died at a young age . Added to the misfortune of an unhappy marriage was the death of his only son .
 His father had also been interested in acquiring a colony for Belgium, though that interest had not been as single-minded as his son's .
 Interest in acquiring a colony was not all that unusual among leaders in the nineteenth century Europe . Moreover, interest in acquiring colonies was not uncommon among leaders .
 King Leopold 11 was the leader of the Congo in the early 1900s . He went to great lengths to present a humanitarian persona to his European and North American audiences . He was simultaneously condoning and even advocating brutal practices to squeeze wealth out of Congo .
 The acquisition of a colony was an acceptable way to aggrandize one’s stature in nineteenth-century Europe . Other details regarding his upbringing might also lead to the suspicion that as king he would feel the need to demonstrate royal prowess .
 The dramatic shift from the blunt young man to the later humanitarian public persona brings up an important dilemma in studying the personalities of leaders . Nevertheless, the dramatic shift . from blunt young . man to later humanitarian . public persona is an important question in studying leaders .
 Not all are so blatantly Machiavellian as King Leopold II, but most engage in some form of public image making . Not all of the world's greatest monarchs engage in public image-making .
 Machiavelli's advice has made his name synonymous with duplicity and unscrupulous behavior . Most people accept that a person’s public face and private thoughts cannot be equated . But most people also accept that people's private thoughts can't be compared .
 Information about the private person is not necessarily a good guide regarding the sort of leader a person would be . Conversely, information about the . private person does not necessarily be a good . guide to the kind of leader .
 Discrimination against several ethnic and religious groups, including the systematic killing of six million Jews, was institutionalized in the U.S.
 Although institutionalized discrimination was public knowledge, the large-scale murders were not advertised . Although the institutionalized . discrimination was . public knowledge . The large scale murders were . not advertised.
 Many Jews were led to their death believing they were simply going to take a shower . In fact, many Jews believed they were going to have a bath .
 Adolph Hitler is the son of Adolf Hitler . Hitler was a German dictator during the early 1930s and early 1940s . Hitler's son was a Nazi leader in the 1930s .
 Superficial biographical information can be misleading regarding a person’s political leadership qualities and performance . The biographical details can be quite misleading about a person's leadership qualities .
 Treatments that focus on the person's early life are not without problems either . Treatments focusing on early life may also have problems, experts say .
 The Soviet leader Joseph Stalin and the Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein were both brutal dictators . Joseph Stalin was a brutal dictator . Saddam Hussein was a ruthless dictator .
 Both mothers had abusive fathers who abandoned their sons while their sons were still young . Biographies of both frequently report that they had abusive dads .
 Psychologists have found that children of abusive parents are very likely to become abusive adults themselves . Psychologists say children are more likely to have abusive parents than they are themselves .
 This makes sense of their later performance as leaders as leaders of their respective countries . It also makes sense that recounting this childhood experience makes sense for them .
 The pieces of information about these men’s lives fit together nicely in hindsight, says CNN.com .
 Psychologists note a greater likelihood, but not a certainty, that children of abuse will become abusers . As you may have noticed, psychologists note that children are more likely to be abusers .
 It's not clear whether private abusive relationships are in any way predictive of a person’s actions as a political leader . More important for our purposes, it is not clear if private relationships are predictive of political leaders .
 Hitler, Hitler, did not have an abusive father and had a doting mother . Hitler, for instance, did . Hitler's father was not abusive . Hitler did not . Hitler had an abusive .
 There was not much in his early life that would have predicted his rise to power or the genocide that his regime perpetrated . His regime has been accused of genocide in the past .
 This does not mean that an interest in the biographies of leaders is fruitless . This doesn't mean that interest in a biographer's biographies is fruitlessly . Instead, it means that a keen interest in leaders' biographies can be traced back to their origins .
 It does mean that we must not overinterpret the significance of snippets of information about a person’s life and seek to gain a more comprehensive picture .
 Stalin's early life experiences of Stalin and Saddam would have seemed equally predictive of their brutality as leaders at the start of their political careers . In addition, we must ask whether Stalin's experiences would have been equally predictive .
 Hitler’s youth provided little indication of his later leadership, and he himself recalled his extended stay in pre-World War I Vienna, where he arrived as an eighteen-year-old, as an experience .
 He spent time in poverty and rejection, but also absorbed many of the ideas that would later shape his political philosophy . While there, he experienced poverty, rejection, he also absorbed ideas that later shaped him .
 We want to look beyond the public persona and learn about the personalities of leaders . We also want to learn more about the personality of leaders.
 Understanding what drives a person can help evaluate the strengths a person brings to a leadership position . A good advisory system could perhaps compensate for some of the weaknesses for which a good adviser system might compensate .
 Two, assessments of the personalities of leaders can facilitate diplomatic negotiations . Two, assessment of leaders' personalities can help facilitate diplomatic talks .
 It can help leaders understand why their counterparts in other countries make foreign policy decisions they do, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It can also help them structure their own foreign policies to have the best possible chance to achieve the desired outcomes, it has been suggested .
 We must begin with the assumption that the public persona and private individual are not synonymous . The Quest to Understand Leaders: The Public persona and the private individual should not be synonymous .
 Studies of leaders borrow concepts from psychology, which has devised many instruments for studying individuals and their motivations . Psychologists have devised many tools to study individuals' approaches to problem solving .
 Psychologists have arrived at their notions about personality through carefully constructed experiments . Psychologists arrive at their ideas about personality by constructing carefully constructed . experiments .
 Most often, psychologists will avoid making definitive predictions about a single individual’s behavior . Psychologists will instead cast their assessments in terms of the behavioral patterns that are likely to be associated with specific personality types .
 Foreign policy analysts discuss their assessments in terms of the likely patterns of behavior associated with leaders’ personalities . Foreign Policy analysts who study leaders are similar to their colleagues in psychology .
 Foreign policy analysts are interested in assessing what sort of leader a specific individual is (or would make) and what kind of foreign policy decisions can be expected from a specific leader . Counseling psychologist tends to focus on individuals for therapeutic reasons .
 Foreign policy decision makers are unlikely to make themselves available for such testing . Foreign policy analysts usually don't have access to their subjects .
 Foreign policy analysts have no choice but to read between the lines of the public persona to find hints of the individual behind the image of leaders .
 Some of these rely on biographical information, as well as interpretations of a leader’s public pronouncements and actions . Other interpretations of the leader's public statements and actions are based on historical facts .
 Others rely primarily on official speeches and less formal comments made during interviews or press conferences . Others rely on less formal statements made during official speeches .
 In some cases, the strategy is dependent on the availability (or paucity of information) of information .
 For example, an effort to understand Soviet leaders during the Cold War would not have been able to rely on as much information as an assessment of a current or former U.S. president .
 Details about the decision making process, such as transcripts or notes taken by participants in policy meetings, would simply not have been available . Details of the decision-making process are simply not available .
 Students of Soviet Union often had to make do with interpretations of subtle shifts in the use of language in official newspapers . Students of the Soviet Union had to learn how to read the language of Soviet publications .
 An early study of the leaders of the Soviet Union juxtaposed Russian literature and texts produced by that leadership to investigate the “unexpressed content” of the latter .
 Operational code as a methodology seeks to describe a leader’s fundamental beliefs, which provide norms, standards, and guidelines for decision making . The operational code is a methodology that describes a leader's fundamental beliefs as a leader .
 The operational code is designed to allow us to “get inside the mind” of decision makers . In other words, the operational code allows us to get into the mind of decision-makers .
 The operational code sought to delineate the collective preferences of the Politburo, the Soviet Union’s highest decision making body . Later studies that employed the operational code methodology invariably focused on individual decision makers .
 It justified this focus on the centrality of this group for Soviet policy, it said . It justified the focus on this group on the basis of this .
 One of the fundamental tenets of the Soviet operational code was, quite consistent with Marxist philosophy, that history was not accidental . The Soviet policy was that history is not accidental, and that history not accidental.
 The larger trends of history, such as the transition from capitalism to communism, were regarded as predictable, even if the path and pace that would bring the world to that future state of affairs was not . The transition to communism was seen as predictable .
 The study's author used publicly available writings of Soviet leaders and imagery in Russian literature to read between the lines of the official pronouncements in an effort to grasp how Soviet leaders understood the world around them .
 The objective was not to predict specific foreign policy decisions, but to understand what policy options the members of the Politburo would entertain seriously in a given situation . The objective is to exclude those that would be ruled out quickly or not even considered .
 Initial version of the operational code was met with skepticism, but it was later revised into a framework for systematic analysis and has become an important strategy for evaluating leaders, as we shall see .
 Foreign leaders are not the only subjects of efforts to understand the personalities of decision makers . Foreign leaders not only subjects to be studied are the subjects of research into personalities .
 A good amount of effort has been expended on strategies to study the personalities of American presidents . This is motivated to a large extent by the knowledge that these leaders can affect the course of world politics .
 The answers to these two questions yield four types of leaders, as summarized in table 2.1.1 .
 Each was willing to listen to the perspectives of their advisors but also comfortable making tough decisions after evaluating the information presented to him .
 "These are leaders who are primarily interested in getting and keeping power," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "These leaders are mainly interested in keeping power"
 Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon are often mentioned as fitting this category . Richard Nixon and Lyndon Johnson were mentioned as examples of Nixon's achievements .
 The former had a tendency to micromanage rather than to defer to specialists within the administration . The former president had to rely on experts in the White House .
 Nixon’s preoccupation with power—and his fear of losing it—led him to engage in secretive and dishonest tactics that eventually cost him his presidency . Nixon's preoccupations with power and his fear for losing it ultimately cost him the presidency .
 His emphasis was on speechmaking and playing host, not on reading extensive briefing papers . His emphasis is on playing host not reading extensive briefings papers .
 In fact, he preferred to receive one page “mini-memos” and left much of the negotiation and deal making to his staff .
 The fourth and last personality category is also a less energetic leader . The leader's personality is also less energetic .
 Like the active-negative type, this personality is motivated by a sense of duty . The active negative type has an active negative personality .
 Dwight D Eisenhower personifies this well-developed sense of service to country . Eisenhower was a well-known leader of the World War II era . Eisenhower's military career spanned six decades .
 None of the categories are invariably desirable or problematic—each has its own pitfalls . The active-positive president appears on the surface to be most desirable .
 The classification of leaders into four categories is, of course, a relatively crude approximation of personality . The classification is a fairly crude approximation to personality .
 The three presidents listed as examples of the active-positive category may have shared certain traits, but they were also distinctly different individuals .
 The relatively simple classification scheme is obscured by the relatively simple scheme . However, studies based on this scheme did address differences between individuals who were placed in the same category .
 Such studies relied on the interpretation of biographical material, speeches, and writings of and about the individual .
 The study of presidential character drew on a more comprehensive set of source materials than the original operational code study . The study was based on a set of more comprehensive source materials .
 Both approaches relied on the policy analyst’s personal expertise, including knowledge of the principles of psychoanalysis .
 This made it difficult for others to replicate these studies and limited the possibility of broad application of these strategies to efforts to understand the personalities of leaders .
 More systematic and more easily replicated strategies for reading between the lines of the public persona have emerged . They also use publicly available materials such as publicly available photos .
 One of these methodologies was a reinvention of the operational code, discussed earlier in this chapter . The operational code is a strategy for determining a leader's fundamental premises and beliefs about politics .
 The original study was distilled into ten questions . The first five of these address the leader’s the philosophical approach to politics . The second five address instrumental beliefs about how to attain desired objectives .
 List of questions provided a systematic approach that allowed comparisons of the operational codes of different leaders who had been evaluated using this strategy .
 Operational code studies have relied on the writings of the writings and recorded verbal comments of decision makers . Operational codes have been developed in the United States .
 An investigation of the operational code of former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger relied primarily on academic writings . An investigation into Kissinger's operational code relied on his academic writings, including academic writings.
 Kissinger believed that the control that an individual can have over the course of history is limited . Kissinger believes that the influence of an individual in history can be limited . He said that the most important thing that Kissinger believed was that he could do is control of history .
 The role of chance and shadow cast by past events is important, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says it's important to remember the shadow of past events as important .
 Policy makers must play the game according to existing rules that can be manipulated but rarely changed . Policy makers are not on the sidelines of history, but cannot expect to have a major influence on historical developments .
 The impact that leaders can have is, in his mind, contingent upon their insight into the forces of history and their strategic responses to these, he says .
 Not all decision makers have such a constant and unchanging set of beliefs . Not all decisions are made by the same people who want to change their beliefs .
 Former United States Senator J William Fulbright evolved in his core beliefs . Fulbright is a former Senator of the U.S. Fulbright . He is the son of Fulbright, a former President of the United States .
 Fulbright started out with the belief that malfeasant leaders of states are a core problem . The legislature has a key role in ensuring that foreign policy is rational and avoids miscalculations, he says .
 During the Cold War, he shifted to the view that the U.S. faces an inherently aggressive opponent in the Soviet Union, which must be countered with a single-minded response .
 Ffe believed this in general, but more importantly, he believed it with respect to the United States in particular . This explains his opposition to Vietnam War in this time period .
 The operational code, as an approach to studying leaders, seeks to utilize their writings and recorded verbal statements . It seeks to use these writings and recordings to study leaders .
 Access to materials is more straightforward in societies that keep extensive written records . Access to such materials is easier in societies with written records, such as those of the past .
 Operational code studies traditionally required that the analyst be able to understand the language in which these materials were written well enough to make nuanced judgments . Such studies employed qualitative analyses, such as qualitative analyses .
 The majority of operational code studies have focused on American and other western leaders . It will come as little surprise that the majority of the code studies focus on western leaders.
 U.S. foreign policy analysts have a relatively underdeveloped knowledge of foreign languages . It's difficult to obtain materials from other countries, and it's hard to obtain them from other nations .
 One strategy for overcoming the second problem is the use of translated speeches and other verbal statements . One strategy is to overcome the problem is to use translated speeches .
 Use of such text enables foreign policy analysts to broaden the scope of leaders they can analyze considerably .
 One effort to understand the personality and style of leaders from a number of different countries utilizes translated text . The translated text is used to help people understand the personalities and personalities of leaders .
 This strategy for leadership trait analysis is founded on a set of questions that probe various aspects of a leader’s personal characteristics that are relevant to foreign policy decision making . This strategy is based on questions that are about the leader's personal characteristics .
 There are fewer questions, and the questions deal more directly with political life . There are few questions, but the questions are more directly about life in the political arena .
 This instrument focuses on whether the leader believes he or she can control events and feels the need to exercise influence rather than whether the person believes that individuals can generally affect the course of history .
 Leadership trait analysis relies on systematic content analysis of text, not on the judgment of the analyst . In addition, where the operational code traditionally relied on . judgment of an analyst on the basis of a . qualitative but structured interpretation of the writings and speeches of leaders, leadership trait analysis . analysis
 The scheme looks for specific words and phrases in interview responses and speeches of leaders . The latter scheme is based on interviews and speeches .
 The trait of conceptual complexity is evaluated on the frequency with which a decision maker uses qualifiers such as possibly, perhaps, sometimes, sometimes and maybe, which indicate high complexity, versus qualifiers like certain, always, undoubtedly, or indisputable which indicate low complexity . For example, the trait of
 Belief in one’s own ability to control events . Perception of control over situations 2. Perception of controlling situations 3.
 Need for power and influence Concern for establishing, maintaining, or restoring one’s influence over others 3. Openness to new information 3. Need for openness and openness . Concern for maintaining, maintaining or restoring the influence of others over others .
 Differentiation in describing or discussing other people, places, policies, ideas, or things 4. Conceptual complexity . Differentiation is differentiating in describing people or places, places or ideas .
 Task versus interpersonal . Focus on substance of policy versus interpersonal relations (team 6) Team 6 focuses on substance and interpersonal relations .
 Inclination to suspect and doubt the motives of others . Distrust of others in the mind of others. Inability to suspect others .
 It also evaluates whether leaders believe they can control events, as well as their need for power, self-confidence, their ingroup bias, and the level of distrust of others . The study also evaluates leaders' desire to control events .
 Tony Blair’s low cognitive complexity explains why he “did not recognize the caveats and uncertainties” expressed in the intelligence he received on Iraq prior to the decision to invade . Blair did not recognize “substantial caveats” in intelligence he got on Iraq before the decision
 This predisposed him to taking tight personal control over policy making with a small, closely knit circle of advisors . This led to him to take tight control of policymaking with a tight personal touch .
 In essence, there may have been insufficient questioning among administration officials of their predisposition to distrust Iraq’s leader . The White House may have had insufficient questioning .
 The presidential character, operational code, and leadership trait analysis are not the only strategies that have been employed . The president's character and operational code are also among the strategies used to identify leadership traits .
 These different strategies do demonstrate the variety of approaches that have been employed to evaluate the personalities of leaders .
 Initially, many studies employed concepts from psychoanalysis and required that foreign policy analysts read and interpret large amounts of information . Foreign policy analysts are now using the concept of psychoanalysis .
 The original operational code study and the study of presidential character represent this generation of leadership analysis . The study of the president's character represents this generation's leadership analysis. President Barack Obama is the subject of the study .
 The advantage of doing this is not only that a computer can code large amounts of text in a fairly short time, but also that the material is evaluated in a consistent manner .
 The company now employs a machine coding strategy to analyze text text . It also employs a similar strategy to that of human programmers .
 Both the leadership trait analysis and the current generation of the operational code use transparent methods that make it easier for readers to understand how analysts arrived at their conclusions .
 Before computer-assisted content analysis, the coding of text was very labor intensive and required human coders trained in the specific methodology . The coding is an integral part of content analysis .
 The move to computerized content analysis techniques has made this sort of analysis easier and quicker and the results more consistent . It has also made it easier to analyze content analysis with computerized analysis techniques .
 Leaders have been portrayed as goal-directed, purposeful, and purposeful . Emotions can affect the impact of emotion in leadership . Emphasizing the importance of emotion is important to leaders .
 Affect, or emotion, influences foreign policy decision making in a myriad of ways, some of which are not yet well understood . Affect affects foreign policy decisions in a variety of ways .
 The impact of emotions on decision making is not wholly separate from the impact of personality . The impact on emotions on decisions is not entirely separate from personality, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 The leader’s propensity to distrust others is measured by the leadership trait analysis method . One of the characteristics measured by this method is the leader's propensity to mistrust others .
 The operational code includes among the philosophical questions a measure of the subject’s optimism or pessimism regarding the prospect of realizing his or her values and aspirations . It includes among those questions are a measure .
 Of course, such a predisposition can be modified by hard-won life experience, he says . But he says it's not always possible to change that .
 The impact of these moods or emotions on decision making is the subject matter of this section . This section includes the impact of moods and emotions on decisions .
 We cannot be certain of the answers; such speculation amounts to counterfactual history . We cannot speculate as to the future of the world's most famous car crash .
 The king was not a happy man, and it is not unreasonable to suspect that this affected his decision making . What we do know, however, is that he was not happy, and this affected him .
 Emotion influences not only the decision making process but also judgments about the object of attention . Emotion is a key part of the decision-making process . Emotions are important in the making of a decision .
 Different societies have different norms regarding the expression of emotion . People in different cultures experience the same range of emotions . Different cultures experience different emotions in different ways .
 The Americans would walk away from negotiations thinking they had a deal, while the Japanese interpreted their responses to be merely polite pleasantries . The Americans thought they had made a deal with the Japanese .
 The former value directness in communication, but the latter value politeness and subtlety . The former and latter value subtlety and politeness in their communication .
 The social norms with regard to overt display of emotion are very different in the two societies, making it difficult for diplomats of either country to interpret the other’s motives and intentions accurately .
 Preexisting positive or negative feelings about other countries and their leaders influence judgments about their foreign policies . Preeksisting negative or positive feelings about countries and leaders influence opinions .
 Leaders’ emotions have an impact on foreign policy decision making that is not trivial, hut that has not yet received much systematic attention . As you read, remember that leaders' emotions have a significant role in foreign policy .
 At other times, leaders either have, or create for themselves, great leeway in their ability to shape the foreign policy of their country . Leaders either create or create leeway for themselves in shaping foreign policy .
 An important difficulty in studying leaders’ personalities is that their public persona may portray a very different image from the person they are in private . The difficulty of studying leaders' personalities is to study leaders' public persona is that it may be very different .
 Their early years and formative experience represent at best a rough guide to their motivations as leaders . The early years of leaders' formative years are at best of their early years . Their early childhoods and early childhood experience are a guide to them .
 There are several different strategies available to assess leader personality . Use these strategies to assess your leader's personality in the workplace .
 The chapter describes the operational code, presidential character, and leadership trait analysis . The chapter includes an analysis of the president's leadership traits .
 The first generation of operational code analyses and presidential character studies were less systematic and more dependent on the analyst’s insight and expertise . The first . generation of . operational code analysis was less systematic than the previous . generation .
 Both leadership trait analysis and the operational code now employ computer-assisted coding strategies, which provide consistent analyses and complete the task fast . Both leadership traits analysis and operational code use computer-assisted coding strategies .
 Not much is yet known about the impact of emotions on foreign policy decision making .
 Dunn, Imagining the Congo, 37; see also Hochschild, King Leopold’s Ghost, 87 .
 The population of the Congo was reduced by about ten million during the period King Leopold II controlled the territory . According to some estimates, the population reduced by around ten million .
 Foreign Policy Decisions are Made in the Third World, says Korany Korany . Braveboy-Wagner and Korany write books on foreign policy in the global south .
 This phrase is translated from Coolsaet, Belgie en zijn Buitenlandse Politiek, 145 .
 George and George, Woodrow Wilson and Colonel House, were both presidents of the White House . They were both assassinated by President Wilson .
 The king had three daughters as well, but only male heirs mattered in terms of the royal succession . The king's three daughters were as well as his three sons .
 His listing also demonstrates a distinct focus on American and western decision makers . The listing also shows a distinct interest in the U.S.
 Shannon and Keller, “Leadership Style and International Norm Violation,” 97. Shannon, Keller, and Keller: ‘Leadership style and international norms Violation’
 Chapter 3 How Leaders Make Sense of the World Chapter Preview • Explains the ways in which “rationality’s been defined and used . Explains how “ rationality” has been defined, used and defined . Chapter 3: How Leaders make sense of the world
 While less devastating in their consequences, these bombings were also an attack on an unprecedented scale . The bombings are also an unprecedented attack on a unprecedented scale, say experts .
 Earlier bombings of the World Trade Center and Oklahoma City’s Murrah Federal Building did not alter American perceptions of immunity from terrorism nearly as much as did the attacks of September 11, 2001 .
 As military technology has changed, so has the value of vast oceans as borders, as well as borders . In earlier times, that perception was certainly valid, but as military technology changed, it has changed .
 How we perceive our world is not only dependent on context but also quite resistant to change . How we see the world is dependent upon context, and it's not always the same thing . The world is a very difficult place for people to live in, but it's also a very hard
 They become the perspective from which we view the world -- the image we have of the world, even if the circumstances have changed . They become part of our perspective, even though the circumstances in the world have changed.
 The image guides our interpretation of new information about our environment and the actors in it . That image guides us to a new understanding of our environment .
 Their perceptions are guided in part by personality, beliefs, experiences, and expertise, but also by how the information is presented, presented, in what context, and by whom .
 It is tempting to assume that decision makers are different from average citizens . Decision makers are not always different from ordinary citizens, says CNN.com .
 There are examples of leaders who did try very hard to view the world from different perspectives . But there are also examples of those who were not able to transcend the perspectives from which they customarily viewed their world .
 Those leaders who have made decisions that others regard as puzzling or even irrational are those who have been criticized for being irrational . Those leaders have made some of the world's most puzzling or irrational decisions .
 The disputed sovereignty of the islands had been a factor in the relations between Argentina and Britain for a long time . The dispute had been the subject of negotiations between the two countries .
 The “recovery’s” of the Malvinas acquired “an artificial but powerful significance in the Argentine imagination” as 1983, the year HOW LEADERS MAKE SENSE OFTHEWORLD 55 of the anniversary approached .
 Argentine scrap-metal dealer Constantino Davidoff had a contract with a Scottish company to salvage an abandoned whaling station on South Georgia Island, which was part of the disputed archipelago . The story starts with the actions of an Argentine scrap metal dealer, Constantino .
 As was the case on an earlier trip, he failed to observe the requisite formalities when traveling to the islands .
 Argentine naval transport on which he traveled observed strict radio silence . Argentina's naval transport also observed radio silence during his trip .
 The British suspected that Davidoff's trips deliberately challenged their country’s sovereignty over the islands . They objected to his presence and to the involvement of the Argentine military in his transportation .
 The foreign ministries of the two countries negotiated the quiet departure of the naval transport . The quiet departure so as not to jeopardize the upcoming negotiations over the transfer of the islands’ sovereignty .
 Davidoff and his party were not on board when the naval transport left . Davidoff's party was not aboard the ship when it left .
 The British press reported the presence of Davidoff and his group as an “invasion” of the islands . Davidoff’s group was reported to have invaded the islands, prompting the British press to call it an invasion .
 British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher responded by dispatching the HMS Endurance, the only vessel of the British Royal Navy in the South Atlantic, to evict the Argentineans .
 Argentine government sends ice patrol vessel to land marines on island to protect Davidoff and his group . Argentine government responds by sending ice patrol ship to land troops on the island .
 Despite the belligerence of these actions, both countries’ governments still sought a diplomatic resolution . Both countries still sought diplomatic resolution.
 Falklands governor of the Falklands, Rex Hunt, asked his government to insist that Davidoff and his group present their passports . Then, the British government insisted that the Falkland Islands government would not accept Davidoff's passport .
 The Argentine junta interpreted compliance with this demand as “tantamount to acknowledging British sovereignty” over the Malvinas . The governor’s demand was seen as an act of British aggression against Argentina .
 Argentine leaders did not expect the British to respond militarily to the crisis . Argentine leaders say they do not expect a military response from the UK .
 Many already saw the Malvinas as Argentine territory . They expected that world leaders would agree with them .
 Thatcher was willing to make the effort with so little at stake, as the islands held little strategic or economic value . It was inconceivable to the Argentine leaders that Thatcher would make such a decision .
 Argentine Foreign Minister Nicanor Costa Mendez reasoned that Britain would act as it had earlier in Suez and Rhodesia, where it favored negotiation over the use of force .
 The junta accepted Mendez’ interpretation that these historical precedents were analogous to the situation they faced . Mendez: "These precedents are analogous to what they faced"
 It perceived its own motives in terms of “right, justice, and national honor” and saw its actions as serving to correct a historical injustice . It perceived itself as serving the nation’s interests in correcting an injustice .
 Prime Minister Thatcher, however, interpreted the situation very differently . Thatcher said the situation was very different in the 1980s .
 Neville Chamberlain had made a deal with Hitler and given appeasement a bad name . To her, the relevant historical precedent was Munich, where Neville Chamberlain made deal . Neville Chamberlain's deal was a deal between Hitler and the Nazis .
 It compelled her to stand tough in the face of Argentina’s invasion of that small, insignificant, and faraway piece of British territory .
 They might have considered whether Costa Mendez’ analogies with Suez and Rhodesia were appropriate . They might also consider whether it would be reasonable to expect Thatcher to act as Eden and Wilson had .
 The British might have considered that their historical claim to the Malvinas had to be reconciled with the British emphasis on the right to self-determination of the islanders .
 The decisions made by the Argentine junta seem puzzling until we begin to take seriously their interpretations of the situation . The junta's decisions seem puzzling, until we take seriously, their interpretations, the author says .
 By developing the ability to see the world the way the leaders of different countries see it, we can better understand the logic behind their foreign policy decisions .
 What may have seemed puzzling or even irrational from our own perspective may be perfectly reasonable from the perspective of the leader at the time she or he made the decision . It may have been irrational from the own perspective, but it may be rational from the leader's perspective .
 That does not mean we have to think it was a good decision, nor that the decision makers should not have tried harder to see the world from different perspectives . That doesn't mean that they should not try harder to think of the world as a matter of perspective .
 Our first step, however, is not to evaluate the decision as good or bad, rational or irrational, but rather to understand how and why a decision maker arrived at it . The first step is to understand the decision maker's thinking, rather than evaluate whether or not it was rational or
 Foreign policy decisions are rational if they are logical in light of the decision maker’s goals . Foreign policy is rational if it is logical in the context of the goals of the policy maker, the author says .
 There is much more to be said about rationality, but there is a lot more to say about rationality . The definition provides us with a good start .
 First, assessments of foreign policy decisions often neglect to make a distinction between individual decision makers and the government as a collectivity of many persons . First, they should be careful to distinguish between individuals and government members .
 In such assessments, foreign policy decisions are treated as if they were made by a single, homogeneous entity . The U.S. government has been accused of being a "homogeneous entity" in foreign policy .
 Both these issues are discussed in this section, and we define each concept as we discuss it . We define the concept as well as define it in this article .
 It is especially tempting to assume that foreign policy decisions of another country are made by a homogeneous entity . Analysts have made such an assumption not only when evaluating other countries’ foreign policies, but also when evaluating foreign policies .
 As observers, we are not privy to the debates that occur among high-level decision makers . As observers we will not be privy of those debates, we will be able to hear them from our eyes .
 We sometimes get a glimpse of them when decision makers write their memoirs after leaving government service or when we get access to declassified documents . We often get glimpses of these memoirs when .
 Knowledgeable and insightful observers interpret signals when decision makers are still in office . Decision makers still make decisions when they are in office, experts say .
 Observers do not have access to classified information, but their knowledge of government and decision making permits them to use publicly available information to derive critical insights .
 Their assessments can be remarkably accurate even if they are largely based on inference . Their assessments are remarkably accurate, even though they are based on inferences .
 Most of the debates among decision makers at the pinnacle of government are not carried out in public . Making accurate inferences is not an easy task, because most of the time, the debates at the highest level of government don't take place in public, he says .
 It's not always clear what information decision makers receive from within the bureaucracy and how they weigh it . In addition to it, it's unclear what information is given to decision makers .
 This makes it tempting to assume that the united front presented to the outside world is reflective of what happens behind closed doors . This is not the case, but it is the case that the United States has a united front to the world .
 This assumption that decision makers act as a homogeneous entity is also called the unitary actor assumption . This assumption is also known as the Unitary Actor assumption . Decision makers are supposed to act as homogeneous entities .
 It means treating the government as if it were a single individual, rather than a group of decision makers or a composite of many agencies and offices, each staffed with many people at various ranks .
 Looking from the outside in and not knowing what really goes on inside a government administration, we are tempted to treat foreign policy as if it is the result of the government acting as a unified entity . We are greatly tempted to think foreign policy is result of a unified government .
 Doing so makes it unnecessary to know the inner workings of an administration by imposing the assumption that the collectivity acts in unison and with purpose, it says .
 There were economic problems, and the government was losing public support . There were also economic problems and public support for the government, she said .
 Leaders may indeed wish to refocus the public’s attention when faced with domestic problems, especially ones they cannot address successfully in the short term . Heightening international tensions or starting a war can be risky .
 If we consider the situation from the perspective of the system level of analysis, it makes no sense for a less powerful actor to confront a more powerful actor as a diversion . The situation is similar to the situation in the U.S.
 At the very least, it would be shortsighted, because the chances of emerging successfully from such a crisis would be small . At the same time, it is shortsighted because it would not be able to emerge successfully from a crisis .
 Evidence suggests that Argentine leaders did not identify a desire to create a diversion from domestic problems as a reason for engaging in this conflict with Britain . In addition, we have already seen that the evidence suggests that .
 The explanation of Argentina’s invasion of the Malvinas/Falklands that relies on the unitary actor assumption is a puzzle . This diversion also created the not-so-rational decision to take on a much more powerful international actor .
 This would require an investigation into the motives of the Argentine junta . This would need to be investigated by the Argentine government .
 Evidence suggests that the junta had a strong desire to correct a perceived historical injustice . As previously discussed, the evidence suggests that this junta wanted to correct an injustice .
 This explanation requires HOW LEADERS MAKE SENSE OFTHEWORLD. 59 research into the Argentine perspective .
 Argentina would never leave the Malvinas, Galtieri said after the invasion . Argentina was invaded by the Falklands in the early 1950s . Argentina would not leave the islands .
 Had he stuck by the original plan and placed the islands under an international administration, war might still have been averted . War might still be averted.
 That might have been wiser foreign policy, but it would also have poured cold water on the triumphant atmosphere and disappointed his domestic audience . That would have also disappointed his foreign audience .
 This story illustrates the possible tensions between domestic and international imperatives . It also shows that governments are made up of individuals who do not always act in concert . This calls the unitary actor assumption into question even more fundamentally .
 Unitary actor assumption can lead to plausible explanations, but it does not always fit the facts well . Unitary actors can be used to explain the facts of the facts, says author .
 Sometimes the plausible explanation is good enough, but at other times we are left with important puzzles, such as in the case of Argentinean decision making during the Malvinas crisis . Argentina's decision to take responsibility for the crisis in the 1980s and 1990s is a puzzle .
 What is easily dismissed as bad judgment with the benefit of hindsight may appear more reasonable if we figure out how the relevant decision makers viewed their world, what motivated them, what options they perceived and how they evaluated those options .
 The study of foreign policy decision making seeks to understand decisions that are puzzling to those making the unitary actor assumption . ft takes as the starting point that foreign policy is made by individuals, acting alone .
 A normative theory of rationality provides a model for rational behavior and judges actual behavior in light of that model . The model of rationality is based on the model of rational behavior, the author says .
 normative theories often imply that everyone judging the same situation will have the same information or understand the situation in the same way . Normative theories often suggest that everyone has the same knowledge or experience the same experience .
 Any time we argue that decision makers should have known better, we imply that there is a standard, or norm, for rational decision making against which we can judge an actual decision . We simultaneously render the verdict that the decision makers have failed to live up to that standard, we say .
 A situation that requires a decision is a decision . Procs: 1. A decision is made by a person in a situation that needs to be made .
 Theory or Prescribed decision process serves a standard for judgment . A decision A decision is a theory or a decision .
 "Closely following the prescribed process leads to the best possible decision," says Ravi Agrawal . Closely following a prescribed process is the best way to make a decision, says Agrawala .
 Empirical theories of rationality are less interested in judging a decision than in understanding how leaders arrived at it . Empiratic theories of rationalism are less about judging a leader's decision than understanding it .
 The U.S. is trying to find ways to lessen the likelihood that decision makers accidentally stumble into war or otherwise make a decision that has strongly negative consequences for their country . "They care a great deal about finding ways to . lessen the . likelihood that . decision makers inadvertently stumble into
 Researchers who favor empirical theories of rationality think that, rather than evaluating a decision against a standard of good decision making, it is important to understand how and why policy makers arrived at their decision as a first step to suggesting ways in which decision making can be improved .
 Empirical analysts try to determine what decision makers knew, when they knew it, and what they did with the information . Empirational analysts try and determine what decisions makers knew and when it happened .
 Researchers who employ empirical theories of rationality do not always study the entire decision making process . Rather, they frequently focus on one or a few of the questions listed .
 Analysts ask what options were actually considered, how those options were evaluated, and how decision makers arrived at their decision . Instead of judging decision makers on the basis of options they should have considered, such analysts ask what they actually considered .
 At the core of empirical theories of rationality is the assumption that better decision making leads to better decisions and, ultimately, better outcomes . Theories of rationality are based on the belief that better decisions lead to better outcomes, say experts .
 Even the best and most thorough decision making process does not guarantee a good outcome . Of course, even the best, most thorough, decision-making process doesn't guarantee the outcome .
 The model of rational decision making provided by the normative theorists is not irrelevant for empirical theorists . The model is provided by normative theorists, but it is not relevant to empirical theorists, says David Frum .
 You probably noticed that empirical theorists are also interested in option selection and evaluation . The empirical theorist is interested in choosing and evaluating an option .
 Evidence suggests that decision makers do not always employ the kind of decision making process that requires them to weigh options . Weighing Options and Defining Interests is a key part of the process . The evidence suggests that .
 That’s a quick way to deal with a problem, and it frees up time to devote to other issues . That's a quick and effective way of dealing with it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Decision makers search for and evaluate options sequentially, discarding those that do not meet their criteria until they find one that seems adequate . Instead of going through an exhaustive search for options and evaluating these by weighing the pros and cons of each of each, decision makers search instead of weighing the
 They judge each option in light of what their experience tells them will be a satisfactory solution to the problem . They do not subject these options to a comparative assessment but judge them to be satisfactory .
 Decisions made in this way are not optimal, but they work -- they are deemed good enough and allow decision makers to move on to the next problem . Decision makers make decisions that are considered good enough, but not optimal . Decisions like this are not always optimal but work .
 Making a decision according to the procedure specified by normative rationality takes time, energy, and resources . Consider that making a decision in this case takes time and energy to consider .
 "There are a lot of issues that require a decision and that not all of them are equally important" Consider also that there are also many issues that need to be decided on .
 It makes sense for decision makers to devote their time and energy first and foremost to the most important issues . The issues are likely to affect the future of the country in significant ways, and to satisfice other issues .
 This will sometimes be obvious, for instance, when the country is experiencing a foreign policy crisis or an attack . This will often be obvious when a crisis is over or when an attack is over . This is often the case of a crisis or attack .
 At other times, whether or not an issue is regarded as highly important (and deserving of top-level attention) is itself a political decision . The decision is contingent upon the worldview and perhaps also the policy agenda of the decision makers .
 The two presidents agreed on their assessment of the nature of Saddam Hussein’s rule and on the importance of containing his ambitions . But they diverged on how best to confront his government .
 European leaders disagreed with the United States about the threat posed by the Soviet Union . During the Cold War, European leaders increasingly disagreed with U.S. over the threat .
 Decision makers tend to focus more readily on issues that require immediate attention . Decision makers also tend to look at issues that need immediate attention, experts say .
 AIDS crisis has only recently begun to be treated with the urgency accorded to foreign policy crises . Consider the global AIDS crisis, which is devastating societies and could politically destabilize entire countries .
 Leaders have long expressed their concern and agree that the problem is an important one . But they have not made the AIDS crisis central to their foreign policy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 John E Kennedy confronted the threat of Soviet missiles at the U.S. in October 1962 . Kennedy faced the prospect that the Soviet Union might soon be able to launch a missile at the US .
 Prior to that time, the Soviet Union had not yet acquired the ability to launch them in such a way that they could reach United States soil .
 U.S. reconnaissance flights discovered the missile sites that were being built in Cuba . The missile sites were discovered by the United States in the 1950s .
 If these had been completed and become operational, Soviet missiles immediately would have gained the capability to strike the United States . The missiles would have made the U.S. less secure at the height of the Cold War .
 In short, the AIDS crisis does not fit the conventional definition of a crisis very well . The AIDS crisis is not a crisis, but it is a very serious problem, experts say . AIDS is a major problem in the United States .
 With so many unknowns, the AIDS crisis is best defined as an ill-structured problem . AIDS crisis has been defined as a problem with an ill,structured health system, experts say .
 Foreign policy problems are not regarded as important only because they are urgent, however, however . Foreign policy is not only because it is urgent but also because of the need for urgent action, however. Foreign policy needs to be seen as a matter of principle .
 Importance derives also from the degree to which decision makers perceive a problem to affect vital national interests . Importance depends on the degree of decision makers' view of a problem affecting vital interests .
 Traditionally, the concept of the national interest denoted security issues . Usually defined in terms of the ability to maintain the integrity of the state’s borders through military defense .
 It is characterized by a concern with maintaining and possibly enhancing a state’s power and, thereby, the integrity and autonomy of the state . The state is concerned with maintaining, possibly enhancing, perhaps enhancing, a state's power .
 Realists assume that security issues are paramount and that economic issues matter to the degree that they affect the state’s power . Realists say that security is paramount and economic issues are important to the state .
 Realists do not readily perceive global health problems like AIDS as a threat to national security . Realists believe global health issues like AIDS are not a national security threat .
 A large, welltrained, and state-of-the-art military can make a state powerful, but so can control over a strategic resource . Oil was demonstrated by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries under the leadership of Saudi Arabian oil minister Sheikh Zaki Yamani in the early
 Oil importing states want to be paid better for the sale of this finite resource . They also want concessions regarding the policies of the oil importing states toward the conflict between Israel and its Arab neighbors . Israel and Arab neighbors have long been involved in the conflict .
 This one resulted temporarily in a severely limited availability of gasoline and, after the end of the embargo, higher oil prices . Although embargoes are not universally successful, this one resulted in limited availability and higher prices . The end of this one, however, was not always successful .
 Soft power can also take other, more subtle forms, as captured by the concept of soft power . Soft power is a form of power that can be captured in subtle ways .
 Soft power is defined as “the ability to shape the preferences of others” through persuasion and the attraction of one’s ideas . Soft power can be defined by ‘persuaded’ and ‘soft power’ as a way to shape others’
 The national interest is difficult to pin down, but what it is and what foreign policy actions best serve it, is difficult . The U.S. has a hard time pinning down on what its national interest means .
 There is no one-size-fits-all guide regarding what makes a specific foreign policy . The U.S. and Japan are the two countries that have the most significant differences in foreign policy terms .
 U.S. decision makers generally understand national security to be a military concept . But Japanese leaders perceive national security in economic terms .
 Japan’s economy is highly dependent on imported materials for its industry . It is also critically dependent on imports for its energy needs . Unlike the United States, Japan can supply about half its own energy .
 These constraints shape decision makers’ world views and their ability to pursue specific foreign policy strategies . These constraints both shape . decision makers' world views .
 Once a problem is perceived as sufficiently urgent and important to warrant the expediture of substantial time and resources, decision makers are more likely to try to evaluate multiple options and discuss the merits of each .
 Empiratic investigations indicate that the answer is, most often, not quite quite . Empiral investigations show that, most of the time, the answer doesn't quite .
 The decision making process is not random and does tend to follow certain identifiable patterns . However, it is not always random and follows certain patterns .
 One effort to investigate to what degree decision makers make an effort to implement the ideas specified by the normative theory of rationality is the poliheuristic theory . One effort is to find out how much decision makers try to implement ideas specified in the theory .
 The poliheuristic theory incorporates elements from normative and empirical theories of rationality . It is based on the theory of rationality in order to achieve the highest degree of rationality, according to the theory . The theory is said to be based on empirical and normative theories .
 It suggests that foreign policy decision making takes place in two stages . Each stage is characterized by a different approach to foreign policy .
 Decision makers use a noncompensatory principle to determine their options . During stage one, decision makers use the noncompensation principle to decide their options in the event of a decision .
 They evaluate a range of policy responses and discard any that are unacceptable on one critical dimensions . They discard any of the policy responses that are not acceptable on a critical dimensions.
 This means that a policy response that is attractive in some respects will be eliminated if it has at least one disadvantage that negatively affects either the national interest or the decision makers’ political interests . This is a policy that is quite attractive, some respects, but it is also very difficult to
 advantages of an option cannot compensate for that option’s critical disadvantage . The advantages of a given option can’t compensate for a critical disadvantage, says the author of this article .
 The disadvantage is in essence given veto power over the policy option, and it is eliminated from further consideration . The disadvantage has been given veto powers .
 The poliheuristic theory posits that decision makers will subject the remaining options to careful analysis during the second stage of the decision making process .
 This second stage involves weighing of the costs and benefits of the remaining alternatives in a manner similar to that specified by normative rationality . Not all possible alternatives are being evaluated but only those that have already passed a minimum threshold of acceptability .
 The poliheuristic theory seeks to integrate aspects of psychological models with those of normative rationality . The theory is based on psychological models and those of normality . It also seeks to incorporate aspects of the psychological model into those of rationality .
 In doing so, the poliheuristic theory represents something akin to bounded rationality . The stage two decision making process of the Poliheurgeary theory is similar to that of the stage two . The theory is based on the theory of a poliheturistic theory .
 This means that in order to determine whether a decision maker arrived at a rational decision, we need to know what that decision maker knew at the time they made the decision . This means we must know what the decision maker was thinking when making the decision to make it .
 The poliheuristic theory adds that policy options must meet a minimum requirement of political acceptability in order to be considered during stage two of the decision making process . However, bounded rationality delimits options on the basis of a decision maker’s knowledge, rather than the poli
 It assumes decision makers will seriously consider all options they know to exist, not just the ones that have met some minimum standard of political acceptability . It assumes they will consider the advantages and disadvantages of all options .
 Both bounded rationality and the poliheuristic theory point to the importance of investigating what decision makers know and how they interpret information . How leaders make sense of information? How leaders interpret information?
 Both approaches fit under the larger umbrella of empirical approaches to rationality . Both fit under an empirical approach to rationality, say experts .
 Both emphasize the evaluation process rather than the selection of options . However, both emphasize the option evaluation process . We will turn in the next section to turn in to an issue of selection .
 Decision making can be divided into two discrete stages, according to the poliheuristic theory . Decision making is a two-stage decision making .
 Decision makers determine realistic options using a noncompensatory decision rule . Decision makers decide their realistic options during the first stage of the process .
 Bounded rationality implies that the enumeration of options is limited by what decision makers know . Decision makers should be limited to what they know, the author says .
 The poliheuristic theory adds that options must also pass a political acceptability threshold . This means that there must not be some critical disadvantage that makes an option unacceptable to the decision makers .
 Neither explicitly addresses the mechanism that ties the decision makers’ knowledge base or the noncompensatory evaluation to the enumeration of the options that will be seriously considered in the decision making process .
 This is not unique to bounded rationality or to the first stage of the poliheuristic theory . It's not only a problem for bounded rationality, it's also a problem in the first phase of polihetoric theory .
 The emphasis in the study of foreign policy decision making has most often been on how leaders choose between options, rather than how those options emerge . The emphasis is often often on how the options emerge, not how they emerge .
 The invasion escalated the situation even further, a fact that the junta failed to recognize . They simply could not imagine that British Prime Minister Thatcher would make the decision to go to war to recover control of the islands .
 Foreign Minister Costa Mendez’s argument that the situation was analogous to the crises Britain faced in Suez and Rhodesia . They convinced themselves that their opponent would respond as it did in those historical events .
 The Argentine junta framed the situation in a specific manner that had consequences for their actions . In other words, the junta frames the situation as a specific way that has consequences for its actions .
 It is quite reasonable to suggest, as bounded rationahty does, that leaders conceive of options within the context of their knowledge . Leaders should be able to think of options in context of the knowledge they have .
 A COMPARATIVE INTRICTION. knowledge, and experiences, as well as formative historical events. knowledge . knowledge, . experiences, and . formative . events. events. As a result of this, we will be able to read and understand each other’s
 The resulting predispositions affect the tasks of making sense of the world, determining what policy options are available and choosing a specific foreign policy decision .
 Decision makers approach the world from a specific vantage point . Decision makers have a unique perspective on the world's future .
 Their perceptions are likely to be affected by the way in which information is presented to them, say experts .
 Prospect theory takes into account that the preferences of decision makers change in predictable ways depending on how a problem is presented or framed . This is the subject of prospect theory, which takes account that decision makers .
 Most people prefer a small chance of a gain to the certainty of a loss . For instance, in problems that can be phrased in terms of gains and losses, most people prefer small gains to small losses .
 Most people prefer a rather small gain over a small chance to win big . If the problem is presented differently, however, most people would prefer a small gain .
 Most people are willing to take a risk at the prospect of a loss, but prefer a certain but small gain, rather than taking a chance to win big . So, while most people would be willing to risk a big loss, they also prefer a small gain .
 The Argentine junta did this and was not able to conceive of the possibility that the British leaders would frame the situation in a very different way . The Argentine government did not have the ability to frame the issue in a different way.
 The concept of the decision frame does not differentiate between perceptions of the situation on the one hand and the perceived policy choices on the other . The concept does not distinguish between perceptions and policy choices .
 Prospect theory places the emphasis on how choice is affected by decision frames . Problem representation privileges investigation into how and why decision makers represent situations in specific ways .
 Problem representations are mental models or schemas that are produced within the context of a decision maker’s more general understanding of how the world works . Problem representations can be mental models, schemas or mental schemas .
 Whether options pass the initial, noncompensatory, stage of the poliheuristic theory’s screening depends in large part on how the problem has been represented . In other words, whether options pass through the first stage depends on how they are represented .
 Problem representations determine what options are seen as plausible ones . Problem representations decide what options can be specified and what is seen as a plausible one .
 Problem representations help us understand why certain options are perceived as feasible and others are rejected out of hand . Problem representations can help explain why some options are considered feasible and some are rejected .
 Problem representation can be seen as a process that is completed before the poliheuristic theory’s stage one decision making takes place . In short, problem representation is a process completed before stage one decisions are made .
 A decision maker’s representation of a problem shapes what options are perceived as viable . Decision makers’ representation of problems shape what they see as viable options . A solution to a problem can be a solution to the problem, experts say .
 Problem representations are far from random. As we have defined the concept, problem representations are not random. We have defined a problem representation. We are happy to clarify that this is not a problem .
 Decision makers are shaped by a decision maker’s knowledge, experience, and beliefs . Instead, they’re shaped by their knowledge and experience, say experts .
 Knowledge about these elements can help us understand why decision makers represent problems as they do . Knowledge of these elements will help explain why problems are being represented by decision makers .
 Consider the differences between Japanese conceptions of national security and those of U.S. policy makers . Consider the different historical experiences of war and terrorist attacks of the United States and Britain .
 The formative experiences of the leaders of these three countries took place in very different contexts . Consider that the formative experience of these leaders of each country's formative years took place very different .
 They were taught different national histories and different perspectives of world history . They were also taught different perspectives on the history of the world .
 Each of these three countries is considered a powerful actor in world politics . Yet each of them are considered powerful actors in the world .
 The British prime minister does not appear to have taken the power differential between the two countries into account in her representation .
 She perceived the Falklands crisis as similar to Hitler’s challenge to its European neighbors . She represented the situation as analogous to Munich .
 The Argentinean debacle in the Malvinas stems largely from its leaders’ inability to imagine the possibility that the British prime minister might define the situation differently than they did .
 The Argentine leaders failed to realize that the British prime minister had framed the situation very differently . Argentina's overestimation was far less damaging to Britain than the failure of the Argentine leaders to realize .
 Historical analogies play an important role in problem representation and framing, says historian . Historians use historical analogies to help with problem representation .
 In the next section, we’U address the use of historical analogies in greater detail . The next section of this article includes a discussion of the analogies .
 It is important to point out that exposure to a specific national history and other aspects of a culture are not the only factors that influence a decision maker's propensity to represent problems .
 When decision makers work together in groups, they need to reconcile such different problem representations to fashion one on which they can collectively agree . When making decisions, decision makers need to be able to reconcile different representations, they must agree .
 The dynamics in groups of decision makers are explored more in chapter 4 of the book . The dynamics of decision-making groups will be explored in Chapter 4 .
 Decision makers do not interpret the actions of the leaders of other countries in a vacuum . Decision makers don't interpret actions of other leaders in any vacuum, says CNN.com .
 Previous interactions, ongoing disputes, and historical animosities influence how events are interpreted . Previous interactions and ongoing disputes may have influenced how events were interpreted .
 Neither the French nor the German government supported the decision of the U.S. to go to war in Iraq in 2003 . The brunt of American disgruntlement was with France, not Germany .
 Unlike Germany, France is a member of the U.N. Security Gouncil, the body where the disagreement over Iraq became visible .
 The Security Council is not the only body where French leaders had openly disagreed with the United States . But the Security Council was also a body where the French leaders disagreed with U.S.
 President Charles de Gaulle challenged the leadership positions of the U.S. and Britain within NATO in an effort to have France recognized as an equal partner in NATO .
 The effort ended with France’s withdrawal from the integrated NATO command . France was the last member of NATO's integrated NATO Command .
 Germany, on the other hand, has long been quite restrained in its foreign policy . Germany's foreign policy has been very restrained in recent years . The country has a long history of restrained foreign policy, not so restrained in the past .
 The leaders of both states have disagreed with their American ally, but when French leaders disagree it is more readily perceived as a challenge to U.S. power because of France’s aspirations .
 The leaders of both countries interpreted the actions of the other with the suspicion that results from longstanding disagreements . Similarly, in the FaUdands/ Malvinas crisis, the leaders of each country interpreted their actions with a suspicion .
 Information is available on some aspects of the problem, but there are also numerous unknowns . Information on some of the problems is available but there is also many unknowns.
 Making decisions more difficult when there is not enough information to construct a complete picture of a situation . Making a decision is rendered HOW LEADERS make sense of a decision .
 This is especially true during crises but is not limited to such situations . This is not only during crises, but also during other crises .
 Incomplete information and its counterpart, secrecy, are inherent in foreign policy making . "Incomplete information" and secrecy are in the making of foreign policy .
 Decision makers refuse to reveal the extent of their knowledge or the full details of their own strategy to their opponents . At the same time decision makers struggle to make sense of a situation on the basis of limited and incomplete information .
 It means that incomplete information is inherent in foreign policy decision making . Whether this is done to maintain the edge of a surprise in war or to have leverage in negotiations, it means there is incomplete information .
 One way to achieve an understanding of an ill-structured problem is to compare it to a historical situation that is deemed similar and about which more is known . One way of understanding is to use historical data to try and find out more about the situation .
 It helps decision makers construct a representation of the current problem and point to potential solutions . It helps them construct a . representation of . the current . problem .
 This analogy is a problem that has been solved in the past and that decision makers are confident they understand well . The analogy is an analogy that has a history of problems that have been solved well .
 Central to comparisons is the effort to determine whether a particular analogy shares meaningful commonalities with the problem at hand . Central to such comparisons is to find out if a given analogy shares commonality with a particular problem .
 It has acquired the connotation that if you give in even a little to an aggressive leader, that leader will be emboldened and present a bigger foreign policy problem in the future .
 Confront and you force that same leader to back down . Confront your leader and force him back down. Confront the same leader and he will back down, says CNN.com.com .
 There are many questions to ponder as we consider the appropriateness of the Munich analogy and the lesson it represents for most contemporary leaders . The Munich analogy is an example of a lesson for most leaders .
 Margaret Thatcher used the Munich analogy during the Falklands/Malvinas crisis . Thatcher's use of Munich analogy was used in Falklands crisis .
 The Argentine junta invaded and occupied a group of islands that were part of their country prior to the British occupation of them in 1833 . The islands were once part of the country before the British invasion of them .
 Since that time, the islands had acquired a British settler population .
 The future of this settler population was one of the topics discussed in the ongoing British negotiations with Argentina over the disputed sovereignty of the islands .
 The series of events described earlier in this chapter cut short these negotiations . This chapter is the last chapter of this chapter . The final chapter of the book ends in a cliffhanger .
 Galtieri’s surprise announcement after the invasion that Argentina would never leave the Malvinas made a military response from Britain almost inevitable . Argentina's surprise announcement made the military response almost inevitable.
 Hitler justified his annexation of Austria and the Sudetenland area of Czechoslovakia on the basis of the ethnic and linguistic commonality of the people who lived in these areas . The annexation was based on the commonity of these people .
 There was the irredentist claim that people sharing a similar German ethnic and linguistic background ought to live together in one national state . Instead, there was the claim that . people sharing . a similar . German ethnic background .
 In the period between the two World Wars, the quest for national self-determination (meaning a group of people sharing a common national and/or ethnic identity to govern itself in its own state) was seen as a legitimate pursuit .
 Hitler’s irredentistist claims and his quest to enlarge German territory generated disquiet, but they were not immediately perceived in the same negative light that such claims encounter in our times . Hitler's quest for greater German territory was not immediately seen in a negative light .
 It was not until Hitler’s conquests reached beyond areas populated by people who identified as ethnically German that the leaders of Europe became truly alarmed . Hitler's conquests began to reach beyond areas that identified as ethnic Germans .
 Chamberlain’s agreement with Hitler at Munich violated the sovereignty of Czechoslovakia in favor of honoring an irredentist claim . The agreement was based on the assumption that this diplomatic agreement would be honored . Chamberlain's deal with Hitler violated Czechsoslovakia's sovereignty .
 As it turned out, it was not, and Hitler proceeded with further conquests . Hitler went on to carry on his conquests in Germany .
 Other than the fact that in both cases one country invaded another, the differences between the two situations far outnumber the similarities . In both cases, the similarities between the countries involved in the invasion of Iraq and Afghanistan far outweigh the differences .
 Expansionist desires were much less a motive for the Argentine junta than for Hitler . Hitler's desire for expansionistism was much less of a motive than for his regime .
 Argentine leaders sought to end what they perceived as the occupation of territory they claimed as belonging with their country . Argentina's leaders wanted to end the occupation, rather than end it as a form of occupation .
 This suggests that the Argentine junta perceived the situation in terms of ending colonial domination over islands they perceived as Argentine territory . This suggests the junta saw the situation as an attempt to end colonial domination of islands .
 The Sudetenland, on the other hand, was a valuable strategic prize for Germany . Germany was able to seize the region in order to protect it from Russia .
 Munich analogy communicates is that aggressive leaders must be confronted . As stated, the lesson the Munich analogy conveys is that aggression is necessary .
 More careful analysis of such differences and similarities between current and historical foreign policy problems has the potential to be quite useful .
 There have indeed been efforts to teach decision makers to engage in more careful comparisons . There have been attempts to teach .
 They remember lessons learned but not the details of Chamberlain’s negotiations with Hitler, nor the context within which these took place . They remember what Munich stands for but not what it stands for, i.e. i.i.e., they remember the lessons learned, but not
 Decision makers appear to choose an analogy less for the analogous situation than for the general lesson for which the case stands . In fact, decision makers seem to choose the analogy less than for an analogy .
 Decision makers use historical analogies as if they were schemas to make decisions . In other words, decision makers use history analogies to make their decisions . Decision makers often use analogies like schemas, rather than historical ones .
 It also precludes deeper and more careful analysis of the current situation . The current situation is not the best way to deal with the situation in the world, experts say .
 Decision makers have framed the situation as “an instance of [insert schema] Decision makers’ interpretations of the actions of opponents and the viability of particular solutions are viewed through lenses colored by that frame. Once they have classified a situation as an instance of “insert schema”
 A decision maker’s formative experiences have long been thought to weigh disproportionately . The post-World War II generation of leaders frequently referenced Munich . Munich came to symbolize the failure to arrest Hitler's quest to control Europe .
 Margaret Thatcher turned 13 in the year of the Munich agreements and was 19 by war’s end . Margaret Thatcher, for example, turned thirteen in that year and was nineteen by the end of war .
 In addition to formative experiences, more recent events are often remembered more easily . Because of their recentness, they are still more vivid in the decision makers’ memory .
 Conceptually complex individuals are more likely to use analogies in a more sophisticated manner than decision makers who are less conceptually complex . Decision makers with less complex people are less complex, according to the study .
 The latter focus more frequently on the surface similarities and the “lesson” of a specific historical analogy . The former are more likely to perceive structural similarities between situations that may not appear analogous .
 Kennedy perceived the possibility that a mistake in judgment might have dire consequences . Kennedy was concerned about the consequences of a mistake made in judgment .
 analogies are frequently selected because they are historical events decision makers happen to remember, either because they were formative experiences or recent events . First, analogies often selected because of historical events, or because of recent events.
 In the example of the FaUdands/Malvinas crisis, it mattered more for Argentina than for Britain . In the case of Argentina, the crisis was more important to Argentina than the UK .
 The conceptualization of the situation as analogous to Suez or Rhodesia led the Argentine junta to drastically underestimate the possibility of a British military response . The junta overestimated the potential of a military response to the situation .
 Regaining control of the Falklands might have been obtained through other means . The Falklands may have been taken by the British government in 1982 .
 The two countries have a long history of negotiations about the disputed islands . Consider that the two countries had a history of talks about the islands .
 Thatcher might have achieved her goal with a less belligerent strategy . Thatcher's strategy might have been more effective if she had taken a less aggressive approach .
 Foreign policy decision makers are rarely criticized for a policy that achieves the objective . However, foreign policy makers rarely criticize foreign policy decisions that achieve an objective .
 We have accepted that decision makers do indeed use their knowledge of history to think about current problems . We accept that history is used to help solve current problems, but not current ones .
 It is possible analogies are used to communicate with an audience, whether that is a private conversation within a group of decision makers or a public speech . It is, of course, possible that analogies may be used instead of using analogies .
 It is difficult to know to what degree analogies are indeed used as “thinking tools” versus verbal justification . It is not clear how much analogies have been used in this case .
 Psychological literature suggests that people do indeed think in terms of analogies . However, the psychological literature suggests people do not use analogies as much as possible .
 In fact, more generalized schemas are the product of analogical reasoning . In this case, the generalities are the result of analogizing reasoning .
 Foreign policy decisions are rarely made by one individual in isolation . Communication with others is an essential component of decision making, says President Obama .
 Most often, groups of decision makers ponder a problem, even if ultimately one person is responsible for the decision . Most often they ponder a decision to make a decision, even though ultimately the decision is ultimately made .
 Argentine decision makers underestimated the likelihood of a military British reaction to the move to occupy the islands . Galtieri’s announcement that Argentina would never leave the Malvinas was a mistake .
 Argentineans framed the situation in terms of Suez and Rhodesia, it became more difficult for them to perceive the possibility of military action by their opponent . The Argentineans were more likely to see military action against their opponent than Suez .
 Had they examined their analogies more closely, the crisis might have had another ending . Britain under Thatcher might act differentiy than it had in those historical situations .
 Skeptics of good judgment in foreign policy decision making argue that the world is very complex and that decisions often have many unintended consequences .
 Students of foreign policy decision making proceed from the notion that it is possible to acquire knowledge that can improve decision making processes and, thereby, the odds that decisions lead to desired outcomes .
 A well-executed decision making process will not always always lead to the desired outcome . That doesn't mean that a well-planned decision making will always be successful .
 Foreign policy decision makers are human beings rather than robots . After all, foreign policy decisions are made by human beings, not robots .
 They are creative beings who innovate and sometimes defy the patterns in their own previous behavior . They often defy their own patterns in behavior, the author says .
 Decision decisions made on the basis of faulty information and flawed processes do not consistently lead to disaster . On the other hand, decisions that are made based on faulty information are not consistently leading to disaster.
 Foreign policy fiasco more likely under the latter conditions . However, a foreign policy fiasco is certainly more likely to occur under these conditions .
 The odds of achieving the desired outcome are much better when the decision has been made on the basis of solid information and a well-considered process . Conversely, the odds of winning are better if the decision is made in a well considered process .
 Good judgment involves the ability to discern patterns in world politics and foreign policy behavior . But there are distinct differences of opinion about the sort of patterns that would be most helpful to decision makers .
 Good judgment is rooted in the ability to discern the simple patterns that define even the most complex of events, simplifiers argue . The simplifiers say that good judgment is based on simple patterns, not complex facts .
 Thatcher accurately characterized the situation as one that called for Britain to take a strong stand . Thatcher would argue that Thatcher accurately described the situation in a statement .
 Leaders should stay focused on geopolitical forces that influence the relative power of states in the global arena, simplifiers say .
 Decision makers assume that their framing of a situation represents that situation objectively, they are usually not aware of their own cognitive biases . Decision makers are trained to identify and counteract them by looking for evidence and for reasons they might be incorrect .
 In doing so, they are likely to achieve not only an understanding of multiple viewpoints, but also to attempt to integrate them . This may lead them to discover innovative policy responses, they say .
 The simplifiers are less able to guide decision makers with regard to the decision process, but they do provide insights into global system dynamics . Decision makers defy the simplifiers at their peril .
 Both the simplifiers and complexifiers offer something that is useful to leaders, but what they offer is quite different .
 We made the point that even the most weU-executed decision process cannot guarantee a good outcome . But we did not specify exactly how we define “good” in this context .
 Good decision making is frequently judged in the context of the decision’s ultimate result, the foreign policy outcome, the author says . Good decision-making should be judged in context of foreign policy outcomes, he says .
 The war against Iraq in the early 1990s was initially hailed as a good decision . The decision to end the Iraq war in the 1990s has been compared to the decision to invade Iraq .
 The military objective, freeing Kuwait from its Iraqi occupation, had been achieved . The Iraqi government was forced to withdraw from Kuwait . The country was freed from the Iraqi occupation .
 The United States government was congratulated for not widening or changing the war’s objective . The U.S. government was congratulating for not changing the objective of the war's objective .
 Usually, more information is available to those who can judge with hindsight . "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure it was a mistake," she said .
 Observers know whether the intended consequences did or did not materialize, and have also discovered potential unintended consequences . Obsers know whether intended consequences were achieved or not, and whether unintended consequences were realized .
 The observer’s personal biases also affect judgments about foreign policy decisions . In addition, the observer's personal biases may also affect his judgments .
 We can expect decision makers to work hard to obtain a thorough grasp of foreign policy problems they confront . On the other hand, we can expect the foreign policy challenges to be dealt with .
 Whether or not the outcome is successful, a good decision rests on a thorough examination of the available information and a willingness to question the opponent's views . A good decision is a good judgment rests on an examination of available information .
 A good decision requires that decision makers make a serious attempt to try to see the world from the perspective of their opponent, says the author of the book .
 In any case, it requires empathy and a broad knowledge of not only one’s own society but of the world beyond the borders, says the author .
 Cognitive biases make it difficult for decision makers to truly be open to new information, especially when it is inconsistent with what they already believe .
 Most decision makers do not revise their judgments, even when new information makes it abundantly clear that the initial judgment was misguided . Most decision-makers are not willing to revise their decisions, even if new information is clear .
 This means that it is difficult for decision makers to learn from either history or their own previous decisions . This is especially true in the United States, where the U.S. government has failed to act in the past .
 Only rarely do decision makers learn and reframe their understanding of a problem or their judgment about a situation or opposing leader . "Only rarely do decisions makers learn" about a problem, reframe them, say experts .
 Decision makers tend to learn only under certain, narrowly specified conditions . Events experienced personally are likely to have a greater impact than those which a decision maker has experienced secondhand through reading or other vicarious experience/^
 Normative rationality specifies a decision making process that follows specific steps . Normative rationality described as a process of decision-making that follows certain steps .
 Empirical rationality seeks to ascertain how decision makers actually make decisions and what ways their decision process deviates from normative models of rationality . Empiral rationality is an attempt to find out how decisions are made and how they are made .
 Decision makers often employ a two-stage decision process, as specified by the poliheuristic theory . Decision makers use the two stages to make a decision . The two stages are specified in poliheturism theory .
 During stage one, options are eliminated on the basis of a noncompensatory rule . During stage first, options have been eliminated . The decision was made on a basis of the noncompensation rule .
 Prospect theory, which investigated how decision makers frame situations, and problem representation, are efforts to study the impact of perception on decision making . Prospect theory is an attempt to study how decision-makers frame situations . Problem representation is a study of how perception affects decision-making .
 Makers often employ historical analogies in a superficial manner . This article provides an overview of the history of the American Civil War .
 Complexifiers emphasize the value of critical thinking . Simpleifiers look for simple patterns, and complexifiers emphasize critical thinking. Simpleifiers focus on simple patterns. Complexifiers are more complexifiers than simple ones . Complexifiers can be used to solve complex problems in complex systems .
 Terms Unitary actor Diversionary theory of war . Normative theory of rationality of rationality . Empiratic theory of rationalism . Realist theory Soft power Poliheuristic theory . Theory of war.
 A classic work on the role of perception in decision making is Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics . Suggestions for further reading are provided by the author .
 Sylvan and Voss work on problem representation in foreign policy decision-making . Sylvan, Voss and Sylvan are well represented in their work on the problem .
 The terminology is adapted from HiU, The Changing Politics of Foreign Policy . HiU: The changing politics of foreign policy is changing .
 Whether satisficing is limited to less important matters is, of course, an empirical question . "Satisficing is only limited to those less important things," says the author .
 Sylvan, Goel, and Chandrasekaran, “Analyzing Political Decision Making,” 78. Sylvan and Goel: ‘Analyzing political Decision Making’
 Holsti, “The ‘Operational Code’ Approach,” identified such a tendency in John Foster Dulles, which became known as the “inherent bad faith” model . HolstI: Dulles was known for his tendency to engage in
 Hemmer, Houghton, Khong and Khong, Neustadt and May, Thinking in Time. Hemmer and May discuss the role of analogical reasoning .
 Teaching decision makers to employ analogies more effectively is the subject of Neustadt and May, Thinking in Time, Thinking In Time . Teaching decision-makers to use analogies to make decisions more effective .
 Renshon, “Psychological Sources of Good Judgment in Political Leaders,” 46. He says there are psychological sources of good judgment in politicians .
 Brzezinski, The Grand Chessboard; Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers . Kennedy, who was in charge of the U.S. during the Cold War, has been in touch with the world's top chess players .
 Tetlock, “Good Judgment in International Politics,” 526; see also Kowert, Groupthink or Deadlock, 18. Tetlock .
 Reiter, Crucible of Beliefs, 38; see also Jervis, Perception and Misperception, 38 . Reiter: Reiter is the author of Reiter's book, The Crucible, and the world of ideas .
 The Role of Advisors and Bureaucracies Chapter Preview . Explains the ways in which leaders are embedded in the institutions of government . Chapter Preview: Explains how leaders can be embedded in institutions .
 Explains the intersection of leader personality and the organization of the advisory system . Explains how the system works in a new way .
 Government agencies and small groups of advisors in decision making . Explains the role of government agencies in decision-making. Explains how small groups are key to making decisions .
 Explains the consequences of various interaction patterns among advisors . Explains how advisors interact and interact with each other . Also explains how advisors react to each other's decisions .
 Explains differences in the advisory structure of presidential and parliamentary systems, as well as specifics of coalition governments . Explains different advisory structures in presidential, parliamentary systems . Also explains differences in advisory structures of political and economic systems .
 President Obama had to make a decision to appoint a new secretary of state . The White House has been criticized for not doing so .
 It is tempting to accept Truman’s contention that a single person bears the ultimate responsibility for foreign policy decisions . Consider again the story of the Argentine junta and the FaUdands/Malvinas crisis discussed in chapter 3 .
 President Galtieri’s surprise announcement after the Argentine invasion of the islands altered the decision in a very public manner that was not easy to retract . The Argentine president's surprise announcement altered the group's decision . Later, the Argentine president announced that he had invaded the islands .
 A public announcement of this nature was probably the only way that Galtieri could override a decision made by the group . The decision was probably made public .
 The junta expected to govern as a collective of equals . The expectation was that they would make decisions together, meaning the junta would govern together .
 Decision making groups may be of vastly different sizes, be less or more formally structured, and bear different names . They make decisions in concert, but all make decisions with the same name .
 He did make the important decisions that shaped the latter days of World War II and the immediate post war period . He made important decisions .
 American presidents do have the ultimate responsibility for foreign policy decisions . More generally, American presidents are responsible for most of the world's foreign policy .
 This is not true in aU countries and decision making situations, as the Argentinean example shows . This is true in Argentina and Argentina, but not in the U.S.
 Whether one person or a collective of multiple individuals is responsible for foreign policy decision making depends on the structure of the institutions of a specific society’s government .
 Foreign policy decisions can be made by different decision units at different times or concerning different types of issues . Within one country foreign policy decisions may be made in different parts of the country .
 The government can use the resources of the government, such as its military, to enforce their decision . The decision is important for a person or group to use the government's resources to enforce its decision .
 Prime Minister Thatcher’s decision to send the military to retake the islands was not easily reversed by any other person or agency . The decision was made within the British government and was made by 87 people .
 In sum, determining who has the ultimate power to decide is not simply a function of the type of government . It depends on identifying whether a single individual or a group has the authority to make a foreign policy decision .
 Making such a determination depends on substantive knowledge about the government in question, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Truman’s farewell address also implied that foreign policy is made through hierarchical organizations . The bottom line is that the ultimate decision maker is not always a single individual .
 Another part of the previous quotation reads, “The papers may circulate around the Government for a while but they finally reach this desk.” The papers may circumnavigation around the government for a long time but they eventually reach the desk. ‘The papers . may circulate
 This reflected the way he organized his White House and communications with various departments, the White House says . This reflected how he organized the way his administration handled communications with departments .
 Not all U.S. presidents, not all leaders, strive for this type of streamlined communications . Not all leaders strive for such streamlined communications.
 Some leaders purposely build multiple channels of information into their advisory systems . Some leaders use multiple channels to build up advisory systems to make decisions .
 He had joined the imperial court in the capital city of Addis Ababa as a teenager . He was a member of the Ethiopian imperial court .
 There, he found himself surrounded by the constant intrigues that were part of political life . "There, he was surrounded by constant intrigue," he said .
 In Ethiopia at the time, there were no formal institutions of government, and rule revolved around personal authority and loyalty to the Emperor . Rule was based on personal authority, loyalty to Emperor .
 Haile Selassie's ministers reported to him on a regular basis, to ensure he was fully informed of his situation .
 If a minister neglected to tell him something, the Emperor would surely find out about it from someone else . The Emperor would be sure to find out what he had to do .
 Each minister maximized control over how the affairs within his department were portrayed . By telling the Emperor himself, each minister maximizes control of how his department was portrayed .
 Ministers would be reprimanded and regarded as less trustworthy if they failed to inform the Emperor . Besides, ministers would be reproached and regarded less trustworthy . Their political careers depended on remaining in the Emperor's favor .
 Roosevelt's executive branch deliberately included overlapping jurisdictions, which led to conflict between departments, but also ensured that the President received information on policy problems from multiple perspectives . Roosevelt's office was deliberately included in overlapping jurisdictions to avoid conflict .
 Both men’s comfort with political intrigue, or the political game, was evident in the interview . So was their comfort with politics, or with the game .
 A leader’s personality is likely to affect how she or he organizes the executive . The personality of a leader can affect how it organizes an organization, experts say . A leader's personality will likely affect how the executive functions, they say .
 Some leaders are intent that their preferences shape policy . Others want policy choices to reflect a consensus among various viewpoints . Some leaders want policy decisions to reflect consensus .
 It also matters whether a leader wishes to be actively involved in foreign policy making, actively seeking out information and shaping the policy options, or relying on trusted advisors .
 Leaders are more likely to actively seek out information when they feel knowledgeable about foreign affairs and when they trust the bureaucracy . Leaders are also likely to seek information from the bureaucracy when they are confident in their knowledge of foreign affairs .
 In sum, there are many aspects of a leader’s personality that influence how much information she or he requires . This is based on a person's personality .
 This has implications for the organization of an effective advisory system, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . Hammond .
 In the remainder of this chapter, the discussion focuses on various aspects of the advisory system that surrounds the leader .
 Much of the advisory system rests below the surface of the ocean, not readily visible . Just like the largest part of an iceberg, much of that advisory system is not visible . The advisory system has been put in place by the government .
 "The tip of the iceberg consists of the leader and her or his immediate advisors," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The rest of the iceberg is the socalled permanent bureaucracy on which leaders rely for the information that shapes their policies and the implementation of their decisions . Leaders rely on the information they use to shape their policies .
 We are not always sure what those working within the bureaucracy do or how their work influences foreign policy decisions . Although we know the bureaucracy is there, we know it is there . We are often not sure what the bureaucracy does or how it affects foreign policy .
 The people with whom a leader surrounds heror himself matter matter . 89 The Tip of the Iceberg—Organizing the Executive—is to the executive .
 It is through the leader’s conversations with the immediate circle of advisors and associates that policy decisions take shape . The leader's conversations with advisers and associates are key to policy decisions .
 Truman portrayed himself as the final arbiter in the decision making process . He would have admitted that his advisors shaped his policies in significant ways . Truman would have said that he would have acknowledged that advisors shaped him .
 There is no such thing as a perfect advisory system; each system has its own pitfalls . There are no such things as perfect advisory systems, experts say . Each system has own pitfalls.
 Leaders have structured advisory systems in place of advisory systems . Leaders need to be able to make sure their advisory systems are in place .
 As you read them, consider how a leader’s personality might predispose her or him to organizing the executive along these lines .
 The formalistic approach to organizing the executive emphasizes a . hierarchical structure with a clear chain of command . The formalism approach emphasizes a hierarchical structure .
 This does not mean that the executive office of every leader who has employed this type of organization could be depicted with the same organizational chart . This doesn't mean that every leader's executive office is depicted with a similar chart .
 Leaders who employ this type of organizational structure endeavor to create an orderly decision process . It means that leaders who employ such an organizational structure are not just trying to create a decision-making process .
 Advisors each provide information on those aspects of a problem that is within their area of expertise and under the jurisdiction of their departments . Advisors provide the leader with information about those areas of their expertise .
 These advisors obtain information and advice from the individuals who work in their department or agency . These advisors, in turn, obtain information from their department, agency or agency.
 Some leaders will want each department head to provide them with advice, while the leader synthesizes the information, as did Truman . Truman synthesized the information with his team of experts .
 United States presidents have employed their White House staff to synthesize information and advice for them . More recently, the White House has employed its White House team to synthesise information .
 Other variations are possible within the scope of the formalistic model . The model is based on a formalistic approach .
 The flow of information and the spheres of competence of various advisors are clearly delineated . They all share common in common that the flow of info and the sphere of competence is clearly defined . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 Emperor Haile Selassie shows, the leader who organizes the executive along these lines actively uses multiple channels of information . The leader of a leader actively uses several channels to organize his organization .
 There is little cooperation between advisors in this type of advisory system . There is also little cooperation among advisors in such a system, experts say .
 All are keenly aware that the leader can access information from a variety of sources, including subordinates of the department heads . This creates an atmosphere of competition and conflict, according to the boss .
 Advisors vie for the leader’s ear and rush to be the first to convey new information . Advisors aU. rush to present the information in a way that portrays their department favorably or so they can play a crucial role in the framing of the policy problem .
 Advisers are likely to present partial, incomplete, or biased information . As a result, advisors often present partial or incomplete information . This information is likely to be incomplete or biased .
 Leaders arrive at a complete, or at least balanced, view of issues as a result of reconciling these various viewpoints, they say . Leaders come to a complete or balanced view of the issues they face, they write .
 When used well, it does place that leader at the hub of an extensive informational network . The leader is at the heart of an enormous network of information .
 There is a confluence of many different ideas and viewpoints at the center of government . In doing so, this approach can generate creative solutions, author says .
 The competitive system, if managed well, can generate solutions that can be creative, politically acceptable, and bureaucratically doable, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 There are leaders who see the advantages of the ability to ponder multiple perspectives and divergent information but not comfortable with the high level of internal conflict .
 They also want to avoid the potential loss or distortion of information that is inherent in the formalistic approach . Yet they also wish to avoid a potential loss of information .
 A third alternative takes advantage of the benefits that flow from obtaining a multiplicity of views but endeavors to cultivate a spirit of teamwork rather than competition . A third option is to use the benefits of obtaining a plurality of views in order to achieve success .
 The leader sits at the center of an extensive informational network . As in the competitive advisory system, the leader sits in an extensive network of information .
 Advisors debate policy options with one another as a group . Advisors do not provide information to the leader individually but debate options with each other . Advisers do not give information to each other individually .
 The objective of such discussions is to achieve a frank exchange of ideas, but without conflict that accompanies the competitive system . The aim is to aim to arrive at innovative policy proposals, the author says .
 The leader communicates directly with advisors but at times also reaches out to subordinates of department heads and obtains information outside the formal chain of command .
 There is also the risk that the team starts to think too much alike, and that the open exchange of ideas turns into too much mutual agreement . On the other hand, there is LEADERS ARE NOT ALONE . There is a risk that leaders are not alone, and there is
 The difficulty in making the collegial approach work is that it requires a delicate balance of diversity of opinion, mediating differences, and fostering a team spirit . The difficulty of making the approach work depends on a balance of opinion and mediating .
 Not all leaders have the skills to manage the interpersonal relations between their advisors to successfully maintain a collegial system across time .
 Each of the three approaches to the advisory system has its own advantages and disadvantages . The three approaches have their own advantages, disadvantages . Each approach to the current system is different and different .
 The formalistic system seeks to shield the leader from both types of conflict, whereas the competitive system exposes the leader to both . The competitive system is more exposed than formalistic .
 How well each works is likely to depend on whether the leader can effectively manage the chosen arrangement .
 Each system has the capacity to do well and also runs the risk of performing abysmally . Each system is capable of performing well but also runs at risk of abysmal .
 Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia, whose advisory system approximated the competitive approach, was introduced by the Emperor .
 This masterful politician has been described as an ‘African Louis XIV,” a reference to the centralization of power that took place during his rule . The masterful . politician has described himself as an African Louis XIV . He was described as a ‘masterful politician�
 Succession to the throne was not predetermined by birth order and family ties . Sons of cousins were certainly not the most likely successors to the . throne .
 Haile Selassie’s ascension to the throne was itself a testament to his political skill . He was the first African monarch to be elected to power .
 The government claimed that international media reports of the famine were “misinformed and exaggerated” and continued to deny its existence until May 1973 . The government denied existence of famine until May .
 Likelihood that High Low Low Low information will be No built-in checks . Likelihood of High Low High Low information . Multiple perspectives distorted on distortion of presented and presented and information openly debated debated debated .
 High for substantive leader is exposed to conflict substantive and Low for interpersonal interpersonal conflict conflict . Low for both High for both . High for leadership is High for conflict substantive . Low is High High for interpersonal conflict . High is High .
 Overall Low High High responsiveness of Focus on best Focus on feasible . May react slow or Highly dependent on both optimal and inappropriate leader’s skill and feasible involvement. May react slowly or may react slow . Highly dependent . on leader's skill .
 When it works well: consideration of High High High alternatives . Thorough, orderly. Thorough and orderly. When it comes to the top of the list: High High . High High. High alternatives. High High
 Emperor’s multiple channels of information that kept him “in touch with the least event,” kept him in touch . Emperor did occasionally use ‘the claim of ignorance” to deny responsibility for specific policies . Emperor used ‘claim of ignorance' to he able
 It would obviously displease the Emperor to hear of such problems within his country . The Emperor is said to be unhappy with the situation in China .
 Of course, it is difficult to establish conclusively what the Emperor did or did not know at a specific point in time, says historian .
 Emperor was in his early eighties, and some described him as ‘too old and senile’ to lead effectively . He had always aimed to be the fully informed central hub of government, but by the early 1970s he was 'too old'
 In fact, it appears that he may have become the captive of his immediate advisors, who took an active role in the day-to-day administration .
 When Hahe Selassie’s attention to detail diminished in his later years, his advisory system suffered . Just as Roosevelt‘s administration ‘spawned inefficiency’ when he could not personally manage the conflict between individuals with overlapping responsibilities,^® .
 With little formal structure, nor an emphasis on analysis, his advisory system increasingly distorted information, he says . The advisory system is increasingly distorted, he adds .
 Because it was buht on interpersonal connection, there were no mechanisms to prevent, or correct for, such distortion . Because of such distortion, there was no mechanism to prevent it, it was never fixed .
 The organization of the advisory system has consequences for decision making, says Dr. John Defterios . He says the system is designed to help people make decisions .
 Ethiopian Emperor was increasingly out of touch with events inside his own country . The deterioration of the competitive approach meant that an aging Emperor was . increasingly out-of-touch .
 The “master of marionettes” had become the father of a cohort of Pinocchios . The ‘master of . marionette’ had also become the . father of . a cohort .
 The story of the last Ethiopian emperor demonstrates the difficulty of managing a competitive advisory system . The Ethiopian emperor was the last emperor of Ethiopia .
 It also requires a personality that is comfortable with political conflict, as both Haile Selassie and Roosevelt were . It also needs a personality to be comfortable with conflict .
 Leaders who are less comfortable in such surroundings wiU choose either to emphasize teamwork, if they seek a hands-on role in decision making, as did John F Kennedy, or a more formal system with gatekeepers .
 The discussion of the advisory system has thus far focused on instances where there is a single leader with substantial control over the design of the system . This article provides a comparison of the discussion of advisory systems in the U.S.
 The leader may have more or less leeway in structuring the advisory system and choosing her or his advisors . Depending on the political system of a specific society, the leader may be able to have leeway .
 The more a leader has the ability to place his or her stamp on the organization of the executive, the more he or her personality will factor into the organizational structure .
 In a presidential system of government, the executive branch of government is separate from the legislative branch . In the U.S. presidential system, for instance, the president is kept in the executive and legislative branches of government .
 In a presidential system, the president usually has substantial leeway in organizing the executive to suit her or his decision making style . She or he has great autonomy in the selection of her or her advisors, she says .
 The prime minister owes her or his position directly to the support of the legislature . In a parliamentary system, the prime minister must support the legislature in order to have a job . The PM owes his job to the legislature, which means he must support his government .
 If the legislature withdraws its support, the prime minister is forced to resign . If the government withdraws support, a vote of no confidence could force him to step down .
 In a parliamentary system, the composition of the executive is less clearly determined by a single individual, depending on the electoral system of the country . The composition of an executive can be determined in part depending in part on the election system .
 In cases where a single party tends to win a parliamentary majority, a prime minister may exercise greater influence over the composition of government and the advisory system . In such cases, the prime minister is likely to exercise somewhat greater influence .
 The advisory system as a whole is less likely to be structured to suit a single personality . In cases where governments are composed of several political parties, such as in coalition cabinet government .
 Each member of the executive structures only a small circle of advisors in the department over which she or he presides . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Cabinet government is a group of ministers who jointly constitute the executive of a country . A cabinet government is the government of a nation .
 Each minister is expected to publicly support all cabinet decisions . They usually have collective responsibility, which means they usually support each other .
 Personal disagreements with collective decisions may not be voiced publicly . Personal disagreements may not always be voiced public .
 The cabinet is made up of a coalition of political parties, meaning that two or more political parties jointly form the government . The collective responsibility for political decision making is carried out by ministers who are affiliated with different political parties .
 The interactions of coalition governments are discussed in greater detail later in this chapter . The interactions between coalition governments will be discussed in more detail .
 The significance of the structure of the advisory system derives from the fact that it is often a function of the leader’s personality, and perhaps more importantly, from its implications for the decision making process . The importance of this structure derives from its role as a leader's adviser .
 In the next sections, we examine the functioning LEADERS ARE NOT ALONE 95 of the government bureaucracy as a whole and then turn to an examination of the smaller decision making groups that form the smaller advisory circle around a leader .
 A thread that runs through the discussion of the organizational structure of the advisory system is that inaccurate, incomplete, and biased information makes its way through such policy making bodies . The Rest of the Iceberg—the Government Bureaucracy—the government bureaucracy .
 In some cases, information is not accurate simply because someone made a mistake or did not research thoroughly enough to discover (through consultation of alternative sources) that their information was not reliable .
 As the discussion of information distortion makes clear, not all failures in policy making can be blamed on such problems . Not all failures can be attributed to such problems such as distortion of information .
 That does not mean that distortions are deliberate efforts to misinform. That doesn't mean that distortion is deliberate . It does mean there are distortions in the media, but there are real ones .
 No matter how well the advisory system works, it remains a political system . The advisory system is still a political process, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Advisors have their own perspectives on the world, as well as their own interests and ambitions, they say . Advisors often have own perspectives and ambitions of the world . The world's most powerful advisor is in the form of an adviser .
 Members of the permanent bureaucracy are not necessarily antagonistic to the leaders’ political agenda . Conversely, they are not antagonistic toward the leaders' political agendas .
 The formalistic model endeavors to follow the decision-making process prescribed by the normative model of rationality discussed in chapter 3 most closely .
 The normative model of rationality and the formalistic approach to the advisory system emphasize finding the “best” solution on the basis of thorough analysis of the problem and the available policy options .
 The normative model of rationality outlines how policy ought to be made . The formalistic approach organizes the relationships between the various individuals who are employed as members of the leader’s advisory system .
 To achieve a better understanding of the inner workings of the advisory system, we will need to delve into efforts to describe the actual advisory process . The process is described as the "advisory process"
 It is tempting to assume that foreign policy decisions are the result of a rational process in which the various agencies, departments, and offices that collectively constitute the government jointly serve an agreed-upon national interest .
 A COMPARATIVE INTRATION provides a fairly accurate description of how foreign policy is made . The author of this article provides an overview of the U.S. foreign policy .
 The process by which the policy response is selected starts by outlining the options, investigates the likely consequences of each, each, and settles on the option that promises the biggest benefit at the lowest possible risk and/or cost . The process starts by looking at the options and investigating the risks and
 Fundamental to analysis, as well as the judgment of cost and benefit, is the desire to serve the state’s interests . Fundamental to the analysis is the judgment on cost, benefit and benefit .
 This rational policy model does not take into account the possibility that information could become distorted in a complex advisory system made up of many individuals, offices, and agencies .
 It does not take into account that identifying the national interest is not necessarily straightforward . Neither does it take account that identification of national interest isn't necessarily straightforward, it says .
 The problems surrounding the concept of the national interest were discussed in some detail in chapter 3 . Chapter 3: Problems surrounding the idea of national interest discussed .
 Two alternative descriptions of the decision making process, the organizational process model and the bureaucratic politics model, were originally created as critiques of the rational policy model . Here, we delve into two alternative descriptions: organizational process and bureaucratic politics .
 The organizational process model envisions the government as a collection of organizations, centrally coordinated at the top, each with their own specialties and expertise, but also its own priorities and perceptions .
 Each organization, moreover, has its own customary ways or standard operating procedures, which are often abbreviated as SOPs .
 Organizations should be flexible when they confront a novel or unusual situation, says author . Organizations need flexibility when confronted by unusual situations, he says .
 Organizations respond to such situations by adapting rather than reinventing their standard operating procedures . According to this model, organizations respond to crises by adapting instead of reinventing .
 Adaptation consists of small and incremental changes to standard procedures . Adaptation is small but incremental changes in standard procedures are needed .
 Such changes are easier to implement, even if they are not an adequate response to the problem they are intended to address . Such changes would be easier to carry out, even though they're not always effective .
 According to this model, inadequate policy responses do not result from a failure to objectively evaluate the risks and benefits associated with various options, but from the inertia of established organizations . The model is based on this model .
 Choose policy alternative that best serves national interest . Adapted from Mison 19 69, 1971, Allison and Zelikow 1999 .
 The competitive style of organizing the executive also predicts an emphasis on feasible policy decisions . But it stresses the interactions among individuals rather than the inertia of organizations as the reasons for that emphasis .
 To understand the difference between organizational inertia and the interactions among individuals within the advisory system, we need to first delve into the details of the bureaucratic politics model .
 The bureaucratic politics model focuses on the role of individuals within governmental organizations . The model is based on individuals within government organizations .
 Advisors are also placed at a specific location within the hierarchical structure of that agency or department . Advisors can also be placed at specific locations within the hierarchy of that department .
 The individual who serves as the head of the agency is dependent upon her or his subordinates to provide information, analysis, and policy options . The individual is dependent on her or her subordinates .
 Agencies run the same risks for distortion of information that we discussed as part of the formalistic style of organizing the executive . Agencies are typically hierarchical structures and run the risk of distortion of data .
 The direction provided by the agency head influences that agency’s functioning . The agency head is responsible for most of the agency's operations .
 How much so will depend on the quality of leadership and the degree of follow-through is monitored . Follow-through will depend upon the quality and the extent of the following-throughs are monitored .
 Those working within the agency are not robots that simply follow orders, but individuals with their own interests and career aspirations . In addition to the agency's staff, those working within it are also individuals with own interests .
 Some may seek to help their superiors by highlighting information that supports their point of view and downplaying the information that contradicts it . Others may also seek to downplay the facts that contradict their views .
 Others may seek to advance their own career by establishing their expertise in a specific policy area . Others may also seek to establish their own expertise in specific policy areas .
 The relationships between superiors and subordinates affect the flow of information, and thereby the policy options that are proposed and the choices that are ultimately made . The relationships are only a small sampling of the many ways in which these relationships affect information flow .
 The bureaucratic politics model stresses that advisors’ perceptions and priorities are shaped by both the organizations that employ them and their personal ambitions and interests . The bureaucracy politics model is based on the model of a bureaucracy .
 Both the competitive and collegial style of organizing the executive recognize that this occurs and seek to harness the power of multiple perspectives . Both require considerable skill and involvement by the leader .
 "The formalistic style does not take either the complex advisory relationships or the distortion of information that can result from them into account," the author says .
 The leader is protected from much of the conflict that is likely to occur within the advisory system . On the contrary, it emphasizes the efficiency of formal bureaucratic structures and shields the leader from the conflict .
 The advisory system surrounding the leader can either mediate or aggravate the distortions in the flow of information from organizations and individuals within the bureaucracy . It is important to recognize that the advisory bureaucracy rarely functions as efficiently and dispassionately as the rational policy model assumes .
 It is the dynamics of this smaller advisory circle, which we now turn to . It is a smaller circle to which we are now turning .
 Leaders and their advisors depend on government agencies for information and advice . 99 Back to the Tip of the Iceberg—Decision Making in Small Groups .
 Policy makers meet face-to-face to make decisions based on the information and analysis provided by agencies and departments . It is in these small groups where policy makers meet with policy makers .
 We are primarily interested in groups that are no larger (and perhaps smaller) than a cabinet government . Here, we are looking at groups that have no larger than a government .
 The prime minister can become a dominant figure within the cabinet rather than simply one of the collective . Officially, cabinets usually have collective responsibility, but the prime minister has a dominant role .
 This is especially true in electoral systems that yield governments dominated by one political party, rather than a coalition of several parties . This is particularly true in election systems that have a single party dominant .
 British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, for instance, was such a dominant prime minister . Margaret Thatcher was one of the world's dominant leaders .
 The kind of group dynamics that are the subject of this section do happen in parliaments, but they are not usually part of the formal sessions of a parliament . The group dynamics are often not part of a formal session of parliament .
 Some of interactions described here could occur in larger groups . Others require the more intimate setting of a small group of people .
 Small groups serve a variety of functions in foreign policy decision making . Small groups are used to make decisions on foreign policy .
 Most foreign policy decision making situations involve creative interplay between individual efforts to make sense of the available information . This interplay yields greater insight than a single person could achieve within a short time frame .
 In cases where a group is jointly responsible, as with the Argentine junta encountered in chapter 3, this may accurately represent the power structure within the government . If we can assume equality among the members of the group, this could be true .
 Most of the time, even in groups of supposed coequals, there are subtle and informal hierarchies that shape the relationships among the individual members of the group .
 Mendez exercised greater influence over the decision than his colleagues . Mendez was seen as more knowledgeable, he exercised more influence over decision .
 In other situations, groups of advisors may make recommendations, but the responsibility ultimately rests with one individual leader . Truman described the situation as the example of the United States Presidency so aptly described .
 If the leader accepts the recommendation, the group appears to be the command center without having the ultimate authority . The leader appears to have the power of the group, but not the authority .
 The accuracy of the image of the group as a command center depends on the powers invested in that collectivity . Whether we should interpret it as one that makes decisions or one that simply advises, depends on how powers are invested in the collectivity, says the author .
 In the case of both the think tank and the command center role, the group is involved in the actual work of decision making . The group works at identifying the contours of the problem, discusses policy options, and so on .
 It can also devolve into a circle of sycophants, making a leader overconfident in the appropriateness of her or his judgments, rather than providing a gentle “reality check” when appropriate .
 Groups that are formally part of the government structure can serve as “smoke screens” behind which informal groups do the actual work of decision making . Three, groups that are officially part of government structure serve as smoke screens .
 Foreign policy making in societies that are governed by coalitions of parties with very different ideas about the policies that will best serve the state’s interests . Consider, for instance, foreign policy .
 Policy makers may prefer to sound out their colleagues in other parties informally and work out major differences before publicly debating the issues with one another . Policy makers might prefer to work out their differences informally rather than publicly debate them .
 The use of informal networks to work out agreements is common in other situations as well as other situations . Informal networks are common in many of the world's most famous social networks .
 Once differences of opinion become public, it will be harder for any of the decision makers to change their opinion, says CNN.com.com .
 Doing so could damage their political reputation or the party’s reputation, party's reputation, says Julian Assange . Assange: ‘Doing so would damage our reputation or our political reputation.’
 It could make either look like they are just “blowing with the winds” or compromising for the sake of expediency or their own advancement . It could also make them appear to be just ‘blowing’
 This discussion of the different roles played by small groups in foreign policy decision making is not exhaustive, nor is meant to be .
 Small groups perform important functions in addition to their role in the decision making process itself . Small groups are not wholly separate from that decision-making process but influence it, the author says .
 The actual decision making role of a group of policy makers is twofold, as previously introduced . Policy makers are responsible for the decisions made by the group .
 Groups play the role of think tank when they gather, organize, and process information to gain an understanding of the problem, i.e., construct a representation of it . Groups play a role of thinking tank when gathering, organizing, and processing information .
 Groups act as a command center that develops and evaluates options . Two, groups act as command centers that develop and evaluate options . Groups are based in Washington, D.C.
 The same group of individuals may fulfill both the think tank and command center roles . The group may also be able to work together in the U.S.
 Colleagues and Competitors are both colleagues and competitors . Advisors are both competitors and competitors. Advisors should be friends and family members .
 As we saw earlier, the competitive executive management style aggravates and utilizes elements of competition among the policy makers who surround the leader .
 The collegial style, on the other hand, seeks to foster collegial interaction while acknowledging the multiplicity of viewpoints . The style of the U.S. Senate style is similar to that of the House of Representatives .
 The formalistic style pushes competition and conflict away from the tip of the policy making iceberg . The formalism style is a formality that pushes conflict and conflict out of the top of the iceberg .
 The thread than runs through each of these three descriptions of government decision making is that individual and organizational factors influence problem representations and decisions . The thread that runs through these three describes government decision-making is that .
 A policy maker can act coegially and loyally to achieve her or his ends or can choose to subvert the career of a superior or a colleague . More importantly, you have probably noticed that the policy making process is rife with opportunities to advance the cause of the national interest
 The bureaucratic politics model specifically mentions bargaining, which implies that the decision making process involves give-and-take . The preferences of any one policy maker never fully shape the decision but often partially do so, the model says .
 This suggests some form of compromise as the likely result of the bargaining process . This is likely to be the result of a compromise in the negotiation process .
 A small group of advisors close to the leader may be able to arrive at an integrative solution easier than a coalition cabinet made up of representatives of several different political parties .
 This situation can emerge in small groups as well, especially if the members of the group are of unequal status . This is especially true in groups of small groups, such as small groups .
 When such acquiescence emerges quickly and without much debate, the decision process is more accurately characterized as one of concurrence . The decision process was more accurately described as a "concurrence" than a debate .
 Decision makers quickly settle on an option they jointly perceive as a reasonable solution . Instead, the decision makers decide on what they think is a reasonable option .
 In terms of the poliheuristic theory , it may mean that only one option met the noncompensatory criteria in the first stage of decision making .
 Other options are sought and considered, but quickly disposed of because they either are not politically feasible or simply not adequate policy responses to the problem . In other words, other options may be sought, considered, and then disposed of .
 Depending on the situation and on other simultaneous problems that demand the time and attention of policy makers, this may be a reasonable way to deal with a situation . This may be the best way of dealing with the situation in the world .
 The primary problem is that decision makers fail to critically examine their problem representations and the option before them, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Argentina's decision makers at the time seems to have considered the possibility . None of the decision makers in Argentina at the . time seemed prepared to consider the possibility of the . possibility .
 They all perceived Foreign Minister Mendez as more expert than themselves . And if they did, they kept quiet . They kept quiet because they all perceived him as more experts than themselves.
 In essence, groupthink is the problem of a distorted and onesided problem representation based on incomplete or faulty information . No member of the group questions the person they all see as more expert might be wrong . No one dares to suggest that the expert they all think is wrong .
 He was aware that his presence might influence the nature and content of the discussions among his advisors . He said he was aware of his presence in the White House .
 A COMPARATIVE INTRICTION account account but which can also devolve into a closed system of mutual support . The account is based on an account that can be used to support each other's interests .
 When the system does not work well, it is likely to fall into the trap of the system . When it does not, it will fall into precisely this trap .
 "The formalistic style has no built-in mechanism to counteract the distortion of information," the author says .
 When it works well, the emphasis on analysis helps avoid the problem of groupthink . But when it does not work well, this style of organizing the executive may also suffer from groupthink without realizing that its distorted view of the issue is not an accurate representation .
 In countries such as the U.S. where the President selects the members of the executive, the occurrence of irresolvable differences among small groups of top advisors should be rare .
 When coalition cabinets are truly deadlocked, tbis may result in the resignation of a minister or even the fall of the government .
 The frequency with which this happens varies, depending on the issues as well as the political traditions within a specific country . The frequency of this happening varies .
 Even in countries where members of government serve at the pleasure of the prime minister or president, is it possible for advisors to have very strong differences with regard to specific policy problems?
 National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance were at odds over direction of foreign policy .
 If they are successful, others in the group come around to see the situation from the point of view of the persuader . If they're successful, they will be able to persuade others to take the situation seriously .
 The difference between persuasion and a subset solution is that it does not require that the persuader have fully convinced his or her colleagues, only that he or she has achieved sufficient agreement among them that they are willing to go along with the proposal .
 The difference between persuasion and compromise is that the former is not an integrative solution that reflects the starting preferences of all members of the group . The difference is not the same as a compromise that reflects all members' starting preferences, it says .
 A subset solution can connote either a partial compromise or partial persuasion . Hence, a subset solution connotes either a compromise or a partial persuasion.
 Comparing the preferences of the advisors at the outset of their deliberations with the decision could help evaluate whether a specific subset solution is best characterized as compromise or persuasion . Comparing preferences of advisors at outset of deliberations with decision can help evaluate if compromise is best described as compromise, persuasion .
 Information about the initial positions of decision makers is not always easy to obtain . Information is often difficult to obtain, but it's important to know the initial position of the decision makers .
 Decision makers often cloak their statements about decisions in terms of bargaining, even if that’s not exactly what happened . Decision makers don’t always say exactly what they mean, even though they say they are bargaining .
 If foreign policy analysts accept decision makers’ own characterization of the decision making process, it is likely that they will overestimate the degree to which bargaining plays a role in decision making .
 The four decision processes described in the previous section define that process primarily by the manner in which the outcome is achieved . Strategies of Influence is defined by the outcome of the outcome .
 Each of the policy makers involved is likely to be trying to manipulate the decision process to increase the chances that the decision she or he favors will dominate or significantly influence the decision .
 Political manipulation is defined as the effort made by one or more individuals to influence a situation in which a group is making a decision in a way that increases the chances that the outcome will reflect their preferences . Political manipulation can be defined as an effort to influence the outcome of a decision .
 In chapter 3 we likened the inevitable gaps in information to Swiss cheese . The book is generally ill-structured . We compare the book to a Swiss cheese cheese cheese .
 This means that knowledgeable and well-informed policy makers can differ greatly in their assessments of the same situation . This is especially true in the United States .
 The impact of these differences of interpretation on the decision making process will depend also on the personal characteristics and ambitions of the individuals involved . The impact will depend on the individual characteristics of those involved in the process .
 Let’s examine each of the three types of strategies previously mentioned in a little more detail:® 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 5 . 4. 4 . 5. 6. 5: 5. 4: 5 . 5: 6. 6: 5:
 Policy makers sometimes try to influence the composition of the decision-making group . Policy makers often try to change the composition .
 This can be achieved either by excluding a colleague whose opinions contradict one’s own or by trying to include additional members into the group who will support one's position . This is possible to exclude colleagues who disagree with one's own opinion .
 Exclusion can be achieved formally only by policy makers who have the clout to play a role in determining membership in a particular decision making group . It is also possible to schedule meetings at a time when the individual with the opposing opinion happens to be out of town or to hold informal meetings with
 Including additional members into the group can sometimes be justified on the basis of their expertise and can be useful in providing additional support for one’s position .
 It is possible to strengthen the credibility of a viewpoint by claiming to speak for one’s superior . It is also possible to make a claim for one's superior, he says .
 It's important to include a person's opinion into the debate, it serves to lend greater weight to one’s own point of view . Doing so not only includes the opinion of a person, it also includes that person's own opinion .
 Efforts to influence how an issue is framed are especially effective at the early stages of the decision-making process . Efforts are especially successful at the beginning stages of a decision process .
 Framing and problem representation are discussed in chapter 3, although the relevance for group decision making was not highlighted . Framing, problem representation and group decision-making were not highlighted.
 Individual decision makers are likely to frame problems each in their own distinctive way . Individual decisions will be made by individual decision makers, say experts .
 Group deliberates the contours of the problem before moving on to outlining and discussing options . Once they join one another in a group to deliberate how to respond to this problem, they will operate on the basis of this individual problem representation .
 By influencing the group’s collective problem representation, an individual policy maker can manipulate which options will then have a greater likelihood of being cho3.3.
 Policy makers are likely to use a variety of tactics to influence how they and others in the group are perceived . Policy makers may also use tactics to manipulate who participates and how the problem is framed .
 It requires a lot of planning and patience to structure a debate in such a way to get colleagues to agree with you on minor points to build to the inevitable conclusion you set out .
 Leaks can easily backfire and have negative implications for the reputation of the source of the leak . This is a risky strategy, writes CNN.com's John Defterios . Leaks are risky, he says, because leaks can easily be backfired .
 It can damage the advisory system because its members can no longer trust that their deliberations will remain confidential . The advisory system is damaged by its inability to trust its members to keep its deliberations confidential, experts say .
 It can be attractive strategy for someone who cannot get his or her voice heard within the group or to circumvent a rival . Yet it can also be an attractive strategy to circumvent rival .
 Other strategies may be used by policy makers as they seek to influence the decision process . Policy makers may also use strategies to influence decision making .
 Whether that process is best characterized by bargaining, concurrence, deadlock, or persuasion will depend on the tactics group members use to influence one another .
 Small advisory groups are especially common in political systems with a strong executive, such as in presidential systems . The advisory groups, with their strategies and political games, are often common in those with strong executive .
 The entire advisory system ultimately coalesces at the tip of the iceberg where the president or prime minister can’t pass the buck to anybody, as U.S. President Harry Truman said .
 A different situation is found in parliamentary governments where coalition cabinets are common . A coalition cabinet is more common than a coalition cabinet .
 This does not mean that the dynamics of advisory systems, bureaucracies, and political manipulation are irrelevant . This doesn't mean that advisory systems and bureaucracies are irrelevant, it does mean that political manipulation is irrelevant .
 It does mean that decisions are ultimately made by a group of policy makers who represent different political parties and agendas . Policy makers are made up of different parties and policy agendas .
 In political systems in which the ultimate responsibility rests with a single chief executive, such as a president, advisory groups are not ultimately responsible for the final decision . Governing Together is a concept of governing together .
 In parliamentary cabinet government, heads of the various departments share collective responsibility for policy decisions . The heads of each department share responsibility for decisions, at least in a formal or legal sense .
 The prime minister is in that case considered to be the primus inter pares . Prime minister holds the special position of head of the collective but is not superior in rank to her or his colleagues .
 Prime Minister often carries greater weight in decision making than other members of the group . In practice, though, the prime minister often carries more weight than the other members .
 This is especially true in parliamentary systems where a single party dominates the government . This is usually the case in Britain .
 Prime ministers like Margaret Thatcher and Tony Blair acted as the central figures of their governments, leading to the “presidentialization” of cabinet government . Margaret Thatcher was the prime minister of Britain in the 1980s and 1990s .
 When the cabinet is created out of a coalition of political parties rather than one dominant party, the situation is different . When the government is formed from a coalition, it will be different from a dominant party's dominant party .
 In such cases, cabinets remain closer to the principle of collective responsibility in their decision-making .
 Coalition cabinets bring together representatives of two or more political parties for the purposes of governing a country . Coalition cabinets are brought together by representatives of parties in order to govern the country .
 Each party’s presence in the coalition is proportional to its relative presence in parliament and also reflects its electoral gains in the most recent election . The coalition is based on the relative presence of each party in parliament .
 The exact distribution of power among the coalition partners is the subject of negotiations . Parties that have agreed to form a government together are still negotiating .
 Before signing a coalition agreement, representatives of these parties negotiate not only the number of ministers each party will provide but also which ministries each will hold, as well as the general outlines of the policy agenda that will guide their government .
 Coalition cabinets rest on the foundation of carefully worked-out agreements between the parties that constitute them, but those agreements can never fully specify policy decisions in advance . Coalition cabinets must be carefully worked out, but not fully specified policy decisions .
 They bargain and persuade, sometimes they concur, and sometimes they deadlock . They bargain, persuade, occasionally concur and sometimes deadlock, they say . Sometimes they agree, but sometimes they do not agree, they are deadlocked .
 Failure to reach agreement on one important policy problem can spell the end of the coalition government . Such deadlock can have consequences far beyond the policy issue itself . The party that cannot get its way threatens to abandon the coalition .
 This is a high price to pay for disagreement, because it necessitates at a minimum another round of negotiations for a new coalition agreement . But it can possibly also lead to a new round of elections, which could possibly also result in a new election .
 It can give the smaller, or junior, party influence beyond its relative strength in the coalition . It can also give a smaller party influence .
 Junior party is in a position to “blackmail’s the larger, or senior, party into agreement, assuming that the senior coalition partner would prefer to continue its government role . In essence, the junior party can "blackmail" the larger or senior party into an agreement
 A more positive interpretation is to view the junior coalition partner as providing a corrective by not permitting the senior coalition partner to always get its way or push through its own policy agenda . The junior coalition partners are not always getting their way or pushing through their own policies .
 It is important to note that junior parties do not have significant influence on every single decision . Junior parties are not always influential enough to influence every decision .
 Not much is known about circumstances that permit junior coalition partners to place their stamp on policy, but it appears that the threat to abandon the coalition is an important strategy for exercising disproportionate power .
 If the junior party has a share of the important, or core, ministries roughly equivalent to the share of core ministries held by the senior coalition partner, it can exercise greater influence than when it is largely relegated to politically peripheral ministries such as culture . The junior party can exercise more influence than
 Whether policy makers function within the institutional constraints of coalition governments or guide a leader who has been able to structure the advisory system that surrounds her or him, each case the institutional arrangements have an influence on the decision making process .
 No institutional arrangement is perfect; each has its own advantages and pitfalls . Each institutional arrangement has own advantages, pitfalls, says CNN.com .
 How well each institutional arrangement works will depend on the leader’s ability to use the system to its full potential . How well the leader uses the system depends on how well he uses it .
 This depends on how well the leader’s personality is suited to the institutional arrangements . And this, in turn, depends on the strength of the institution, the leader .
 It also depends on wisely chosen advisors, who understand the institutional framework in which they operate and the person for whom they are working . It's also important to be wisely chosen advisers, says David Cameron .
 Even under the best of circumstances, foreign policy outcomes depend on more than good decision making . Foreign policy outcomes are more important than good decisions making, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Domestic and international constraints also play a role in determining whether policy decisions lead to the desired outcome . Domestic or international constraints play a key role in deciding policy decisions .
 Each leader personality requires a certain leader personality to work well and avoid that style’s disadvantages . Each leader has a different leader personality that works well and avoids that style .
 Processes can alternatively lead to an integrative, subset, or dominant solution . These processes can lead to a solution that can be integrated, subset or dominant .
 Decision units Decision units Formalistic approach Gompetitive approach Gollegial approach . Presidential system Presidential system Parliamentary system . Electoral system Goalition cabinet Gabinet government Goalition goalition cabinet .
 An Intimate Study of the Presidency, and George, George, Presidential Decisionmaking in Foreign Policy: The Effective Use of Information and Advice. George, President Obama, President George W. Bush and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. George. President Obama. President Bush. Bush.
 The dynamics of advisory groups are the subject of Kowert, Groupthink or Deadlock . Garrison, Garrison, Games Advisors Play: Foreign Policy in the Nixon and Garter Administrations .
 Herman, Herman, and Hagan, “How Decision Units Shape Foreign Policy Behavior,” they say .
 Hermann and Preston, “Presidents, Advisers, and Foreign Policy,” 78; . Johnson, Managing the White House, 4. Johnson, 4 .
 George, Presidential Decisionmaking in Foreign Policy, 165; Johnson, Managing the White House, 6. George, 9. Johnson, 5. Johnson . George, 7. Johnson: "The White House is a great place to be in the world"
 See Lijphart, Patterns of Democracy, and Parliamentary versus Presidential Government . See Lijnphart .
 Allison: "Conceptual Models" see also Allison, Essence of Decision, or Allison and Zelikow, Essence . Allison: “Conceptually Models” is Allison’s book, “Essence of Decision’. Allison, ‘Concept
 Hart, Stern, and Sundelius, andSundelius: Beyond Groupthink . Hart: “Irving Janis’ Victims of Groupthink’s Groupthink are victims of groupthink.” Hart: Groupthink.
 Perlmutter: “The Presidential Political Center and Foreign Policy” Richards, “Coordination and Shared Mental Models,” 261.
 Domestic Constraints on Foreign Policy Making Chapter Preview Explains how relations among government bureaucracies constrain foreign policy making . Chapter Preview: Relations among government bureaucracy constrain policymaking .
 President Obama spoke to CNN.com's John Sutter about the impact of domestic audiences on foreign policy decision making. Explains that domestic audiences influence foreign policy decisions .
 Explains the role of the media in framing and focusing pubic attention on foreign policy . Explains how the media plays a role in framing foreign policy in the U.S.
 Explains the influence of national history and culture on foreign policy decision making . Explains how history influences foreign policy making .
 Democratic peace proposition for foreign policy making. Explains the relevance of the democratic peace proposition . Explains why peace is important to foreign policy .
 Congress would not permit the U.S. to enter the war at that point, he says . He also knew that Congress wouldn't permit the United States to enter .
 In the period between the two World Wars, the U.S. had returned to isolationism, which meant that the country avoided an active role in world affairs .
 This policy was supported by the domestic public as well as the Congress, which made it difficult for President Roosevelt to get what he wanted . Roosevelt was able to get the policy he wanted, but it was difficult for him to get it .
 Leaders almost always face domestic constraints on foreign policy making . Leaders often face domestic and foreign policy decisions .
 Policy options must not only respond appropriately to the situation, they must also be acceptable at home . Policy options need to be acceptable to the public, not only but also acceptable to home, say experts .
 Decision makers must also evaluate how such options will be received by the domestic audience . Decision makers need to consider whether such options constitute effective and appropriate responses to the situation .
 This may include the ability of the executive to convince the legislature, as well as understanding of domestic constituencies outside of government . Depending on the country and the relationship between the executive and legislative branches, this may include a thorough understanding of constituencies outside government .
 In chapter 3, we briefly alluded to the influence of domestic political considerations in decision making . We discussed the poliheuristic theory in chapter 3 of this article .
 Theory posits that the decision process is divided into two stages . You may remember that this theory .
 During the first stage, options are excluded if they are not acceptable on one critically important dimension . Options are excluded from consideration if they do not meet criteria on one of these dimensions .
 In order to remain in office, leaders need the support of the domestic public . Leaders need support, or at a minimum the acquiescence, from domestic public, to stay in office . Leaders must also have the support or acquiescence of domestic public to stay on top .
 Options that a leader judges to be unacceptable to the domestic audience will be eliminated during the first stage of the decision-making process .
 President Roosevelt knew that the United States needed to come to the aid of the countries fighting the Axis powers . But he also knew that proposing direct American military involvement was not a politically feasible option .
 President Obama knew he would not be able to convince either Congress or the domestic public . He knew he was not going to convince them either .
 Roosevelt’s options were constrained by the isolationist attitude that prevailed domestically . Roosevelt's options were limited by his isolationist stance, he says .
 Constraints narrow a leader’s options, but can also lead to creative solutions, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Constraints are narrow but can be creative solutions"
 Before the attack on Pearl Harbor, the U.S. Congress passed the L.Lease Act, which provided for the shipment of large amounts of war materials, including tanks and planes .
 It was a clever idea that stretched the boundaries of the domestic constraints to—and perhaps beyond—their limits . It was the first time the U.S. government has been able to use the power of the White House in a presidential election .
 The U.S. was officially neutral with regard to the war that was raging in Europe . It placed the United States squarely on the side of the Allies at a time when the country was neutral . The United States was on the war's side when it joined the Allies .
 The lend-lease policy enabled Roosevelt to act on an international threat at a time when the domestic public and Congress were hesitant to involve the United States in wars between other countries .
 The policy provided support to the Allied war effort without direcdy involving the United States, making it acceptable to Congress . Congress passed the policy without involvement in the U.S.
 The Lend-Lease Act shows that constraints may not just narrow the available policy options but may also lead to innovative policy responses . The Act was passed by the US Senate last year .
 How constraints are managed depends on leaders and their advisors . How constraints can be managed depends upon leaders and advisors .
 Their ability to evaluate the domestic environment and perceive not only the limitations but also the opportunities it presents affect foreign policy decisions they make .
 In this chapter, the focus is on domestic constraints, and in chapter 6 we investigate how international constraints influence foreign policy decision making . In chapter 6, we look at the impact of international constraints on foreign policy .
 Foreign policy makers always navigate between domestic and international pressures . Both are important, and foreign policy makers must navigate between them .
 Like all citizens of their society, they have been shaped by it through their upbringing and education . They may have lesser or greater awareness of the extent to which their understanding of history and international affairs is culturally determined .
 Decision makers who have attained a great deal of comparative insight have achieved a deep appreciation for the different perceptual lenses with which the leaders of various countries view the world .
 Decision makers have a sophisticated understanding of the political system of their own country . More typically, decision makers have to understand their own political system .
 They also strive to achieve a thorough understanding of domestic constituencies . They also aim to be able to reach out to their constituencies .
 The press freedom associated with democracies makes it easier for decision makers to acquire information about the reaction of the domestic public to their decisions and proposals . This is true irrespective of the system of government, but it is true regardless of the country's political system . The world's most powerful democracy is
 At the end of chapter 4, we discussed bargaining among coalition partners . We also discussed bargaining with the U.S. government .
 Whether or not a coalition cabinet is needed depends on the electoral system, or the rules that govern the elections of countries with parliamentary government . The electoral system and the rules governing the elections in those countries are different .
 Countries that elect their representatives from single-member districts usually end up with two dominant political parties . However, additional parties often do exist in the districts .
 Countries that elect multiple members of the legislature from one district are more likely to have a larger number of political parties . Each of those parties tends to control a smaller proportion of the seats in parliament .
 A coalition of two or more political parties is needed to obtain the majority required to pass legislation and to form a government . When no single party obtains a majority in the legislature, a coalition is needed in order to obtain a majority .
 How the members of parliament are elected has consequences for the type of government that results . In other words, how the members are elected have consequences for government . How they are elected affects how the country's government is formed .
 In chapter 4, we discussed the possibility that the junior coalition partner exercises influence beyond its numerical presence in the cabinet . In chapter 3, we discuss the possibility of a junior coalition party exercising influence beyond numerical influence .
 This gives the junior coalition partner power beyond its numerical strength within the coalition . This gives them power beyond their numerical strength in the coalition.
 A country’s domestic political structure affects foreign policy in other ways as well as its foreign policy . A country's domestic politics can affect foreign policy as well, experts say .
 Leaders often have less direct influence over the structure and functioning of the government bureaucracy . Unlike the advisory system or the governing coalition, leaders often don't have direct influence .
 Government agencies facilitate emergence of new ideas or make change difficult to achieve . Government agencies may facilitate the emergence of a new idea, or make it difficult for change .
 Government bureaucracy often functions as a constraint on leaders and their advisors . Government bureaucracy frequently functions as constraints on leaders, their advisors, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We discuss the structural elements of the government bureaucracy and its constituent parts that influence both the flow of ideas and policy implementation . To illustrate, we discuss the structure of government bureaucracy .
 The government’s foreign policy bureaucracy consists of many organizations and agencies, including agencies .
 Ins insulated agency is an autonomous or independent entity within the government bureaucracy . Ins insulated agencies have their own resources and organizational structure . An insulated agency can be independent or independent of the government .
 The U.S. Peace Corps is an example of such an insulated agency . The Peace Corps has been criticized for being too insulated by the government .
 An embedded agency, on the other hand, may have a clear mandate, but is created as a subunit of a larger entity . The embedded agency may be created as an agency with a clear mission, but not as an entity with clear mandate . The agency's mandate is clear,
 "As part of that larger entity, it will have a structure that is largely determined by the organization of which it is a part" "It will also depend on that larger organization for resources," he says .
 Embedded agencies have less autonomy and are less able to develop their own organizational identity, criteria for advancement, or other unique structural features, say experts . Embedded agency has less autonomy than other agencies in the U.S.
 The Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs was created as an embedded agency within the U.S. State Department . The agency is embedded within the United States' State Department.
 An idea-based agency can over time influence other agencies within the government bureaucracy . If they LEADERS IN CONTEXT can do so in ways that resonate with their counterparts in other agencies .
 In contrast, representatives of an interest-based organization can bargain with those in other organizations . Depending on its power and stature within the government bureaucracy, may have greater or lesser success .
 In the end, the norms and values of idea-based organizations give such entities an advantage in their interactions with other agencies within the government .
 This is especially true for embedded idea-based organizations . It is also more difficult for such agencies to successfully maintain their unique mission and identity over time .
 Maintaining a core identity is easier for insulated idea-based organizations, but it is also more difficult for such agencies to propagate their ideas successfully to other government agencies . Maintainaining a central identity is difficult for insulated organizations .
 The Peace Corps has carved out a unique mission and autonomous identity . It has had little impact on other foreign policy agencies within the United States government .
 The founding ideas of the Peace Corps revolved around the promotion of development and the creation of goodwill among allies in the developing world . The Peace Corps is based in Washington, D.C. and New York .
 In this, it was very much a creature of the Cold War, with its focus on allies and enemies . In this case, the U.S. was focused on allies, not enemies .
 The direct action of the Peace Corps Volunteers was at the heart of the agency’s strategy . The Peace Corps is a volunteer group of volunteers who volunteer in the United States .
 Despite its survival and continued relevance, the Peace Corps has not had much impact beyond its own activities . The Peace Corps is a non-profit organization that has been in existence since 2001 .
 It has influenced neither decision making regarding foreign aid and development, nor U.S. foreign policy as a whole, it has influenced any decision making .
 It initially had highly conflictual relationships with other bureaus within the State Department . The State Dept. initially had a conflictual relationship with other State Department agencies .
 During the subsequent Presidency of Ronald Reagan, the mission of the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs was changed to no longer include economic rights . The mission was changed during the subsequent presidency of Reagan .
 In this altered form, the bureau now focuses on human rights violations and civil and political rights .
 By the end of the second Reagan administration, the bureau had begun to influence U.S. foreign policy . The bureau had also moved away from its founding ideas .
 A comparison of bureaucracy influences their capacity to propagate ideas . bureaucracy influences the capacity to propagate ideas .
 Peace Corps is more likely to stay true to its founding principles but less likely to infuse other agencies with its ideas . An insulated agency, such as the Peace Corps, is likely to remain true to the founding principles .
 An embedded agency, such as the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, is less likely to stay true to its founding ideas, but more likely to infuse other agencies with its ideas, provided it remains in existence .
 In sum, the structural relationships among agencies within the government bureaucracy influence whether new ideas remain isolated in small corners or provide the impetus for new directions in a state’s foreign policy more broadly .
 Whether an agency is created as an insulated or embedded entity is a political decision . The agency's creation is subject to the same decision processes that characterize all political decision making .
 It has consequences for the functioning of the agency and especially for the likelihood that the agency’s founding ideas will survive and influence policy .
 The structural relationships between agencies influence whether ideas thrive in isolation, have a more general influence on the state’s foreign policy, or become muted and have little or no impact . The structural relationship between agencies determines whether ideas are successful or muted .
 The bottom line is that “ideas do not float freely”;”’s flourish or flounder depending on the institutional context within which they hnd themselves.’
 Domestic pressures may take several different forms . How Domestic Constituencies influence foreign policy is a key part of U.S. policy .
 "There are explicit pressures exerted by interest groups, the media, and public opinion," she says . "There is explicit pressure exerted by the public," she adds .
 The degree to which these domestic constituencies influence foreign policy is difficult to gauge . The degree of influence is hard to gauge in foreign policy .
 The relationship between decision makers and domestic constituencies is shaped in part by the political institutions of the society . The relationship is shaped by political institutions, the author says .
 Authoritarian governments provide very few, if any, avenues for citizens to explicitly influence foreign policy . Authoritarian leaders provide few opportunities to directly influence foreign policies . Authoritative governments provide few avenues for citizen participation in foreign policy.
 This does not mean that the public has no impact, but it does mean that its impact is likely to be largely indirect or implied . The public is not likely to have a direct or indirect impact on the economy .
 Decision makers in authoritarian societies face few explicit domestic constraints, experts say . Decision makers face little explicit domestic restraints, they say .
 Citizens cannot join interest groups, it is difficult for polling firms to keep their pulse on the public’s opinions and attitudes, and the media are often not free . Polling firms are often unable to keep a pulse on public opinion and attitudes if they are allowed to poll .
 Leaders in such societies do seek to understand their public, if only because this helps them stay in power . Despite this, leaders in such a society do try to understand the public .
 Leaders present foreign policy problems and decisions in terms of verbal imagery that they believe will resonate with their domestic audience . They try to convince their audience that their policies are in the national interest, as defined by the leader .
 Such countries may hold elections and maintain a set of institutions that give the appearance of democracy without providing either citizens or the press with the freedoms necessary to foster political debate . Such countries might hold elections but not give citizens the freedoms needed to foster debate .
 In authoritarian societies that lack a free press, leaders pay far more attention to certain segments of the population than to others . Domestic constraints in authoritarian societies are also to be considered in their decisions .
 This makes it important to understand the opinions among that segment of the population and among those civilian elites who could exercise influence on those in the military . This is important for the U.S. to understand .
 Widespread dissatisfaction among a population could be used by military officers as a justification for the overthrow of a leader . Military officers could use dissatisfaction with the leader or with the conditions within the country to justify overthrow .
 In societies where people are not free to create organizations, it may be difficult for citizens to build the organizational infrastructure necessary to plan effective action against a leader . Citizens may not be able to build an organization that can take action against leaders .
 Not only organized but also has ready access to weapons and the training to use them . The U.S. military is organized and trained to use weapons in combat .
 Semi-authoritarian societies differ from authoritarian societies in that there are wider possibilities for protest . Semi authoritarian societies have wider possibilities of protest than authoritarian ones . Semi-autocratic societies are less likely to be authoritarian societies .
 The media are generally not fully free in some countries, although the press in such countries can be surprisingly bold in its criticism of government decision makers .
 Semi-authoritarian governments differ in terms of how much press freedom they are willing to tolerate . Semi authoritarian governments differ on how much freedom they allow press freedom .
 They may react to criticism by shutting down media outlets and jailing journalists, CNN.com reports . They may shut down media and jail journalists, they say . They say they may also jail journalists .
 Leaders of such countries face fewer explicit domestic constraints than decision makers in democratic societies . But they ignore their domestic constituencies at their peril, says Julian Zelizer . As a result, leaders of such nations are less constrained by their domestic constraints .
 In democratic societies, the public has more avenues formally available to express dissent . In democratic society, public have more avenues for expressing dissent, says CNN.com .
 Open institutional structures provide greater access and more contact points for interest groups and other societal actors . Open institutions provide more opportunity to influence decision making. Open institutions have greater access to interest groups .
 Americans often perceive foreign policy as something that is quite distant from them, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "One of the greatest challenges of foreign policy is that it is not a matter of policymaking"
 Decision makers often try to mold public opinion by presenting problems from a particular perspective . At the same time, decision makers often also try to present problems with a different perspective .
 The public’s impact on foreign policy is dependent on a delicate dance between decision makers’ efforts to anticipate public opinion, their attempts to shape public reactions, and efforts by (segments of) the public to shape the set of options decision makers will perceive to be viable strategies
 First, it's important to distinguish crisis and non-crisis foreign policy problems, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The former usually focus the attention of the domestic audience for a short period of time, when the issue is highlighted in the media, while the latter can occupy decision makers for long periods of time without much media attention .
 There is some debate as to when its impact is felt most clearly . Second, although it appears that the domestic audience plays a role at specific junctures of the decision .
 One scholar argues that policy makers can define a problem’s contours without much explicit attention to or input from the public . Another argues that public opinion has a direct impact on getting issues on the agenda .
 Recent attention to the AIDS crisis in Africa owes much to celebrities like U2’s Bono . Bono focusing the media's attention on this continent . AIDS crisis has impact on economic development and political stability in Africa .
 The path that ultimately led to the war in Iraq first depended on the U.S. government's portrayal of Saddam Hussein’s regime as tied to terrorism . On the other hand, the path to the Iraq war was based on the United States' portrayal of Hussein's regime as
 Whether or not such a connection did indeed exist prior to the invasion is a matter of debate .
 Previous U.S. administrations had defined Iraq as a rogue state . Nevertheless, previous United States administration defined it as rogue state. Nevertheless, the United States has declared Iraq a rogue country .
 Most countries classified as rogue states do not conduct their foreign relations according to international diplomacy . There are no clear and transparent criteria for defining a state as such, but most countries that are classified rogue states don't conduct foreign relations .
 The problem representation phase in this case involved primarily the leader’s circle of advisors . Hence, the problem represented by the leader's circle of advisers .
 This suggests that crises and national security problems differ from other foreign policy issues in terms of how and when public opinion matters . This suggests . It suggests that national security . problems differ . from other crises .
 It is often the leader and his or his immediate circle of advisors who define a crisis as a crisis . In addition, it is often also the leader of his or her immediate circle, advisors . The leader defines a crisis by defining it as crisis .
 The public’s attention builds steadily and is usually greatest during the implementation phase . Decision makers may have greater leeway in defining, or framing, the problem during a crisis .
 The U.S. war in Iraq continues to make headlines well into 2007 . Consider that the United States war is still making headlines in 2007 .
 There was quite a lot of public support at the beginning of the war in 2003 . Public support has waned as time went on and a definitive conclusion to the war remained elusive .
 In other words, the public has been acutely aware of how the decision to invade Iraq has turned out . The public is aware of the impact of the Iraq invasion .
 In non-crisis situations the public’s attention usually starts to wane before the implementation of a decision . In contrast, in non-Crisis situations, the public's attention usually wanes before a decision is made . The decision is expected to be made in a non
 Failure of the policy may go unnoticed, and it will take effort to focus the public’s attention on success . Attention will be greatest during the decision phase, which means that decision makers are scrutinized as they weigh policy options .
 Most U.S. citizens know far less about the country’s policy regarding the AIDS crisis in Africa than they do about its policy regarding Iraq . Most Americans don't know about the policy regarding AIDS in Africa .
 Different types of policy problems present decision makers with different kinds of constraints . Different kinds of policy challenges present different types of constraints, say experts .
 Leaders may launch bold initiatives in response to non-crisis foreign policy problems even if they know such initiatives may not come to fruition . The public will lose attention well before the fate of such an initiative is evident, as well as the public's attention .
 In crises, public attention tends to crest at the implementation phase, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Decision makers are likely to choose policies that are acceptable to the public, even if they consider such policies less optimal than alternative options . Decision makers likely to make such policies acceptable to public even if such policies are less optimal, say experts .
 Poliheuristic theory suggests that during the decision process options are discarded if they do not meet one important criterion . Remember that during stage one of the . decision process . options are rejected if they meet one . important criterion, such as the . criterion of selection .
 Decision makers try to make educated guesses about whether they can persuade the public to support certain policies, but such assessments can be wrong . Decision makers often try to predict if they can win support for certain policies . Such assessments can often be wrong.
 Decision makers make assessments about the likely success of policy options . Similarly, decision makers assess the success of policies based on their findings .
 Even when such assessments are done carefully and use the best information and intelligence available, the information is often incomplete, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Decision makers will discard any option they do not consider acceptable to the domestic public during the first stage of the decision process . This does not guarantee that the option they choose will continue to receive public support .
 Many people gauge this by the amount of media coverage a specific issue receives . Quite often, they gauge the coverage of a particular issue by how much coverage it receives .
 How this power of the press is used depends on the media tradition of a specific society, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In some countries, the media place their emphasis on balanced reporting, or even objective reporting . In other countries, media are overtly partisan and freely mix commentary into reporting .
 The lack of press freedom deprives the public of information, it also makes it more difficult for decision makers to evaluate whether that public is likely to support their policy initiatives, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Media do not merely reflect the views of decision makers. Moreover, the media do not simply reflect the . views of the . decision makers .
 In doing so, they function as an intermediary that influences how the public frames or represents the issues . "They function as a . intermediary that . influences how they . influence how the . public frames . or represents issues," CNN's John Sutter says .
 Consider how Canadian newspapers reported speeches by U.S. President Bush in the immediate aftermath of 9/11 . Consider how Canada reported President Bush's speeches in the aftermath of the attacks .
 Reporters select certain statements for quotation purposes, not others . When they do so, reporters select certain phrases for quotation . Reporters use certain quotes to quote, but select others .
 A systematic analysis of reports on President Bush’s post 9/11 statements shows that . Canadian reporters tended to select those quotes that resonated with Canadian political values .
 Reporters' definition of what was important in the President’s speech was guided by the Canadian political values these reporters shared with their audience . In other words, their definition of . what is important in . the President's speech .
 Canadian reporters focus on certain quotes in Bush's post 9/11 speeches that fit well with Canadian values . It is what led Canadian reporters to focus on .
 Political culture does not necessarily provide straightforward guidance . Political culture is not necessarily providing straightforward guidance, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Leaders can fairly easily frame the problem in such a way that they achieve broad agreement on the problem representation among their audience . At those times, leaders can be fairly easily framed the problem as such a problem .
 At other times, the guidance from a country’s political culture is ambiguous . Sometimes the guidance is ambiguous, and sometimes it's not clear what the government is telling .
 This makes it possible for the media to present alternative points of view . This is the first time the media has been able to show alternative views of views .
 The media thrive on controversy, but they also need informants to help them present an alternative point of view . The media thrives on controversy but also needs informants to present alternative points of view, say experts .
 This makes it more difficult for the media to perform its role as watchdog when it matters most . Ironically, this makes it harder for them to perform their role as a watchdog .
 When leaders and their public have the greatest tendency to think alike, it is quite important for the media to encourage both to think critically so as to avoid policy failures .
 The media do make an effort to do this, often by relying on criticisms from abroad . The media often rely heavily on foreign criticism .
 It is necessary to delve more fully into the constraints placed on foreign policy making by a society’s political culture or, more specifically, the impact of national history and culture, as well as the well-supported notion that democracies do not go to war with one another . It is
 The concept of political culture and the notion that certain statements resonate better with audiences in certain countries suggests that there are differences in the way the citizens of different countries view the world .
 This is true also for decision makers, who are products of their societies as well as representatives of those societies . Decision makers are products and products of societies, as are representatives of that society . This is also true for decision-makers and representatives of their society .
 Both citizens and decision makers have been shaped by their upbringing and education . Both citizens, decision makers are shaped by upbringing, education .
 Both may have lesser or greater awareness of the extent of their understanding of history and international affairs is culturally determined . Both may be less or greater aware of how cultural factors determine history .
 Most citizens in the West never consider that this map might look very strange to people elsewhere . The map is so familiar that most citizens never consider it might look strange to other Europeans .
 The map to which you are accustomed will seem more natural . The map will be more familiar than the map you're accustomed to .
 That sense of the customary as natural or inevitable is at the heart of enculturation, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Foreign policy decision makers remain unaware that their way of understanding the world is not universally shared . Foreign policy makers will also remain unaware they are hemmed in to a certain perspective, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The discussion of the Europe-centered and China-centered world maps illustrates in a tangible manner that we are accustomed to viewing the world in a particular way .
 It also illustrates that it is often difficult, for citizens and decision makers alike, to understand that what is customary is not the only possible perspective .
 The failure to do so can lead to foreign policy failures, as was illustrated by the case of the Malvinas/FaUdands crisis .
 The ability to grasp the vantage point of the decision makers of other countries can substantially increase the likelihood of successful foreign policy making . Conversely, the ability to . grasp the . vantage point . of the . decision makers . of other . countries can be helpful in foreign policy decisions, experts say
 Foreign policy making requires the ability to see the world from multiple perspectives . Effective foreign policy making, in other words, requires a different perspective .
 It is relatively easy to show how differently centered world maps can alter one’s perspective . The map shows how different world maps have different perspectives .
 The role of national history and culture in the way we view the world is less easy to demonstrate . National history is important to show, but it's not always easy to show .
 National history consists not merely of facts, but of facts . It is important to note that national history is not merely, but most importantly, of facts.
 National history is characterized in important ways by the meanings that are conveyed through tales that, although fact-based, are employed to communicate common values the society seeks to instill in the next generation . National history should be characterized by meanings conveyed by tales .
 At the heart of a culture are generalized beliefs and attitudes about one’s own state, about other states, and about the actual and desirable relationships between these . The culture of a state can be summed up in a state of your own, your state .
 References to culture tend to caricature foreign policy responses of the leaders of other countries and are no better than stereotyping . Used in that way, references to culture tends to caricature the foreign policy response of other nations .
 It additionally requires recognition that decision makers, on the basis of personality and life experience, interpret their national history and culture in their own way . Decision makers must also be able to make decisions based on personality and experience .
 History and culture are not fixed guiding stars, although they do shape the boundaries of what is perceived as possible . Hence, history and culture is not fixed guides stars, but it shapes the boundaries .
 Decision makers determine how decision makers think and judge, as well as their attitude toward information and intelligence . They determine how decisions are made and how they are made .
 It requires the ability to place oneself into the perspective of the leaders of another country . It requires a willingness to put yourself in the context of the world's leaders .
 Belgium and the Netherlands are two small states, Belgium and Netherlands . To illustrate the influence of history and culture on foreign policy decision making, we will make a comparison between them .
 They are roughly equal in size, especially as compared to other surrounding states . The state is roughly equal size in size .
 The Netherlands is slightly larger and also more densely populated than Belgium . The Netherlands has more than 1,000 fewer people per capita than Belgium and is slightly smaller than the Netherlands .
 Both countries are heavily dependent on international trade . It is necessary to maintain positive relations with current and potential future trading partners .
 This means that the power of their monarchs has been circumscribed by a constitution that specifies the separation of powers between the various branches of their governments . The power of the monarchs is circumscribed in the UK by the constitution .
 In each country, the monarch has a largely, but not entirely, symbolic function . The country is effectively governed by a coalition cabinet with the support of the parliament .
 On the basis of these similarities, it would be reasonable to suspect that these two countries tend to pursue comparable foreign policies .
 Dutch leaders tend to be more eager to play a role in international affairs than Belgian politicians . However, the leaders of the Netherlands tend to play more of an active role in foreign affairs .
 Dutch leaders have endeavored to position their state as a leader in development cooperation . In particular, Dutch leaders are endeavoring to position themselves as a leading development cooperation leader .
 First, there are significant differences in the founding histories of the two countries . First, the founding history of the U.S. and Canada is different .
 Dutch achieved national independence in 1648, after having been at war with Spanish rulers since 1568 . The Dutch achieved their independence from Spain in 1646, 1648 .
 Eighty Years’ War and the riches of the seventeenth century are featured prominently in Dutch history . Dutch history features prominently in the history of the Eighty years’s War and of the riches .
 The glory days of the seventeenth century are well preserved in architectural landmarks, art, and artifacts . In addition, the glory days were well preserved by architectural landmarks .
 The Belgian independence was brokered in the 1830s by the leaders of the great powers of the time at an international conference in London . The leaders of Belgium and France brokered the Belgian independence in 1830 .
 The Belgians revolt against the Dutch King William I was not won on the battlefield . Instead, they fought for independence from the Dutch king William I .
 The leaders assembled at the London Conference decided that a neutral and independent Belgium was the most desirable solution to the Belgian Revolt . The leaders gathered at the conference decided that the best solution was a neutral Belgium .
 The leaders of those big powers wanted Belgium to remain neutral in conflicts between them . They wanted the new country not upset the balance of power in Europe by siding with them .
 Although it is difficult to draw immediate causal links between contemporary foreign policy and historical events associated with the founding of each country, these national histories are suggestive, especially since they continue to be transmitted from one generation to the next .
 These histories teach each country's citizens something about the state’s capacity to assert itself in the international environment . The histories of each nation's history teach them something about its capacity in the world .
 The relationship each country has had with the developing world is also different . The relationship between the two countries has been very different .
 Former colonizers often began their development cooperation policies with aid to their former colonies . This is relevant because former colonizers began their cooperation policies by aid to former colonies. This is important because it's relevant because of the history of colonialism .
 It is not unreasonable to think that countries with similar histories might exhibit similar development cooperation policies . Countries with similar history might exhibit such cooperation policies, it is said .
 A simple way to characterize such policies is the proportion of gross national income they spend on development aid, which is a generally accepted indicator of a state’s generosity, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Belgium’s development aid constitutes a considerably lower proportion of its gross national income than the Dutch aid . Belgium's development aid is less than that of the Netherlands' .
 The colonial experiences of the two countries were quite different, both in terms of the length of time and the way in which colonialism was tied into the society and economy of each country .
 King Leopold II acquired the Belgian Congo in 1885 as a personal possession, which he used largely to enrich himself . The Belgian state was not involved in its administration until the colony was transferred to it in 1908 .
 The Belgian colonial era ended in the early 1960s when first Zaire and subsequently Rwanda and Burundi acquired independence . Zaire was the first country to become independent from Belgium .
 Dutch colonialism has roots extending back to the 1600s, when merchant marine companies established trade connections in both Southeast Asia and the Americas . In contrast, Dutch colonialism was established in the 1800s .
 colonialism was closely tied to the mythology regarding the founding of the Dutch state and the emergence of a merchant middle class at a time when wealth was defined in terms of the possession of land and the landed estates of the nobility .
 During the nineteenth century the Dutch established territorial control over Indonesia, Surinam, and the Netherlands Antilles . The focus during the early period was on trade rather than acquisition of territory .
 Dutch policy makers saw the possession of colonies as essential to the economic well being of the state, a frame that harkens back to the trade profits that financed the wars that secured Dutch statehood .
 The Dutch added a sense of a ‘civilizing’ mission to their desire for profit . As they had tightened their territorial control, however, the Dutch had added a 'civilizing' mission to them .
 This sense of mission entails a vision of the colony’s future that reshapes its society in terms of the colonizer's value system . The idea has been largely discredited today, but is still relevant today .
 Dutch policy has been characterized as driven by both profit and moral principles . This added a certain duality to Dutch policy, which is driven by profit and morality . The Dutch government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Moral principles found a new voice by justifying the Dutch role as a beacon for the rich countries to follow as more and more countries initiated development cooperation policies . The Dutch role was justified by the role of the Dutch as an example of the Netherlands .
 Some scholars see foreign policy as driven at times by short-term commercial expediency . The country is highly dependent on international trade for its economic well being .
 European Union structures, such as those of the European Union, are not seeking to serve as any other state’s heacon or guide . The UK has been in a state of crisis crisis since 2001 .
 The Belgian state was founded by the Belgian city of Flanders in 1883 . Belgium is the only country in the world to have a state of its own . Belgium was founded in 1783 .
 This comparison provides only a small snapshot of the impact of history on the hroad traditions of foreign policy making hy these two small states .
 The Dutch have not always heen as assertive, and the Belgians have at times had greater impact . The Belgians are more assertive than the Dutch, but the Dutch have often been more cautious .
 Individual decision makers within each country have disagreed about the direction of their country’s foreign policy . Individual decisions are made by individual decision makers in each country's decision .
 On the whole, however, the policy makers of the two countries have conducted their foreign policies in very different ways .
 It would be overstating the facts to claim that this difference is caused by the differences in the founding histories, but it does appear that the foreign policies of the two countries each share a logical consistency with their founding histories .
 The comparison between Belgium and the Netherlands makes clear that decision makers do not have absolute freedom in selecting their course of action in response to a foreign policy problem .
 This first stage of the decision making process is characterized by a noncompensatory decision rule . This first step of the process is defined as the decision-making process . This is characterized as the first stage .
 You’ll remember that during this stage, an option will be discarded if it is unacceptable on one single, but critical, dimension . You'll remember that this is a decision to make a decision on the next step .
 One of the aspects that guides decision makers’ evaluations is whether or not they can convince their domestic public of the merits of a proposed policy . Decision makers are evaluating whether to convince the public of a new policy .
 If they are convinced that it is impossible to explain a policy in a manner that will resonate with the domestic public, it is extremely likely to be discarded during the first stage of the decision making process .
 History and culture affect the role that decision makers can conceive for their country to play in international affairs . Put another way, history and culture affects decision makers' decision-making decisions .
 Just as national history and culture influence foreign policy making, so does the domestic political system . Just as history influences foreign policy, so do domestic politics, the U.S. political system.
 Earlier in this chapter, we discussed how the domestic audience constrains decision makers .
 We distinguished between different institutional arrangements in democracies, as well as between democracies, semi-authoritarian, and authoritarian countries . Domestic audience’s ability to influence foreign policy varies across these .
 The domestic audience has a greater impact in political systems where decision makers are accountable to that audience, as is the case in democracies . Domestic audiences have greater impact on political systems such as democracies, experts say .
 Do note that democracies vary in their institutional arrangements and, as a consequence, in the degree to which they are open to domestic influence . Do note, however, that democracies .
 On the basis of both these variations in political institutions and variations in national history and culture, we might expect that the constraints placed on foreign policy decision makers by that domestic audience is highly idiosyncratic . The nature of foreign policy decisions by that audience is likely to be idiosyncratic.
 In other words, there should be little reason to expect that the foreign policies of democracies share much in common . The foreign policy of democracies should not be shared with each other .
 Before we conclude that this is so, we should take a look at the democratic peace theory . We should also consider the idea of democratic peace in the world .
 Theory suggests that countries that are governed democratically are less war-prone than non-democracies . This theory suggests that non-democracy countries are less likely to suffer war more often .
 Empirical studies have demonstrated that democracies rarely, if ever, go to war with one another . Empiral studies have shown that democracies never go to wars with each other .
 Leaders of democratic states expect that their counterparts in other countries will apply the same norms of behavior to which they each adhere domestically in their foreign policy behavior . In disputes, leaders expect their counterparts to apply same norms in other nations .
 Leaders of democratic states will not approach confrontations with leaders of nondemocratic states with that same set of expectations . However, they will not be able to avoid confrontation with nondemocracies, they say .
 In fact, they may adopt nondemocratic norms when confronting nondenocratic opponents . The U.S. government may adopt a similar policy when confronting its opponents . It's not a democracy, it's a democracy .
 Structural or institutional explanations for the democratic peace emphasize that decision makers are hemmed in by institutions, which place constraints on their behavior . The author argues that institutions are responsible for the peace .
 The institutional structure of democratic governments deliberately limits the power of decision makers who function within that structure and makes the various parts of the government check one another . The institutions of democratic government are designed to limit the power and check each other, he says .
 Leaders understand that their counterparts in other democratic states are subject to similar constraints . Moreover, leaders understand that other countries' governments are also subject to such constraints .
 They will assume that there is “time for processes of international conflict resolution to operate” from another democratic state. They will not fear surprise attack’s from another Democratic state, he says .
 A nondemocratic state may more easily engage in a surprise attack of another state, irrespective of whether this opponent is democratic or not . In fact, a nondemocrite state may also engage in an attack on another state .
 The leaders of nondemocratic states understand the constraints faced by democratic leaders . This can give them leverage in dealings with democracies, he says .
 Leaders of democracies, on the other hand, may choose war over giving in to the demands of a nondemocratic leader and appearing weak . The leaders of democracies can choose war instead of appearing weak, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The normative and institutional explanations for the democratic peace are not mutually exclusive . The Normality and Institutional Explanation for the peace is not mutually exclusive . The democratic peace is a key part of the democratic process .
 The more well-established a democracy’s institutions are, the more deeply ingrained its norms will be and the more powerful will be their influence on the actions of its leaders . The more powerful a democracy's institutions will influence its leaders' actions .
 This suggests that what guides decision makers is not just domestic norms but also their assessment of the norms and constraints that guide the behavior of their opponents . It suggests that this is not only domestic norms, but also what guides the decision makers .
 Agencies can be ideaor interestbased, and they can be insulated or embedded . Agencies may be insulated, embedded or embedded. Agencies need to be idea-based, or interest-based .
 Domestic audiences influence foreign policy making in both democracies and non-democracies . But the extent of, and the mechanisms through which, that influence is exercised, differ in different political systems . Different political systems are different in different countries .
 Public attentiveness varies across the life span of foreign policy problems, and does so differently in crisis and non-crisis situations . Public attention is different in crisis or non crisis situations, experts say .
 The media frame foreign policy and focus public attention within the context of the society’s political culture . The media frames foreign policy as a matter of public interest .
 National history and culture predispose leaders to give greater credence to certain problem representations and pursue foreign policies congrued with them .
 The democratic peace theory holds that democracies are less likely to go to war than non-democracies . The peace theory is based on the theory that democracy is more likely to avoid war .
 Leader expectations are shaped by their knowledge of the political system of countries with which they interact . Leader expectations should be shaped by knowledge of their country's political system, says CNN.com .
 The democratic peace is the subject of numerous books and scholarly articles . It is also subject to numerous books, articles and books .
 Drezner, “Ideas, Bureaucratic Politics, and the Crafting of Foreign Policy,” 736. Drezners: “Bureaucratic politics’s the crafting of foreign policy.” He says.
 See also Chan and Safran, “Public Opinion as a Constraint against War” for discussion of the influence of electoral systems on the impact of public opinion on foreign policy .
 Knecht and Weatherford, “Public Opinion and Foreign Policy,” 705, 705; see also Entman, Projections of Power, 163 . Entman: “The U.S. needs a strong presence in the world”
 Holsti, Public Opinion, 23; see also Entman, Projections of Power, 163 . Entman: "Projections of the future are very difficult to predict"
 Powlick and Katz: “Defining the American Public Opinion/Foreign Policy Nexus”; Knecht and Weatherford, “Public Opinion and Foreign Policy” Entman: Projections of Power.
 This paragraph relies heavily on Entman, Projections of Power, Chapter 7 . Entman is quoted as a reference to Entman's work on the U.S. government in the past .
 The data on which this comparison is based are based are from OECD, various years .
 Bouveroux, Belgie uit Afrikai Luykx and Platel . Platel, Politieke Geschiedenis van Belgie, is a member of the Politiokeke Gesmiedeke Gesrke Gesniede . B
 Kennedy, The Rise of the Fall of the Great Powers; Voorhoeve, Peace, Profits and Principles; Weis, Aloofness and Neutrality. Kennedy . Kennedy, the Rise of The Fall of The Great Powers, is published by Edward Snowden .
 Voorhoeve, Peace, Profits and Principles; Weis, Aloofness and Neutrality. Voorhoven, Peace and Profits are Peace . Weis is Neutrality . We are neutral .
 Breuning, “Culture, History, Role”; see also Holsti, ‘National Role Conceptions’; . Walker, Role Theory and Foreign Policy Analysis; .
 Schafer and Walker, “Democratic Leaders and the Democratic Peace,” 579. Walker and Schafer: Democratic Leaders and Peace . Walker: Democratic leaders and peace have been a source of unity .
 International Constraints on Foreign Policy Making Chapter Preview . Explains how a state’s capabilities shape its role on the world stage . Chapter Preview: Explains why a state needs to be able to shape its international role .
 T he international environment is the stage on which foreign policy decision makers find themselves . All the World’s a Stage for foreign policy .
 Decision makers must take into account how the international environment constrains policy options that are realistically available to them . Decision makers need to take to account how international environment restricts policy options .
 They must also recognize opportunities that may present themselves, especially if these help secure their state’s interests . They also must recognize opportunities to secure their states' interests .
 Perceiving opportunities accurately is a challenge that demands great insight into the decision makers of other countries . The challenges of seeing opportunities accurately are a challenge for the business community .
 It also requires the ability to understand the domestic and international constraints such leaders perceive, such as the constraints they face .
 The importance of the ability to put oneself into the shoes of another country’s leadership is evident from the previous chapters of this book .
 International environment places constraints on decision makers, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The world's most enduring constraints are the international environment .
 In thinking about these questions, consider the foreign policies of the states that were mentioned in earlier chapters . Consider these questions in thinking about the foreign policy of states mentioned in previous chapters .
 The states they represent have very different capabilities, which can be used as an indicator of their potential power . The states' capabilities can be seen as a sign of potential power, experts say .
 Capabilities are measurable assets, such as a country’s geographic size, its population, its natural resources, and the size of its economy and military . Capabilities can be measured by a country's size, population, natural resources and economy .
 Although such measures may seem straightforward, they also leave many questions yet unanswered . Such measures leave many unanswered questions still unanswered .
 The significance of specific natural resources will depend on technological advances, experts say . Technology will determine the significance of certain natural resources .
 Oil has been quite important to Iraq’s economy, but the importance of it rose only after the invention of the internal combustion engine . For instance, oil has been vital to Iraq's economy since it was discovered in 1903 .
 In addition, resources are not always reliable indicators of a state’s role in the international environment . Resources—or the lack thereof— are not necessarily reliable indicators, experts say .
 The Gulf War in the early 1990s and the current conflict have increased, but not caused, this gap . The current conflict has not increased the gap, but has not caused this gap, experts say .
 Belgium’s economy has in the past benefited from the rather unequal trade relationship with its colonies . Iraq was first part of the Ottoman Empire and then a British colonial possession prior to acquiring independence in 1932 .
 This means that natural resources can be helpful but also that a lack of natural resources does not make it impossible for a country to create a thriving economy . Natural resources can help but also make it difficult for a nation to develop its own economy, says David Cameron .
 Information about a country’s resource base is of only limited usefulness in understanding its potential power . It also means that information about the resource base can only be limited usefulness .
 It tells us something about the constraints under which decision makers function . Decision makers are constrained by the constraints of their decision makers, it says .
 Their focus has heen on the country’s economic external relations, including also efforts to further develop European economic integration .
 A state’s smallness and economic openness may make it logical for its decision makers to focus primarily on economic external relations, hut it does not guarantee it . A state's smallness makes it logical to focus on external relations .
 Both Belgium and the Netherlands are democratic countries and located in a neighborhood of democracies . Belgium and The Netherlands are both democratic countries .
 There is evidence that democracies are much less likely to go to war with one another . As was noted in the discussion of the democratic peace in the chapter 5, there is evidence .
 Belgium and the Netherlands are both founding members of the European Union and its predecessors . The Netherlands and Belgium are Belgium's two most important countries in Europe .
 Regional organizations create rules that guide the interactions of the states that belong to them . These rules are created by regional organizations such as regional organizations .
 The leaders of such states are constrained not only by domestic factors, but their decision making also takes place within the confines of the norms, rules, and expectations of these regional organizations . The decision making takes place in such states is also constrained by regional norms and expectations .
 This may not affect all of their external relations, but it does influence relations with the states in the region that also belong to the same regional organization . The region is one of the most important countries in the Middle East .
 In the European landscape, democracies and regional organizations are both important . In the EU, democracy is a key part of the continent's future . In Europe, it's important to ensure that democracy is preserved .
 It is unclear which contributes more to the relative peacefulness of this region . It's unclear which contribute more to this region's relative peace .
 The relationship between a state’s foreign policy behavior and its capabilities is not always straightforward . It's not always always straightforward, and the relationship between foreign policy and capabilities is often complicated .
 State capabilities are the parameters that form the parameters of the stage on which leaders act . Let’s first examine some basic measures of state capabilities, including state capabilities .
 We will examine what degree such objective indicators guide foreign policy decision making and behavior . Subsequently, we will examine to what degree these objective indicators guides foreign policy making .
 Geographic size and population size may suggest a state’s power potential, experts say . Geographic size, population size and size of state may suggest state's power potential . State's population size is a key factor in state power .
 The United States is slightly larger geographically than China, but its population is somewhat less than a quarter the size of China’s . The U.S. population is slightly smaller than China's, as shown in table 6.1 .
 There are few countries in the world that control such enormous territories . The U.S. is one of the world's most powerful nations .
 The largest is Russia, followed by Canada, and the United States is in third place . Russia is the largest country in the world and Canada is the second .
 This term became popular during the Cold War and denotes a state that can project power globally . This term was used by the U.S. State of the State to project power in the world .
 Other labels, such as hyperpower, have been used to describe the United States since the end of the Cold War . The United States was widely perceived as the single most powerful country in the world .
 It makes little sense to use increasingly superlative terms for the few countries that have the capabilities to project power around the globe . The UK is one of the most powerful countries in the world, but it is not the only superpower in the Middle East .
 Some states are endowed with greater capabilities than others, experts say . What matters is that we understand that some states have greater capabilities, they say . It's important to understand that states have different capabilities, not everyone has different capabilities .
 Strong capabilities do not always translate into the motivation or the ability to define the state’s interests as global in scale, writes Andrew Hammond . Lesser capabilities can under favorable circumstances be translated into a substantial ability to project power, he says .
 Currently, China is seen as an emerging power, which means that it is rapidly becoming more powerful and likely to rival the U.S. in the near future . The country is expected to become more powerful in the coming years .
 Of the four countries that are the largest geographically, three either have played important roles in world politics or are likely to do so in the future . Hence, three of the four nations that are located in the Middle East have played significant roles in politics .
 When capability is measured in terms of population, the U.S. comes in third, also . The United States comes in second and third in population capability .
 Both countries have higher population densities than the U.S. Both have higher populations densities .
 Russia and Canada, on the other hand, have vast territories but much smaller populations . Russia has vast territories, Canada has vast populations, but has much smaller territories .
 Russia’s population is just under half that of the United States . Canada’S population is somewhat smaller than Argentina’'s . Russia's population is less than half the U.S.'s .
 Argentina 2,766,890 39,921,833 599. Military expenditure (percent of gDP) Argentina's military expenditure is the largest military expenditure in the world . Argentina has the largest GDP of the world and largest economy .
 Whether population density is an advantage or not depends on other factors . Population density is a key factor in determining the size of the population .
 Ethiopia is smaller but much more populous than Argentina, but the latter has a much larger and more diversified economy . Consider that Ethiopia's economy is much more diverse than Argentina's, but Argentina has a far more diverse economy .
 Argentina is sometimes still classified as a developing country, a designation that is imprecise but generally denotes countries that are not as technologically advanced or industrialized as countries like the U.S. or others with wealthy and advanced economies . Argentina is not as advanced as the United States or other countries
 Currently, Argentina is at the upper income end of the developing countries, whereas Ethiopia is among the poorest and has an economy that is highly dependent on agriculture .
 Less than half of Ethiopia’s adult population is literate . Argentina's is well educated, whereas Ethiopia's is less educated . Less than 50 percent of the adult population in Ethiopia is literated .
 The same measure shows that the economic performances of Belgium, Britain, and the Netherlands are very similar . Belgium, the Netherlands, Belgium and the UK have very similar economic performance .
 Britain has a much larger economy than either Belgium or the Netherlands and, as a result, has greater capabilities . Of course, Britain has an economy that is much larger than Belgium and the Netherlands .
 In addition to geographic, population, and economic size, a country’s military prowess determines its relative power capabilities . The U.S. is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 There are many ways to measure military might, such as the number of people employed in the military or the guns, missiles, tanks, ships, planes, and so on at its disposal . A comparison of the U.S. military's military might is based on the numbers of people
 A problem with many comparisons is that countries vary in their defense needs, depending on part of their geographic circumstances, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Countries vary in need of defense needs depending on geographic circumstances .
 A country with predominantly land borders may want to include more tanks in its military . A state with mostly sea borders might want to have a stronger navy .
 This implies that a state’s military capability depends on its economic wealth . It is a sign that the country's military capability will depend heavily on its wealth . This implies a state's ability to defend itself is dependent on wealth .
 A state with a poorly developed economy usually has a lesser capability to project military strength . The state's military strength is usually limited to less technologically sophisticated weaponry . Leaders may devote a smaller or larger proportion of the state’s wealth to their militaries .
 Remember that the focus here is on the capacity to project military strength, not on the actual use of the military instrument in settling disputes or the propensity to go to war . Remember that it is important to project your military strength .
 The U.S. and China allocate a larger proportion to their militaries than the other countries . This is dictated by a desire to be able to project power globally .
 Ethiopia devotes a rather substantial share of its economy to its military . The country also devotes much of its economic resources to the military . Ethiopia is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Given the relatively small size of its economy, this does not constitute the ability to project power in the same way as the United States or China . But it indicates a desire to play a significant role in the politics of the Horn of Africa, the region in which the country is located .
 The Sudan spends slightly more than its larger neighbor, the Sudan . Interestingly, it spends more than any other country .
 Argentina, Belgium, and the Netherlands spend anemic amounts on their militaries . The Netherlands, Argentina and Belgium also spend little on their military .
 These countries do not seek to project military power beyond an ability to defend their borders . These countries are not seeking to project power beyond the ability to protect their borders, say experts .
 Traditionally, sea borders were regarded as more easily defended than land borders . This is the case with Switzerland and Afghanistan, as well as the mountainous borders .
 Britain has primarily sea borders and has proved difficult to invade . Consider that Britain has proven that it is not easy to invade in the past .
 Belgium, on the other hand, has primarily land borders and also borders on two much larger countries . Belgium has more land borders than Belgium, but borders on larger nations .
 Military technology has perhaps made such geographic features less valuable than they were in the past . Modern military technology has made such features less likely to be valuable now .
 table 6. provides the proportion of the total borders that are constituted by each country’s coastline . Table 6.1 shows that each country's coastline is composed by its coastline .
 The U.S. has a rather substantial proportion of coastline borders, while Iraq and Ethiopia have little to none .
 Ethiopia is located on a high plateau and has a mountain range in its center . The country borders on the largest country in Africa, the Sudan . Ethiopia is also located on the highest plateau in Africa .
 Iraq finds itself wedged between three countries larger than itself, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey . Iraq shares a strategic location along the Persian Gulf with Iran, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia .
 Both Iraq and Ethiopia are located in regions that have seen substantial instability dating back decades . Both countries have seen significant instability in recent decades .
 Ethiopia’s geographic location in an unstable neighborhood suggests a partial explanation for its military spending . There are no current figures available for Iraq's military expenditure due to the U.S. occupation . Ethiopia's geographic location is in a neighborhood with unstable neighbors .
 These descriptive features provide only a small glimpse at the positions of states in the larger international environment . Coastline borders, neighboring countries, and relative size, as well as measures of capabilities previously discussed .
 These measures cannot tell us what foreign policies the decision makers of various states will pursue, but they help us understand the set of constraints they face . The measures are not enough to tell what foreign policy makers are pursuing, they say .
 Leaders of the U.S. long perceived their state had favorable geographic circumstances by being wedged between two oceans . But geographic location may matter less when a state commands vast power capabilities .
 The leaders of smaller states vary greatly in their ability to project power . The “small state” label encompasses states of dramatically different capabilities .
 Leaders of states with limited capabilities must find ways to secure their states’ interests that rely less on the ability to project power . The leaders of states that have limited capabilities need to find ways of securing their interests, experts say .
 For such states, the context of their geographic location may be quite significant in helping us understand the sort of foreign policies they pursue and how they choose to employ their capabilities . The context of such states may help us understand their foreign policies .
 In sum, the discussion of capabilities and geographic circumstances has given us an initial understanding of the variety of circumstances faced by the decision makers of various countries . The discussion has also helped us understand the challenges faced by decision makers in the world .
 Large countries, by virtue of their larger territory, have a better likelihood of also being well endowed with natural resources . Large countries have a larger territory and a better chance of being rich in natural resources, experts say .
 Leaders of states with smaller territories, populations, and economies should perceive greater constraints as they navigate the international environment than leaders of larger states, with more resources and population .
 Second-largest country in SouthAmerica, after Brazil . Bolivia, Brazil, Chille, Paraguay, Uruguay . Paraguay and Uruguay .
 France is Western Europe’s largest country and Germany is strategically located . Germany is large and strategically located. France is the largest country in Western Europe .
 Ireland is more than 3 times as large as the only country with which it shares a land border . Ireland is 3 times larger than Ireland and has a larger population than any other country .
 Burma,India, fourth largest country in the world, Kazakhstan, North and the largest in Asia . Borders on Afghanistan, Bhutan, the world Russia, and is itself the Burma, India, Burma, and the world's largest .
 Borders on the largest country in Djibouti, Eritrea, Africa , is substantially larger than its remaining neighbors . Borders are substantially Kenya, Somalia, Sudan, Sudan larger than those of other neighbors . Djib out of Eritrea is the largest African country in the region .
 Iran, Iordan, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Syria and Turkey . Smaller than half of its neighbors and larger than remaining three .
 Belgium, Germany borders on large and strategically located Germany, for which it provides transshipment . Belgium is located in Germany, which is strategically strategically located .
 We will turn to a more comprehensive classification of states that is built upon the notion that size matters in more than just its geographic sense . Now, we will focus on the state's size .
 Size is related to power as well as to a state’s interdependence with other states . Size of a state's size is also related to its inter-dependency with others, experts say .
 Interdependence denotes the structure of a state’s interactions with other states and will be discussed in greater detail in the next section . We will delve further into the interrelations between unequal states and unequal states .
 Remember that a state’s size is a very rough guide to estimating its foreign policy behavior . As you read this and the next section of this article, remember that the size of a state is a rough guide for foreign policy .
 Size may set the parameters for action, but it does not predetermine how decision makers navigate constraints and perceive or create opportunities for their country . Size does not dictate how decisions should be made, it says .
 The concept of size is not limited to the geographic dimensions of a state . It is not only the size of a nation, it is also the concept of statehood .
 A frequently used classification is a division of states into small, middle, and great powers . The world's largest state is considered to be one of the world's most powerful .
 Others have used terms like weak state,^ which is sometimes synonymous with small state . It has also been used to define countries with ineffective institutions of government . The term has been used in the past to define weak states .
 A weak state is similar to a failed state, defined by the failure of the institutions of government to control the state’s territory, and also the absence of effective institutions . A failed state is defined as a state that is unable to control its territory or control it .
 The classification of states as great, middle, or small powers is rather imprecise, because the concept of size lacks specificity . The classification is imprecising, because it is not specific to the state of the nation .
 This is less problematic at the extremes than in delineating the boundaries between the categories . This is not the case at all, but it is the case for the future .
 Few will challenge the notion that the United States qualifies as a great power . The U.S. is considered a major power by some .
 It has the political, economic, and military strength to exert influence on a global scale . It has a political, military, and economic strength, it has been claimed .
 Another way to evaluate great power status is to look to those states recognized as significant players on the world stage by their status as members of the UN Security Council .
 Alongside the United States, we find Britain, China, France, and Russia . The U.S. is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Permanent membership in the UN Security Council is not the only way to define great power status, however, however . Permanent membership is not only a way of defining great power, however. It is also a key part of the U.N. Security Council .
 Its eight members together represent well over half of the world economy . The eight members of the group together represent around half the world's economy .
 Ganada was added very soon after the group’s inception in 1975 . The initial six were Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the U.S.
 G8 meetings shortly after the end of the Cold War and became a full participant in 1997 . G8 officially became the G8 in 1997, when the group officially became a G8 . The G8 is the largest economic and security group in the world .
 The membership of the UN’s Security Council and the G8 each reflects their missions as well as the history behind these organizations . G8 membership reflects its missions and the history of these organizations, the author says .
 The UN was created in the waning days of World War II to maintain international peace and security . It was created to promote social and economic progress, and safeguard human rights . The UN is now the world's largest body of diplomatic and political power .
 The G8 emerged in the aftermath of the 1973 oil crisis and in response to the economic recession and changes in the world economic system that followed on its heels . G8 was formed in the wake of the oil crisis in 1973 .
 The histories of these two bodies provide a partial explanation for their membership . It is not the only explanation for why they are members of these bodies .
 Ganada, a member of the G8, is a self-described middle power . Ganada is the self-proclaimed middle power in Latin America .
 Its decision makers began to use this concept to describe their role in the international environment . Decision makers use it as a tool to help shape the world's future .
 Norway played a key role in the negotiations between representatives of Israel and the Palestinians that culminated in the Oslo Accords of 1993 . Gonsider, for instance, played a major role in negotiations between Israel and Palestinians .
 Middle powers are usually affluent states that employ their resources to foster peace and lessen global economic inequality . Middle powers usually employ resources to promote peace and reduce inequality .
 In addition to Ganada and Norway, the Netherlands and Sweden have employed this label . Ganada, Norway and the Netherlands have employed the label .
 The leaders of these states have at times characterized their countries as ‘like minded’ and have acted as norm entrepreneurs in the international environment . Leaders of these countries have characterized themselves as “like minded,” and acted as normal entrepreneurs .
 The countries listed here have at times also labeled themselves as middle powers . They have played such a role in the area of international development cooperation .
 The concept of middle power is not synonymous with the notion of a regional power . Middle power is defined as a state that has resources to exert influence in its own region of the world .
 Gountries like Brazil, India, Indonesia, Iran, Nigeria, South Africa, and Turkey are often named in this category .
 Other states either are, or have the capacity to be, regional power brokers . Other states have the potential to be regional power broker .
 Whether or not states do in fact play such a role often depends on whether its leaders decide to position their state in such a way .
 This is true even if we expand the category of regional powers to include additional states and thereby reduce the pool of states eligible for the small state label . This would be true if we expanded the category to include more states .
 Small states are defined as those that have a rather limited capacity to exert influence on other states . Small states have a very limited ability to influence other states, according to CNN.com .
 In general, leaders of small states have a smaller range of instruments they can effectively employ in relations with other states . Small states are less likely to be able to effectively engage in their relations with others, experts say .
 Small states can be quite adept at working through international organizations such as the UN or regional organizations like the European Union to exert influence beyond their own, independent capacity . Small states are quite adept in working with international organizations, such as UN .
 A state strategically placed strategically placed may be less in the shadow of a larger neighbor than it would otherwise be . Conversely, a small state that is strategically placed can be less than it is in shadow of larger neighbors .
 Djibouti is an important transshipment point for goods into and out of its much larger but landlocked neighbor, Ethiopia . The tiny but strategically placed country is strategically placed in the region .
 Djibouti does not have power over Ethiopia, but it provides an incentive for the latter to maintain a stable relationship with the former . This strategic position does not give Djiboutsi power over Ethiopian, but gives it an incentive to maintain the relationship .
 The classification of states into small, middle, and great powers leaves much to be desired . It is not easy to categorise nations into small and middle states .
 It may be easy to identify the few great powers and to name some of the very smallest states . Beyond the extremes of the spectrum of state capabilities it becomes more difficult to differentiate between small and middle, or middle, powers .
 Despite difficulties in pinning down these concepts, the differences among states have consequences for foreign policies . Despite the difficulties, these differences are important for foreign policy .
 "Size and power are about the degree of which states are constrained in the range of foreign policy options available to their decision makers," says Peter Bergen . Ultimately, size and power is about how constrained states are, Bergen says .
 Very few states have the capabilities to project power across the globe . Very few countries have the power to project global power .
 Only a small number can exert influence over other states within their own region of the world . Only small number of states can exert power over other countries .
 Most states lack the political, economic, and military strength to project power or exert influence over other states . Most states have little political or economic strength, but lack the ability to project political power .
 The foreign policies of such states are circumscribed by the limitations imposed not only by their size but also by their geographic location and the structure of their relations with other states . The foreign policy of these states is limited by the size of the state and its geography .
 There is much more to be said about interdependence than the simple definition previously provided . Interdependence and the Inequality of States is a key part of the relationship between states .
 Between states and states are characterized by mutuality and equality . The relationship between states and nations is described as mutuality, equality .
 These differences have consequences for the interactions between states, such as the interaction between states and regions . These differences are important to the relationship between states .
 The effects of smallness are felt most acutely by the smaller developing states in the global South . Smaller developing states are most acutely affected by the effects .
 Their foreign policy is constrained by their dependence, which is best defined as an asymmetric pattern of interactions between a more and a less powerful state . The U.S. has a long history of instability in the Middle East .
 The general condition of inequality does not mean that the foreign policies of small, dependent states can be easily compared . Small-dependent states should not be able to easily compare their foreign policies, says David Cameron .
 This means that the leaders of a small state voluntarily align their external policy with that of a larger more powerful state that has the capacity to exert influence over them . This is the case of small states aligning external policy to a larger state that can exert influence .
 If a small state does not align its foreign policy with it, the more powerful state can pressure the smaller state’s leaders to align their foreign policy . This can result in a compliant foreign policy, the second foreign policy orientation, the third orientation .
 The observed foreign policy behavior of the small state consists of actions that are in alignment with the desires of the more powerful country . In both cases, the observed behavior is consistent with those of the larger countries .
 In practice, it will be difficult to determine from a small state’s foreign policy behavior alone whether consensus or compliance best explains it, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The only thing that distinguishes the two is the motivation behind the behavior, not the behavior itself . In other words, it would be necessary to have insight into the decision making process to understand why the small state’s policy makers decided .
 Three, counterdependent foreign policy represents a defiant reaction to dependence . Counter-dependency foreign policy is a defiant response to dependence on the U.S. President .
 The leaders of such states are frustrated with the dependent situation of their state . They try to find ways to reduce the consequences of that dependence, usually inviting the displeasure of more powerful states in the process .
 A foreign policy that antagonizes the leaders of powerful states in an effort to appease domestic audiences is compensation . Compensation is a foreign policy aimed at antagonizing powerful states, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The difference between consensus-oriented and compliant foreign policy behavior will be difficult to discern from a state’s behavior alone . The U.S. should be careful not to rely on foreign policy alone .
 The difference is primarily in the motivations that drive the policy choices, CNN's John Sutter says .
 More information than that presented in chapter 3 would he necessary to determine whether this decision is more accurately characterized as counterdependence or compensation . More information would be needed to determine if this decision was more accurate characterized .
 Insight into decision making process can help untangle the motivations behind foreign policy actions . Insight into the decision-making process can be helpful to untangle foreign policy decisions .
 The first two types of small state foreign policies, consensus and compliance, recognize the existence of power differentials . The first and second type of foreign policy, consensus, compliance, recognizes that power differences .
 The resulting foreign policy behaviors demonstrate a willingness to work within the constraints of smallness and dependence, the author says .
 The latter two types, counterdependence and compensation, reflect a desire to work around or even defy the existing power differences . Counterdependence, compensation and compensation are the other two types of work around power differences.
 Such strategies may invite diplomatic, or more forceful, retribution from more powerful states . At other times, such strategies invite diplomatic or forceful retribution .
 Leaders have choices in the face of the limitations that size and dependence place upon policy options available to them, authors say . What these four types of foreign policy behavior illustrate is that leaders have choices, they say .
 They can seek to stretch the limits of the possible , they can accept the constraints and pursue a consensus-oriented foreign policy . They can comply with the wishes of the policy makers of larger powers even if they would have preferred a different decision .
 Foreign policy decision makers are always engaged in a two-level game, needing to satisfy both their domestic audience and their counterparts in other countries . Foreign policy makers need to satisfy simultaneously both domestic and foreign audiences, writes Peter Bergen .
 These differences form the backdrop against which foreign policy making takes place . These differences are the backdrop of foreign policy decisions .
 Decision makers are well aware of their own state’s capabilities relative to those of the states surrounding them and of those more distant states with which they have active relationships .
 A comparison of capabilities or the classification of those states that matter most in their interactions with the leaders of other states . A comparison is based on state capabilities .
 We have already noted that a state’s capabilities delineate at best a range of possibilities for foreign policy action . We have also noted that we have no idea how effective a state can act on foreign policy .
 A great power does not always always bring all its weight to bear on its interactions with other states, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 "Capabilities measure power resources and the possibility for a state to be powerful, but not whether a state and its leaders are willing and able to make effective use of those power resources . Furthermore, capabilities measure power . It measures the possibility of a state being powerful but not the ability to
 Small states are sometimes very effective in using an advantageous attribute of their state to play a role beyond what might be expected given its capabilities . Conversely, the leaders of small states can play a larger role beyond expectations .
 Information about the capabilities of states or the classification of one’s own and other states in the world is at best a very rough guide to the roles they play in international politics .
 Leaders make foreign policy in the shadow cast by the history of the foreign relations between their own and other states . Leaders make their decisions in the long shadow of the history .
 Distribution of capabilities in the international environment only partially describes the international constraints perceived by decision makers . The distribution of capabilities only partially reflects the international .
 Decision makers have constraints on what they want to see and what they expect from other states . Those constraints are also, and importantly, determined by the expectations decision makers have on the basis of past interactions between their own and others .
 As the Cold War ended, one scholar argued we would soon miss the predictability that it had given to international politics . One scholar argued that we would miss the predictable predictability of international politics as a result .
 Their established understandings of the world around them no longer fit this new reality . They are no longer able to relate to each other's experiences in the world .
 Foreign policy making is guided by the expectations decision makers bring to the task, the authors say . The expectations are as forceful as the measurable capabilities of their own and other states, they say .
 The accompanying national role conception is delineated by the decision makers’ definition of the types of foreign policy decisions and behaviors that are appropriate for their state to undertake . Decision makers define their national role in foreign policy .
 Nigerian leaders increasingly position their state to play the role of peacekeeper in West Africa . For instance, Nigerian leaders are increasingly positioned as peacekeepers in the region .
 Sweden and several other states have used the middle power label and have positioned their states in a leadership role as norm entrepreneurs in the effort to lessen global inequality . The decision makers of Sweden have positioned themselves as a middle power states .
 This has resulted in relatively larger development cooperation budgets for these countries . This has also resulted in larger development budgets for them .
 It has prompted among these states’ decision makers a commitment to fostering the development of norms and standards within international organizations that favor an increased transfer of resources to especially the poorest countries .
 The middle power label used by Sweden and others is less about power status than about a specific set of foreign policy interests . Sweden and other countries use the label less than power status as a status quo .
 Use of the label obscures that decision makers often perceive their state to play several roles simultaneously . State of the state is often perceived to be a state of multiple identities .
 Middle power label is used to communicate a specific set of values with respect to relations with developing countries . Middle power labels are used in the Middle East to communicate with developing nations .
 The states that employed this label play very different roles in other areas of their foreign policy, CNN.com's John Sutter says .
 The Netherlands long perceived its state as a faithful ally with NATO partners . Canada's decision makers have tried to fashion an independent role for their state . Sweden has long taken a strong position in favor of neutrality .
 Leaders of all three states also saw their states as having a special obligation with respect to developing countries . But leaders also said their states had special obligation to help develop countries .
 National role conceptions, like more general notions of capabilities or power status, suggest only the broad outlines of foreign policy objectives . In addition, national role conceptions are often vague and vague about national powers .
 U.S. policy makers have long perceived a global role for their country, but its foreign policy has clearly changed . As indicated, American policy makers .
 In the aftermath of World War II, the United States was instrumental in the creation of international organizations . The UN, the World Bank, and NATO played an important role in structuring and regulating political and economic relations .
 In the past decade, the United States has increasingly acted unilaterally . The U.S. has acted unilaterally in the past .
 Some see this as a temporary shift resulting from the preferences and perceptions of specific decision makers . Another interpretation suggests that the incentives presented by the post-Cold War international environment encourage American decision makers to act in this manner .
 America’s allies have become increasingly insistent that the U.S. act in accordance with the rules of international organizations, while at the same time being less willing to follow the American lead . After all, America's allies have been less likely to follow its lead .
 As the most powerful actor on the global stage, the U.S. cannot be compelled to cooperate . It may see little benefit from trying to persuade the reluctant leaders of smaller countries . The United States cannot be forced to cooperate, and it may see no benefit .
 Although it may be tempting for American decision makers to go it alone, doing so may have negative consequences in the long run . The U.S. has the capacity to do so, but it may have a negative impact on the country's future .
 In chapter 3, we introduced the concept of soft power, which we defined as the ability to shape the preferences of others . Soft power is defined as being able to shape others' preferences, we said .
 Soft Power is a concept that has emerged relatively recently . Soft Power and the Instruments of Foreign Policy are key to foreign policy . Soft power is the idea of soft power in the U.S.
 There have been a few instances where sanctions have been successful, such as the oil embargo instituted by the Organization for Petroleum Exporting Countries in the 1970s .
 Both military and economic power can be expressed through tangible foreign policy action . Nevertheless, the U.S. can still influence the world with tangible power .
 It relies not so much on specific actions as on what a country represents, it relies on what the country represents . It relies on the actions of the country, not specific actions .
 It involves making others want to do what you would like them to do, rather than making them do it . It has a strong psychological dimension because it involves making people want to follow your wishes .
 It is also likely to require patience because it means figuring out how to motivate the leaders of another country to want to pursue a course of action that you want them to pursue .
 The concept of soft power has been closely associated with U.S. foreign policy . Soft power was first coined in the context of foreign policy in the United States .
 For smaller states, it may be the only way in which their leaders can exercise influence on the world stage . Yet for smaller states it may still be a way to exercise influence .
 Think back to the description of the self-described middle powers that function as norm entrepreneurs earlier in this chapter . The self-proclaimed middle powers function as normal entrepreneurs .
 Countries are generally perceived quite positively. The U.S. is generally perceived positively in the world .
 Sweden's leaders carry weight in international diplomacy beyond what one might expect on the basis of the power capabilities of their state . As a result, the leaders of Sweden carry weight beyond what might be expected .
 The United States, on the other hand, can impose its will on the leaders and populations of other states, which resent its actions . The U.S. is the only nation to impose its own will on other states .
 Soft power might complement America’s power capabilities to achieve a more positive reaction to its foreign policy actions . Consider how soft power could complement U.S. power capabilities . Soft power could help America achieve a better reaction to foreign policy .
 Sovereignty is the doctrine that the government of a state is the legitimate and ultimate authority over that state . The doctrine is that the state is sovereign and the government is the ultimate authority .
 The government of a sovereign state recognizes no other authority over itself . This is in first instance a legal concept. This is the government of the sovereign state .
 Smaller states are acutely aware that their size limits their capacity to make legal sovereignty a practical reality . Whether such smaller states pursue compliant or counterdependent foreign policies, their leaders are aware of their size .
 Leaders of states have accepted limitations on their sovereign rights through membership in international organizations and by signing treaties, conventions, and declarations . The leaders of states are able to realize their sovereignty in practice, the authors say .
 Through such mechanisms they express a willingness to abide by common rules and norms, they say . Through such a mechanism, they express willingness to adhere to common rules, norms .
 International organizations and agreements largely depend on the voluntary cooperation of the member states . However, sovereignty also means that international organizations depend on voluntary cooperation from member states, such as Russia .
 Realists are quick to point out that the international environment is anarchic . After all, as Realists . point out, the international . environment is an anarchic state of anarchy .
 Anarchy means that there is no central power, that each sovereign entity is left to its own devices . Anarchy is anarchy, anarchy, and anarchy is anarchy . Anarchy means there are no central powers in the world .
 In the final analysis, whether anarchy or voluntary cooperation best describe the nature of the international environment is an empirical question . The answer is whether anarchy and voluntary cooperation are best described as anarchy .
 Or perhaps it depends on how leaders interpret the international environment . Or perhaps, it depends upon how they interpret the world's environment .
 Leaders make foreign policy decisions on the basis of their expectations and understandings of the international environment . After all, leaders make decisions based on their own expectations and understanding of the world .
 International expectations are grounded in the actions of the leaders of other states in the international arena . Those expectations are also shaped in important ways by interpretation of the meanings of, and motivations for, those actions .
 Decision makers in foreign policy are key to foreign policy, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 These are at best a rough guide to the role of a state in international politics . It is not the first time that a state has been involved in international affairs .
 Classifications of states into small, middle, and great powers are often as much about the roles states play in international politics as about objective power differences .
 Some small countries function as norm entrepreneurs and influence international politics beyond what their size or capabilities should lead one to expect . Some small nations are able to influence international affairs beyond what one should expect .
 Not much attention has been devoted to the size and capability of the U.S. Air Force One . The U.E. has been criticized for its lack of capability and size .
 Ingebritsen, Neumann, Gstohl, and Beyer, Small States in International Relations, reprints many classics and offers new contributions . Another recent book that reprints some of the classics is Small States .
 See Hochschild, King Leopold’s Ghost, for a gripping account of Belgian predatory colonialism . Hochschschild's book is published by Pulitzer Prize-winning American historian David Perry .
 Belgium is a comparatively young state in the West European context, dating its independence to 1830 . Belgium is one of Europe's youngest states, dating back to 1830, and is a relatively young state .
 Coolsaet, Belgie, Belgium, is a member of Belgium's Buitenlandse Politiek . He has been in charge of the Belgian government since 1986 .
 See,g., Rotberg, Milliken and Milliken, State Failure; Zartman, Collapsed States. See, g. Rotberg .
 Small States in International Relations: Keohane, ‘Lilliputians’ Dilemmas’; Rothstein, Alliances and Small Powers; Vital, The Survival of Small States .
 Kwitny’s argument in Endless Enemies is also relevant in this regard . He argues that the U.S. has a right to freedom of expression .
 See Holsti, “National Role Conceptions,” 12; see also Walker, Role Theory . Walker: “Role Theory’s Role Theory is a theory of the role of a person in society .
 Chapter Preview: Explains why foreign policy analysis puts the human decision maker at the center of its endeavor . Explains how foreign policy can be applied to foreign policy decisions .
 Explains the importance and appropriateness of multicausal explanations of foreign policy decision making . Explains why multicusal explanations are necessary for foreign policy decisions .
 Outlines prospects and challenges for the field of foreign policy analysis . Outlines prospect and challenges of the field in foreign policy .
 This is not wrong, because multicausal explanations are often the most appropriate ones . This is often the case for the most obvious explanation, and it's not always wrong .
 Different causes sometimes explain slightly different things, such as decisions, behaviors, and outcomes . We need to investigate phenomena at different levels of analysis—the individual, state, and international system . However, it is also important to recognize that different causes can sometimes explain different things .
 Looking back, you will readily notice that the previous chapters have been on decisions, decision making, and decision makers . The emphasis in this chapter is on decision making and decision making .
 World history is rife with the sometimes puzzling and frequently disastrous decisions that leaders have made . The book started with the observation that world history was rife with world history being made by leaders .
 Foreign policy analysis is first and foremost interested in explaining how and why such decisions came about . We argued that foreign policy analysis should be first to explain how such decisions were made .
 Foreign policy analysis differs most clearly from the broader study of international relations . This is where foreign policy analysis is most clearly different from the wider study of foreign policy .
 Foreign policy analysts proceed from the conviction that “human decision makers acting singly or in groups” are at the heart of international relations . ft ft is ultimately leaders who make foreign policy decisions .
 President Obama's administration has committed resources to foreign policy in foreign policy . The White House has been criticized for its foreign policy policies . President Obama has been accused of being a hypocrite .
 The resulting outcomes may not be what they intended, but that does not altogether absolve leaders from responsibility for the consequences of their decisions . Leaders should be held accountable for their decisions, but not for their actions, experts say .
 outcomes depend on the complex interplay between decisions made by the leaders of several countries and are often not what any one of those leaders intended to happen .
 It is in the end the decisions of leaders that shape the course of world history . Despite these mitigating factors, the decision of world leaders is crucial to history .
 Ffence, leaders—human decision makers, are at the heart of world politics . Fence, leader, decision makers are key to world politics, says Fence. Fence .
 Much of world history could have been different if world history had been different, says David Cameron . Yet gaining insight into the personalities and perceptions of leaders helps us understand how and why they arrived at their decisions .
 Better advice, more information, greater effort to see the world from the perspective of one’s opponent, could have influenced the course of history .
 If we want to understand international politics, we must understand leaders and their advisors . We must understand world leaders and advisors in order to understand world politics . We need to understand leaders' advisors and their leaders' views .
 This does not mean that international and domestic constraints are unimportant, it says . International and domestic factors are not unimportant. This is not the case, it is the case for the country's future .
 Leaders and advisors do not function in a vacuum but are embedded in a domestic and international environment that they defy at their peril . After all, leaders and their advisors are not functioned in an isolationist environment .
 It is important to understand the contours of those environments and also to obtain a grasp of the manner in which decision makers understood those environments at the time of the decision we seek to explain .
 Institutional facts are those things that can exist only in the context of human institutions, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Institutional facts," he says, "are those things ... that can only exist in a context"
 Government is an institution, both as a concept and in terms of the specifics of its design . Whether it is democratic or not, it's an institution that must be democratic, whether it's democratic, or not . Government is a concept, as well as an institution and as much as
 Foreign policy and international relations are conducted within the boundaries of institutions and proceed largely on the basis of social facts . If government is an institution, you might guess that foreign policy is conducted within those boundaries . Foreign policy, international relations proceed largely based on social facts, says David Cameron .
 Although there are many places in the world where the borders between countries are not demarcated in the landscape, we generally accept that borders exist and we behave accordingly . We bring along our passport when we travel .
 In fact, we often behave as if social facts are immutable forces of nature . Social facts are not, as are social facts of nature, they are, they say .
 At such times, our long-held assumptions are less useful in navigating the world around us . We are less likely to rely on our assumptions in our daily life, says CNN's John Sutter .
 After the end of the Cold War, decision makers were initially less sure of how to define their country’s national interest . Decision makers initially were unsure of how they would define their national interest after the war .
 The Soviet Union had dominated their framing of the international environment . The U.S. and the Soviet Union, had dominated the frame of the world .
 Decision makers suddenly faced an international environment that no longer fit their representation of it . Without it, decision makers faced a global environment that didn't fit them, they would not be able to represent it .
 The end of the Cold War provides a tangible moment when decision makers had to confront the socially constructed nature of international relations and had to arrive at a new understanding of the world .
 Decision makers may perceive themselves as having the capacity to influence the domestic environment but simultaneously experience much of it as a constraint or a given as well . Decision makers often perceive themselves having the ability to influence their domestic environment as a given or constraint .
 Foreign policy decision making takes place in context of human institutions and social facts, rather than in the context of natural phenomena . The individuals engaged in policy making often—^but not always—experience the international environment as dominated by unchangeable facts, he says .
 Even decision makers of countries that have played the role of norm entrepreneur understand that outside of the specific issue area in which their country seeks to influence international politics, that same country exists in an international environment that is largely a constraint on their state’s foreign policy behavior .
 From this point of view, the domestic and international environment, as institutions and their accompanying social facts, are the stage on which foreign policy making takes place, says David Cameron . Cameron: "Domestic and international environments as institutions are as institutions"
 Foreign policy decisions and behaviors have the power to significantly alter those institutions and social facts that delimit the world stage . Change in these environments requires cumulative effort across time, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Decolonization can be dated back to the eighteenth century’ This is not only much earlier than the conventionally referenced period of decolonization in the post-World War II period that had its roots in the early twentieth century ideas of national self-determination . It also suggests that
 Colonialism continued and expanded even as the idea of self-determination was beginning to take root . Colonialists continued to expand and expand even though the idea was starting to take hold .
 The rapid decolonization of the 1960s was, in effect, the culmination of a trend that had long been developing . It was the result of a rapid decolonialization that had been developing for decades .
 Social facts may be human constructions, but once they are in place, they are often resistant to change . Social facts are a constructions of human constructs, but they are human constructs . In the U.S. social facts are often very resistant to changing, writes CNN.com
 The domestic and international environment are often perceived as constraints . Domestic and international environments are often seen as constraints within which policy making takes place . Policy makers often see the international environment as a constraint .
 Foreign policy analysis does not deny that the state and system levels of analysis have their roles to play in foreign policy analysis .
 It has been argued that especially the constraints presented by the international environment are “undertheorized,” meaning that there has not been much attention for—or good ideas about—how exactly the international . environment affects foreign policy decision making .
 The discussion of the international constraints in chapter 6 supports this contention . capabilities make a difference, but we cannot say exactly how, but it's not clear .
 Classical Realism proceeded from a rather narrow perception of what motivated decision makers. Additionally, classical Realism, first introduced in chapter 3, proceeded from .
 The national interest was defined largely in terms of hard power or military might . It was defined by hard power and military might, but national interest is defined by national interest .
 Foreign policy analysis seeks to empirically determine how decision makers actually define their state’s interests . In contrast, foreign policy analysis does not assume interests; rather it seeks to determine how decisions are made .
 Leaders of some small states define their interest in terms of their role as norm entrepreneurs . As discussed in chapter 6, the leaders of some states define themselves as 'norm entrepreneurs'
 In doing so, they are not interested in expanding their military prowess . They are interested in not expanding their own military prowess.
 In other words, they seek to alter the institutions of international politics . They seek to change the institutions in international politics, they say . They say they want to 'alter the institutions'
 Foreign policy analysis shares with classical Realism the emphasis on decision makers but differs in its assumptions about human behavior . Foreign Policy analysis is based on the assumption that human behavior is human .
 Realism generally more akin to normative and empirical approaches to rationality . The difference is similar to that between Normals and empirical theories of rationality . Realism and foreign policy analysis are often different approaches to rationalizing .
 Making Sense of Multiple Simultaneous Explanations is rarely simple . Explaining foreign policy decisions is rarely easy . Making sense of multiple explanations is often difficult .
 Multiple causes help to generate a rich and complex explanation of foreign policy behaviors of states . Usually, multiple causes help generate a complex explanation .
 Foreign policy analysis is an eclectic field that brings together a variety of ideas and types of studies . Since the introduction of these global frameworks, foreign policy analysis has grown to be a field of eclectic ideas .
 Rarely does one scholar investigate the entire, comprehensive scope of factors that might impinge on foreign policy making . Rarely has one scholar examine the entire scope of the factors that may impinge upon foreign policy .
 Some people spend much of their professional life analyzing leader personality . Others choose to focus on problem representations or the use of analogies in reasoning .
 Specialists focus on the advisory system and sometimes on specific aspects of it . Specialists may focus on how it affects decision making processes, such as the impact of institutional arrangements .
 Other foreign policy analysts seek to understand when, how, and why public opinion or the media matter .
 There has been relatively little work on the impact of culture and national history or the influence of size, capabilities, and geographic location . The impact of the nation's influence on its size and capabilities is still unknown .
 They simply focus on those areas that most hold their interest or those where they think they can make a contribution to our collective understanding of foreign policy making .
 Foreign policy analysts carve out small problems to study, not because they think these are the only ones that matter, but because it is much easier to make sense of a small aspect than the entire foreign policy process at once .
 Foreign policy analysts readily agree that the decisions, behaviors, and outcomes they study are multicausal . Single research projects usually seek to isolate the impact of one or a small set of variables .
 We are interested, first and foremost, in knowing which variables contribute most to the decision, behavior, or outcome in the cases we study . We are also interested in knowing how many variables contribute to the decisions, behavior and outcomes .
 The next step is to investigate whether those same variables matter most in other cases as well .
 If they do, we can say that our findings are more generalizable than if they do not . We hope to see if the findings are true in general .
 Small studies help us understand how widely or narrowly our explanations apply . Either way, it is through a sequence of small studies that we begin to understand how wide or narrowly we explain .
 Some explanations will obtain only under a narrow set of circumstances, others will be more generally valid . Others will apply under certain circumstances, and other will explain other sets of circumstances . Some will apply only under certain situations, and others will explain others .
 The task is to develop further insight into which explanations apply to what type of cases and under what circumstances . The task will be to find out which explanation applies to what kind of cases .
 Prospects and Challenges for Foreign Policy Analysis are comparatively young . The field of foreign policy analysis is comparatively young, with many challenges still to come from abroad .
 These efforts were too unwieldy to serve as ready-made frameworks for research projects . But they did serve to define the field of study .
 Foreign policy analysis privileges the human decision maker, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Foreign policy analysis is the individual level of analysis in foreign policy analysis . It also includes state level analyses of foreign policy in the US .
 This is especially true for large-scale event data sets focusing on foreign policy behavior . This is particularly true for foreign policy data sets such as foreign policy events .
 The creation of large data sets was extremely labor intensive . As a result, the creation of these data sets is extremely labor-intensive . The data sets are extremely difficult to create .
 Machine coding is now a new generation of efforts at event data collection that employs machine coding . Machine coding was largely abandoned by the end of the 1980s .
 The focus of foreign policy analysis is most often on decision makers and decision making processes . Foreign policy behavior is treated as the result of decision making, rather than something that can be understood on its own terms .
 Efforts to understand decision makers and the decision making process are most often motivated by a desire to generate useful knowledge .
 Foreign policy analysis is methodologically eclectic, but various approaches share an emphasis on carefully explicated empirical analysis . Three, foreign policy analysis will focus on carefully explaining empirical analysis of foreign policy . Three and four ways to understand foreign policy in the world .
 Research may be quantitative or qualitative in nature, but it always strives for transparency in research design . Research strives to make it possible for other scholars to understand precisely how evidence was employed and evaluated .
 Quantitative studies have the advantage of being the most easily replicable, but some questions are not easily answered through quantitative analysis . Quantitative analysis can be used to answer questions such as whether or not quantitative analysis is useful .
 Foreign policy analysis seeks to test generalizable propositions about foreign policy decision making and foreign policy behavior . Four, foreign policy analysis aims to develop and test generalizability of foreign policy .
 As noted earlier, initial efforts in the study of foreign policy often presented grand, comprehensive theories that encompassed the entire scope of subjects from individual and advisory system via bureaucracies and domestic constraints .
 Such theories specify the conditions under which it applies or the range of cases to which it is expected to be generalizable . Instead of being generalizable, theories specify conditions and ranges of cases it applies .
 Such more modest theorizing helps the field to develop cumulative knowledge of certain aspects of foreign policy, such as foreign policy .
 It also demonstrates that the seminal early works have become a paradigmatic umbrella that unifies a diverse set of efforts . The seminal works have also become an umbrella unifying a diverse group of efforts.
 Foreign policy analysts often focus on a specific element or dynamic of the decision making process . Under that large umbrella, foreign policy analysts focus on specific elements of the process .
 They formulate expectations and test them on the basis of empirical analyses that are relatively small in scale, such as a set of case studies, either historical or contemporary, that is chosen to specifically study .
 Each carefully designed small-scale study can help expand our knowledge . What is held constant and what is permitted to vary will depend on the specific research question .
 As the world becomes more interconnected, it will be important to begin to explore foreign policy making on subjects beyond crises more earnestly . Foreign policy making will need to be on the subject of international crises more seriously .
 In addition, there has been a distinct bias in favor of U.S. foreign policy making as the subject of investigation . In addition to the investigation, there is also a clear bias toward the investigation of foreign policy .
 This evidences the American origins of the field of study but has other roots as well as other roots . The field of science has roots in the United States .
 When the foreign policies of other countries are the subject of investigation, the emphasis is frequently on great and emerging powers or states relevant to U.S. foreign policy at the time .
 On the one hand, this is to be expected of a field of study that seeks to provide useful knowledge . On the other hand, it is expected of the field of research to be a useful knowledge.
 There are also missed opportunities both for theory development and for a deeper understanding of the dynamics of international system change over time . On the other hand, there are also missing opportunities for theory .
 The application of propositions regarding the organization of the American executive to the court of Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia in chapter 4 represents an effort in this book to apply theoretical propositions developed in the context of U.S. foreign policy to other another country .
 In this case, the example helps us understand the problems that emerged at the center of power as the Emperor aged . The Emperor's example is an example of the problems he faced as he aged .
 The strong centralization of foreign policy making power in the American executive suggests that theories developed in the context of United States foreign policy may be more helpful in the study of authoritarian regimes than in studying the foreign policies of parliamentary democracies .
 The pinnacle of government, are a poor fit for understanding foreign policy making of countries with coalition governments, says the author .
 The junior coalition partner can exercise control well beyond its numerical representation within the coalition . In such governments, as described in chapter 4, it is possible to exercise control beyond numerical representation .
 In coalition governments the buck does not automatically stop at the prime minister’s desk . In other words, in coalition governments, the buck doesn't automatically stop with the PM . The buck doesn’t always stop at prime minister's desk .
 Small states also understudied in foreign policy analysis . Small states are also under-studied by foreign policy analysts .
 There has been a general perception that small states are less important than large states because of their lesser power capabilities . Small states are seen as less important as large states due to their lesser capabilities .
 Size and capabilities are, as explained in chapter 6, at best a rough guide to a state’s foreign policy behavior . Size and capability are, for example, a key factor in foreign policy decisions in the United States .
 Small states have occasionally positioned themselves as norm entrepreneurs in specific foreign policy issue areas . Two, small states have positioned themselves to be norm entrepreneurs on foreign policy .
 State may not have the resources to engage in extensive foreign policy making efforts on a wide range of issues . But by targeting their efforts in a narrow, well-defined set of interconnected issues, such states may be able to affect the behavior of other states in that specific domain .
 The connection of the efforts of norm entrepreneurs with the American concept of soft power demonstrates that small states, and especially norm entrepreneurs, may be useful subjects for investigation .
 In sum, foreign policy analysis is a dynamic approach to the study of international relations . Foreign policy analysis should be considered as an approach to international relations.
 It is characterized by a strong emphasis on human decision makers and a focus on the cumulation of knowledge through the shared enterprise of scholars engaged in small-scale, systematic, and empirical efforts .
 There are aspects of the field that are as yet underdeveloped, as well as areas in which we have gained important insights, say experts . There are areas in the field where we are yet to learn from, such as how to use technology .
 Foreign policy disasters almost always have at their root the inability of foreign policy decision makers to perceive the world from the vantage point of the decision makers of one or more other countries .
 There are no guarantees that carefully crafted foreign policy decisions will always yield the intended outcomes . The odds are much better when human decision makers have the ability to perceive the world from multiple perspectives, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Foreign policy analysis, at its core, is about understanding the multiple perspectives of the world that either collide or connect when foreign policy decision makers of different countries meet .
 Foreign policy analysis concerns institutions created by human beings . The subject matter of foreign policy analysis is a matter of concern to the world .
 These institutions often function as constraints but are nonetheless the products of accepted norms, rules, and practices . These institutions are often constraints but nonetheless are products of acceptance and acceptance of norms .
 Repeated tests, using different case studies or different data, help to evaluate the generalizability of any specific theory . Repeated test results can be used to test generalizibility of any theory .
 Terms Institutions Institutional facts . Social facts Social facts . Mid-range theory Mid-Range theory Study Questions 1 .
 Most of the early efforts in foreign policy analysis that presented comprehensive conceptual frameworks are now out of print . Most of these early efforts are now in print .
 The journal Foreign Policy Analysis is a good source of current research in foreign policy analysis .
 Adler, “Constructivism and International Relations,” 95; Houghton, ‘Reinvigorating the Study of Foreign Policy Decision-Making,’ 28. Adler: “I’m glad that we’ve found a way to
 Houghton, “Reinvigorating the Study of Foreign Policy Decision-Making,” 34.5, is a result of the study of foreign policy .
 Houghton, “Reinvigorating the Study of Foreign Policy Decision-Making,” makes precisely this point . Houghon: The study of foreign policy decision-making should be reinvigorated .
 Singer: Man, the State, and War: A Theoretical Analysis; Waltz, Theory of International Politics. Singer, “The Level-of-Analysis Problem in International Relations” Waltz: ‘The Level of Analysis Problem in international relations’ Singer:
 Ingebritsen, “Norm Entrepreneurs”; see also Finnemore, National Interests in International Society . See also Finnmore, "Norm" and "Norm," for more information .
 Foreign Policy Decision-Making; Sprout and Sprout, The Ecological Perspective on Human Affairs. Foreign Policy decision-making . Foreign Policy . Decision-making. Decision- Making.
 See, for instance, Snyder, Bruck, and Sapin, Foreign Policy Decision--Making. See how foreign policy decision-making decisions are made.
 Astorino-Courtois and Trusty, “Degrees of Difficulty,” 29, italics in original . Trusty’s book was published in 2007 .
 See also Drezner, “Ideas, Bureaucratic Politics, and the Crafting of Foreign Policy”; Kowert, Groupthink or Deadlock .
 Hagan, a Democrat, is a key figure in the U.S. House of Representatives . Hagan was elected to the Senate in 1996 .
 This page intentionally left blank . Glossary Accountability — The idea that decision makers cannot do as they please but must take responsibility for their decisions and actions .
 The concept is often associated rvith democracy but not exclusive to it . The concept of democracy is not always exclusive to democracy .
 Active-negative —A category used in the study of presidential character . Active negative is a term used in study of president's character .
 These are individuals who invest a lot of energy in their leadership role but also perceive the job as a chore . These are people who invest energy in leadership but also feel it's a chore.
 Active-positive —A category used in the study of presidential character . Active positive is a term used in study of president's character .
 These are leaders who invest a lot of energy and derive a much of satisfaction from the job . These leaders are leaders of the world's most successful companies .
 Analogical reasoning is a process of comparing a poorly understood problem to a historical problem that is deemed similar and about which more is known . Analogical reasoning —^ is a form of comparison of a problem to an historical problem .
 There is a rough parity among the large powers in the international system . Balance of power is a situation in which there is rough parity .
 Analysts prescribe certain policies to arrive at balance of power . Balance of power leads analysts to prescribe policies, they say .
 Implies that the decision making process involves give-and-take . The preferences of any one policy maker never fully shape the decision but often partially do so .
 Bounded rationality — Holds that actors are rational are rational within the scope of what they know . Bounding rationality .
 Bureaucratic politics model is one of three models of decision making outlined in this book . Bureaucratatic politics is the third model of decision-making in the book .
 Policy making is the outcome of multiple bargaining processes between individual decision makers at multiple levels within the government . It describes policy making as the result of multiple negotiation processes .
 Cabinet government is an executive branch of government in which collective responsibility for decision making rests with a cabinet . Cabinet government —^An executive branch government . Cabinet is a Cabinet of government .
 Measurable assets, such as a country’s geographic size, its population, its natural resources, the size of its economy and its military, can be used as an indicator of the potential power of a state . Capabilities — such as geographic size and population — can be
 Associated with parliamentary systems and electoral systems that employ proportional representation . Coalition—^ Associated with parliamentary systems that employ proportional representation .
 Two or more political parties jointly form the government, because no single party has a majority of the seats in parliament . No one party has the majority of seats in the parliament . Two or three political parties may jointly form government .
 Coalition agreement provides basis for cooperation between the coalition partners . Coalition agreement is negotiated agreement that provides basis of cooperation . Coalition deal is negotiated by the partners of the coalition .
 Coalition cabinet is a government in a parliamentary system that consists of ministers who represent two or more political parties . Coalition Cabinet is a coalition government in the parliamentary system . Coalition cabinet includes ministers from two or three parties .
 Coalition partners—The parties that join together to form a coalition government . Coalition partners are the parties that form a government .
 Cognitive biases—Identifiable and systematic errors in human reasoning . Cognitive biases are the result of systematic errors of human reasoning.
 An approach to cabinet government in which each minister is expected to publicly support all cabinet decisions . Collective responsibility is an approach to a cabinet government .
 An approach to organizing the executive that emphasizes teamwork and debate rather than competition . Collegial approach—^An approach to . organizing an executive that . emphasizes teamwork, rather than . competition .
 The leader seeks out multiple sources of information and encourages multiple viewpoints . He seeks to use his authority to make the most important decisions .
 The group develops options, evaluates them, selects the most viable ones, and ultimately makes a decision . The group decides on the best way to proceed with the project .
 A dependent state’s foreign policy is antagonizing the leaders of powerful states in an effort to appease domestic audiences . Compensation foreign policy—^A dependent state's foreign policy that antagonizes the leaders is a compensation policy .
 Competitive approach—An approach to organizing the executive that actively and systematically employs multiple channels of information. Competitive approach . Competitive approach is an approach that actively uses multiple channels to organize an organization .
 Results in a competitive relationship between advisors but provides the leader with multiple viewpoints on issues . Results in competitive relationship but provides leader with different viewpoints .
 Complexifiers—Describes theorists who perceive good judgment to be connected to the ability to think critically . Complexifiers are often associated with good judgment .
 A dependent state’s foreign policy alignment with that of a larger, more powerful state on the basis of influence exerted by the latter to achieve such an alignment . Compliant foreign policy is a state that must align with a larger or more powerful country to achieve that alignment .
 It measures whether a decision maker perceives the world in complex and nuanced ways or in simpler back-and-white terms . The measure is a measure of whether the world is complex or nuanced .
 Decision makers quickly settle on an option they jointly perceive as a reasonable solution . Decision makers settle on a solution they perceive as reasonable solution.
 A dependent state’s voluntarily alignment of their external policy with that of a larger, more powerful state that has the capacity to exert influence over the dependent state . Consensus-oriented foreign policy is a voluntary alignment of external policy by a larger state .
 It can vary from interpretive schemes guided by a set of questions to counting frequency of specific words in text .
 A dependent state’s defiant foreign policy usually invites the displeasure of the large, more powerful state on which it is dependent . Counterdependent foreign policy is a defiant policy that invites displeasure of a larger state . Counter-dependence foreign policy often invites displeasure from the more powerful states on
 Counterfactuals—Decisions, behaviors, or outcomes that differ from the actual facts of history . Counterfactsuals -- Decisions, behavior, or events that are not based on historical facts . Counterfactorials—decisions, actions, decisions, or behaviors that differ
 Careful exploration of counterfactuals can enhance our understanding of causality in international politics . Careful consideration of alternative facts can enhance the understanding of causes in politics, says David Cameron .
 Deadlock—The result of a decision making process in which the decision makers fail to achieve agreement . Deadlock is the result of the decision-making process that ends in deadlock .
 Decision frame—The manner in which a decision maker has framed, or represented, a specific decision making situation . Decision frame is the manner of a decision making decision maker to make a decision .
 Decision units are decision units who are in a position not only to make a foreign policy decision but also to prevent any other entity within the government from explicitly reversing that decision . Decision units include individuals who are not in position to explicitly reverse the decision .
 Democratic peace theory is a set of propositions that suggests that countries that are governed democratically are less likely to initiate wars than non-democracies .
 There is substantial empirical evidence that supports these propositions, says CNN.com.com .
 Dependence—An asymmetric pattern of interactions between a more and a less powerful state. Dependence . Dependence is a pattern of interaction between more and less powerful states .
 In scientific investigation, the occurrence or value of dependent variable is what we seek to understand . The occurrence of a dependent variable in a scientific investigation is what is sought to understand. In scientific investigations, it is the result of the study .
 Developing country—A designation that is imprecise and encompasses a wide variety of countries . Developed country is a country that is considered a developing country .
 Generally denotes countries that are not as technologically advanced or industrialized as states with advanced economies . Country with less advanced economies is considered to be less technologically advanced .
 Leaders may take their country to war to focus the public’s attention on foreign policy rather than on the domestic problems to enhance support for the government . Diversionary theory of war .
 Dominant solution is the only credible option for dealing with a foreign policy situation; the obvious choice of all decision makers . Dominant solutions is the obvious option for all decision-makers, says Obama .
 These rules determine how votes are translated into seats in that legislature . These rules are how it is determined which candidate gets to hold the office .
 Embedded agency is an entity that is created as a subunit of a larger government agency . Embedded agencies are created as sub units of larger government agencies . An embedded agency is a sub unit of a large government agency.
 Emerging power—state that is rapidly becoming more powerful; one developing its capabilities into usable assets . Emerging power: State that is developing capabilities into useful assets. Emerging power; one state that is becoming increasingly more powerful .
 The first are described as feelings and the second as physical changes . The first were feelings and then physical changes, the second were physical changes.
 Empirical theory of rationality is a theory about rationality that favors empirical investigation into human reasoning and decision making . Empiral theory is an empirical investigation of human reasoning .
 A failed state is a state in which the government effectively does not control the state’s territory . Failed state is considered a failed state by the U.S. government .
 Foreign Policy is the totality of a country’s policies toward and interactions with the environment beyond its borders . Foreign policy is a country's policies toward its environment .
 Foreign policy options are the range of possible options for responding to a specific problem or situation . The range of foreign policy options is the number of possible responses to the situation .
 Foreign policy outcomes are the end result of a state’s foreign policy behavior in interaction with the foreign policy behaviors of other states . The end result is the result of the state's behavior with the behavior of others .
 Formalistic approach is an approach to organizing the executive that emphasizes hierarchy and has a clear chain of command . Formalist approach is a formal approach to organization that emphasizes the hierarchy of the executive .
 A major event strongly influences a decision maker’s thinking about the nature of world politics and foreign policy . Formative event is a major event that strongly influences the thinking of a major decision maker .
 Framing—Describes the systematic effects of a person’s perspective on the interpretation of situations and events, e.g., a tendency to judge risk in terms of how a problem is presented . Framing is a systematic effect on a person's perspective on a problem .
 Good decision is a decision in which a sound decision making process was followed or from which a good outcome resulted . Good decision was followed by a sound process of making a good decision .
 Great power is a state that has the political, economic, and military strength to exert influence on a global scale . It is a term for classifying a state with the political and economic strength of a state .
 Decision makers quickly concur but may have overlooked or ignored options . Decision makers may also overlook or ignore options, experts say .
 Groups are small groups of advisors at the pinnacle of government . Groups of advisors are at the top of the government .
 Policy makers meet face-to-face in small groups where decisions are fashioned on the basis of the information and analysis provided by the various agencies and departments . Policy makers make decisions based on the information provided by agencies, departments .
 Its objective and strategy for achieving it are shared by those who work for the organization . Its objective is to achieve the goal of achieving it, and its strategy is shared by the organization's staff .
 This type of organization is mission driven. lU-structured problem—A problem that is not well defined, usually because of incomplete information. The problem is a mission driven problem.
 Independent variables explain the value or the occurrence of the dependent variable . Independent variables are independent variables explaining the value of a dependent variable. Independent variables also explain the values of a given dependent variable, such as the dependent variables . Independent variable explains the value, or occurrence, of an occurrence of
 Individual level of analysis is most specific of the three levels of analysis . Individual level is the most specific level of the analysis of all three levels .
 It focuses on individuals, such as leaders and their advisors, to explain foreign policy .
 Insulated agency is an autonomous or independent entity within the government bureaucracy . Insulated agencies are an independent or independent body within the bureaucracy . The agency is often an independent body of the government .
 Institutional facts owe their existence to human society, such as borders between countries or citizenship . Institutional fact is a fact that owes the existence of human society .
 Institutions—Systems of rules, procedures, and practices shared by collectivities of individuals, states, or even the international community as a whole . Institutions are systems of rules and procedures that are shared with collectivities .
 A result represents the preferences of all members of the group, albeit modified to some degree . Integrative solution—^ A result that represents a result that is consistent with the group's preferences . The result is the result of an agreement on a solution .
 Interdependence is the structure of a state’s interactions with other states . Interdependency is a state's structure of its interactions with others . Interconnection is an interaction between states and each other .
 Usually refers to states that have active trading relationships with each other . Usually refers as states that trade with one another .
 Interest-based organization is characterized by bargaining with other organizations within the government bureaucracy . Interest based organizations are characterized by negotiating with other government agencies .
 It is driven less by organizational mission than by a desire to maintain or improve the organization’s standing within the larger government bureaucracy . The agency is driven by an effort to maintain its standing in the larger bureaucracy .
 Irredentism is the quest to include an ethnic kinship group that lives across the border into the territory of the state . It is usually by incorporating the territory in which that group lives into the state, usually .
 Isolationism—Describes the basic foreign policy attitude of the United States prior to World War I . The country avoided an active role in world affairs .
 Large-N comparison is a research strategy in which a large number of cases is systematically compared, usually with the aid of statistical methodologies . A research strategy is used to systematically compare large numbers of cases .
 Leadership trait analysis is an approach to the study of leader personality . Leadership traits are a key part of a leader's leadership strategy .
 Levels of analysis—The specificity or abstraction of the entities studied studied . Levels are the specific or abstractions of the objects studied, and levels of analysis are used in analysis .
 Middle power—state that can wield a measure of influence, albeit not through the projection of military might . Middle power . State of influence in Middle East .
 Mid-range theory—Provides explanations for only specific aspect of foreign policy . Midrange theory: Provides explanations for specific aspects of foreign policies .
 A theory specifies the conditions under which it applies or the range of cases to which the findings are expected to be generalizable . Such a theory can be described as a theory that may be generalizing .
 National history conveys common values that a society seeks to instill in the next generation . National history—Conveys and communicates common values .
 Uses tales that are factually accurate but chosen because they convey values and meanings that are deemed significant . Uses tales to convey values that convey significant meanings .
 National interest is defined in terms of security issues, such as maintaining the integrity of the state’s borders through military defense . National security is defined as the ability to maintain the integrity .
 Foreign policy analysis does not impose such a definition but instead asks how decision makers define the national interest . Foreign Policy Analysis: National interest is defined by how it defines national interests .
 National role conception—The scope and type of foreign policy decisions and behaviors that decision makers perceive are appropriate for their state to undertake . National role conceptions are defined by the scope of national policy decisions .
 National self-determination is the desire of a group of people sharing a common national or ethnic identity to govern itself in its own state . Self-determination can be defined as the desire to govern yourself in your own state.
 Policy options excluded if they are unacceptable on one critical dimension, irrespective of other attractive features such options may have . Noncompensatory principle—suggests that policy options are excluded .
 Normative theory of rationality is a theory that specifies a specific model of rational decision making . The Normative Theory of Rationality is based on a model of rationality .
 Actors advocate for the adoption of certain international norms . They work diplomatically to persuade the representatives of other states to also adopt these norms .
 Organizational process model is one of three models of decision making outlined in this book . Organizational processes model is a model of organizational processes .
 Government describes government as a collection of organizations and decision making as the product of organizational processes . Decision making is a result of organization processes, government says .
 Parliamentary system—A system of government in which the executive and legislative branches of government are linked . Parliamentary system is a system that links the executive with the legislative branch .
 Parliamentary elections determine the composition of both the parliament and the executive . Parliamentary elections are held in the United States and Canada .
 A category used in the study of presidential character . Passive-negative is a category used for presidential character studies . Passive negative is a form of negative character .
 These are leaders who perceive the presidency as a chore but are motivated by a sense of duty to country . These leaders don't see it as a job but as a duty to the country .
 Passive-positive is a category used in the study of presidential character . Passive-negative is a term used in study of president's character .
 Persuasion—Describes the process by which one or more decision makers are successful at convincing others in a decision making group to adopt their point of view . The process is described as "persuasion"
 Persuasion generates agreement on a solution in a decision making group . Persuasions generate agreement in decision-making groups .
 Poliheuristic theory is the theory of foreign policy decision making . It specifies a two-stage decision process, with different decision rules characterizing decision making at each stage . The theory is based on the two stages of decision-making .
 Political culture—Encompasses the shared political values of a society’s people . Political culture is a form of social interaction between people and their communities .
 This includes generalized beliefs about one’s own state and about other states, as well as the actual and desired relations between these . This includes beliefs about the state and other states and about the relationship between them .
 Presidential system is a system of government in which the executive branch of government is separate from the legislative branch . The system is called the Presidential System .
 The president and legislature are elected independently of one another and have their own independent mandate . The president, legislature and the president are elected independent of each other . The state legislature has its own independent mandates .
 Problem representation is a mental representation of a problem or situation that has an impact on the decision making process . Problem representation has a mental impact on a decision being made .
 Prospect theory—A set of propositions about the impact of framing or problem representation on the evaluation of options in decision making . Prospect theory is a theory of framing and problem representation .
 Public diplomacy is a government’s diplomatic efforts that target citizens, the press, and constituencies in other countries rather than the governments of those countries . Public diplomacy targets citizens and press rather than those of those nations .
 Public opinion—The attitudes and opinions of the population of a society . Public opinion is the opinion of the people in the society .
 Rationality—Suggests a thought process that starts with a purpose and revolves around weighing options and making choices in a manner that best achieves that predetermined end .
 This rather thin definition of rationality is expanded upon in Chapter 3 . Chapter 3 expands on this thin definition in Chapter 4 .
 The rational policy model is one of three models of decision making outlined in this book .
 Realist theory is an influential perspective in the study of world politics . It is a concern with maintaining and possibly enhancing a state’s power and, thereby, the integrity and autonomy of the state . Realist theorists are concerned with maintaining a state's power .
 Regional power—A state that has the resources to exert influence in the region of the world in which it is located . Regional power is a state that exerts influence in its region .
 Rogue state—A state whose decision makers do not conduct their foreign policy according to the conventions of international diplomacy . Rogue state is a rogue state that does not conduct its foreign policy in accordance with international diplomacy.
 Their violation of these conventions and of international law makes them threats to other states in the international environment, says CNN's Peter Bergen . The U.S. State Department says it is investigating the situation .
 Satisficing—Choosing the first acceptable solution; “good enough” decision making. Satisficing is “satisfying” a decision making decision making . Satisfying is a decision to make a decision that is good enough .
 Semi-authoritarian regimes are governments that hold elections and have the institutional framework of democracy without the substantive commitment to democratic values . Semi-Authoritarian regimes include those that have not committed to democratic principles . Semi authoritarian regimes are countries that have no commitment to democracy, say experts .
 Simplifiers are theorists who hold that good judgment is the ability to discern simple patterns that define even the most complex of events . Simplifiers—Describes theorists who believe good judgment requires simple patterns . Simplifier is a theorist who says that simple patterns define complex events .
 Skeptics of good judgment are theorists who judge that the complex nature of international politics makes it impossible to fully grasp the consequences of any decision . They attribute good outcomes largely to luck .
 Small-N comparison is a research strategy in which a small number of cases is systematically compared . A research strategy is used to systematically compare small numbers of cases to a given case .
 Such comparisons permit a rich and nuanced understanding of similarities and differences between cases, but findings are not as easily generalized . Findings are not easily generalized, the researchers say .
 Small state is a state with a comparatively limited capacity to exert influence on other states . Small states are a state that has a relatively limited capacity for influence .
 U.S. generally has a smaller range of foreign policy instruments they can effectively employ in relations with other states .
 Soft power—The ability to shape the preferences of others through compelling ideas and values . Soft power is a form of power that can shape the opinions of others by compelling ideas or values .
 It may involve both the modeling of desirable behaviors and persuasion . It may also involve modeling desirable behavior and persuasion.
 The doctrine is that the government of a state is the legitimate and ultimate authority over that state; i.e., it recognizes no other authority above itself. Sovereignty is the doctrine that a state's government is legitimate .
 Standard operating procedures are the customary, or standardized, processes that describe most of the decision making in organizations . Standards include standard operating procedures, or standard procedures, that describe the process .
 It focuses on factors internal to the state as the ones that compel states to engage in specific foreign policy behaviors .
 Subset solution is a result in which one faction’s ideas dominate over the preferences of other members or factions within the group . Subset solutions are a result of a disagreement between factions or factions in a group .
 System level of analysis—The most abstract of the three levels of analysis . System level analysis is the most abstract level of system analysis .
 Foreign policy analysis rarely employs this level of analysis, although it uses system level attributes descriptively to understand the context of foreign policy making . Foreign policy analysts rarely use such analysis to analyze foreign policy .
 Think tank—^A group of advisors who work jointly to create a problem representation, generate options, or evaluate options . Think tank is a think tank that works jointly with advisors .
 Groups are considered superior to single decision makers especially when problems are ill-structured . Groups are thought to be better than single decision-making decisions .
 Two-level game is required when foreign policy decision makers try to satisfy domestic constituencies and international imperatives .
 Weak state—Describes a country with ineffective institutions of government, sometimes used synonymously with small state . Weak state is sometimes synonymized with small states .
 In Integrating Cognitive and Rational Theories of Foreign Policy Decision Making, ed. In Integrations Cognitive and . Rational and Cognitive and rational Theories, . ed. ed. on Foreign Policy .
 Gerner, Deborah J. Gerner and Philip A Schrodt, Ronald A Francisco, Ronald Francisco, and Judith L. Weddle.
 Observational Learning, Analogies and Foreign Policy in Russia and Ukraine . Observational learning, analogies and foreign policy in Russia, Ukraine .
 Hagan, Joe D. Hagan and Joe D Political Opposition and Foreign Policy in Comparative Perspective . Hagan: The U.S. has a long history of foreign policy in the Middle East .
 Hermann, Charles F. Hermann and Janice Gross Stein, Bengt Sundeius, and Stephen G. Walker are the authors of the book .
 CNN's John S. Hermann, Margaret G., Thomas Preston, Baghat Korany, and Timothy M Shaw are featured in this week's iReporters' weekly travel reports .
 Christine Inge-ritsen, Iver Neumann, Sieglinde Gstohl, and Jessica Beyer are the authors of the book . The book was published by the University of Cambridge University in Cambridge, England .
 Ingehritsen, Christine, Iver Neumann, Sieglinde Gstohl, and Sieginde . Beyer, Jessica Beyer and Iver . Neumann. Beyer .
 Integrating Cognitive and Rational Theories of Foreign Policy Decision Making . Integrating cognitive and rational theories of foreign policy decision making .
 International Interactions 25 : 1-31. Do the Psychological Characteristics of the Leader Matter? Do the psychological characteristics of a leader matter?
 The Ecological Perspective on Human Affairs, with Special Reference to International Politics, is published by The International Ecologist . The Ecologist's view of the world is based on the Ecological perspective on human affairs .
 The Determinants of the Aid Policies of Canada, Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. Canada, . Denmark, . The Netherlands, . the Netherlands and . Norway, Sweden, Canada, and . Denmark have the highest aid budget in the world .
 Donald Sylvan, Donald A Introduction to Problem Representation and Foreign Policy Decision Making, ed. Sylvan . Sylvan: "Problem Representation" is a problem of problem representation .
 A Comparative Analysis of the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, France, and Japan. A Comparable Analysis of U.S. and the UK. Canada, Japan, and France. The United Kingdom.
 Information Processing Cognition Cognition, and Perception in Foreign Policy Decision Making, is published in the Journal of Psychology .
 His insistence shortened X PREFACE the road to the completion of this project . His insistence that the X PRECEPTION X PREVIEW the project was a pre-lude .
 Last, but not least, I want to thank my spouse, John, and my daughters, Fasika and Bedelwa, for their support .
 Foreign policy is defined as the totality of a country’s policies toward and interactions with the environment beyond its borders . This definition is quite broad and encompasses a variety of issue domains or issue areas .
 Implementation phase has its own problems and pitfalls: those who are implementing the decision may misunderstand the orders they have been given . They may disagree with their orders and carry them out in a subtly or more overtly different manner than had been intended, or they may simply ignore the order and hope no
 Einally, the world beyond the borders affects the possibilities for foreign policy action . E. E. M. Johnson: E. Johnson says the world outside the borders influences the possibility of foreign policy actions .
 Flowever, the definition of political interest, sometimes called national interest, is not necessarily straightforward . Flowever: "Flowever, it's not always easy to define political interest"
 In fact, Saddam Flussein may have calculated that the United States would decide it was not in its interest to intervene in Iraq .
 Archduke Franz Ferdinand assassinated by a Serbian nationalist during a visit to Serajevo . The assassination is often portrayed as the cause of World War 1 . Franz Ferdinand was heir to the throne of the Austro-Hungarian Empire .
 Concert of Europe began to disintegrate around the turn of the twentieth century . Germany strengthened itself economically and militarily after unification in 1871 .
 Foreign policy analysis and social scientific terminology . Factors that contribute to the Foreign policy decision, behavior, or occurrence of foreign policy . One, he could have studied many crises and investigated how often, and under what circumstances, they led to war or were resolved peacefully .
 It would be possible to include information on all states in the world for a given period of time, provided one could get information for all of them .
 Counterfactuals are essentially decisions, behaviors, or outcomes that differ from the actual facts of history . They help us evaluate whether we have accurately determined the independent variables in historical cases . Counterfactorials help evaluate whether to accurately determine the independent variable in historical .
 Czechoslovakia ceased to exist when on January 1, 1993, it split into the Czech Republic and Slovakia, two sovereign states . The dissolution took place without a war and was widely touted as a 'velvet divorce'
 Snyder, Bruck, Sapin and Sapin: Foreign Policy Decision-Making . Ceorge: “Case Studies and Theory Development’s Theory Development.”
 Hemmer, Houghton, Khong and Neustad have investigated the role of Analogical Reasoning in the past .
 King collected vast amounts of intelligence on the interests of other European countries in Africa, which allowed him to craft his arguments for best effect .
 The Congo remained his personal possession until it was transferred to the Belgian state in 1908 . It was transferred after an international movement exposed the extreme coercion and violence that had accompanied the acquisition .
 Domestically there was not much interest in such faraway ventures, which many feared would be too costly for a small country . Many feared that such ventures would cost too much for the small nation .
 Smallness, in other words, generally serves as a constraint on foreign policy . Smallness is a constraint for foreign policy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 These insights support the notion that a person’s early life may provide important clues to his or her orientation toward life and leadership . These insights were derived from the king's younger years, according to the author .
 The use of a person’s early life to predict their performance in office is predicated on the notion that personality is formed early and remains fundamentally unaltered throughout life . Do notice that the use of . a person's early life . to predict . their performance .
 His father, Leopold 1, was tapped for kingship when Belgium emerged as an independent state . His father was an ambitious German nobleman who, as the result of a strategic marriage and his own political efforts, had been tapped for king .
 King Leopold II was one of the world's most successful monarchs . He went to great lengths to present a humanitarian persona to his European and North American audiences . But he also condoned and even advocated brutal practices to squeeze wealth out of the Congo .
 Niccolo Machiavelli, a fifteenth-century political thinker, counseled that it was more important for a king to appear benevolent than to actually be good . Machavelli: 'It's more important that a king appears benevolent than be good'
 A historical figure that did not smoke or drink, ate a vegetarian diet, and was monogamous . Consider, for instance, a historical figure who didn't smoke, drank or smoked, ate vegetarian diet .
 Most often, it is a lot more difficult to decipher a leader’s character and personality . It is less clear how the individual views the world and what motivations drive him or her. Most often it is more difficult than deciphering a leader's character .
 The fourth and last personality category is also a less energetic leader . He preferred to receive one page “mini-memos” and left much of the negotiation and deal making to his staff .
 The role of chance and the shadow cast by past events are important, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says it's important to remember that chance and shadow are important .
 He believed this in general, but more importantly, he believed it with respect to the United States . This explains his opposition to the Vietnam War in this time period .
 Focus on substance of policy versus interpersonal relations (team work) 6. Task versus interpersonal . Focus on task versus interpersonal. Focus on . substance of . policy versus . interpersonal relations .
 Decision makers with the lowest scores for distrust of others were also least central to the decision making process . Unfortunately, the lowest score for distrusting others was also less central to decision-making .
 Leaders’ emotions have an impact on foreign policy decision making that is not trivial, but that has not yet received much systematic attention . As you read, remember that leaders' emotions have a significant role in foreign policy decisions .
 East, “Size and Foreign Policy Behavior”; “National Attributes and foreign Policy” 10. East: “The U.S. needs to have a strong presence in the world’s most powerful state of mind.” East: The U.
 The Argentine leadership fully expected Britain to relinquish the islands . It perceived its own motives in terms of “right, justice, and national honor” and saw its actions as serving a historical injustice .
 Analysts of foreign policy have often posited that they can treat a government as a purposeful and rational unitary actor . This is not surprising, then, that they often do so .
 Interpretations of the Falklands/Malvinas crisis often judge that the Argentine junta initiated the crisis to divert domestic attention away from the country’s economic problems .
 Several participants in the decision making process during the crisis later said that President Galtieri suddenly changed course after the invasion . Several participants said that the president later changed course .
 It is certainly possible that Galtieri got caught up in the excitement of the moment .
 Study of foreign policy decision making seeks to understand foreign policy decisions that are puzzling to those making the unitary actor assumption .
 It takes as the starting point that foreign policy is made by individuals, acting alone or in concert with others and taking advantage of opportunities or acting within constraints . Foreign policy should be taken as a starting point, says David Cameron .
 Process: 1. A situation that requires a decision. Process: 2. A decision . Process: A decision is made in a situation that needs to be made in order to solve a problem .
 Theory or model: Prescribed decision process serves a standard for judgment . A decision A decision is a decision . Decision process is a standard of judgment .
 With so many unknowns, AIDS crisis is best defined as an iU-structured problem . AIDS crisis best defined by iU as a 'structured' problem, experts say . AIDS is a "iU" problem, they say .
 It is quite reasonable to suggest, as bounded rationality does, that leaders conceive of options within the context of their knowledge . Leaders should be able to think of options in context of knowledge, says David Cameron .
 Prior events (or the sequence of events in which the problem is situated), as well as the decision maker’s vantage point, affect the decision frame . Prior events or sequence of the problem are affected by the decision-maker's vantage point .
 In the next section, we’ll address the use of historical analogies in greater detail . We’re going to use the analogies to help explain the history of analogies .
 The dynamics in groups of decision makers are explored more fully in chapter 4 of the book . The dynamics of decision-making groups will be explored in chapter 3 .
 Unlike Germany, France is a member of the U.N. Security Council, where the disagreement over Iraq became very visible .
 Leaders of both countries interpreted the actions of the other with the suspicion that results from longstanding disagreements . Similarly, in the Falklands/ Malvinas crisis, the leaders of each country interpreted their actions with suspicion that resulted from longstanding disagreement .
 In the period between the two World Wars, the quest for national self-determination was still seen as a legitimate pursuit . Self-determination in the quest to govern itself in its own state was seen as legitimate pursuit in the early years of WWII .
 This means that decision makers make a global judgment that a current situation is similar to a particular historical case, rather than comparing the two point by point for differences as well as similarities . They fail to carefully compare the current and historical situations .
 A decision maker’s formative experiences have long been thought to weigh disproportionately . A decision-making decision maker's formative experience is thought to have a disproportionate impact on his life .
 In the Falklands/Malvinas crisis, it mattered more for Argentina than for Britain . In the example of the Falkland Islands crisis, the crisis was more important to Argentina than Britain .
 Foreign policy decision makers are rarely criticized for a policy that achieves the objective . FFowever, foreign policy . decision makers rarely criticize foreign policy decisions that achieve objective .
 The psychological literature suggests that people do indeed think in terms of analogies . FFowowever, the psychological literature . suggests that . people . do indeed use analogies. FFowever .
 The Falklands/Malvinas crisis turned into a fiasco for Argentine decision makers largely because they underestimated the likelihood of a military British reaction . Galtieri’s announcement that Argentina would never leave the Malvinas was a mistake .
 FFad examined their analogies more closely, and perhaps taken account that Britain under Thatcher might act differently than it had in those historical situations, the crisis might have had another ending .
 Decision makers are often “too quick to rush to judgment and too slow to revise their beliefs in response to new evidence,” study says . Those who are “explicitly encouraged to think of reasons why they might be wrong” are more likely to reevaluate their
 Complexifiers provide some guidance that can serve to improve decision processes and thereby the odds of desirable outcomes .
 We made the point that even the most well-executed decision process cannot guarantee a good outcome . But we did not specify exactly how we define “good” in this context .
 The terminology is adapted from Hill, The Changing Politics of Foreign Policy . Hill: "The changing politics of foreign policy is changing"
 He did make the important decisions that shaped the latter days of World War 11 and the immediate post war period . He made important decisions .
 All his ministers reported to him on a regular basis, to ensure that Haile Selassie was fully informed . All ministers reported him regularly .
 Some leaders gain insight from hearing their advisors debate issues in their presence, while others like to ponder the policy options their advisors provide to them in solitude .
 Truman portrayed himself as the final arbiter in the decision making process . It is through the leader’s conversations with the immediate circle of advisors and associates that policy decisions take shape .
 Advisors all vie for the leader’s ear and rush to be the first to convey new information . Advisors rush to present the information in a way that portrays their department favorably or so they can play a crucial role .
 Of course, differences of opinion can always spin out of control, and advisors may become competitors . In the collegial approach, the emphasis is on teamwork rather than competition .
 Comparison of executive management styles: Formalistic Competitive Collegial . Collegial Collegial 1.1.2.5. 5.3.4.5 . 5.6.5%. 5.7.5% . 5% .
 Likelihood that information will be distorted High No built-in checks on distortion of information . Multiple perspectives presented and openly debated Low Multiple perspectives present and debated 2.
 Leader exposed to substantive and interpersonal conflict High for both High for substantive conflict . Low for both leader exposed to both high for substantive and low for interpersonal conflict . 3.5% of leader's level of exposure to substantive conflict is high .
 Overall responsiveness of decision process Low Focus on best solution May react slow or inappropriate in crisis . High Focus on feasible solution Highly dependent on leader’s skill and involvement . High Aims to identify solutions that are both optimal and feasible . May react slowly or inappropriately .
 When it works well: High Cacophony of voices; leader exposed to partial and biased information . When it does not work well: Low Emphasis on objectivity may distort political pressures and public opinion . Adapted from Johnson 1974 and George 1980 .
 Emperor’s multiple channels of information that kept him “in touch with the least event,” kept him in touch . Emperor used “the claim of ignorance” to be able to deny responsibility for specific policies . Emperor did occasionally use ‘the claim . of
 Haile Selassie was less skillful at manipulating his advisors as he aged . He may have managed a competitive advisory system well at one point in time . But he appears to have managed to manipulate his advisors more effectively .
 Haile Selassie’s attention to detail diminished in his later years, his advisory system suffered . Just as Roosevelt's administration “spawned inefficiency” when he could not personally manage the conflict between individuals with overlapping responsibilities,^® .
 "Because it was built on interpersonal connection, there were no mechanisms to prevent, or correct for, such distortion," says author . "Because of interpersonal connection," there was no mechanism to prevent such distortion, he says .
 Leaders who are less comfortable in such surroundings will choose either to emphasize teamwork, if they seek a hands-on role in decision making, as did John F Kennedy, or a more formal system with gatekeepers . Truman was more comfortable pondering advice and options in solitude, as was Truman
 In a presidential system of government, the executive branch is separate from the legislative branch . The president is elected independently and does not owe her or his position to the support of the legislature . A troubled relationship with the legislature can render policy making difficult .
 Choose policy alternative that best serves national interest . Adapted from Allison 1969,1971, Allison and Zelikow 1999 .
 The advisory system surrounding the leader can either mediate or aggravate the distortions in the flow of information from organizations and individuals within the bureaucracy . Although it is important to recognize that the advisory bureaucracy rarely functions as efficiently and dispassionately as tbe rational policy model assumes .
 The Argentine junta accepted analogies to Suez and Rhodesia proposed by their Foreign Minister, Nicanor Costa Mendez, and estimated the British response on the basis of that assessment .
 One, group decision making can help a government present itself as a unified team that works together in the national interest . Group decision making is key to a government showing it can work together in national interests .
 Such a group becomes an emotional support system for a leader, which can help her or him deal with the pressures and stresses of leadership . Such a support system can help a leader cope with the pressure of leadership, experts say .
 A policy maker can act collegially and loyally to achieve her or his ends or can choose to subvert the career of a superior or a colleague . More importantly, you have probably noticed that the policy making process is rife with opportunities to advance the cause of the national interest,
 On the opposite end of reaching agreement too readily is the failure to achieve any agreement at all . The U.S. should not reach an agreement too easily, it should not be reached too readily .
 When coalition cabinets are deadlocked, this may result in the resignation of a minister or even the fall of the government . This may be the result of the resignation or the fall .
 If such problems are allowed to fester, they can have negative consequences for a government’s ability to respond to foreign policy problems . The two men had very different worldviews.
 By influencing the group’s collective problem representation, an individual policy maker can manipulate which options will then have a greater likelihood of being chosen .
 Not much is known about the circumstances that permit junior coalition partners to place their stamp on policy, but it appears that the threat to abandon the coalition is an important strategy for exercising disproportionate power . The U.S. government has been accused of using disproportionate power to exercise power .
 Government decision making can be conceptualized in terms of rational policy, organizational process, and bureaucratic politics models . Government decision-making can be thought of as rational policy and organizational process .
 Advisors in small groups may engage in various different patterns of interaction, such as bargaining, persuasion, concurrence, or deadlock . Advisors may also engage in bargaining, persuading, or negotiating, in order to avoid deadlock.
 In coalition governments, junior coalition partners have extraordinary influence over decision making . Junior coalition partners can influence decision making in certain circumstances . Coalition governments are unique to a subset of parliamentary systems .
 Decision units Decision units Formalistic approach Competitive approach . Presidential system Presidential system Parliamentary system . Electoral system Electoral system Coalition cabinet Cabinet government . Coalition partners Coalition agreement Study Questions 1. 1.
 The dynamics of advisory groups are the subject of Kowert, Groupthink or Deadlock . Garrison, Garrison, Games Advisors Play: Foreign Policy in the Nixon and Garter Administrations .
 Almost invariably, what is critically important to a leader is political survival* In order to remain in office, leaders need the support, or at a minimum the acquiescence, of the domestic public . Leaders need to be supported by the public to stay in office .
 The policy provided support to the Allied war effort without directly involving the United States . It was acceptable to Congress, making it acceptable to support the war effort .
 In sum, the structural relationships among agencies within the government bureaucracy influence whether new ideas remain isolated in small corners or provide the impetus for new directions in a state’s foreign policy more broadly .
 The bottom line is that “ideas do not float freely”; they flourish or flounder depending on the institutional context within which they find themselves, says John Sutter . Sutter: “Ideas don’t float freely,” but they flourish
 In addition to the nature of government and the structure of the bureaucracy, the interrelation between a government and its people, as well as the “values and norms embedded in its political culture,” matter in foreign policy decision making .
 For most leaders, the ability to maintain public support for their policies is a critical dimension that policy options must be able to meet . Policy options must also meet the need to meet the public support of their policies, experts say .
 Bush advocated respect for Islam in these speeches . The speeches resonated with Canadian multicultural values and were quoted extensively in Canadian newspapers .
 The failure to do so can lead to foreign policy failures, as illustrated by the case of the Malvinas/Falklands crisis in chapter 3 .
 European Union structures, such as those of the European Union, are not seeking to serve as any other state’s beacon or guide . The EU is not trying to be a beacon for any other country, rather than a beacon .
 This comparison provides only a small snapshot of the impact of history on the broad traditions of foreign policy making by the two small states .
 The Dutch have not always always been as assertive, and the Belgians have at times had greater impact . The Belgians are more assertive than the Dutch, but the Dutch have had greater influence .
 Whether or not domestic values and constraints influence foreign policy depends on whether a democratic state is located in a democratic neighborhood or is surrounded by nondemocratic countries . This suggests that what guides decision makers is not just domestic norms but also their assessment of the norms and constraints that guide the behavior of
 Flolsti, Public Opinion, 23; see also Entman, Projections of Power, 163. Entman: "Projections of power"
 Bouveroux, Belgie uit Afrikal Luykx and Platel . Platel, Politieke Geschiedenis van Belgie, is a part of a group of politicians in Belgium .
 Explains the usefulness and limitations of classifying states into small, middle, and great powers . Explains how the world is divided into small and middle states . Also explains the usefulness of the classifications of nations into small states .
 Explains patterns in foreign policy behavior of dependent states . Explains the patterns in the foreign policy .
 Explains the value of soft power and the role of norm entrepreneurs in international politics . Explains why norm entrepreneurs are important in the world's most powerful nations .
 Their focus has been on the country’s economic external relations, including also efforts to further develop European economic integration .
 A state’s smallness and economic openness may make it logical for its decision makers to focus primarily on economic external relations, but it does not guarantee it . Hence, a state's smallness makes it logical to focus on external relations rather than economic relations .
 This suggests that perhaps it's not only the sort of government a country has domestically that matters, but also its membership and participation in regional organizations . This suggests perhaps it is not only a country's government that matters domestically, but its membership of regional organizations is important .
 Argentina 2,766,890 39,921,833 599. Military expenditure (percent of gDP) Argentina's military expenditure is the largest military expenditure in the world .
 Whether population density is an advantage or not depends on other factors, says CIA World Factbook . Population density is a factor in population growth .
 Argentina's economy is larger than Ethiopia's when adjusted for each country's population size . The economy of Argentina is bigger in absolute terms, and in relative terms, than Ethiopia . Per capita size of each country’s economy is vastly different .
 Afghanistan, Bhutan, Burma,India, Kazakhstan, North Korea, Kyrgystan, Laos, Mongolia, Nepal Pakistan, Russia Tajikistan, Vietnam . Russia is the fourth largest country in the world, and the largest in Asia .
 Smaller than half of its neighbors and larger than the remaining three . Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkey, Syria .
 Canada, a member of the G8, is a self-described middle power . Interestingly, Canada, which is part of the U.S. middle power, is also self-proclaimed middle power.
 Norway played a key role in the negotiations between representatives of Israel and the Palestinians that culminated in the Oslo Accords of 1993 . Norway's role in negotiations between Israel and Palestinians was key to the Oslo peace talks .
 In addition to Canada and Norway, the Netherlands and Sweden have employed this label . Sweden and the Netherlands have employed it .
 Countries like Brazil, India, Indonesia, Iran, Nigeria, South Africa, and Turkey are often named in this category . Countries like Nigeria, Nigeria and South Africa are often mentioned in the category .
 Middle powers like the Netherlands and Norway are sometimes also listed among the small states . Middle powers such as the Netherlands, Norway and the Netherlands may also be listed .
 Four distinct foreign policy orientations have been identified that characterize the foreign policies of small states . Small states have four distinct orientations that characterize their foreign policy . Small countries have a different foreign policy orientation .
 Some small states pursue a consensus-oriented foreign policy . One reason is that some small states seek consensus-based foreign policy. Another is that they have a common sense sense of common sense .
 More information than that presented in chapter 3 would be necessary to determine whether this decision is more accurately characterized as counterdependence or compensation .
 In chapter 3, we introduced the concept of soft power, which we defined as the ability to shape the preferences of others . The concept is mainly associated with American foreign policy but merits further investigation .
 Ingebritsen, Neumann, Gstbhl, and Beyer, Small States in International Relations. Another recent book reprints many classics and offers new contributions is Small States In International Relations .
 Nye dates the concept to his own earlier book, Bound to Lead . Nye {Soft Power, xi) dates the idea to his earlier book .
 Foreign policy analysts proceed from the conviction that “human decision makers acting singly or in groups” are at the heart of international relations .
 Leaders, human decision makers, are at the heart of world politics . Human decision makers are key to world politics, says David Cameron .
 Institutional facts are accepted as fact only within the context of human society and can therefore also be called social facts . Institutional fact is accepted only in context of a human society, such as human society .
 For example, decolonization can be dated back to the eighteenth century . Decolonization is a form of colonialism that began in the 17th century . It is also possible to decolonize the continent .
 We lack a precise conceptualization of size and propositions about the expected behaviors of states of various sizes . Size matters, but we lack both conceptualization and proposition about how to behave .
 They seek to influence international norms to popularize certain values and encourage behaviors consistent with those values . Instead of influencing international norms, they aim to influence behavior of others .
 Early efforts in the field of foreign policy analysis presented conceptual frameworks of the decision making process and the various constraints on that process . Early efforts presented comprehensive conceptual frameworks .
 It is an approach to the study of international relations that dates back to the 1950s . The approach to international relations has been developed in the past .
 The concept of democracy is often associated with democracy but is not exclusive to it . Democracy is a form of freedom of expression, freedom of speech and freedom of association .
 Emerging power is a state that is rapidly becoming more powerful; one developing its capabilities into usable assets . Emerging power means a state developing capabilities into useful assets . State of power is an emerging power; one of the most powerful states .
 Ill-structured problem—A problem that is not well defined, usually because of incomplete information . Ill-Structured problem is a problem that isn't well defined or well defined .
 Poliheuristic theory is a theory of foreign policy decision making . It specifies a two-stage decision process with different decision rules characterizing decision making at each stage .
 Satisficing—Choosing the first acceptable solution; “good enough” decision making. i 84 GLOSSARY Schema is a generalized mental representation of a concept. Satisficing is a form of satisfaction . i 84 .
 Maurice East, Maurice A “National Attributes and Foreign Policy” in Why Nations Act, ed. East, is Maurice A. East . East’s “national attributes and foreign policy” is Maurice East . The U.N. Act was passed into law in
 Christine Inge-ritsen, Iver Neumann, Sieglinde Gstbhl, and Jessica Beyer are interviewed for the first time in a row .
 Ingegebritsen, Christine, Iver Neumann, Sieglinde Gstbhl, and Jessica Beyer, eds. eds . The book is published in Germany, Germany and Denmark .
 The Foreign Policy Operational Codes of J William Fulbright, 1943-1967 . Fulbright's Foreign Policy Opal Opal Codes of 1945-1967. Fulbright was the Foreign Policy Director of the State Department of the United States .