 Author takes a critical view of the legality and good faith of the U.S. action . In this article the author takes an opinion of the American action .
 International Crises and the Role of Law, by a former legal adviser to the State Department, is an authoritative statement of the U.S. position . He says it is a statement by an ex-legal adviser .
 Shalom rejects the official U.S. justification in terms of regionalism and self-defense as incompatible with established principles of international law . Shalom: In contrast to the almost universally favorable interpretation of the American action in published legal opinions, Shalom .
 International law is obviously not the ultimate standard by which conduct ought to be judged . International law, like domestic law, is not an ultimate standard for conduct, it's said .
 All law is formulated by the powerful, and it often diverges markedly from justice . All law must be given to justice, says the U.S. Supreme Court .
 In cases where law and justice clash, it is the moral course to follow justice and ignore law . In the case of a case of law and law clash, follow the law and ignore the law . Follow the law by following justice and ignoring law .
 It enables us to assess the conduct of 'great powers' in accordance with the standards they themselves have written and publicly espoused. It enables . us to . assess the . conduct of ""great powers"" in accordance . with the . standards they . themselves have . written or publicly esp
 The Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 provides an illuminating insight into the Cuban crisis . The author acknowledges valuable comments from Marc Miller and Robert C Rosen .
 It exhibits the extent of U.S. compliance with international law and, more important, it demonstrates how that law may affect international action in time of crisis .
 The arguments set forth in defense of the U.S. course of action permit us to assess the objectivity exhibited by international lawyers and other commentators . Moreover, the arguments set out in . defense of . the United States course of . action allow us to . assess the . objectivity
 'International Crises and the Role of Law' is the only book-length treatment of the legal aspects of the missile crisis .
 Chayes, a professor at Harvard Law School, was Legal Adviser to the Department of State from 1961 to 1964 . He was a legal adviser to the State Department .
 The book is not, however, a participant's account written during the heat of crisis . It is not the book's author, but it is written in the hope it will help others in need .
 It represents the measured reflections of a prominent participant-scholar writing more than a decade after the fact; and, as such, it warrants serious attention . This is not only the result of a decade-long debate, but it is a serious reflection of the debate .
 It suggests that once such advice is given the obligations of the legal adviser are discharged . The legal adviser's obligations are discharged, it says .
 It does not obligate the State Department's legal advisers to speak out when the U.S. is violating or about to violate international law .
 Chayes nowhere asks even the questions Rusk includes among the legal adviser's limited responsibilities . It is striking, however, that he asks even if Rusk is included among the questions .
 All subsequent page references to this book will be indicated in the text . The book is published in the UK and Australia .
 U.S. State Department of State, Dept. of State Bulletin, 27 Sept. 2012, says it is a violation of freedom of expression . State Department Bulletin: "We have a right to free speech"
 Chayes's understanding of the terms ""persuasive,"" ""serious,"" and ""responsible"" is so broad as to subsume the most perfunctory efforts at legal justification . However, he says the terms are so broad that they can be considered persuasive .
 A blockade is a threat or use of force in the dictionary meaning of the words, he tells us . The State Department's legal advisers say a blockade is not a threat to use force, he says .
 We are reduced by Chayes's standard to a legal relativism, which justifies the actions of all parties to a dispute, he says . It prevents us from distinguishing between those who abide by law and those who violate it, he writes .
 Without such a distinction, it is difficult to see what possible relevance law can have, says CNN.com .
 Chayes's argument for the legality of the U.S. action during the missile crisis is neither ""persuasive,"" nor particularly serious notwithstanding the faqade of legal terminology . The Legality of United States actions is not particularly serious, notwithstanding the legal terminology, Ch
 Covey Oliver, an international lawyer, wrote these words only to dismiss them derisively as ""the favorite popular syllogism in more or less informal logic,"" and he capped his dismissal with the remark that some telegrams to the White House containing legal critiars containing legal
 Proceedings of the American Society of International Law, 57th meeting , 11.11.02.02 . The study was published by the American society of International law .
 A reviewer in the Harvard Journal of International Law commends Chayes's book, but wonders whether the view he criticizes might not be ""made of straw" A reviewer wonders whether anyone in these professions really subscribes to this view .
 "A Hopeful Prescription for Legal Writing,"" American Journal of International Law 57 (April 1963): 373. "The Lawyer for the State of the State"
 The first part of the argument asserts that the quarantine was a blockade in everything but name . The other part asserts that it was in fact a quarantine in the name .
 Chayes himself has admitted that his assistant suggested the use of the term 'defensive quarantine' to avoid the question of whether it was an act of war .
 The second part of Covey's ""popular syllogism"" asserts that a blockade is an act of war . Covey: A blockade is a war, and a blockade of food and medicine .
 Blockade is an act of force which, if not accepted by the other side, would be interpreted and approached as a war . Blockade would be considered a 'act of war' by the opposing side . Blockades are an act that would not be accepted by either side .
 All that a pacific blockade is is is an announcement by the blockading party that these steps you are taking are all you have in mind . The blockade is a statement by the blocking party that it is all you want to do is take these steps .
 If the other side refuses to accept that measure, it is an act of force which can be interpreted or could be interpreted as war . The other side could be forced to use that measure against them . If that measure is rejected, it could be seen as a sign of war .
 If we decided to institute a blockade we would have 5,000 Cuban citizens, the U.S. would have more than 5, the Cuban president says .
 In place of the ""popular syllogism,"" the State Department Legal Office justified U.S. actions on the basis of the rights of regional organizations as formulated in the Rio Treaty and the United Nations charter .
 Article 53 of the U.N. Charter precludes enforcement action by regional organizations without Security Council authorization . But the quarantine was not enforcement action and, in any case, authorization does not mean prior authorization .
 All of these would violate territorial integrity, sovereignty, or political independence without being an armed attack without being armed attack . All of the attacks would violate territory integrity or sovereignty .
 It's hard to see how Soviet missiles placed in Cuba with the consent of the Cuban government violate the sovereignty or independence of either Cuba or any other American state .
 Article 2 of the United Nations Charter requires that member states ""refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force 8.8.8" Article 2 requires member states to refrain from using force in international relations . Article 2 states that members of the U.N. should
 The USSR placed missiles in Cuba with the Cuban government's consent, it violated the political independence of other American states . The United States blockade of island Cuba did not violate Cuban political independence . We are expected to accept that .
 It is essential to the State Department's legal case to consider Cuba part of the ""inter-American system,"" for regional organizations . Regional organizations may take action against nonmember states only in case of self-defense against armed attack .
 In early 1962, the United States had had Cuba excluded from the inter-American system . Unfortunately for the U.S. position, in early 1962 at the Punta del Este Conference, Cuba was excluded . The United States did not want Cuba included in the system .
 Chayes has dealt with this difficulty by denying that Cuba had been expelled . Elsewhere, however, he has also denied that Cuba was expelled .
 The Castro government, says Chayes, had been ""suspended"" from participation in OAS agencies . Castro government had been "suspended" from participation from OAS .
 To argue that this is only a suspension because the resolution refers to 11.11, it's not a suspension, it would be impossible to say that, it is a suspension . The suspension is only suspended because of the resolution referring to 11,000 people .
 As Quincy Wright has noted, this makes the blockade illegal vis-a-vis the Soviet Union even if it were legal against Cuba .
 Chayes replies that this results in a legal anomaly because law would then allow an air strike but not the more moderate blockade-assuming, contrary to fact, that the Soviet Union would not be affected by the air strike .
 No one considers it an anomaly that a state may imprison one of its own citizens but may not even tax residents of another state . No one, for example, considers such an anomaly, even though it may be an anomaly .
 nowhere does he specify any subsisting rights, and it's difficult to imagine what these might be . But nowhere does it specify any sub-reserved rights, he says .
 The Punta del Este resolution declared that no member state of the inter-American system could claim the rights and privileges of membership if it failed to recognize the corresponding obligations . In any case, Cuba's alleged failure to live up to its obligations, the resolution declared .
 The first precedent involved OAS-imposed sanctions against the Do minican Republic, in particular the severance of diplomatic relation and the partial interruption of economic relations . The OAS imposed the first precedent .
 Breaking diplomatic or economic relations do not qualify as enforcement action . Since enforcement actions involve the threat or use of force, it is neither surprising nor relevant to the status of a blockade that breaking diplomatic relations does not qualify .
 Measures taken by a regional organization to deal with a threat to the peace, are not necessarily ""enforcement action"" even though they are obligatory in character .
 The defective logic of the argument posits that some obligatory measures are not enforcement action . The quarantine was recommendatory; therefore the quarantine was not enforceable . Therefore, therefore, the quarantine did not enforce action .
 The Suez operation was not an enforcement action, not because it was only recommended to member states that they contribute 17.5 per cent to the EU . It was not only recommended that member states contribute 17 per cent .
 A regional organization could recommend to its members any military action whatsoever . The recommendation would only be a recommendation, not enforcement action .
 The United States says the quarantine decision was a recommendation . The U.S. says the Rio Treaty states that no country can be required to resort to armed force against its will .
 The position was unwieldy enough to cause a shift in official exposition towards a second approach . But his only answer is that each of these objections could be rebutted .
 The U.N. force in Suez, however, required the direct consent of the parties, not just the consent entailed in United Nations membership . The force required the consent of all parties to take part in the operation .
 Cuba consented by virtue of its OAS membership, says Cuban diplomat . OAS says it's impossible for regional organizations to take any actions against members that might be characterized as enforcement action .
 The U.S. government says it does not recognize the concept of "authorization" in the United States . One may wonder just how easy such a rebuttal would be .
 The United States legal position maintains that such authorization need not be prior authorization, despite Chayes's acknowledgment that ""very probably"" the intent of the framers of the United Nations Charter was that authorization take place before the enforcement action . This is plain common sense, since once an enforcement
 "Authorization" does not make quarantine legal, because at no timebefore or after the fact-did the Security Council authorize the OAS action . In any case, to view ""authorization"" as including including after-the-fact authorization doesn't make the quarantine legal .
 Authorization is now interpreted to include the absence of disapproval by the Security Council . Authorization was now interpreted as including absence of approval by the council .
 The argument is worth considering if only to show the extent to which international lawyers view their craft as a creative enterprise . Although explicitly rejected by the U.S. government, it's worth considering, if only .
 These provisions would seem clearly inapplicable in the case of the Cuban missile crisis, where no armed attack had occurred . No armed attack on Cuba occurred, but no armed attacks had occurred.
 Under strict logic, these two articles together are the equivalent of permitting self-defense ""if and only if"" an armed attack occurs . The two articles are equivalent to allowing self-defence ""if and only if" an armed attack occurs .
 Other jurists have argued that the ""inherent"" right of self-defense by tradition permits action in those cases where an enemy is just about to attack .
 Obama administration officials took it for granted that the Soviet Union was not preparing a surprise attack . This is of no relevance to the case of the Cuban missile crisis .
 The Soviet missiles in Cuba did not come near eliminating U.S. strategic nuclear superiority, officials say .
 A Soviet first-strike would be "patently suicidal" in the face of the U.S. two to one advantage in strategic nuclear weapons .
 Allison has argued that there is no reason to assume that the Soviet Union would have stopped with the planned 72 missiles in Cuba . Allison has also argued that an indefinitely greater number of missiles could have been installed, thus shifting the balance of power .
 This is like saying that the U.S. troops in Berlin were a threat to Moscow because they could have been augmented with many millions more . But this is not the case, it's the case that the United States could have had millions more in Berlin . The United States troops in
 In both cases, the hypothetical danger could be dealt with when it threatened to become actual . Both cases could be solved when it threatens to become an actual threat .
 If military action is permissible any time an adversary installs a missile base, then every great power would be justified in attacking any other . The situation is hardly conducive to strengthening world law, it says .
 American missiles were installed in Turkey and Italy during the Eisenhower administration . U.S. missiles were also installed in Italy and Turkey .
 Apologists for American policy have tried to distinguish between the ""defensive" missiles of the United States and the ""offensive"" missiles in Cuba . Apologists have tried . to distinguish . between the 'defensive' missiles and the 'offensive' missiles .
 In the U.N. Security Council, Adlai Stevenson delivered a lengthy disquisition on the subject .
 United States missiles, he said, ""help a country to defend its political independence,"" ""leave the political institutions of the recipient countries intact" U.S. missiles are not designed to subvert the territorial integrity or political independence of other states, he added .
 In the Soviet lexicon, all weapons are purely defensive, even weapons that can strike from 1,000 to 2,000 miles away . In the USSR, weapons are used to strike from between 1,,000 and 2,500 miles away.
 Khrushchev announced in advance that long range missiles were being installed in Cuba . It is unlikely that the U.S. response would have been less belligerent than if Khrushchems announced it .
 According to the United States intelligence estimate, the Soviet Union presumed the U.S. knew about the ""secret" missiles . Moreover, according to the U .S. intelligence estimates, the . Soviets believed the United . States knew the missiles .
 The States in which bases are maintained by the United States are in each case among the major targets of Soviet military preparations . In a memorandum prepared in August 1962, United States Assistant Attorney General Norbert Schlei argued .
 Henry Kissinger, "Reflections on Cuba,"" Reporter, 22 Nov.62, 22.62 . Kissinger: "Reflection on Cuba" Henry Kissinger: 'Reflections of Cuba' Henry Kissinger.
 For Cuba to harbor Soviet missiles would constitute a disproportionate response to any sane estimate of its defense needs against the U.S. The United States. Cuba's defense needs would be vastly different from that of the Soviet Union, author says .
 In April 1961, the United States sponsored an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . The U.S. invaded Cuba in April 1961 . The invasion was sponsored by the U.N. government .
 In the ten months preceding the missile crisis, a program to help overthrow the Castro government-""Operation Mongoose""-had been approved at the highest levels of the Kennedy administration and sabotage missions against Cuba were undertaken . Operation Mongoose had been approved by the Kennedy Administration .
 "The whole conduct of the United States over the past fifteen years gives no suggestion of aggressive intentions," he says . "The overwhelming majority of the international community would testify," he adds .
 All Soviet military aid to Cuba short of ballistic missiles, but including the MIG'S and the anti-aircraft missiles, could do no more than slow down an American invasion of Cuba by 24 hours .
 Sorensen, Kennedy, 696, citing an adviser who had served in the preceding administration . Sorennsen: "I'm not sure what happened to the president's administration"
 Almost every American legal expert writing on the missile crisis found the U.S. action legitimate under international law by virtue of one of these two rationales . What is significant is that almost every legal expert found the United States action legitimate .
 There was also a less commendable type of exception, that the U.S. acted illegally but that this was how it should have acted . But there was also an exception .
 All other uses of force require Security Council authorization, but self-defense is permitted . Self-defense against armed attack is permitted, precisely because survival may be at stake . Self defense is permitted in the U.S.
 To say that the U.S. may take whatever actions it wants in defense of its power, position, and prestige is refreshing in its candor . But it is no less an apologia for imperialism, nor does it move on a higher moral plane .
 On the whole, much of what passes for debate on missile crisis reflects a rather limited difference of opinion . Much of the debate on the missile crisis is based on limited differences of opinion, says David Cameron .
 Some hold United States actions to have been legal and, therefore, justified, justified . Others argue that U.S. actions were illegal but justified nonetheless .
 Lawyers were well-represented among U.S. policymakers, both in formal legal capacities and otherwise . Chayes considers it significant that lawyers were well represented in the United States . Lawyers are well represented among United States policymakers .
 Three formal legal advisers put forth arguments regarding the blockade . The blockade has been put in place by the government .
 Robert Kennedy was a key figure in ""Operation Mongoose,"" who had pushed for ""massive activity"" against Castro . George Ball, who felt that a blockade would have more ""color of legality"" than other measures .
 Nicholas Katzenbach, a member of the Johnson Administration, said he need no more legal authority than the Tonkin Resolution to justify escalation of the Vietnam War .
 Strikes at population targets are likely to create a counterproductive wave of revulsion abroad and at home . Strikes likely to increase the risk of enlarging the war with China and the Soviet Union . Strikes are likely not only to be counterproductive but also to increase risk of expanding the war .
 Destruction of locks and dams, however-if handled right-might offer promise, might offer promise .
 He claims that legal considerations were instrumental in the choice of the blockade as the prudent and moderate course of action . The blockade was a 'proper and moderate' decision, he says .
 The air strike option was thought likely to precipitate an all-out nuclear war . The invasion option ""more than any other course"" was feared to risk world war,""4 prudence was dictated .
 In the relevant chapter, the inquiry was significantly narrowed to exclude ""milder"" responses . But in the relevant . chapter, a . chapter of the inquiry has been significantly narrowed .
 Evidently he considers this sufficient reason for omitting other options (such as negotiations) from his analysis . Evidently this is enough for him to omit other options .
 If law pointed to the blockade, it was because of the drastically restricted list of available options . Thus, if law . pointed to a blockade, . it was due to the drastically limited list of . available options, the law says .
 Robert Kennedy was emphatic that he would not have his brother go down in history as the Tojo of the sixties . Robert Kennedy would not be remembered as the 'Tojo'
 The point would be more convincing if the air strike had not also been rejected because of doubts that it would accomplish its intended purpose, that is the ""surgical"" elimination of the missiles . Nevertheless, it is instructive to examine what Robert Kennedy understood by his Pearl Harbor analogy .
 He was not expressing a blanket rejection of surprise air attacks by big countries against small ones, for he had approved of such attacks preceding the Bay of Pigs .
 It is certainly true that jingoist feeling was widespread, but the Kennedy Administration must bear much of the responsibility . The Kennedy Administration bears responsibility for the loss of the war heroics .
 The Bay of Pigs taught the American people that Castro was a dangerous threat to U.S. security and that calls for invasion had legitimacy . Allison Allison observes that the Bay of Pigeas taught the U.N. people that the threat to Castro was legitimate .
 Four days after Robert Kennedy raised the Pearl Harbor analogy, the president was still asking the military whether the ""surgical"" air strike could succeed . The president asked the military if the attack would succeed .
 Rober Kennedy, Rober Kennedy and those who accepted his Pearl Harbor analogy, did not object to an air strike killing thousands, but only to the fact that there would be no warning . Abel's view as quoted by Abel was shared by Rober Kennedy .
 This is clear fro the testimony of participants52 as well as from the fact that every policy maker was willing to go ahead with an air strike if Khrushchev did no capitulate . The testimony is clear from the testimony from participants52 .
 Third way in which the law influenced policy was adherence to the standard of necessity and proportionality, Chayes says .
 In his first State of the Union message in January 1961, Kennedy declared that "communist domination in this hemisphere can never b 50" Kennedy declared in his first SOTU message that communism could never be ruled out of this hemisphere .
 The U.S. brought the world to the brink of nuclear war only to accept roughly the same terms it had rejected before the crisis . Thus, the United States .
 From the time the U.S. discovered the missiles, negotiations were never a significant consideration . Negotiations were never significant consideration, officials say .
 Khrushchev offered to trade his missiles in Cuba for the United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The deal was part of a deal to end the crisis in Cuba .
 This would have involved absolutely no military cost to the U.S. since the Jupiters were obsolete . Kennedy had wanted them removed earlier, Kennedy had said earlier .
 John Kennedy, in his brother's words, "obviously did not wish to order the withdrawal of the 54.54" However, John Kennedy said he did not want the withdrawal order .
 This highly significant speech is totally ignored in the accounts of Robert Kennedy, Abel, Sorensen, Schlesinger, and Chayes . Kennedy's speech was totally ignored by Robert Kennedy and Abel .
 Brezhnev followed the diplomatic path in Czechoslovakia after his tanks had arranged the military setting that made diplomacy effective . By similar logic, one supposes, one . .
 Khrushchev was desperately clutching at any straw that would make his defeat appear less than total . It was the United States that was now threatening Cuba with air strike or invasion, while the U.S. was desperate to make it appear as though it had won .
 In any case, U.S. policymakers rejected the ""not unreasonable"" Soviet proposal, and did so knowing that their rejection carried with it a significant chance of nuclear war .
 Graham Allison suggests that the U.S. did accept the Soviet offer . Allison's suggestion is that the United States accepted the offer from the Soviet Union . Allison: The U.K. did not accept the offer .
 Kennedy, says Allison, offered in private to accept Khrushchev's deal even though he rejected it in public . Allison says Kennedy offered to accept the deal in private . Allison: Kennedy rejected the deal, but offered in public to accept it . Kennedy was assassinated in September 1968 .
 The U.S. might not be approached to shut down so of its overseas bases in return for the Soviet Union closing down its Cuban bases . This is not a negotiable point, Rusk said .
 His concern was solely with avoiding the appearance of capitulating to Kennedy . He was concerned with avoiding appearing to capitulate to Kennedy.
 A public trade would serve this end, though Khrushchev knew he would be giving up new missiles for old, because it might strike world opinion as an even-handed resolution of the crisis . A public . trade would be a public trade .
 A private commitment from Kennedy to remove the missiles some months later could obviously neither alter strategic realities nor prevent Khrushchev's humiliation, since humiliation is by its nature public . A private pledge to remove missiles from the U.S. from the Soviet Union could obviously not alter the strategic realities
 Robert Kennedy made clear to Ambassador Dobrynin that the understanding would be cancelled at once if the Soviet government made it public, Schlesinger says . Robert Kennedy told Dobrynins that the agreement would not be made public at once .
 At no point during the crisis did the United States drop its insistence that the Soviet Union suffer a public humiliation . The U.S. continued to insist on a humiliating humiliation .
 A final episode revealing the U.S. commitment to ""necessity and proportionality" involved the IL-28 bombers . The final episode revealed the United States commitment to 'necessity' and 'proportionality'
 Only when Khrushchev sent word that he would remove the planes did Kennedy declare the end of the quarantine . Kennedy declared end of quarantine after Khrisschev's intervention . Kennedy was the last president of the Soviet Union .
 Chayes sees still another influence of law on U.S. policy in 64. International Organizations . International Organizations International Organizations is a major influence in law .
 The U.S. must show it intends to abide by the decisions of the U.N. and OAS bodies, says David Rothkopf . He says the Obama administration must show that it is willing to act beyond political expediency . The White House says it will take
 Chayes fails to show this, but he provides evidence to the contrary . Not only does he fail to show that, he also provides evidence of the contrary, he says .
 Sorensen relates an Executive Committee discussion in which the point was made that without a two-thirds OAS vote ""allies and neutral as well as adversaries might well regard it as an illegal blockade, in violation of the United Nations Charter and international law"
 Robert Kennedy suggested in mid-1961 that the OAs could be persuaded to prohibit any external arms shipment to Cuba if the U.S. falsely reported that Cuban MIG's had attacked Guantanamo . Kennedy's regard for the OAS is also indicated by his suggestion that the United States
 The most telling indication of the U.S. attitude toward the OAS was its resolve to go ahead anyway . The quarantine would go ahead regardless of the failure to endorse the Oas' endorsement .
 Kennedy's October 22 speech was purposely ambiguous on this point, and at a press briefing for the press that evening Chayes and George Ball were questioned about it . Kennedy's speech that night was deliberately ambiguous .
 State Department legal adviser and undersecretary of state fielded reporters' questions . State Department's legal adviser, himself a distinguished lawyer, fielded the questions .
 One group for whom law was clearly not important was U.S. policymakers . One group of whom law is not important is United States policymakers .
 In 1974, Chayes wrote that the appeal to the OAS confirmed the importance of law . If the U.S. had rejected the blockade, it would have been difficult to go ahead with it, he wrote .
 Political difficulties can be minimized, for example, by secrecy or bribery, or can be accepted as a cost that can be balanced in a cost-benefit analysis . Political difficulties may be minimized by secrecy, bribery or by a cost of doing so .
 The OAS action was to provide the legal basis for the blockade, but U.S. officials charged that Latin America was as much the target of the Cuban missiles as was the United States, United States 74 .
 The next day the United States rushed through the OAS a resolution endorsing the quarantine . The U.S. rushed the next day a resolution endorsed the quarantine. The United States was quick to quarantine .
 Kennedy was aware that time for deliberation had swayed his Executive Committee in favor of the blockade rather than the air strike . Kennedy's Executive Committee voted for the blockade .
 But similar time for sober deliberation was not given to the OAS nations . The U.N. Security Council will meet in Washington, D.C. to discuss the matter .
 The OAS structure gives members much leeway for qualifying their positions on the United States resolution .
 Brazil, Mexico, and Bolivia abstained on a sentence authorizing the U.S. to use force beyond the blockade . The United States, Brazil and Mexico voted against the sentence .
 Most accounts of the missile crisis do not even refer to the reservations of Brazil, Mexico, and Bolivia . The reluctance of governments representing more than half the population of Latin America to endorse U.S. action beyond the blockade seems not to have been of any concern to United States .
 One of the main reasons for putting off the President's speech from Sunday to Monday-a delay that nearly resulted in premature disclosure-was Assistant Secretary Martin's view that it would be virtually impossible to get to Latin American heads of state on Sunday .
 It cannot be said, therefore, that the reference to the OAS was a gesture in the direction of legalism, adopted at the stage of execution, carrying no risks for the basic policy chosen . The reference to OAS is not a gesture that carries no risks, it is a
 The State Department stressed that our ambassadors had to brief Allied and Latin-American leaders . But the State Department noted that the impossibility of reaching them all on a Sunday would be impossible .
 The President agreed to Monday, but stated he would still speak Sunday if the story appeared certain to break . The President said he would speak on Sunday if it appeared certain that the story was breaking .
 He was going ahead regardless of Allied reaction, though he wanted them to be informed . He was, moreover, going ahead despite Allied reaction . He wanted them informed .
 Abel, Crisis, 113, mentions only that Bolivia abstained on a single paragraph without indicating what it was . Abel mentions only the single paragraph of the article .
 Kennedy was clearly moved by political, rather than legal, considerations . Kennedy was concerned with briefing not just Latin American governments but also the Europeans .
 Dean Acheson-the lawyer who said that ""legal niceties were so much pompous foolishness"" 79-who urged that Kennedy inform NATO allies . Achesons called for Kennedy to inform allies of his actions .
 Chayes believes that ultimately, the OAS would have been involved, even if the decision had been for air strike or invasion . Chaye believes that the decision was made by the U.S. to strike in Syria would have led to an invasion .
 U.S. considers air strike and invasion to be clear violations of the United Nations Charter . Chayes concedes that it was not a deep sense of legality that impelled the United States to seek OAS sanction, but rather political expediency .
 The United States approach to the United Nations evinced a greater lack of concern for law . The U.S. approach to U.N. has been a failure to comply with the law, says Sen. Marco Rubio .
 The characteristic response of the United Nations in major crises had been some kind of standstill resolution, an effort to stop the shooting and slow down the momentum of the crisis to give time for cooler heads to prevail .
 It would be much more difficult for the United States to escalate in any way that would intensify the pressures on the U.S.R. and Cuba .
 It was pretty certain that once the crisis was made public, the world would know that it was closer to a nuclear showdown than ever before . The crisis was 'pretty certain' that once made public it would be 'closer to nuclear showdown'
 U.N. demand that the United States not only stand still, but stand down . That perception might very well translate itself into a United Nations demand for the U.S. to stand down. That perception could translate itself, whether from disapproval or from fear .
 Dean Acheson's version of Robert Kennedy's Version of the Cuban Missile Affair was published in Esquire .
 'The U.N. was by no means a Soviet puppet-as shown most clearly when it took no action whatsoever against the American-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion. It was the basis for a United States holding action in the United Nations,' says historian John Avlon .
 U Thant sent identical letters to Kennedy and Khrushchev asking for a two to three week suspension of arms shipments to Cuba and of the quarantine . The letters were sent two days after Kennedy's announcement of the blockade .
 The Soviet Union accepted but the United States rejected U Thant's appeal . The United States did not accept the appeal .
 Kennedy had been ""anything but grateful"" for the secretary general's intervention . Kennedy said he had been anything but grateful" for the intervention, adding that he was not grateful .
 U Thant's proposal ""would clearly blunt the American initiative and destroy its momentum,"" as Roger Hilsman put it . The proposal would "clearly blunt" the U.S. initiative, he said .
 Kennedy statement that Chayes quotes was not a reply to U Thant's October 24 letter, which the U.S. rebuffed . However, the Kennedy statement is not a response to the letter, but a Kennedy statement .
 It was a reply to a second appeal by the secretary general on October 26, after the Soviet Union had already backed down by turning its ships around .
 Kennedy responded to this second appeal, in Sorensen's words, ""simply stating the obvious- that there would be no incidents if Soviet ships stayed 81" Kennedy responded, "simply stated the obvious"
 To most liberal American commentators, the notion that the United States bore primary blame for the crisis has been unthinkable . To most liberals, it has been simply unthinkable for the U.S.
 There surely was an asymmetry here, but not of the kind Chayes assumes . Again, there surely was a asymmetry there .
 Scholars were quick to pronounce new principles of international la derived from the missile crisis . Scholars were also quick to say new principles were formed in the wake of the crisis .
 Authors mus certainly have known that these new principles did not apply equally to all nations . But their authors mus certainly know that they did not mean that all nations were affected .
 The United States did not bother to obtain ""mutual agreements" for stationing nuclear weapons in Korea or Japan or West Ger many or the Philippines . The U.S. didn't bother to get "mutual agreement"
 No U.S. legal scholar denounced such American violations of nuclear-age law . Nor did any United States legal scholar denounce such violations .
 If international la is to have any meaning, the great powers and their international lawyers will have to be more consistent in applying and interpreting its rules . The great powers must have to apply and interpret its rules more consistent, says David Cameron .