 2009 marked the 200th anniversary of the birth of Abraham Lincoln and Charles Darwin . It was also the 40th anniversary the musical experience that became known as Woodstock, Woodstock .
 Mexico, Pakistan, Mexico and Pakistan battled drug wars, Islamist extremists . The recruitment of child soldiers remained a scourge, but the future looked promising .
 China prospered; electric cars geared up; unmanned aerial vehicles helped fight wars and defend borders . Unmanned aerial vehicles help fight wars, defend borders and defend China .
 In the sciences, autism therapies were tailored for youngsters, primate research became a key to understanding what it means to be human, and ""Ardi,” a possible ancestor older than the hominin skeleton Lucy .
 In the swimming world, the advent of nontextile swimwear led to the smashing of hundreds of records . In the past, swimsuits have smashed hundreds of swimming records .
 The arts and music world experienced a particularly grave loss of talent with the deaths of American painter Andrew Wyeth, American composer Lukas Foss, American author John Updike, and pop superstar Michael Jackson .
 Also leaving the scene were Walter Cronkite, the dean of American journalism, and Edward Kennedy, the lion of the U.S. Senate . Edward Kennedy left the scene at the end of the day .
 Banking Emerges from the Worldwide Financial Crisis Computers and Information Systems . Computers, Information Systems. Computers . Information systems. The world's financial system.
 Geology and Geochemistry, Geophysics, Meteorology and Climate Education . Geology, Geochemistry and Meteorology at the University of Cambridge, England .
 Zoology, Botany, Molecular Biology and Genetics, Paleontology Literature. Literature. Zoology . Zoology and Botany . Molecular Biology . Genetics, Genetics, Zoology. Literature .
 English, German, French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Russian, Persian, Arabic . Arabic, Arabic, Chinese, Japanese Military Affairs. Military Affairs .
 November 9 marks the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall . Giant dominoes placed in front of the Brandenburg Gate fall in a symbolic act during ceremonies .
 Chinese naval personnel march past Tiananmen Square in Beijing on October 1 as part of China's celebrations marking 60 years of communist rule .
 A Samoan man surveys damage left behind by a tsunami that was generated by a magnitude-8.8. earthquake near Samoa on September 30 . The Samoan tsunami was the result of an earthquake that struck near Samoa .
 Sri Lankan children participate in a victory procession on May 20 following the capture of the final enclave of the Tamil Tiger rebels and an end to Sri Lanka's long-running civil war .
 The November 5 mass shooting at the U.S. Army base at Ft. Charleston, Florida, was the site of a mass shooting . The suspect was killed by a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head .
 13 people were killed in the attack in Hood, Texas, on Sunday night . They were the first responders to the scene of the deadly shooting .
 Astronaut Andrew Feustel performs work on the Hubble Space Telescope on May 14 . The Hubble Space telescope was launched in 1992 and will be launched in 1994 .
 In reaffirming the greatness of our nation, we understand that greatness is never a given . January reaffirms that greatness never is ever given .
 Czech Republic assumes the presidency of the European Union . Czech Republic led by Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek assumes presidency .
 A suicide bomber detonates his weapon among a crowd of pilgrims visiting a Shi'ite shrine in Baghdad . At least 40 people, many of them Iranians, are killed .
 The new U.S. embassy compound in Baghdad is dedicated . It is the largest United States embassy in the world . The compound is dedicated to the United States .
 Some 40 Palestinians are killed by Israeli shelling outside a UN educational facility that was being used as a refuge in the Gaza Strip . Israeli shelling killed some 40 Palestinians outside the facility .
 George W Bush creates the largest marine reserve in the world . Mariana Trench, Pacific Remote Islands, and Rose Atoll are marine national monuments . The reserve is 505,773 sq km in area .
 The centenary of the U.K.’s domestic intelligence agency, MI5, is marked by the first interview of the head by the press . Jonathan Evans meets with reporters at MI5 headquarters in London .
 The Sirius Star, a Saudi-owned supertanker seized by Somali pirates in November 2008, is released in return for the payment of $3 million in ransom . A boat carrying pirates to shore capsizes, which results in the drowning of five of the pirates and the loss of some
 Best picture honours go to Slumdog Millionaire and Vicky Cristina Barcelona . Danny Boyle wins the award for best director for the film . Best director is Danny Boyle .
 Lee MyungBak of South Korea and Prime Minister Taro Aso of Japan agree to embark on a program of economic cooperation in view of the global economic crisis . South Korea's president and Japan's prime minister say they will work together on a joint economic program .
 Islamist groups, notably al-Shabaab, take over vacated posts . Ethiopian troops complete their withdrawal from Mogadishu . Islamist forces and Ethiopian troops leave at least 15 people dead .
 Israeli armed forces shell a hospital run by the Palestine Red Crescent Society and the headquarters of the U.N. Relief and Works Agency in Gaza City . Said Siam, the head of Hamas security forces, was also killed in the attack .
 A demonstration in Vilnius by thousands of people opposed to proposed adjustments to economic austerity in Lithuania turns into rioting . Demonstrators were angry at proposed changes to the country's austerity measures .
 Some 1,200 Palestinians and 13 Israelis have died during the 22-day operation . Israel declares that it will begin a cease-fire early the following day in Gaza .
 Prime Minister Vladimir Putin of Russia and Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko of Ukraine reach an agreement on the price that Ukraine will pay for Russian natural gas . Previous accords have fallen through, and at least 12 people have frozen to death while some 20 countries are cut off from gas
 In the Swat valley in Pakistan, five schools closed for winter vacation are bombed . Authorities believe the culprits are Taliban fighters determined to prevent the education of girls .
 Barack Obama is inaugurated as the 44th president of the United States . The inauguration is perhaps the largest crowd ever to attend a presidential inauguration . Barack Obama was inaugurated in Washington, D.C.
 Janet Napolitano sworn in as U.S. secretary of state . Hillary Rodham Clinton confirmed as Secretary of State Clinton confirmed in Senate vote . Napolitanos sworn in to Homeland Security .
 eBay reports its first-ever revenue decline . The online marketplace company reported its first ever revenue decline in 2013 .
 Japan reports that its export rate in December 2008 fell drastically . China announces a sharp slowdown in growth in the final quarter of the year . South Korea says that its economy shrank in the same period . All these results are related to the economic crisis in the United States and Europe .
 Obama signs executive orders requiring that the military prison at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba be closed within a year . Obama also orders that interrogation methods fall within the guidelines of the Army Field Manual .
 Spain’s unemployment rate during the last quarter of 2008 reached 13.9%, the highest in the euro zone . The British Office for National Statistics releases data showing that the U.K. officially went into recession in the final quarter .
 A suicide car bomber detonates his weapon near an African Union peacekeeping base in Mogadishu, Som., as a public bus is passing . At least 15 people are killed, including at least 15 civilians .
 The coalition government of Iceland falls, a victim of the collapse of the country's economy . Iceland's coalition government is the first government to fall out of government .
 The U.S. House of Representatives passes an $819 billion economic stimulus package . The package is supported by Pres. Barack Obama .
 Afghanistan’s Independent Election Commission postpones the country's presidential election until August 20 . The constitution requires that an election be held at least 30 days before May 22, when Pres. Hamid Karzai is in office .
 Rod Blagojevich is found guilty of abuse of power and removed from office . Pat Quinn becomes governor in his place of Blagoevich .
 Pres. Morgan Tsvangirai agrees to become prime minister of Zimbabwe in coalition government with Pres. Nelson Mandela . Pres. Mugabe agrees to be prime minister in a coalition government of Zimbabwe .
 Southern African Development Community pushed for this solution to the impasse . Robert Mugabe is the president of Zimbabwe . Mugabe was the prime minister of Zimbabwe's presidency .
 In Djibouti, Somalia’s transitional legislature elects Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, former head of the Islamic Courts Union, president . The news is greeted with exultation in Mogadishu .
 Johanna Sigurdardottir sworn in as prime minister of Iceland at the head of a caretaker coalition government . Iceland has been hit by wildfires that have consumed 1,995 sq km and left dozens dead .
 South Korea’s exports declined by a record 32.8% in January, a government report says . South Korea's exports fell by 32.9% in a year, a record low in January .
 Kurmanbek Bakiyev announces that he will close the Manas air base used by the U.S. in Afghanistan . The Manas base is used as a staging area for military forces in the country . Bakiyeva says the base will be closed .
 Barack Obama announces new rules that will cap the salary of top executives in companies receiving government financial assistance at $500,000 . The rules will also impose restrictions on bonus and severance pay for such company leaders .
 A massive infestation of Achaea catocaloides rena caterpillars is devastating forests and crops in northern Liberia . Scientists from Liberia and neighbouring countries announce they will meet to try to find a way to contain the infestation . The infestation is causing a huge problem in Liberia
 Hu Jintao signs an agreement for the China Railway Corp. to build a monorail system in Mecca for the use of pilgrims making the hajj . The system will be used by pilgrims to make the pilgrimage to Mecca .
 Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe swears in Morgan Tsangirai as prime minister . Previous day Tendai Biti was chosen as finance minister . Mugabe chose Biti to be finance minister; the previous day Tsngirai chose Tendai .
 Officials in Pakistan acknowledge that the terrorist attacks that took place in Mumbai in 2008 were partially planned in Pakistan . Six people have been arrested in connection with the attack . The arrests were made in Pakistan in February 2008 .
 Abraham Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg Address, opens as part of nationwide celebrations of the 200th anniversary of Lincoln’s birth . The Gettysburg address is part of a series of events celebrating Lincoln's birth .
 A suicide bomber kills at least 35 Shi'ite pilgrims who were on their way to Karbala’, Iraq, for a religious observation . The pilgrims were travelling to the holy city for a holy observation .
 A missile attack from U.S. drones against Taliban and al-Qaeda targets in Pakistan’s South Waziristan province kills 30 people . 30 people were killed in the attack .
 Voters in Venezuela approve a ballot measure that will remove term limits for all elected officials, including Pres. Caracasso . Voters approve a measure that removes term limits from elected officials .
 Pakistan agrees to an accord with the Taliban that will allow Shari'ah law in the Swat valley region of the North-West Frontier Province . The accord will restrict government military action to responding to attacks, in effect ceding that area to the Taliban .
 Swiss bank UBS agrees to reveal the names of American holders of secret bank accounts . U.S. authorities believe UBS accounts holders are culpable of tax evasion . UBS agreed to reveal names of accounts held by American holders .
 Barack Obama announces a new $275 billion plan to help as many as nine million people save their homes from foreclosure or refinance their mortgages . As many as 9 million people will be able to refinance or save their mortgages, Obama says .
 The International Atomic Energy Agency says Iran has a third more enriched uranium than the country had disclosed . The amount of uranium would be sufficient to make an atom bomb, the agency says .
 Ivars Godmanis resigns as prime minister of Latvia, as the country’s economy suffers a collapse in the face of the global credit crisis . Latvia's economy has been hit hard by the collapse of its credit sector .
 Shimon Peres asks Benjamin Netanyahu, leader of the Likud party, to form a government . Peres: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do with the government"
 U.S. military offiW I cials concede that an air strike in Afghanistan's Herat province by coalition forces on February 17 killed 13 civilians and 3 militants . The United States military had initially said that all the dead were militants .
 Police in Athens say leftist militant grouping, Sect of Rebels, has claimed responsibility for the attack . The attack took place on February 18 on the headquarters of the Alter private television network .
 J W Islamist insurgents attack African Union compound in Mogadishu . 11 peacekeepers, all of them from Burundi, killed in attack .
 A study describes the engineering of antibodies that attack a portion of the influenza virus that does not mutate . The study suggests the possibility of a single vaccine effective against all strains of flu .
 Dow Jones Industrial Average falls 250.89 points, to 7114.78 . Nasdaq composite index loses 3.71% of its value, dropping to 1387.72 . Dow Jones drops 250.09 points, while Nasdaq drops 3.72% .
 The U.S. government describes its intention to give $900 million to nongovernmental organizations to help rebuilding efforts in the Gaza Strip . The United States plans to give the money to aid reconstruction efforts .
 The leader of J the Taliban in the Swat valley region of Pakistan declares an indefinite cease-fire . The Taliban in Swat Valley have declared an indefinite ceasefire .
 Barack Obama makes a nationally televised speech before both houses of Congress in which he lays out his plans and describes the goals of his budget . Obama also makes a national televised speech to both chambers of Congress .
 At least 50 people are killed in a gun battle between mutineers and army troops in Dhaka, Bangladesh . At least 100 people were injured .
 Barack Obama proposes a sweeping 10-year budget that would overhaul health care, push back global warming, and reverse a 30-year trend of increasing economic inequality . Obama also proposes a plan to reverse the trend of increased economic inequality in America .
 Dell Inc. reports that its net income in the most recent quarter fell 48% from the same quarter a year earlier . The American computer company says its net profit in the quarter was 48% less than a year ago .
 E. Scripps Co. had been trying to sell it since 1926, but felt it could not afford to keep publishing . The company had tried unsuccessfully to sell the company .
 Two days of consultations between China and the U.S. end with an agreement that highlevel discussions about military issues will be resumed .
 Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan orders that presidential elections be held in April or May, not in August . Karzai: It had been deemed logistically impossible to stage elections earlier than August .
 Joao Bernardo Vieira of Guinea-Bissau was killed by army troops . The previous day the army chief of staff had died in a bomb attack . The army chief-of-staff had also died in the previous day .
 Omar al-Bashir of The Sudan to face charges relating to atrocities in Darfur region . Bashir almost immediately expels several international aid groups working in the Darfur area. Bashir also expels several international associations of Darfur .
 The European Central Bank lowers its key interest rate by half a percentage point to 1.5%, its lowest level since its inception . For the first time, the economy of the 16 eurozone countries is likely to shrink in the coming year .
 United States government data show that the unemployment rate in February reached 8.1%, its highest level in 25 years . U.S. unemployment rate is now at the highest level ever recorded in February .
 Salam Fayad submits his resignation as prime minister of the Fatah-dominated Palestinian Authority . Fayad has been in office for more than a decade . He has been a member of the Palestinian Authority since 2007 .
 A suicide bomber detonates his weapon among a group of Iraqi army officers heading toward a reconciliation conference in the town of Abu Ghraib . At least 33 people are killed in the attack .
 Representatives of Fatah, Hamas, and 11 other Palestinian groups begin reconciliation talks in Cairo . Fatah and Hamas will meet in Cairo for reconciliation talks this week .
 Turing Award for excellence in computer science is granted to Barbara Liskov for her contributions to the use of data abstraction to make software easier to create, change, and maintain .
 Nicolas Sarkozy of France announces that the country will once again become a full member of NATO . The country had withdrawn from the organization’s military command in 1966 .
 Madagascar opposition leader Andry Rajoelina backs out of a planned meeting with Pres. Madagascar's president . Madagascar's opposition leader and opposition leader withdraws from a meeting with the president .
 Marc Ravalomanana and other community leaders to seek a solution to the country's political crisis . The country is in a state of crisis and has been hit by a wave of violence in recent months .
 Medet Sadyrkulov, a high-ranking politician in Kyrgyzstan, is killed in a car accident that his supporters characterize as highly suspicious . Medet had recently changed camps to join the opposition, and was killed in the accident .
 The revelation that executives at the troubled insurer American International Group are to receive large bonuses ignites a firestorm of public criticism . The financial products unit that caused the company’s difficulties are to be rewarded .
 Mauricio Funes of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front emerges as his party’s first victorious presidential candidate . Funes is the party's first candidate to win a presidential election in El Salvador .
 Chavez orders takeover of two key ports in petroleum-exporting states . New law shifting control of ports, airports, and highways from the state government to the central government .
 Opposition leader Nawaz Sharif broke out of house arrest in Lahore to lead a massive demonstration toward Islamabad . The day after the break-out, Pakistani Pres. Sharif was forced to step down from house arrest .
 Asif Ali Zardari agrees to restore Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry as chief justice . Zardar agrees to reinstate Iftar Muhammad Chadhry, who was jailed for corruption . Asif will be able to take charge of the Supreme Court .
 Marc Ravalomanana resigns as president of Madagascar, turning power over to the military . He cedes power to Andry Rajoelina, in spite of the fact that he is too young to legally hold the office of president .
 A constitutional amendment to end the limit of two terms of office for the president is approved in a referendum in Azerbaijan . Azerbaijan's president is expected to be re-elected in the next year .
 U.S., Canada, Russia, Denmark, Denmark and Norway signatories of a 1973 treaty that limited polar bear hunting . Climate change is the greatest long-term threat to the survival of polar bears, they say .
 Brazil’s Supreme Court agrees to the creation of the Raposa Serra do Sol indigenous reserve . The reserve was first established in 2005 by Pres. Mariano Acosta of Brazil .
 This allows for the removal of rice farmers who petitioned to remain in the 1. million-ha reserve . Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, in Roraima state, was removed from the reserve .
 The African Union suspends Madagascar’s membership, saying that the country must restore a constitutional government within the next six months . Madagascar's membership was suspended by the African Union . The country has been in power for more than a decade .
 Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany of Hungary surprises observers by offering his resignation . Hungary's prime minister resigns from his post in a surprise resignation announcement on Monday .
 In Oakland, Calif., a man stopped by police opens fire, killing two officers . After a chase, a shootout, two more officers and the suspect are dead .
 Presidential and local elections are held in Macedonia . They are regarded as largely free and fair . They result in the need for the holding of a presidential runoff .
 Redoubt in Alaska begins erupting, throwing ash on several cities north of Anchorage; it last erupted for a five-month period in 1989-90 . Redoubt is last seen erupting for a period of five months .
 Timothy Geithner unveils three-part plan to help free banks from bad housing loans and mortgage-related securities . Stock markets rise dramatically in response to announcement .
 U.S. demand for illegal drugs and failure to prevent arms smuggling from the United States into Mexico are contributing factors to the drug trade and violence attending it in Mexico . Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton says arms smuggling is a significant contributing factor to the violence in Mexico.
 A suicide bomber detonates his weapon in a mosque near Peshawar, Pak., during Friday prayers . The explosion causes the building to collapse, and some 40 people are killed .
 Well Armed wins the Dubai World Cup, the world’s richest horse race, by a record 14 lengths . Well Armed won the race by 14 lengths in Dubai .
 A gunman invades a nursing home in Carthage, N.C., and kills seven elderly residents and a nurse before being stopped by police . Seven elderly residents were killed in the attack, including a nurse .
 Omar al-Bashir is among the attendees, and other members express strong support for him . The Sudanese president is expected to speak at the end of his speech .
 President Obama announces that Chrysler LLC must complete a merger with Italian company Fiat by April 30 . General Motors has 60 days in which to greatly restructure itself, requiring major concessions from the United Auto Workers union, in order to remain eligible for government financial assistance .
 A suicide bomber attacks a post of paramilitary security personnel in Islamabad, killing eight officers . Also, a missile attack from a United States drone kills 11 militants in North Waziristan, killing 11 militants .
 North Korea’s test launch of a longrange missile rocket intended to put a satellite into orbit fails, though North Korea declares it a success . UN Security Council responds with call for stronger sanctions against North Korea .
 Prosecutors drop corruption charges against African National Congress leader Jacob Zuma . Zuma has been accused of corruption charges in South Africa since 2009 .
 District of Columbia council votes to recognize same-sex marriages performed in other states as valid marriages . Same-sex marriage is legal in the state; also, D.C. council votes also to recognize marriages performed by other states . Jim Douglas's veto overrides state's veto and makes
 Fiji’s government, installed after a coup in 2006, is illegal, a court has ruled . Fiji's government was overthrown by a coup, installed in 2006 . Fiji has been in power since 2007 .
 Ratu Josefa Iloilo abrogates the constitution, appoints himself head of government, and abolishes the judiciary . The constitution was abrogated by the Iloillo government, which was overthrown .
 Summit meeting of leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations abruptly canceled . Participants evacuated after protesters gain access to convention centre in Pattaya, Thailand .
 Voreque Bainimarama reappoints most of the previous cabinet . Fiji's first prime minister after a coup in 2006 . Fiji is ruled by Ratu Josefa Iloilo of Fiji .
 U.S. Navy snipers aboard the USS Bainbridge kill three Somalian pirates who were holding Capt. Capt. Omar Hassan . Capt. Hassan was being held captive by the Somali pirates .
 Richard Phillips of the Maersk Alabama hostage on a lifeboat rescued on lifeboat, rescued Phillips . Richard Phillips was rescued from the lifeboat by the crew of the ship . Phillips was taken hostage by the ship's crew .
 Barack Obama lifts restrictions on travel to Cuba by those with family in that country . All restrictions on remittances to ordinary people living in Cuba are lifted . American telecommunications companies are empowered to seek licensing agreements in Cuba .
 Fernando Lugo of Paraguay admits that he is the father of a boy bom in May 2007 . His resignation as a priest and bishop was accepted in July 2008 .
 U.S. Department of Justice releases documents describing harsh interrogations of suspected al-Qaeda operatives in 2002-05 . The documents describe in detail the harsh techniques employed by the Central Intelligence Agency in interrogating suspects .
 Leaders of 34 countries in the Western Hemisphere gather for the Summit of the Americas in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago . U.S. Pres. Obama attended the opening ceremony of the summit .
 Barack Obama declares that the U.S. seeks a positive change in its relations with Cuba . Obama says the United States is looking to improve relations with the island nation .
 A suicide bomber at a military and police checkpoint in Hangu district in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province kills 20 people . The attack took place in the province's North West Frontier Province .
 Ayad al-Sammaraie is elected speaker of Iraq's legislature . He replaces Mahmoud al-Mashhadani, who resigned in December 2008 .
 80% of the jobs that have been lost in the ongoing recession in the U.S. belonged to men, according to a recent report .
 Mahmoud Ahmadinejad denounces Israel as a racist regime . Delegates from 23 European countries walk out of the speech . Delegate walk out .
 IMF releases a report on the global financial crisis in which it estimates the amount of losses faced by financial establishments throughout the world as $4.05 trillion . IMF estimates that financial establishments in the world face losses of $4 trillion .
 The World Digital Library is inaugurated in a ceremony at UNESCO headquarters in Paris . It contains some 1,250 books, maps, and works of art from more than 30 national libraries . The international online library is supported by UNESCO .
 In Iraq a suicide bomber sets off her explosives in a line of women and children receiving food supplies in Baghdad, killing 28 people, and another suicide bomber targets a restaurant crowded with Iranian tourists in Muqdadiyah; at least 89 people die there . In Iraq, a woman sets off
 Sri Lanka calls for the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam to surrender . The government of Sri Lanka has declared a unilateral ceasefire in response to a declaration of a ceasefire .
 General Motors announces a plan to cut 23,000 jobs in the United States by 2011 . The company will drop 40% of its dealers, close out the Pontiac brand, and offer a swap of company stock for unsecured debt to bondholders .
 Pakistan’s military mobilizes to reverse Taliban takeover of Buner district in North-West Frontier Province . 6,000 Pakistani troops will be moved from border with India to border with Afghanistan . Pakistan also reported to be moving troops from border to border .
 U.S. output fell at a 6.1% annual rate in the first quarter of 2009, a contraction of a magnitude last seen in 1958 . Consumer spending rose slightly after January, but consumer spending rose after January .
 Chrysler LLC files for bankruptcy protection after some of its smaller creditors refuse to accept a reduced repayment . Agreement may now be reached with Italian car company Fiat that will allow Chrysler to stay in business .
 Senegal names Souleymane Ndene Ndiaye to replace Cheikh Hadjibou Soumare as prime minister . Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal names new prime minister of Senegal .
 Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam spokesman Selvarasa Pathmanathan, on TamilNet, ahead of Sri Lankan government’s declaration of victory, May 18 . Fiji's military regime misses the deadline to return the country to democratic rule .
 U.S. military air strikes kill at least 30 civilians in Bala Baluk district, Afghanistan, officials say . Officials in Afghanistan say the strikes came the day after heavy fighting against Taliban militants . The Taliban militants were killed in heavy fighting in the area .
 Tolkien in the 1920s and '30s, edited by Christopher Tolkien, is published for the first time . Tolkien's first edition of The Hobbit books is published in the 1930s and 1930s .
 Pakistani Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani makes a televised speech in which he declares that the military is undertaking to eliminate the Taliban in the country . Gilani declares that he is committed to eliminating Taliban in Pakistan .
 Hundreds of women in Kathmandu demonstrate to demand the removal of Nepal’s army chief . Riot police officers fight with them .
 Pakistani military offensive against the Taliban intensifies as some 200,000 civilians flee the area . Some 200,500 people have fled the Swat valley in the past two years .
 Alvaro Colom, among others, leads to a political crisis over the following weeks . The unrest leads to unrest that leads to the death of Colom . Colom's death leads to political crisis .
 David D McKiernan is being replaced as the top commander of U.S. forces in Afghanistan by Lieut. Lieutut. David D McKiernan . He will be replaced by Lieutenant General David D. McCiernan in Afghanistan .
 Stanley A McChrystal, who has a stronger background in unconventional warfare, will be the new commander . He has a strong background of unconventional warfare . He is expected to be the next commander of the US Army in Afghanistan .
 Mikheil Saakashvili meets with opposition leaders, but no agreement is reached . Saakashesvili: "No agreement has been reached. It's time to get back on track"
 The Medicare fund will run out of money in 2017 and Social Security in 2037, trustees say . This is two years and four years earlier than previous estimates . The Social Security fund is projected to run out in 2017 .
 A second day of shelling of a field hospital in Sri Lanka’s war zone is said to have killed at least 50 people . Satellite images back up reports of destruction in the zone .
 In Myanmar, democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi is arrested for having violated the terms of her house arrest . Uninvited American man had illegally swum across a lake to enter her house .
 Some detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, will be tried in military tribunals that have been changed in order to allow more rights for defendants than had been earlier permitted . U.S. government officials announce that some detainees at the . military prison at Guantanamo .
 Eurostat, the statistical office of the European Union, reports that the economies of both the EU and the euro zone shrank 2.5% in the first quarter of 2009 . Eurostat: The economies of Europe and the Eurozone shrank in the same quarter in 2009 .
 The American carmaker General Motors informs some 1,100 dealerships that their franchises will be discontinued after this year . General Motors tells them that they will be discontinuing their franchises .
 Fossil found near Darmstadt, Ger., of an Eocene-era primate that may be ancestral to the anthropoid lineage that produced monkeys, apes, and humans . Species has been designated Darwinius masillae .
 Dalia Grybauskaite, European Union budget director, wins a convincing victory in Lithuania's presidential election . European Union's budget director Dalia Girobuskaite wins the election in Lithuania .
 Sri Lankan government reports that Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam leader Velupillai Prabhakaran has been killed . LTTE acknowledges defeat and acknowledges defeat in Sri Lanka .
 Some 1 million people have been displaced by fighting in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province since the beginning of the month . The UN High Commissioner for Refugees declares that some 1. million people are displaced .
 Sri Lanka declares defeat of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam . Leader of the group's leader is confirmed to be killed by government forces .
 The Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse, after nine years of investigation, releases a 2,575-page report . Report details abuse at reform schools and orphanages ran by the Roman Catholic Church in Ireland from the 1930s to the 1990s . Abuse was routinely perpetrated at hundreds of
 Well-connected multimillionaire Hisham Talaat Moustafa is sentenced to death in Cairo for having hired a man to murder Lebanese pop star Suzanne Tanim . He is accused of hiring the man to kill the pop star .
 No agreement reached on how to prevent price disputes between Ukraine and Russia from interrupting natural gas supplies to EU countries . No agreement was reached at a summit meeting between the European Union and Russia in Khabarovsk, Russia .
 Roh MooHyun commits suicide by throwing himself off a cliff in the village of Bongha . He was questioned the previous month in connection with a corruption scandal . Roh was questioned by the South Korean government in connection to a corruption case .
 Asif Ali Zardari produces agreement to work together to fight Islamic extremism and drug smuggling . Zardar: We will work together together to stop Islamic extremism, drug smuggling and extremism .
 North Korea conducts its second underground test of a nuclear weapon; its first was in October 2006 . North Korea conducted its first nuclear test of its own in 2006; it took place in a series of months .
 Pakistan's Supreme Court overturns a judgment made in February and rules that opposition leader Nawaz Sharif is entitled to run for and hold public office . The ruling overturns an earlier ruling that ruled that Sharif was not allowed to hold office in Pakistan .
 Mamadou Tandja had his attempts to change the constitution to allow him to run for a third term of office turned down by the Constitutional Court . Niger dissolves the legislature after he loses his bid to change its constitution .
 Barack Obama names Sonia Sotomayor of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit as his choice to replace David Souter on the U.S. Supreme Court . The Supreme Court will hear the case on a federal appeals appeals court .
 Armed men driving an explosives-laden car attempt to attack the Pakistani intelligence agency’s command centre in Lahore . The car hits a police emergency-response station and explodes, killing at least 26 people .
 The National Ignition Facility will use lasers to create fusion reactions . The facility will be the first to be dedicated at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California .
 Pakistan’s military declares that it has achieved full control over Mingora, the biggest city in the Swat valley . Pakistan's military declares full control of Mingora .
 In Georgia’s breakaway region of South Ossetia, a new legislature is elected . It is dominated by followers of its president, Eduard Kokoity, who enjoys the favour of Russia .
 Mir Hossein Mousavi, Iranian opposition presidential candidate, declared election for Pres. Mousavi . Mousavi was the candidate for Iran's first time in a decade .
 North Korean leader Kim Jong II has chosen his youngest son, Kim Jong-Un, as his successor . It is reported in South Korea that North Korea's leader has chosen Kim Jong Un as his heir .
 Moldova's legislature fails in its second attempt to elect a new national president . As a result, a general election must be held . Moldova’s legislature failed in its first attempt to vote for president .
 New Hampshire governor signs legislation making same-sex marriage legal in the state . The law will go into effect on Jan. 2010 .
 Barack Obama makes a major speech addressing the Muslims of the world . He asks for a change in the relationship between the West and the Muslim countries . Obama also addresses the conflict between Israel and Palestine .
 Violence between riot police in Peru and indigenous Amazonian protesters leaves at least 54 people dead . 14 police officers, including 14 officers, were killed in the clashes .
 Taliban suicide bomber detonates his weapon in a mosque in the Dir district of Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province . At least 30 people were killed in the attack, sparking a local backlash against the Taliban .
 The bodies of two young women who had been raped and murdered have been found in Indian-administered Kashmir . Demonstrators blame Indian soldiers for the assault on the women .
 Omar Bongo of Gabon dies in Barcelona; he had been in office since 1967 . He was Africa’s longestruling head of state . He had been president of the country since 1967 and was Africa's longest-ruling leader .
 An attack that includes a massive explosion of a car bomb destroys part of the luxury Pearl Continental Hotel in Peshawar, Pak.; at least 11 people, many of them foreigners, are killed . The hotel is located in the city of Peshawar .
 10 major banks, including JPMorgan Chase, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and U.S. Bancorp, will be permitted to return bailout funds to the government and exit from the Troubled Asset Relief Program .
 The permanent members of the UN Security Council agree on a draft resolution to increase sanctions against North Korea . The full Security Council unanimously approves it on June 12 . The draft resolution was approved by the full council .
 Chrysler Group LLC is owned by the United Auto Workers union, Fiat, and the governments of the U.S. and Canada . Fiat CEO Sergio Marchionne is headed by the new Chrysler Group . The new Chrysler group LLC will be headed by Fiat CEO .
 The United States Senate approves a version of a bill that was earlier passed by the United States House of Representatives . The bill will give the Food and Drug Administration jurisdiction to regulate the manufacture and marketing of cigarettes and other tobacco products .
 Iran's President Mahmoud Ahmad Ahmadinejad declares victory in Iran's presidential election . The election is expected to be a very close presidential election in the country .
 Mahmoud Ahmadinejad is declared the winner by a landslide . Opposition candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi insists that in fact he has won the election . Mousavi says he has not won .
 Harith al-Obaidi, the head of the Iraqi National Accord, is assassinated in a mosque in Baghdad . His secretary and three bodyguards are also killed .
 Thousands of people take to the streets of Tehran, enraged by what they believe to be fraudulent results in the previous day’s presidential election . The previous day, Iran's president was elected to the presidency .
 UN World Food Programme reports that two days earlier a convoy of boats carrying food aid down the Akobo River in the southern part of The Sudan was attacked in an outbreak of interethnic violence . At least 40 people were killed .
 Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah —^ Ali Khamenei, calls for the Revolutionary Guard to review the results of the presidential election . Tens of thousands march in Tehran in a silent protest .
 The U.S. Department of State asks the social-networking site Twitter to postpone scheduled maintenance lest it disrupt the flow of information within Iran and from Iran to the West about the political situation there .
 For the third consecutive day, tens of thousands of people who demand new elections march in silence in Tehran . Demonstrations are also taking place in other cities in Iran .
 The U.S. Supreme Court rules that convicted prisoners are not constitutionally entitled to DNA testing that could prove their innocence . Many state legislatures have conferred that legal right, the court says .
 Peru's legislature overturns presidential decrees that would have opened the jungle to development . Indigenous residents of the affected area rejoice . Peru’s legislature overturned the decrees .
 Ayatollah Ali Khamenei declares the presidential election results valid and orders an end to demonstrations opposing the reported results . Khamenei also orders a halt to demonstrations against the reported election results .
 In the largely Turkmen town of Taza in northern Iraq, a suicide truck bomb kills at least 68 people . The explosion also damages many houses . The largely Turkman town is largely home to Turkmen .
 Greenland's self-governing status within Denmark goes into effect amid official ceremony and celebration . Greenland's new self-governability status within the Danish state of Greenland goes to effect . Greenland is the only nation in the world to have self-government .
 Nicolas Sarkozy becomes the first French president to address the National Assembly and Senate since 1875 . Sarkozy also declares that the burka worn by some Muslim women is a sign of subjugation that is not welcome in France .
 An air strike on the funeral of a Taliban commander in Pakistan's South Waziristan region kills what is said to be at least 60 people . The strike, locally attributed to a U.S. drone, is believed to have been carried out by a drone strike .
 Kyrgyzstan agrees to allow the U.S. to keep Manas Air Base open in spite of having ordered it closed in February . The United States will pay a much higher rent, and the base is to be renamed as a transit centre .
 A bomb attached to a motorcycle explodes in a market in the Sadr City neighbourhood of Baghdad . At least 76 people were killed in the attack, including 76 people .
 Mark Sanford publicly admits in a televised news conference that he had been in Argentina with a woman . Sanford had been having an extramarital affair for the past year . Sanford's whereabouts had been unknown since June 18 .
 Israel agrees to allow Palestinian security forces greater authority in West Bank towns of Ramallah, Qalqilyah, Bethlehem, and Jericho . Also, several Israeli checkpoints in the West Bank have been removed . Several Israeli checkpoints were removed .
 Ayatollah Ahmad Khatami states that leaders of the protests against the presidential election results should be punished . Mir Hossein Mousavi declares that he will not call for more protests without first applying for permits . The Guardian Council reiterates the validity of the results .
 Michel Suleiman of Lebanon announces that Saad alHariri has been chosen to serve as prime minister . AlHariri will be the first prime minister of his country to take office .
 The winner of the 37,000-nautical-mile around-the-world race is announced in St. Petersburg, Russia .
 Manuel Zelaya in a coup and deports him to Costa Rica . The country’s legislature replaces him with Roberto Micheletti . Zelaya was deposed in 2009 .
 Nestor Kirchner resigns as head of the party . Cristina Fernandez de Kirrchner was president of Argentina in 2003 . Nestor resigned from the party after a series of scandals .
 Legislative elections in Albania result in a narrow victory for the coalition led by Prime Minister Sali Berisha . Prime Minister Berisha's coalition wins narrow victory .
 Mamadou Tandja of Niger dissolves the Constitutional Court that had ruled his referendum to extend the period of time that a president may hold office illegal . Niger's Constitutional Court had ruled that the referendum was illegal . The court dissolves .
 The milestone is celebrated in Iraq, although a bomb in Kirkuk kills 33 people . In accordance with the terms of a security agreement, U.S. troops withdraw from Iraq's cities .
 Ivo Sanader abruptly resigns as prime minister of Croatia . Jadranka Kosor is sworn in to replace him on July 6 . Boyko Borisov, on the Bulgarian election that his party won, July 5 .
 Russia has agreed to allow U.S. military flights en route to Afghanistan to fly through Russian airspace . Russian and United States officials say the move is part of an agreement to allow military flights to pass through the country's airspace . Russia and the United States have not commented on the agreement
 The Association of Researchers and Teachers of Qum declares that the Iranian election of June 12 and the new government are illegitimate . The group was founded by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, a group founded by the late cleric .
 The Chinese government shuts down the city of Urumqi, imposing a strict curfew and cutting off connections to cell phones and the Internet . The government blames the previous day’s violence on the expatriate World Uighur Congress, led by Rebiya Kadeer .
 START I treaty, which will expire on December 5, will be replaced by a treaty on nuclear-arms reduction to replace START I . START I will expire December 5 . Russia and the U.S. agree to negotiate a new treaty .
 Hu Jintao issues a statement calling for the preservation of security in Xinjiang and for security forces to ""deal a blow"" to those who were responsible for the killings in Urumqi . Hu calls for the protection of security .
 Talks between ousted Honduran president Manuel Zelaya and de facto president Roberto Micheletti are unsuccessful . Neither side is willing to compromise, but they agree to further talks in San Jose .
 Barack Obama makes a speech in Accra that is televised throughout Africa in which he enjoins the continent’s people and leaders to take responsibility for their future .
 Alan Garcia of Peru names as his new prime minister Javier Velasquez Quesquen . Alan Garcia names as new leader of the country .
 Denis SassouNguesso reelected president of the Republic of the Congo in a vote that falls short of international standards for fairness . The vote was held in the Congo's capital, the capital of the country, on Sunday night .
 In Zimbabwe, the first meeting of a national conference to create a new constitution is disrupted by backers of Pres. Robert Mugabe's government .
 Regina M Benjamin is the head of the Alabama Medical Association and of a family clinic in Bayou La Batre, Ala., as surgeon general . Benjamin is also head of an Alabama family clinic . Benjamin will be surgeon general of the state .
 Episcopal Church USA votes to affirm that any level of ministry may be filled by openly gay persons . On July 17, the convention votes to allow the blessing of same-sex unions in jurisdictions where such unions are legal .
 National Guard troops take over a state police station in Curiepe . The action ignites fighting between the troops and protesters angered by the move .
 Prime ministers of Pakistan and India agree to cooperate to combat terrorism . They say they will continue to engage in talks to resolve their differences .
 Pakistan’s Supreme Court acquits former prime minister Nawaz Sharif of the crime of hijacking, of which he had been convicted following his unsuccessful attempt to prevent Pervez Musharraf from taking over the country in a coup in 1999 . The ruling makes Sharif eligible to hold public
 Some 5,500 Mexican soldiers are deployed to Michoacan state in Mexico after a series of horrific attacks on police by drug cartel members . Mexican soldiers have been deployed to the state after a string of attacks against police by the cartels .
 Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz is elected president of Mauritania in a national referendum . He took power in a coup in 2008 after taking power in the country's first coup .
 Amateur astronomer finds a dark spot the size of the Pacific Ocean in Jupiter’s atmosphere . The dark spot suggests that the planet was hit by a comet .
 Four U.S. soldiers are killed by a roadside bomb in eastern Afghanistan . The total number of United States troops killed in the country in July is 30, the highest number in any month since the 2001 invasion . 56 coalition troops were killed in July, also a record; 56 coalition
 Peace Now reports that Israel has declared plans to annex some 14,022 ha of land in the West Bank . The land has emerged as the Dead Sea has shrunk . Peace Now says the land is in the area that emerged as Dead Sea shrunk .
 A tribunal at the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague redraws the borders of the disputed Abyei region between northern and southern Sudan . Both the Sudan government of The Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement accept the new borders .
 Leading opposition candidate, Almazbek Atambayev, announces his withdrawal, citing fraud . The incumbent, Kurmanbek Bakiyev, wins by a landslide in an election that falls short of international standards . Obama holds a televised news conference to bolster support for his planned overhaul of
 Esfandiar Rahim Mashaei resigns as Iran’s deputy president . Under strong pressure from Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, he resigns . Iran's deputy president resigns under strong pressure .
 In regional elections in Kurdistan in Iraq, the ruling coalition retains power . In spite of a surprisingly strong showing by the opposition coalition, opposition coalition wins .
 At the end of two days of violence sparked by attacks on police stations in northern Nigeria, some 55 people have died . Muslim fundamentalist organization Boko Haram attacked police stations on Friday .
 Texting while driving increases the risk of collision by a factor of 23 . Talking on the phone while driving reduces the risk by only a factor 4 . Texting is the most common form of texting while driving .
 Mohammad Yusuf, the leader of the militant Islamist group Boko Haram, is confirmed dead in Maiduguri, Nigeria . Hundreds of people may have died in several days of violence .
 Cambridge, Mass., police officer and scholar Henry Louis Gates, Jr. speak to ease tensions at Gates’s home . Obama had exacerbated the incident with an answer at a news conference, which Obama exacerbated with a press conference .
 The Leaf is an all-electric hatchback that is expected to go on sale in the U.S., Japan, and Europe by the end of 2010 . Nissan opens its new global headquarters in Yokohama, Japan .
 In London, robbers steal 43 pieces of diamond jewelry with an estimated value of $65 million . Graff jewelry store in one of Britain’s largest-ever diamond heists .
 Andry Rajoelina of Madagascar and Marc Ravalomanana of Madagascar sign an accord agreeing on an interim government . An interim government will be put in place by September and rule until elections are held within 15 months .
 The Iraqi village of Khazna, near Mosul, is largely destroyed by two huge truck bombs, and 28 or more people are killed . Also, assorted bombings in Baghdad leave at least 22 people dead .
 Myanmar opposition figure Aung San Suu Kyi sentenced to 18 further months of house arrest for letting an American intruder into her home . The American, John Yettaw, is sentenced to seven years of imprisonment and hard labour but is released to U.S. Sen. John McCain
 Armed forces in Yemen begin an offensive against Shi'ite rebels in Sa'dah province . Armed forces began an offensive in the country's capital, Yemen, earlier this month .
 The Philippine military begins an offensive against two encampments of the militant Muslim organization Abu Sayyaf on Basilan island . At least 20 insurgents and 23 soldiers are killed .
 Sen. Barack Obama bestows the Presidential Medal of Freedom on 16 people, including Sen. John McCain . Sen. McCain is the only person to receive the medal .
 Edward M Kennedy, former Supreme Court justice Sandra Day O’Connor, actor Sidney Poitier, tennis star Billie Jean King, and physicist Stephen Hawking were among the guests .
 Taiwan for the first time agrees to accept foreign help in responding to Typhoon Morakot . Government of Taiwan for first time accepts foreign help to respond to disaster caused by Typhoon Morokot .
 Asif Ali Zardari lifts the ban on political organization and activity in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas . The ban has been in place since the period of British rule, during which British rule was in charge .
 Hamas security forces clash with radical Islamist group that had taken over a mosque in Gaza Strip . 22 people, including the leader of the Warriors of God, are killed in the clashes .
 18 Taliban militants are found in the streets of six towns in Pakistan's Swat valley . The bodies of 18 militants were found in Swat Valley towns in six towns .
 Some 1 million people in Kenya are still going hungry, the UN World Food Programme says . The drought has caused a number of thousands of people to go hungry .
 In Baghdad a powerful truck bomb explodes outside the Ministry of Finance, collapsing an elevated highway and killing at least 35 people . Within three minutes a stronger explosion from a truck bomb at the Foreign Ministry kills a minimum of 60 people .
 Islamist militant organization al-Shabaab attacks an African Union peacekeeping base in Mogadishu, Somalia . At least 24 people die in the ensuing battle, including 24 people .
 Greece declares a state of emergency as wildfires spread to Vamava and Marathon . The wildfires started near Grammatiko and spread to nearby towns of Marathon and Vamavava .
 South Korean Pres. Kim DaeJung attended the state funeral of former president . Kim's funeral was held in Seoul, South Korea, on Friday .
 Lee Myung-Bak meets with a delegation of officials from North Korea who went to Seoul to pay their respects . North Korean officials paid their respects to the South Korean president .
 The Picasso Museum in Paris closes for an extensive renovation and expansion that is expected to take about two years . The museum will be closed for two years to undergo renovations and expansion .
 Palestinian Prime Minister Salam Fayad presents a plan that maps out the government of a Palestinian state . It is intended to be in place within two years and is to be pursued in parallel with peace negotiations with Israel . Fayad says the plan will be pursued parallel to peace negotiations .
 Edward M Kennedy of Massachusetts dies at his home in Hyannis Port, Mass. Kennedy died at age 81 . Kennedy was a national leader of the Democratic Party .
 Argentina’s Supreme Court strikes down laws mandating penalties for the private possession and use of marijuana by an adult . Argentina's Supreme Court struck down laws requiring penalties for private possession, use of pot by adult .
 Prime Minister Zinaida Greceanii of Moldova announces the resignation of the country's government . Moldova's prime minister announced the resignation on Monday morning .
 The U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. reports that the country’s banking industry lost $3.3 billion in the second fiscal quarter of 2009 . The banking industry was hit hard by the recession .
 Iran has increased its number of centrifuges for enriching uranium but has slowed its production of enriched uranium since June . Iran says it has increased cooperation with the IAEA in some but not all areas . Iran has also slowed its uranium enrichment production since June, agency says .
 Suicide truck bombers kill 10 people at and near a police garrison in the Iraqi village of Hamad . Another truck bomb, in Sinjar, leaves 4 people dead .
 Turkey and Armenia announce that they have agreed to take steps toward establishing diplomatic relations . The two countries have been in talks to establish diplomatic relations for the first time .
 The Afghan Electoral Complaints Commission declares that it has so far received more than 2,600 reports of vote fraud, including vote stealing . Close to half of the votes from August 20 presidential election in Afghanistan have been counted .
 A belief that the August 30 presidential election was stolen leads to rioting in Port-Gentil, Gabon . The French embassy is set on fire in the city .
 Lee Myung-Bak replaces Prime Minister Han Seung-Soo with Chung Un-Chan as part of a cabinet shake-up . The new prime minister replaces Han Seong-SOO as a minister .
 North Korea unexpectedly releases water from a dam on the Imjin River, which flows through both North and South Korea . The resultant wall of water sweeps away six South Koreans who were camping and fishing on the river . Six South Koreans were killed .
 Felipe Calderon of Mexico replaces Attorney General Eduardo Medina Mora with Arturo Chavez . Chavez is the Attorney General of Mexico .
 Preliminary results from Afghanistan's August 20 presidential election give a resounding victory to Pres. Hamid Karzai . Afghanistan's election commission declares that preliminary results from the August 20 election give an overwhelming victory to the president .
 The Electoral Complaints Commission calls for a partial recount of votes . Hamid Karzai, the president of Afghanistan, has called for a recount of the votes . Karzai says the election should be re-run .
 Barack Obama addresses a joint session of Congress with a nationally televised speech laying out his vision of meaningful health care reform . The large undertaking has roiled both the public and lawmakers wrestling with creating legislation .
 Hywind, the first full-scale floating wind turbine, opens in Norway . The turbine is attached to the seabed some 10 km from the island of Karmpy . Hywind is the first of its kind in the world .
 Saad al-Hariri resigns as prime minister of Lebanon . He is frustrated at his inability to form a government . He was designated prime minister in June after elections in June .
 General Motors announces that it plans to sell a majority stake of its European operations, Opel and Vauxhall . Vladimir Voronin resigns as Moldova’s interim president; he is replaced in that capacity by Mihai Ghimpu .
 Salah Ezzedine, a Hezbollah-connected owner of a publishing house and financial institution, is charged in a pyramid scheme . Many in Lebanon's Shi'ite community lost a total of hundreds of millions of dollars in investments .
 Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan was believed to have been behind the bombing of a hotel in Mombasa, Kenya, in 2002, and to have played a part in the bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998 .
 Denis Sassou-Nouesso of the Republic of the Congo abolishes the post of prime minister in 2005 . The country's constitution does not make a provision for such a post, and the constitution does .
 EU monitors say about one-third of the votes that were tallied for Pres. Barack Obama were counted for him . Election monitors from the European Union state that about a third of those votes were for Obama .
 Hamid Karzai in Afghanistan’s presidential election on August 20 should be further examined for possible fraud, says John Defterios . Karzai is expected to win the presidential election in Afghanistan . The Afghan election will be held in August 20 .
 Michel Suleiman again designates Saad al-Hariri prime minister, instructing him to try again to form government . Al-Haririri has been prime minister of Lebanon since 2003 .
 Barack Obama cancels plans to base components of an antiballistic missile shield in Poland and the Czech Republic . Obama orders that a different system to protect against shortand medium-range missiles from Iran be put in place .
 Fervently Do We Pray is a dance piece choreographed by Bill T Jones and commissioned by the Ravinia Festival of Highland Park, Ill., to commemorate the bicentennial of the birth of Abraham Lincoln . The piece has its world premiere .
 A powerful car bomb explodes in the Shi'ite village of Ustarzai in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province . At least 35 people are killed in the blast .
 The new Liege-Guillemins railway station officially opens in Liege . It will be a hub in Europe’s high-speed train network, serving some 36,000 people a day .
 A statement ostensibly from Mullah Omar, in which he warns Western countries away from Afghanistan, tells them to study the country’s military history . The statement is posted on a Web site used by the Taliban . It is purported to be a statement from the Taliban leader .
 Fighters of the Lou Nuer people attack the village of Duk Padiet in the southern part of The Sudan . The violence results in the deaths of 51 villagers, 28 army and security personnel, and 23 attackers .
 Najibullah Zazi ordered held without bail on charges of lying to federal investigators . Zazi is thought to have been planning an attack in the U.S., but the investigation was short-circuited when Zazi learned of it .
 The U.S. EnviW W ronmental Protection Agency issues new rules that from Jan., 2010, will require the biggest emitters of greenhouse gases in the country to track and report their emissions . Some 10,000 industrial sites and fossil-fuel suppliers will have to start
 In massive raid, police in Los Angeles arrest 45 suspected members of the violent Avenues street gang . Police say 45 people are suspected of being involved in the violent street gang.
 Heavy rain of the past several days in the southeastern U.S. begins to taper off . Most of the damage has occurred in Georgia, where at least eight people drowned .
 A dust storm blankets Sydney and other parts of Australia’s east coast with red dust . It is the worst such event Sydney has experienced since the 1940s .
 The U.S. Federal Reserve scales back two emergency lending programs . The previous day it chose to slow a program intended to push down mortgage rates . The Fed also scaled back a program to push back mortgage rates.
 The Group of 20 countries with industrialized and emerging economies agree to coordinate their economic strategies with each other in an effort to prevent future global meltdowns and to attempt to reach a new international trade agreement . It is also decided that global economic issues will now be discussed by the Group 20 rather than
 Families that had been split up by the Korean War take place in a resort in North Korea . For the first time since late 2007, reunions of families that were split up in 2007 take place . Families reunite in North Korean resort .
 Film director Roman Polanski is arrested in Switzerland in connection with a 1977 sex-offense conviction in the U.S. from where he fled before being sentenced . Polanski fled the United States before he was sentenced in 1977 .
 Typhoon Ketsana makes landfall in Vietnam; at least 99 people are killed . At least 99 are believed to have died in the storm .
 In a significant constitutional development, the first-ever Supreme Court of the United Kingdom is sworn in . The independent body replaces the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords .
 Under new rules to go into effect on December 1, people reviewing products in blogs, in social networks on the Internet, or on talk shows must disclose any relationship they have with advertisers . Reviewers must disclose having received gifts from advertisers, including gifts .
 Four major meat-producing companies agree to eschew purchase of cattle from deforested areas of Brazil . Greenpeace has documented the link between increased cattle farming and expanded deforestation of the rainforest .
 Italy’s Constitutional Court rules that a law shielding Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and other top officials from prosecution in criminal cases while they hold office violates the constitution . The court rules that the law shielding the prime minister and others from prosecution while he holds office is unconstitutional .
 Militants dressed in military fatigues open fire on Pakistani army headquarters compound in Rawalpindi, killing six people and taking several others hostage . By the time the siege has ended the following day, 23 people have been killed, but 42 hostages have been rescued .
 Exhibition of 36 bodies that were naturally mummified from about 1850 to 1950 in Guanajuato, Mex., opens in Detroit Science Center . The exhibit will move to several other museums over the next two years .
 A suicide car bombing in a crowded market in Shangla district in the Swat valley kills at least 41 people . The attack happened in a packed market in the area known as Shangla . The market was a popular tourist destination in the region .
 Government ministers from Turkey and Syria sign agreements on a range of issues . Issues include the removal of visa requirements, use of water from the Euphrates River, and pipeline project .
 Senior Movement for Democratic Change leader Roy Bennett is arrested and charged with possession of weapons for terrorism in Zimbabwe . He is accused of possessing weapons for terrorist purposes . He has been charged with possessing weapons to commit terrorism .
 Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki of Iraq and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan sign pacts on cooperation on oil and gas exports and sharing water from the Euphrates River, among other agreements .
 Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai of Zimbabwe announces that he and other members of his party will disengage from, but not pull out of, the unity government with Pres. Tsvagirai .
 Pakistani military begins a long-planned major ground offensive against militants in South Waziristan . The Pakistani military has been fighting militants in the region for more than a decade .
 In Baluchistan region of Iran, 42 people are killed, including 5 Revolutionary Guard commanders . Suicide attack on meeting led by Revolutionary Guards and roadside attack on car carrying Revolutionary Guards leaves 42 people dead, including five Revolutionary Guards commanders .
 Hamid Karzai short of 50% of legitimate votes cast, which would make a runoff election necessary . Karzai would have to face a runoff if Karzai does not get enough votes to win .
 Hamid Karzai announces that he accepts the need for a runoff presidential election, scheduled for November 7 . Karzai: "I accept that there will be a runoff election in Afghanistan" Karzai says he accepts that the election will be held in November .
 The president of Nicaragua’s Supreme Court declares that he will not accept a decision by a constitutional commission to overturn laws that prohibit consecutive reelection and serving more than two terms of office .
 Speaker of Iraq’s legislature adjourns efforts to pass a new election law . The measure was to have been passed by October 15 .
 Litokwa Tomeing of the Marshall Islands is voted out of office by the legislature . On November 2 he is replaced by Jurelang Zedkaia . Tomeing is the head of the country's legislature .
 Mahmoud Abbas declares that elections must be held in Jerusalem, the West Bank, and Gaza on Jan. 2010 . Abbas' party, Fatah, and Hamas, which rules Gaza, lack of agreement between Fatah and Hamas .
 Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany announces a new government with a new coalition partner, the Free Democrats . The Free Democrats will be the first party to form a government in Germany .
 The European Union lifts its sanctions against Uzbekistan, imposed in 2005, citing the release of some political prisoners and the abolition of the death penalty in Uzbekistan . The EU lifted its sanctions in 2005 citing release of political prisoners, abolition of death penalty .
 Under pressure from the U.S., Roberto Micheletti agrees to allow ousted president Manuel Zelaya to complete his term of office . Zelaya was ousted president of Honduras in 2009 . He is now the de facto leader of a unity government .
 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton meets separately with Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in an attempt to persuade them to engage in peace negotiations . Clinton also meets with Israeli PM Benjamin Netanyahu .
 I hoped there would be a better process. Royal Caribbean International: "I hope there would he have been better process"
 Opposition candidate Abdullah Abdullah announces his withdrawal from the runoff presidential election in Afghanistan, November 1 . Abdullah Abdullah says that Pres. Hamid Karzai will not be allowed to take part in the November 7 election .
 Hamid Karzai has failed to make the changes necessary to assure a free and fair election . Karzai needs to make changes to ensure a fair and free election in Afghanistan, says the Afghan president .
 President Hamid Karzai is officially declared the winner of the Afghan presidential election . U.S. Pres. Barack Obama is declared the victor of the election in Afghanistan .
 Barack Obama tells him that he must now take action against corruption in the government and against the drug trade in the country . Barack Obama says he must take action to stop corruption in government and drug trade .
 The Czech Republic is the last of the European Union's member states to ratify the Lisbon Treaty . The Lisbon Treaty creates a new governing structure for the organization .
 General Motors decides not to sell its European divisions Opel and Vauxhall . Sale of the units to Canadian auto supplier Magna had been in the works .
 Fernando Lugo of Paraguay replaces the leadership of the country’s armed forces for the third time in 15 months . Lugo replaces the president of the armed forces in Paraguay's capital, La Guardia .
 Nidal Malik Hasan, an army psychiatrist, goes on a rampage, using civilian firearms . 13 people are killed and at least 28 wounded, including the shooter . Hasan, a psychiatrist, uses civilian firearms to kill 13 people .
 Gordon Brown proposes a tax on financial transactions to create a fund for any future financial bailouts of banks . Brown proposes the tax on transactions in a meeting of finance ministers in St. Andrews, Scotland .
 The Yomiuri Giants defeat the Hokkaido Nippon-Ham Fighters 2-0 in game six to win baseball’s Japan Series . The Giants win the Japan Series for the first time .
 In Lebanon a new cabinet led by Prime Minister Saad alHariri is appointed . The country had been unable to form a government since elections in June .
 Election officials of the Palestinian Authority announce that the presidential and legislative elections scheduled for January 2010 will have to be postponed because of the lack of cooperation on the part of Hamas, which rules Gaza, with election preparations in the territory . Hamas rules Gaza .
 Maoist protesters led by former prime minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal surround the seat of government to demand the resignation of Nepal’s president . Nepal's president is the prime minister of Nepal, who has been in office since 2008 .
 Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey announces a plan to allow the use of the Kurdish language in broadcast media . Erdogan also wants to restore the original Kurdish names of cities that had had their names changed to Turkish ones . The plan will also restore the names of Kurdish cities that were changed to
 A truck bomb explodes at a police checkpoint in Peshawar, Pakistan, killing at least 12 people . The blast was the deadliest of a series of blasts in the country's history .
 Barack Obama attends a summit meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in Singapore . He also engages in substantive talks with Russian Pres. Vladimir Putin .
 Dmitry Medvedev and attends AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation talks . Later he flies to Shanghai to meet with Chinese leaders . Medvedvedev will meet with China's leaders .
 The government of Japan announces that the country’s GDP grew at an annual rate of 4.8% in its third fiscal quarter, its second consecutive quarter of growth . The government announced that the growth was the country's second consecutive quarterly growth .
 Honduras's legislature declares that on December 2 it will vote on whether ousted president Manuel Zelaya should be restored to office until the end of his term in January 2010 . A presidential election is scheduled to take place on November 29 .
 Tariq al-Hashimi, one of Iraq’s two vice presidents, reports that he vetoed the election law passed by the legislature on November 8 . All three members of Iraq's presidency council are required to approve the law for it to go into effect .
 Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy elected first president of the European Council under the Lisbon Treaty . He will serve a term of office of two and a half years . The treaty enters into force on December 1 .
 In the city of Farah in western Afghanistan, a suicide bomber on a motorcycle kills at least 16 people in a marketplace . The incident occurred in the city's Farah, which is located in the eastern province of Afghanistan .
 Sri Lankan government official declares that 136,000 people still in government-run ethnic Tamil refugee camps will be permitted to leave the camps beginning December 1 . Camps will be closed by the end of January 2010, official says .
 In 50 November what appears to be part of a feud between clans, members of the entourage of a gubernatorial candidate, consisting of relatives, supporters, and journalists, are abducted and massacred . In Maguindanao province on Mindanao island in the Philippines, in 50
 Ahmadinejad is the first Iranian leader to visit Brazil since 1965 . He is also the first to meet Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva in Brasilia, Brazil . The two leaders agree on cooperation in several areas .
 The U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. declares that as of the end of the third fiscal quarter on September 30, its deposit fund had a negative balance of $8.7 billion .
 Government of Dubai in the United Arab Emirates and conglomerate Dubai World ask to put off debt repayments for six months . Action causes a shock wave in the world's stock markets .
 Andal Ampatuan, Jr., the mayor of the Philippine city of Datu Unsay, surrenders to authorities in connection with the massacre of supporters of a rival politician three days earlier . 20 others have also been arrested in the massacre .
 Wolfgang Schneiderhan resigns as chief of staff of Germany's armed forces . German media reported that the military had been aware of civilian casualties in an air strike in Afghanistan in September during the time that it had denied that civilians had been killed .
 30 passengers die when homemade bomb detonates on train in St. Petersburg, Russia . Plane carrying 30 people aboard derails when it encounters homemade bomb on tracks .
 Hifikepunye Pohamba of Namibia wins reelection, and his party gains majority of seats in legislature . Both victories are landslides .
 Porfirio Lobo wins resoundingly in Honduras . A presidential election of questionable validity is held in Honduras, Honduras . The conservative candidate, Porfiro Lobo, wins the vote .
 Inflation rate in euro zone in November to have reached 0.6%, its first rise above zero in five months . Euro zone is no longer in recession, with 1.6% annualized growth in the third fiscal quarter .
 U.S. Pres. Barack Obama announced a limited agreement at the UN conference on climate change in Copenhagen, December 18 . Obama announced the agreement at a UN conference in Copenhagen .
 Obama says he intends to send 30,000 extra troops in the next few months . He says he will pull the U.S. military out of Afghanistan in 2011 . Obama: "I will begin pulling the United States military out in 2011"
 Jacob Zuma addresses his country to describe a new approach to the AIDS epidemic that is in line with recommendations issued the previous day by the World Health Organization . Zuma urges the consistent use of condoms as well .
 At a mosque attended by military officers in a secure area of Rawalpindi, Pakistan, several attackers make an assault with guns and grenades . At least 38 people, several of them high-ranking officers, are killed in the attack .
 U.S. government announces tentative settlement of class-action suit brought in 1996 . Suit accused government of mismanaging American Indian trust funds . Complex settlement envisions payment of $3.3 billion .
 Lebanon’s legislature approves the new government and its policy platform, one part of which allows the militant group Hezbollah to retain its arms . Hezbollah militants are allowed to retain their arms in Lebanon .
 Authorities in Bangkok seize a North Korean cargo plane loaded with weapons . The UN forbids the export of such weapons from North Korea . The plane was en route to an unknown destination .
 Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi is struck in the face by a man wielding a 53 December souvenir model of Milan’s cathedral . He suffers a broken nose and broken teeth; he also suffers broken teeth .
 Exxon Mobil agrees to buy natural-gas producer XTO Energy . The energy company will buy the natural gas producer . Exxon Mobil says it will buy XTO .
 Abu Dhabi agrees to grant the troubled emirate of Dubai a $10 billion bailout . Abu Dhabi's central government is located in the United Arab Emirates . Dubai's troubled economy has been hit by a series of scandals .
 Citigroup and Wells Fargo become the last major American banks to exit the federal Troubled Asset Relief Program . Both declare that they will repay the money they received from the fund .
 Austria nationalizes the Hypo Group Alpe Adria bank to prevent its collapse . The collapse would have had deleterious effects on the economies of Croatia, Serbia, Slovenia, Croatia, and Slovenia . Austria nationalized the bank after the collapse .
 Hu Jintao ceremonially opens a naturalgas pipeline that runs from Turkmenistan through Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan into Chinas autonomous region of Xinjiang .
 Members of the Gulf Cooperation Council agree to launch a single currency similar to the euro in the region . The first step will be the creation of a monetary council in 2010 .
 Pakistan’s Supreme Court rules as unconstitutional an amnesty created in 2007 for politicians charged with corruption . Decision affects some 6,000 people, including Pres. Hamid Hussain, who is accused of corruption .
 Mahmoud Abbas as well as that of its currently nonfunctioning legislature . Mahmoud Abbas is currently in charge of the Palestinian government .
 The Yemeni military conducts strikes against alQaeda bases in the mountainous area of Abyan and in Sanaa . At least 34 militants are reportedly killed .
 U.S., China, India, Brazil, and South Africa forge an agreement to be presented at international climate talks in Copenhagen . The agreement calls for developed countries to reduce their greenhouse-gas emissions and provide financial assistance to lessdeveloped countries . It also calls for the world to keep the
 Andry Rajoelina of Madagascar dismisses Prime Minister Eugene Mangalaza, replacing him with Cecile Manorohanta . Two days later he appoints Albert Camille Vital prime minister and rejects power-sharing agreements .
 The wrought-iron sign reading ""Arbeit Macht Frei” at the entrance to the Nazi death camp Auschwitz in Poland is stolen; it is found, cut into three pieces, three days later . The sign is found in three pieces three days after it is stolen .
 A large protest F I I by Maoists and their sympathizers in Kathmandu, Nepal, is met by riot police, and fighting breaks out . Some 70 people are arrested; some 70 people were arrested .
 Large protests continue for a second day in Nepal, which has been largely shut down by a general strike called by Maoists . Maoists call for general strike on New Year's Day in Nepal .
 UN Security Council imposes sanctions on Eritrea, saying it supports Islamist militants in Somalia . Eritrea has been accused of supporting Islamist militants there . The UN says Eritrea supports Islamists in Somalia, which has been hit by militants .
 Greece's legislature passes an austerity budget in an attempt to rein in the budget deficit . Greece’s legislature passes the budget in a bid to curb the deficit in the country .
 During Shi'ite holiday, clashes take place between antigovemment protesters and government forces in several public squares in Tehran . Protesters clash with government forces during public squares .
 At least 10 people, including a nephew of opposition leader Mir Hossein Moussavi, are killed . On the holiday of ‘Ashura’, police fire their guns into crowds of protesters .
 Military officers in Thailand armed with riot shields and clubs begin to forcibly return some 4,000 Hmong refugees seeking asylum to Laos . The Hmong people were seeking asylum in Thailand .
 Afghanistan announces that legislative elections will be held in spring 2010 . Despite the lack of a new election law deemed necessary for fair balloting by the UN and the U.S., Afghanistan will hold elections in the spring .
 Lee Myung-Bak pardons Lee Kun-Hee, who resigned in 2008 after some 20 years as chairman of Samsung . Lee was later convicted of tax evasion and embezzlement . Lee's pardon comes after he resigned from his post as Samsung chairman .
 Double agent viewed as a valuable informant blows himself up at a meeting with CIA agents at a CIA base in Afghanistan’s Khost province . Eight CIA employees were killed in the attack . The incident occurred on the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan .
 A twin turboprop plane operated by Manaus Aerotaxi and chartered by a family to fly from Coari to Manaus plunges into the Manacapuru River; 24 of the 28 aboard die .
 Continental Connection Flight 3407, a Bombardier Dash 8 Q400 turboprop, crashed into a house in Clarence Center, N.Y., killing all 49 on board as well as an occupant of the house . icing on the wings is suspected of being the cause of the crash
 A helicopter ferrying workers to offshore oil platforms plummets into the Atlantic Ocean; 17 passengers are lost . 17 people were killed in the crash . Helicopter was ferrying offshore workers to oil platforms .
 Super Puma helicopter ferrying workers to Aberdeen from North Sea oil platform goes down in calm weather 14 nautical miles off Peterhead . All 16 aboard are lost . Helicopter was carrying 16 workers from BP oil platform .
 A military training flight ends in disaster when the Fokker 27 airplane crashes while attempting to land at an air base in West Java . All 24 military personnel aboard are killed .
 A Pakistani military transport helicopter crashes in Chapri Ferozkhel, killing at least 26 and possibly as many as 41 military personnel . It is unclear whether the disaster is due to overloading, bad weather, or insurgent gunfire .
 A Russian-made transport helicopter working for the NATO-led military crashes in Kandahar, Afghanistan . 16 civilians were killed in the crash, including 16 civilians .
 At Santika, a nightclub, fireworks set off to celebrate the new year cause a fire, which quickly spreads . The conflagration and resulting stampede result in the deaths of 66 people .
 A deadly blaze of unknown origin kills at least 40 people in a shantytown . The blaze is believed to have been caused by a fire that was unknown origin .
 Fireworks set off at a birthday celebration in a restaurant in Changle ignite a fire that leaves at least 15 people dead . The fire is believed to have been a result of fireworks set off in the restaurant .
 A fire quickly spreads through a wooden structure housing a nursing home; at least 23 of the residents expire . The fire kills 23 people, including 23 of those who died .
 Bangkok nightclub Santika was started by fireworks and killed 66 partygoers on January 1 . 66 people were killed in the fire that started by fire .
 A quickly spreading fire at a three-story building housing the homeless results in the deaths of 23 residents . 23 people were killed in the fire at the building in which the homeless were sleeping .
 A series of explosions as ammunition detonates at the Mbagala military depot flattens hundreds of houses and kills at least 22 people . Hundreds of houses were destroyed in the blast, killing 22 people in total .
 A fire that may have started in a neighbouring warehouse sweeps through a day-care centre, killing at least 47 babies and small children . The fire may have been caused by a warehouse fire that swept through the centre .
 A quickly moving fire kills at least 39 patients and staff members at a drug-treatment centre with barred windows . The centre's barred windows were used to treat at least 40 people at the time .
 A river ferry capsizes in the Kosi River; two bodies are recovered, and some 20 other people are missing . Some 20 people are still missing . Two bodies have been recovered .
 An open wooden boat capsizes in the Atlantic Ocean; more than 40 people are missing . Among them are members of the National Islamic Council, which runs mosques and schools in the country .
 A boat carrying would-be migrants to Italy strikes a rock and capsizes . As many as 30 Tunisian passengers are believed to have drowned .
 A greatly overloaded ferry sinks in the Gianh River; at least 42 of the passengers, mostly women and children, drown . The ferry was overloaded with more than 40,000 passengers .
 A small fishing boat carrying African migrants capsizes; at least 21 of the occupants drown . At least 21 African migrants drown in the boat .
 A trawler collides with a small ferry on a river, causing the ferry to capsize; at least 17 people are drowned . The ferry capsizes after the accident, capsizing in a river .
 A smuggler’s boat capsizes in the Gulf of Aden, and some 35 would-be migrants from Somalia and Ethiopia drown .
 A doublehulled catamaran ferrying passengers from Tarawa to Maiana island sinks; 33 of the 55 passengers lose their lives . 33 people died in the sinking .
 A sailboat grossly overloaded with Haitian wouldbe migrants sinks; 15 bodies are recovered, and a further 67 people are believed to have drowned . 15 bodies recovered, 15 bodies found, and further 67 drowned .
 MV Princess Ashika, an interisland ferry traveling from Nuku'alofofa to Ha’afeva island, sinks; some 74 passengers drown . 74 people were killed in the sinking, including some of the passengers .
 Italy and Malta blame each other for having failed to prevent the tragedy . Eritreans say that 75 others perished during a three-week trip from Libya .
 The llinden, a tourist boat plying the waters of Lake Ohrid, sinks; though most of the passengers are rescued . 15 Bulgarian tourists lose their lives in the tragedy .
 An overloaded ferry sinks in darkness in the Congo River near Ankoro; at least 15 passengers die . Some 90 others are missing, and some 90 are missing .
 inflatable dinghy crowded with Africans sinks off Spanish islet of Perejil, near Morocco . There are 11 survivors and 8 bodies; dozens are feared lost .
 A sightseeing boat in Periyar Lake capsizes when the passengers flock to one side to see an elephant . At least 41 tourists die .
 A boat sinks in open waters in the Indian Ocean; though a merchant ship rescues 17 survivors, it is feared that two dozen people perished . It is feared two dozen perished .
 At least 50 people are believed to have lost their lives . Shortly after leaving the town of Pathein, a ferry collides with a barge in the Ngawun River .
 A logging boat illegally carrying passengers sinks on Lake Mai Ndombe, in northeastern part of the country . At least 73 passengers die, and many more are missing . Many more are still missing .
 An overloaded triple-deck ferry carrying passengers from Dhaka to Nazir Hat capsizes in the Tetulia River as it approaches the dock . At least 77 people were killed in the accident, including 77 people .
 A ferry sinks on the Daira River; at least 46 passengers, most of them women and children, drown . Most of them were women, children, and many were on board .
 A cargo ship carrying livestock sinks; the bodies of nine crew members are recovered . 35 more of those aboard are reported missing . The bodies of 35 more crew members were recovered .
 The 2,300-year-old pagoda collapsed during renovations in Yangon, Myanmar . At least 20 people were killed in the collapse, according to reports .
 Mining and Construction in Shanxi province, China, is a mining site . Mining and construction is a major construction project in China's Shanxi Province .
 The 2,300-year-old Danok pagoda in Yangon collapses, reportedly killing at least 20 people . The pagoda was undergoing the final stages of renovation when it collapsed .
 The Harmony Gold Mining Co. in South Africa reports that at least 36 illegal miners were killed in an underground fire in a closed shaft . Eventually at least 76 bodies are found, including 36 bodies found .
 A landslide buries the Jiwei Mountain iron ore mine and several homes and buildings in Wulong county, China . At least 26 people, 19 of them miners, are killed, but 27 miners are believed to have survived .
 A landslide caused by heavy rains destroys a dam project at a hydropower plant in Kangding county . 4 construction workers are killed, with some 50 more missing . Some 50 more are still missing .
 An unfinished iron casting factory building in Shijiazhuang collapses in a thunderstorm; at least 17 people, among them construction workers, lose their lives .
 An explosion at a coal mine in Pingdingshan leaves 35 miners dead and a further 44 workers trapped . A further 44 miners are trapped in the coal mine .
 In Korba a chimney being built at a power plant collapses into the buildings cafeteria . At least 40 people are crushed to death, with dozens more believed to have been trapped in the rubble .
 A gas explosion collapses a shaft and starts a fire in a coal mine in Devecikonagi; 19 miners are killed . 19 miners were killed in the explosion .
 A 50-m section of a 1,100-m cable-stayed bridge that was being built some 50 m above the Chambal River collapses, killing at least 45 people, with many more missing . The collapse is believed to have been caused by a collapse of the bridge
 A magnitude6.6. earthquake with its epicentre about 32 km north-northwest of San Jose creates devastation and leaves at least 34 people dead, with more than 60 others missing . More than 60 people are missing .
 After several days of severe flooding, the country's sugar farms have been decimated . 9,000 people have been evacuated, and at least 11 people have died . 11 people are believed to have died in the flooding .
 Ferocious winds cause the collapse of the roof of a sports centre in Sant Boi de Llobregat, Spain, killing four children . Another casualty of the storm is a weeping beech tree that was planted at Versailles in France in 1786 as a gift to Queen
 A winter storm that began the previous day causes power failures and traffic accidents in Texas, Arkansas, Kentucky, Indiana, and Ohio . At least 23 deaths are attributed to the weather system .
 Flash flooding on the island of Guadalcanal leaves at least 13 people dead and 7 missing . Flash flooding leaves 7 people missing and 13 people missing .
 A landslide precipitated by heavy rainfall sweeps through a gold-mining camp, leaving at least 13 people dead and 22 others missing . 22 others are still missing .
 Hifikepunye Pohamba declares a state of emergency in the northern and northeastern areas of the country . At least 92 people have been killed in flooding over the past few weeks .
 A landslide destroys five houses in a mountain village, leaving at least 16 people dead . The landslide is believed to have been caused by a landslide in the mountains .
 Two earthquakes, of magnitudes 5.1, in Nangarhar province cause the collapse of houses in four villages and leave at least 21 people dead . The quakes were of magnitude 5.2.1 and 5.4 .
 Officials report that a heat wave that has brought temperatures as high as 48 °C has left at least 18 people dead . Officials say the heat wave has killed 18 people .
 Floodwaters fed by two months of heavy rains begin to recede; at least 40 people have died . 300,000 have been left homeless . Floodwaters have flooded some areas in Haiti, Haiti and Haiti .
 A landslide buries the Jiwei Mountain iron ore mine and several homes and buildings in Wulong county . 26 people, 19 of them miners, are killed, and 72 people aboveground are missing .
 Monsoon rains in Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Jharkhand leave at least 15 people dead . 15 people killed in three states .
 Landslides reportedly caused by blockage of a river by debris from jade mines kill some 30 people in Phakant region . The region is believed to be in danger of landslides in the region .
 Authorities report that recent mountain storms have caused the death of at least 22 people . Authorities report the deaths of 22 people in mountain storms .
 A landslide caused by heavy rains destroys a dam project at a hydropower plant in Kangding; at least 4 construction workers are killed, with some 50 more reported missing . Some 50 more people are still missing .
 A landslide sweeps away some 30 prospectors who are panning for gold in a river . Five bodies are recovered, while the rest of the rest remain missing .
 A cloudburst causes a landslide that obliterates three villages, leaving 18 people dead and 48 people missing . 18 people are believed to have been killed in the landslide .
 Typhoon Morakot levels more than 6,000 homes in Fujian and Zhejiang provinces . Tropical Storm Goni, which carved a path through southern China beginning on August 4, left 3 mariners dead and 26 more missing .
 Unusually heavy rains lead to flash flooding that inundates homes, offices, and highways . At least 31 people in the area drown .
 Flash flooding submerges homes and sweeps away bridges and roads in Mandailing Natal district; at least 38 people perish, and several more are reported missing . Several more people have been reported missing in the area .
 The landscape in the township of Kinglake, Vic., was left ravaged after wildfires swept through the Australian state in February . The landscape was left devastated by wildfires that swept through Australia in February.
 Typhoon Ketsana roars through the country, leaving behind rising floods; at least 99 people expire . 99 people have died .
 A magnitude-7.7. undersea earthquake collapses hundreds of buildings and leaves the large city without power or communications . At least 1,100 people are killed in the earthquake . The quake is the largest earthquake ever recorded in the history of the world .
 mud slides cause the collapse of dozens of buildings near Messina, Italy, leaving at least 23 people dead . A further 35 people are still missing after mud slides caused the collapse .
 Typhoon Parma brushes the northeastern area, causing landslides and flooding that leave at least 16 people dead . The typhoon is the latest in a long line of typhoons that have swept across the Philippines .
 Officials report that at least 38 people have died in landslides following heavy rains over the past two days . Officials say 38 people are believed to have been killed .
 Chinese officials say waves of snowstorms that began on November 9 have left at least 40 people dead . More than 9,000 buildings have collapsed in China, according to officials .
 Three days of unusually severe winter weather have left at least 42 people in Poland and 27 people in Ukraine dead from the cold . Unusually severe weather has left more than 40 people dead in Poland alone .
 Flooding and landslides in the area of Rio de Janeiro after heavy rains result in the deaths of at least 18 people . Heavy rains have caused landslides and flooding in Rio de Rio .
 The Coromandel Express train, traveling from Haora to Chennai, derails, and three cars are crushed . 9 people are killed, and some 40 people are critically injured .
 A Metro public transit train slams into the back of a stopped train so hard that the first car rides up on top of the last car of the stopped train; nine people are killed . Nine people were killed in the crash .
 Fires caused by derailment and explosion of a freight train carrying liquefied petroleum gas lead to the collapse of buildings and the deaths of at least 22 residents . At least 22 people were killed in the explosion and derailment .
 A Delhibound express train slams into a stopped train, crumpling several cars and killing at least 22 passengers . 22 passengers and railroad employees were killed in the crash .
 A southbound passenger train slams into a second passenger train that had unexpectedly stopped on the tracks . At least 18 passengers are said to have died in the incident .
 Bus traveling over wet roads in the Cajamarca region slips off the road . 18 passengers perished in a train crash outside Cairo on October 24 in which 18 people perished .
 The driver of a truck carrying Hindu and Sikh pilgrims to a temple in the foothills of the Himalayas loses control of his vehicle, and it overturns . At least 20 passengers perish; at least 20 people were killed .
 A bus carrying 30 passengers crashes into a fuel tanker truck; the ensuing explosion incinerates at least 20 of the bus passengers . The explosion is believed to have been caused by an explosion on the bus .
 A passenger bus collides head-on with a truck not far from Khartoum; 21 bus passengers perish . Bus passengers were killed in the crash . Bus driver: "I'm not sure what happened to me. It was a terrible accident"
 A tanker truck carrying gasoline collides head-on with a passenger bus near Samarskoye; at least 21 people are killed . At least 21 killed in the crash .
 On the outskirts of Panama City, a truck trying to overtake another vehicle while crossing a bridge hits a bus head-on; at least 24 bus passengers die . At least 24 people were killed in the crash .
 A fuel tanker on a highway riven with potholes falls over and is then hit by a car, causing an explosion that engulfs six commuter buses . Some 70 people are thought to have been killed in the explosion .
 Near the town of Haripur, a crowded bus rolls into a gorge; at least 34 passengers perish . Bus rolls into gorge; 34 people are killed .
 A head-on collision between two crowded buses in the Faridpur district kills 20 or more people . The bus crash is the latest in a series of road accidents in India's troubled region to hit the ground .
 A passenger bus in the Andes goes off the road and falls into a ravine; 40 passengers die . 40 passengers were killed in the crash .
 The Ministry of Health reports that at least 84 children in the country have died after ingesting teething medication produced by Barewa Pharmaceuticals . The medication contained the industrial solvent diethylene glycol .
 At a World Cup association football qualifying match between the home country’s team and Malawi, a stampede results as crowds try to force their way into the stadium before the start of the game . Survivors report that police fired tear gas into the crowd, adding to the
 A shipping container being trucked from Afghanistan to Iran through Pakistan is stopped by Pakistani police . It was found to be packed with would-be migrants from Afghanistan, at least 62 of whom have expired . The container was being transported to Iran from Afghanistan .
 At the close of the Mawazine music festival, a stampede erupts in the departing crowd; at least 11 concertgoers perish . At least 11 people were killed .
 Officials report that the death toll among teenage boys so far this year from ritual circumcisions has reached 31 . The death toll has now reached 31, officials say .
 A five-story building, evidently undermined by monsoon rains, collapses, crushing to death 23 people . 23 people, mostly women and children, were killed in the collapse .
 At the aging Sayano-Shushenskaya hydroelectric power plant, the largest such facility in Russia, a water conduit bursts, unleashing flooding that leaves 75 workers dead . The cause of the disaster is unclear .
 At least 19 women are crushed to death in a stampede to be first in line during Ramadan . The stampede occurred at a location where food is being distributed to the poor, as is traditional during Ramadan.
 At least 22 people died at a World Cup association football qualifying match between the host team and Malawi on March 29 . The match took place in Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire .
 Rio de Jhpeiro has been selected to host the 20T6 Olympic Games . Brazilians gathered on Copacabana beach on October 2 celebrate followm^l the announcement by the International Olympic Committee that Rio had been selected for the Games .
 Nobels in 2009 were AWARDED to eight men and a RECORDSETTING five women . Recipients included a sitting United States President for strengthening INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMacy .
 The Nobel Prize for Peace for 2009 was awarded to United States Pres. Barack Obama . Obama received the Peace Prize for 2009 .
 Obama became the third sitting U.S. president to receive the prize . Theodore Roosevelt in 1906 and Woodrow Wilson in 1919 received the award .
 Jimmy Carter received the prize in 2002, two decades after he had left office . Former president Jimmy Carter also received the award in 2002 .
 For several years, the boy lived with his mother and stepfather in Indonesia and then with his maternal grandparents in Hawaii . They subsequently divorced . The boy's maternal grandparents also live in Hawaii, where he was raised .
 Obama was elected to the Illinois Senate in 1996 and to the United States Senate in 2004 . Obama has served in the Senate since 2004 . He was elected in 1996 to Illinois Senate .
 In 2008, he won the Democratic nomination for the presidency, the first African American to be chosen by a major party . He won a decisive victory in the general election .
 The Nobel Prize, which came less than nine months after Obama’s inauguration as president, was a surprise . Many people were puzzled, even shocked, by the committee's decision, given that not enough time had elapsed for the president's major policies to come to fruition .
 President Obama had made a number of dramatic shifts in foreign policy from his immediate predecessor . While coping with a severe financial and economic crisis at home, he had nonetheless made significant changes .
 Obama indicated that the U.S. would rejoin international efforts against climate change . Obama also reached an agreement with Russia to reduce nuclear weapons, attempted to restart peace talks .
 Some observers saw the award as a recognition of this new atmosphere that Obama had created . Obama has created a new atmosphere in the world .
 The Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences was awarded in 2009 to Americans Elinor Ostrom and Oliver E Williamson . They established economic governance as a field of research . The prize was awarded to the two Americans .
 This extended the traditional focus of the theory of the market and market prices . The theory was extended to include the concept of market prices in the 1930s .
 The results of Ostrom’s work challenged conventional thinking that common natural resources where use by one person reduces the amount available to others are badly managed unless regulated by a central authority or privatized . The results challenge conventional thinking .
 Williamson’s work offered a new theory to explain why firms exist and why some transactions are kept within firms rather than opened to the marketplace . Williamson's work offers a theory that explains why firms are kept in firms .
 She found that societies and people often devised sophisticated methods of governance to ensure that shared natural resources are not overexploited . She found these methods were often more appropriate and effective than rules imposed by a less-well-informed government .
 The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action , 01strom used case studies to show that private associations often avoided the “tragedy of commons” by developing the efficient use of resources .
 She found that a flaw in the “tragedy"" was its failure to take account of the often repeated interaction of people sharing a resource, which made credible use of punishments .
 Williamson received his share of the award for his analysis of economic governance, especially the boundaries of the firm . Williamson's analysis broadened understanding of why large companies evolve in some industries .
 British-born economist Ronald Coase won the Nobel Prize in 1991 for his work in institutional economics . This advanced the 1937 theory of the 1937 Coase theory of institutional economics, Coase .
 Williamson realized that it did not necessarily cost more for a firm with adequate administrative infrastructure to expand its boundaries to bring more of its business activities inside the firm .
 Williamson argued that negotiating in the market was more difficult, given the greater scope for haggling and disagreement . In papers and books beginning in 1971, notably Markets and Hierarchies, he argued .
 The high cost of writing and enforcing contracts would make it more competitive to integrate activity into the firm, where conflicts could be resolved via the use of rules and hierarchy . In such cases, the high cost could be made more competitive .
 The greater the mutual dependence of the two parties, the stronger the likelihood of integration . A firm with several suppliers in close proximity might opt for the market but would choose greater integration if there was only one .
 At the time she was awarded the Nobel Prize, Ostrom was Arthur F Bentley Professor of Political Science and co-director of the Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis . Ostrom co-founded with her husband and fellow political science professor, Vincent Ostrom .
 In 1988 he returned to the faculty in Berkeley, where in 2004 he was named Edgar F Kaiser Professor Emeritus of Business, Economics and Law . In 2004, he was awarded the Edgar F. Kaiser Prof. Emeritus .
 The 2009 Nobel Prize for Literature was awarded to Romanian-born German author Herta Muller . Muller was a voice of opposition against political oppression and the anguish of human existence .
 Known primarily as a novelist, Muller was also prolific as a short-story writer, poet, and essayist . Muller's works portrayed the harsh reality of life in Romania under the repressive dictatorship of Nicolae Ceausescu .
 Muller for much of her career was limited to a German-speaking audience . Muller was highly regarded by those who read her, but her reputation was largely limited to those in Germany . Muller died at the age of 92 on December 18, 2009 .
 She was the 12th woman to receive the literature prize and the first German writer to win since 1999 . Gunter Grass won the award for his work in 1999 .
 Outspoken in her criticism of all forms of totalitarian rule, she was drawn to those victimized by the abuse of authority . Women traumatized by emotional and sexual exploitation .
 Muller was born on Aug., 1953, in the village of Nitchidorf in the Banat region of Romania . He was born in the Germandominated Banat, Romania, in 1953 .
 Her father served in the Waffen SS during World War II; her mother was deported to the Soviet Union and spent five years in a labour camp in present-day Ukraine . Her mother, like members of other ethnic minorities in postwar Romania, was deported .
 She was dismissed for refusing to cooperate with the Securitate, the Romanian secret police . She then worked as a translator of trade materials and a private tutor . She found employment as a kindergarten teacher and private tutor after being dismissed .
 In 1982 she published her first book, Niederungen, a collection of stories that depicted ethnic intolerance and the hypocrisy of village life governed by corruption and exclusion . Her first book was published in 1982 .
 As a result of her public condemnation of the Ceausescu dictatorship, Muller was prohibited from publishing in her native Romania . Muller was forced to publish in Romania because of her criticism of the regime .
 Muller was permitted to leave Romania in 1987, when she was allowed to enter West Germany . In 1987, she immigrated to West Germany, where she now lives in Germany . Muller was the first Romanian woman to be allowed to leave the country .
 Muller explored the condition of exile and the difficulties of assimilation . Muller's next novel, Reisende auf einem Bein (1989; Traveling on One Leg, 1998), explored the conditions of exile . Muller: "Traveling On One Leg"
 Muller’s semiautobiographical novel is narrated by a female protagonist who escapes the brutality and harassment encountered in Romania by starting a new life as an emigre in Germany . The novel is one of Muller's most distinctive works .
 Muller explored humiliation and indignity suffered by another female narrator deemed by the state as subversive and parasitic . Muller's next novel, Heute war icli mir lieber nicht begegnet, explores the humiliation of another female . Muller explored the humiliation .
 In 2009 she published her novel Atemschaukel, a work set against the backdrop of the ethnic deportation to the Soviet Union . The novel was inspired in part by the experience of her mother .
 The selection of these three individuals illustrated vividly how the traditional lines between the sciences had blurred and virtually disappeared . The selection and contribution of these . individuals illustrated how the . traditional lines . between the . sciences had . blurred, virtually disappeared.
 The ribosome is the biological engine that reads the genetic information stored in DNA and builds the corresponding proteins from amino acids . Their research elucidated the structure and function of the ribosomes .
 The process of building proteins requires cells to translate DNA into an RNA molecule that moves from the cell nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it acts as a messenger . The messenger RNA carries the genetic information to the ribosome .
 Transfer RNA retrieves amino acids needed to build the specific protein to which the mRNA corresponds . A second kind of RNA, called transfer RNA, retrieves and carries the amino acids necessary for the protein to be built . Transfer RNA retrieved and carried amino acids to build a protein to match the
 The process of matching the sequence carried from the DNA to mRNA and . thence to tRNA is the job of the ribosome .
 The first big step toward achieving this understanding was uncovering the structure of the ribosome, scientists say . The ribosomes are a key part of the understanding of life's biology .
 The small subunit is made of one large RNA molecule and roughly 32 proteins . The subunits are made of roughly 32 protein molecules .
 The large subunit is made of three RNA molecules and about 46 proteins . It is the largest subunit of the large subunits . The subunits are made of about 46 protein molecules .
 Determining the structure of these pieces is accomplished by passing X-rays through a very nearly perfect crystal composed of ribosome units . The structure of the ribosomes is determined by passing the X-ray through a crystal .
 The pattern formed by the scattering of the X-rays when UPI/Landov Thomas A Steitz they travel through the ribosome crystal produces an image that contains information about where every atom in the entire structure lies .
 Generating a nearly perfect crystal, however, is by no means an easy task . Generating an almost perfect crystal is not always easy .
 After taking a position as a postdoctoral scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the late 1960s, she became interested in deciphering the atomic structure of ribosomes by using X-rays .
 By 2000 she had achieved her goal by working with ribosomes from a bacterium that survives at high temperatures . She was able to produce crystals of the large ribosomal subunit .
 In 1998, using high-resolution Xray crystallography techniques, Steitz revealed the location of the RNA molecules in the large ribosomal subunit .
 Steitz determined the full stmcture of the large subunit in 2000 . Finally achieving higher resolution in 2000, Steitz achieved higher resolution .
 Ramakrishnan’s background in physics and biology enabled him to study ribosome structure in Escherichia coli . He used a technique called neutron scattering to study the ribosomes .
 He later also used X-ray crystallography to elucidate the structure of several different cellular components, including ribosomes . He also used the technique to also elucidate structure of various cellular components .
 Steitz crystallized and determined structures of the large subunit in intermediate stages revealed the pathway for protein growth . Steitz's ability to crystallize and determine structures of large subunits revealed the protein growth pathway for proteins .
 The work of all three scientists also provided insight into the atomic structure of antibiotics and how these agents bind to ribosomes, opening the way to the design of new antibiotics .
 The 2009 Nobel Prize for Physics was awarded to three physicists who in separate ways made possible the worldwide information explosion . The prize was given to physicists who helped make possible the world's information revolution .
 Half of the prize money went to Charles K Kao for groundbreaking work on the use of optical fibres for information transmission . The other half went jointly to Willard S Boyle and George E Smith for the invention of the charge-coupled device .
 Kao worked as an engineer for Standard Telecommunication Laboratories (STL [later part of Nortel Networks], Harlow, Eng. Kao graduated with a degree in electrical engineering from Woolwich Polytechnic .
 He was awarded the Charles Stark Draper Prize of the U.S. National Academy of Engineering in 1999 .
 In 2000 he became chairman and chief executive officer of ITX Services . In 2000, he was chairman and CEO of ITx Services .
 At that time, existing telephone cables based on copper wires were reaching the limit of the speed at which they could transfer data . At the time, the speed of the data-transfering cables was reaching the limits of the cables .
 Systems using light in the visible or near-infrared region of the spectrum would enable data transfer at much higher rates . The technology could be used to send data to the next generation of data networks .
 At the time, it was generally believed that the intrinsic attenuation losses in optical fibres made it impossible for them to replace copper . It was generally thought that the loss of these losses made them impossible for copper .
 In 1966 Kao and Hockham published a paper demonstrating that these losses were far smaller than expected and that the main sources of loss were impurities in the glass itself .
 Kao predicted that such fibres could be made into optical waveguides for communications purposes . He also predicted that the fibre could be used as a waveguide for communications .
 Within a few years fibres of ultrapure silica were being produced that confirmed his analysis . The fibres were being used to create fibres that can be found in silica .
 The first fibre-optic telephone cables were installed in 1975, and the first transatlantic fibreoptic cable was laid in 1988 .
 Modernday global communication is based primarily on fibre-optic transmission systems . Global communications systems are based on fibre and optic networks .
 In 1962 he became director of Space Science and Exploratory Studies at Bell Labs subsidiary Bellcomm . In 1964 he returned to Bell Labs in 1964 and was executive director of research from 1975 until 1979 .
 Smith and Boyle played a significant part in the revolution in electronic technology that occurred over the past 50 years . They were pioneers of electronic technology .
 The first solid-state transistors of the 1950s were joined up into ""integrated circuits" The major advance came with large-scale integration when thousands of transistors could be manufactured together on a small sheet of silicon and then connected to make circuits .
 An individual transistor comprises a dot of metal on an insulating layer of silicon oxide deposited on a silicon substrate . The silicon oxide is deposited on the silicon substrate and deposited in silicon .
 In 1969 Smith and Boyle realized that such devices could be used for light detection . In 1969 such devices were used to detect light from light sources .
 A detector is composed of a matrix of such CCD cells (known as “pixels”), and the intensity of light falling on each cell is recorded and stored . A detector was created by combining the matrix of cells with a matrix known as a matrix .
 Their use revolutionized the storage and transmission of photographic images . They were used to transport and storage of photographic photographs . Their use of the technology revolutionized photography .
 The 2009 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine was awarded to three American scientists for their discovery of the enzyme telomerase and of how chromosomes are protected by telomeres . Three American scientists were awarded the prize for the discovery of telomerases .
 Telomeres are structures at the ends of chromosomes that help control when cells divide . Telomere are structures that are at the end of chromosomes and help control the cell divide .
 Szostak was independently studying telomeres when he met Blackburn at a conference in 1980 . He met Blackburn when he was working independently on the subject of research .
 Researchers began a collaborative investigation of telomere function in yeast and Tetrahymena yeast . They began to investigate the function of the yeast in yeast .
 In 1983 Greider joined Blackburn’s lab as a graduate student . Greider and Blackburn jointly discovered telomerase, an enzyme that appeared to control telomere behaviour . The enzyme is thought to control the growth of telomeres .
 Several of the repeated DNA segments of telomeres are lost each time a cell divides, shortening telomere length . Telomeres can be found in cells that divide in a cell .
 telomeres play an important role in determining cell life span . Telomeres are an important part of a cell's survival span, according to scientists .
 Szostak’s later work connected the loss of telomerase activity and cell death to cell death . Szostaks' later work also connected telomerases activity to cell deaths .
 This provided the initial link between telomeres and the aging process of cells . The link was established by the study of human cells .
 Greider and Blackburn also confirmed telomerase was the key to stopping telomeres from overshortening . Greider, Blackburn and Blackburn subsequently also confirmed Telomerase is key to preventing telomere shortening . The study was published in The Lancet, published in October .
 Dr. Greider suspected that abnormal telomerase regulation contributed to tumour development . He said telomerases regulate the production of tumour cells .
 Greider found blocking telomerase activity in cancer cells forces telomeres to shorten . Greider also found that blocking telomere activity forces telomerases to shorten in cancer patients .
 This process stops cells from surviving indefinitely and slows tumour growth . It stops cells dying indefinitely and stops tumour cells growing indefinitely .
 The findings brought a surge of new interest in developing anticancer drugs that target telomerase . These findings brought an interest in new anticancer drug development .
 Elizabeth H Blackburn was born on Nov., 1948, in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia, and later obtained U.S. citizenship . She was born in 1948, and has since obtained citizenship .
 Blackburn became a fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1992 . Blackburn was a foreign associate of the National Academy of Sciences in 1993 .
 She received the 1999 Lewis S Rosenstiel Award for distinguished work in basic medical science . She shared the award with Greider, who she shared with .
 Jack W Szostak was bom on Nov., 1952, in London and later obtained U.S. citizenship . He was born in London, England, and later became a citizen .
 He joined the faculty of Harvard Medical School in 1979 as an assistant professor of biological chemistry . He gradually advanced to professor of genetics in 1988 . He joined in 1979 and is now a professor at Harvard University's Medical School .
 He became a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator and a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1998 . He is also a Howard-Hughes Medical Institute member .
 The key to Star Trek's revitalization was the decision to hand the reins of the franchise over to Abrams, the new film’s 42-year-old director . Abrams had already earned a reputation as the ""it boy"" among the “geek set” for
 Jeffrey Jacob Abrams's father was a producer of made-for-television movies . Abrams followed him into entertainment industry at an early age by making short Super-8 movies as a boy .
 Abrams felt frustrated by the network over the series’ frequent time-slot moves, which he believed contributed to its relatively poor ratings and eventual cancellation . The well-reviewed program was a testament to creator-executive producer Abrams’s drive .
 Lost, the story of a group of plane-crash survivors marooned on a mysterious island, premiered in September 2004 . Lost premiered in 2004 .
 The show’s byzantine plots and unique supernatural mythology quickly drew fans in . It was arguably the single-most-discussed television show of its time .
 Israeli entrepreneur Shai Agassi unveiled the prototype for a robot that could quickly remove the depleted battery from an electric car and replace it with a freshly charged battery in 2009 .
 The device was designed for battery-exchange stations, a key component of Agassi’s plan for an infrastructure that would spur the public to adopt more efficient all-electric vehicles .
 Such stations would allow the driver of an electric car to travel long distances without waiting to recharge the battery along the way . Such stations could be used to charge drivers of electric cars .
 Another key element of his plan was to set up a network of ubiquitous recharging spots in parking lots and other places for recharging electric cars whenever they're not being driven .
 Agassi’s business plan positioned Better Place as a service company to provide drivers of electric cars with batteries and an electric-charging infrastructure on a subscription basis .
 He also started several other businesses, including software companies Quicksoft and TopManage .
 In 2001 TopTier was bought by SAP, a leading German software company, for $400 million . SAP bought TopTier from TopTier in 2001 . SAP is now owned by TopTier .
 Agassi served on the SAP executive board and became president of SAP's Products and Technology Group . Agassi also served as SAP's president of its products and technology group. Agassi was a member of the executive board .
 Time magazine named him one of the most influential businesspeople in the world in 2003 . Time magazine considered him in line for the company’s CEO position .
 Agassi looked into climate change, especially in the area of transportation . Agassi spoke at an induction meeting in which participants were entreated to find ways to make the world a better place .
 Known as a persuasive visionary with a command of the facts, he soon had more than $200 million lined up from investors . Known as persuasive visionary, he was known as persuasive .
 By 2009 he had reached agreements to establish Better Place’s open recharging system in a number of countries, including Denmark and the United States . Renault had begun development on a mass-production electric vehicle suitable for the system .
 Blue LEDs had been previously considered impossible or impractical to make . Blue LEDs are now the first blue LEDs to emit red or green light .
 Blue LEDs became available commercially commercially in 1993 . They achieved importance in a range of applications, including electronic displays and indicators .
 Further work led to the development of blue semiconductor lasers, which proved useful for high-capacity optical-media devices, such as Blu-ray disc players .
 The availability of blue LEDs made possible the development of white LED lighting . White LED lighting combined light from red, green, and blue LEDs is a promising form of high-efficiency general-purpose lighting .
 A major breakthrough was the team’s discovery that a materials-forming technique called metalorganic vapour phase epitaxial growth could be used to create highquality GaN crystals on a sapphire substrate .
 Akasaki’s work in developing blue LEDs was the discovery that p-type GaN could be formed by doping GaN crystals with magnesium atoms and then irradiating them with electron beams .
 This p-type material was then used with existing ntype material to form GaN diodes . The material is then used to create GaN-Diodes using existing material .
 Akasaki continued research into GaN materials through the 1990s and early 2000s . His research helped lead to the development of blue semiconductor lasers and other electronics applications .
 In July 2009 Yukiya Amano was elected the director of the International Atomic Energy Agency . Amano is a Japanese veteran diplomat . He was elected to lead the agency's director in July 2009 .
 Concerns were heightened by the disclosure in September 2009 that Iran was operating a clandestine nuclear facility . Concerns have been heightened since the disclosure of Iran's clandestine nuclear program .
 Amano, an expert in nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation, had worked for more than 36 years in the Japanese foreign service . Amano was Japan's envoy to the IAEA and a member of the organization’s board of governors .
 Amano was elected director general on the sixth round of voting with the support of 23 member countries of the board of governors . The minimum twothirds majority required for Amano to be elected . Amano is the first director general to have been elected by 23 countries .
 Amano and South Africa's IAEA envoy, Abdul Samad Minty, voted for Amano . The vote was divided between Amano, Minty and Minty . Amano says Amano is the only member of the world's largest nuclear watchdog agency .
 The split reflected the multiple mandates of the IAEA, with Western industrialized countries more concerned about nuclear proliferation . LDCs generally gave higher priority to sharing nuclear technology among all countries for the generation of nuclear energy .
 Amano said he was ""resolute in opposing the spread of nuclear arms because I am from a country that experienced Hiroshima and Nagasaki” and that he supported the IAEA's 70 Biographies mandate of helping countries make safe use of nuclear energy and technology . Amano supported
 Amano formally succeeded Mohamed ElBaradei, who had held the position of director general for three four-year terms . Some observers believed that under Amano’s leadership the organization would be less politicized than it had been under ElBadei . Amano succeeded El
 He was subsequently appointed director of the publications and information centre of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in Tokyo . He was also director of nuclear energy division of the Japanese Foreign Ministry .
 Amano participated in arms-control talks that led to the 1995 extension of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and the 1996 Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty . Amano's expertise on international issues concerning nuclear weapons grew, he says .
 He then held positions in Japan’s Foreign Ministry as director general for arms control and scientific affairs and director general of disarmament, nonproliferation, and science department .
 IAEA and its then director general ElBaradei were jointly awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace in 2005 . In 2005 the IAEa and its former director general were joint awarded the Peace Prize .
 Amano accepted the IAEA's share of the Nobel Prize on behalf of the organization . Amano was chairman of the board of governors at the time, and accepted the award .
 Catherine Margaret Ashton, Baroness Ashton of Upholland, of St. St. Mary's, is the Baroness of the Ashton family . She was married to Catherine Ashton, who was born in 1913 . She is also a Baroness for the Ashton Family .
 Baroness Ashton took office as EU’s high representative for foreign affairs and security policy in Dec. 2009 . She had previously served as leader of the House of Lords and EU trade commissioner .
 On assuming her new position, Ashton became one of the most powerful women in the world . She is acting as the voice of the EU in all matters of foreign policy .
 Upon graduating, she worked as a secretary for the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament before taking a job in management consultancy in 1979 .
 Ashton was a director of Business in the Community from 1983 to 1989 . Ashton was an organization that encouraged corporate responsibility and facilitated partnerships between the public and private sectors . Ashton: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future"
 She was tapped to head the county of Hertfordshire’s health authority in 1998 . She spent the 1990s working as a policy adviser, and in 1998 she was head of the county .
 The following year she was awarded a life peerage by Labour Prime Minister Tony Blair . She entered the House of Lords and became a member of the Lords in 2010 .
 Throughout her parliamentary career, Ashton focused on education and human rights issues . Ashton is currently a member of the Labour Party in London .
 In 2002, she assumed leadership of the earlychildhood-development initiative Sure Start . She served as a junior education minister .
 In 2004 Ashton switched portfolios, becoming a junior minister for constitutional affairs . Ashton is now a senior minister in charge of constitutional affairs in the UK .
 She was admitted to the Privy Council in May 2006 . Her efforts to promote equality earned her recognition as Politician of the Year by gay and lesbian rights group .
 In 2007 Ashton served briefly as a junior justice minister . He was promoted to leader of the House of Lords by Prime Minister Gordon Brown . Ashton is a former member of the Labour Party's shadow cabinet .
 In that role she was instrumental in easing the passage of the Lisbon Treaty through the upper house .
 She earned the admiration of the European Commission president, Jose Manuel Barroso, for her efficiency . Ashton's predecessor, British politician Peter Mandelson, was European Commission chief .
 European leaders were faced with the task of filling the newly created roles of president of the European Council and high representative for foreign affairs and security policy . The roles were created in November 2009 .
 Support for Blair for the presidency flagged in the face of French and German opposition . Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy emerged as favourite for presidency . Barroso and Brown championed Ashton for high representative office .
 Glenn Beck debuted his self-titled television talk show on Fox News in January 2009 . Beck's show was to a ready-made audience of nearly two and a half million viewers . Beck is a conservative pundit and conservative commentator on Fox .
 Beck took his trademark blend of sentimentality, theatrics, and unpredictable, divisive commentary to an audience that felt marginalized by the political shifts reflected in the November 2008 election of U.S. Pres. Barack Obama . Beck's show was built upon the popularity of his Cable News Network show
 He won an hour-long discjockey debut on a local station when he was 13 . He developed a fascination with radio at a young age, and he won a local radio show when 13 .
 His parents divorced later that year, and he moved with his mother to Puyallup, Wash. His parents later divorced, and the boy moved with them to Washington .
 Beck's mother, who had battled depression and substance abuse, died in a boating accident in 1979 . Beck would later characterize her death as a suicide . Beck later characterized the death of his mother as an accident .
 Beck returned to live with his father, and by age 15 he had a job at a radio station in Seattle . Beck is now a successful radio personality . Beck has returned to his native Washington state .
 He later worked at stations in Provo, Utah, Corpus Christi, Texas; and Louisville, Ky. He worked in Louisville, Kentucky, and Provo .
 Beck’s Louisville show, Captain Beck and the A-Team, followed the newly popular ""zoo crew” format, which featured wacky hosts and humorous stunts and skits . The show was hosted by Beck .
 At that time Beck began politicizing . Beck inserted blunt patriotism into a largely lighthearted morning show .
 He spent 1987-89 in Phoenix, Phoenix, where he employed increasingly outrageous tactics to drum up publicity . He spent that time in the Phoenix, Arizona, using increasingly outrageous methods .
 Beck sabotaged a free concert sponsored by a rival station, using it as a platform to call further attention to his own show . Beck has a history of sabotaging free concerts sponsored by rival stations . Beck is known for his anti-American tendencies .
 Beck was fired from his radio job in Houston in 1990 . Beck later moved to Connecticut, where he cohosted the Glenn and Pat Show with fellow disc jockey Pat Gray .
 Around this time Beck’s dependence on drugs and alcohol, long a factor in his life, increased . Beck's dependence on alcohol and drugs also increased, he says .
 He went sober in the mid-1990s with the help of Alcoholics Anonymous . In 1999, he joined the Mormon church .
 The Glenn Beck Program began airing in Tampa, Florida, in 2000 . Beck's radio show catapulted him to household-name status .
 Beck’s first foray into talk radio was his first foray to talk radio . Beck's first foray was a pulpit from which to air his right-wing political beliefs . Beck is known for his conservative views .
 Beck was invited to take an evening slot on CNN's Headline News in 2006 . Beck's show went national two years later, and he has since taken a slot on the network .
 His flair for the dramatic carried over from radio, he quickly drew a devoted audience with his showmanship and biting commentary . He quickly drew his own audience with showmanship .
 Beck’s profile only grew with the ascendance of a Democratic president . Beck's profile grew in the wake of President Barack Obama's election . Beck has a long history of supporting conservative causes .
 Beck’s was among the loudest cries of the alienated right following the election that brought Obama to power . Beck's call for the GOP to be more moderate and more moderate in the conservative community was among its loudest .
 By late 2009 he was drawing millions of people to his show, podcast, and Web site . His show and podcast are now being broadcast on PBS .
 Glenn Beck's Common Sense, released in 2009, quickly became a best seller . Beck's book Common Sense was released by Beck in 2009 . Beck is a conservative commentator and author of the book .
 Regina M Benjamin spent most of her medical career serving poor families in a shrimping village on the Gulf Coast of Alabama . She was nominated by United States Pres. George W. Bush in July 2009 .
 Benjamin had achieved distinction for the dedication she had shown in providing health care to her medically underserved community and patients . Many of Benjamin's patients were uninsured and unable to pay for treatment .
 Bayou La Batre has had to rebuild its health clinic three times since Hurricane Georges, Hurricane Katrina, and again in 2006 after it was extensively damaged by fire . She persevered in running the clinic despite having to rebuild it three times .
 She mortgaged her house to help finance the clinic’s reconstruction after Hurricane Katrina . While the clinic was being rebuilt, she made house calls to see her patients . The clinic was rebuilt in New Orleans .
 Benjamin's new high profile post would give her the opportunity to champion health care for those unable to afford it . Benjamin will be the first woman to hold a high-profile job in the White House .
 Benjamin attended medical school with the aid of funding from the National Health Service Corps, a United States federal program that paid medicalschool tuition in exchange for a commitment to work for a defined period in an area with few or no doctors . Benjamin is now a pediatric surgeon in New York City .
 Benjamin was active in medical organizations and advisory groups throughout his career . Benjamin was also active in advisory groups and medical organizations .
 In 1995 she became the first African American woman and the first person below the age of 40 to be elected to the AMA’s board of trustees . She was also the first American woman to become a member of the AMA board .
 As president of the Medical Association of the State of Alabama, she was also the first African American woman to preside as president of a state medical society . She was the first black woman in Alabama to be president of an Alabama medical society.
 In 1998 she received the Nelson Mandela Award for Health and Human Rights . She served on the board of Physicians for Human Rights, and received the award for health .
 Benjamin Benjamin was awarded a John D and Catherine T MacArthur Foundation fellowship in 2008 . Benjamin is a member of the MacArthur Foundation . In 2008 Benjamin received a fellowship from the foundation .
 American pop songwriter and multi-instrumentalist Andrew Bird appeared poised to break out in 2009 . Bird has been playing music in relative obscurity for years .
 Bird was known to fans for his virtuosic skill on the violin, which he often sampled and looped onstage . Bird's meticulously crafted songs combine wistful melodies with hyperliterate lyrics . Bird was a darling of the indie-rock set .
 Multifaceted American musician Andrew Bird Bird was immersed in music from early childhood . Bird is a multi-lauded multi-generational musician .
 He chafed at the rigid expectations of the classical music world . After graduation, he supported himself by playing his instrument everywhere from weddings to Renaissance fairs .
 The Squirrel Nut Zippers were a popular swing-revival band in the late 1990s . He appeared on 72 of three of their albums . He has also appeared on a number of vintage jazz recordings .
 The band failed to catch on among audiences, though, and Bird decided to strike out on his own . Bird's band was released in 2004 .
 After testing the waters with a series of solo gigs, Bird recorded Weather Systems at his family’s rural Illinois farm .
 The album marked a turning point in his songwriting; the idiosyncratic pre-rock-and-roll touches were now filtered through a sound that owed more to contemporary folk and poprock music than his previous work .
 Bird's next record, The Mysterious Production of Eggs, brought him further attention . Bird frequently opens for more famous musicians . Bird opened for other musicians before his next record .
 Armchair Apocrypha sold more than 100,000 copies, a considerable number for an independent release . The book is the first of its kind to be published in independent publishing .
 The election was harshly criticized by opposition groups, who claimed that the poll was marred by widespread fraud and voter intimidation . The election, however, has been widely criticized by the opposition .
 Bouteflika’s family was from Tlemcen, Alg., and he spent much of his early life living in Algeria . He spent most of his life in Algeria, but his family is from Algeria .
 In 1957, three years into the Algerian war for independence, he joined the National Liberation Front in its fight against French rule . He joined the N Liberation Front three years after independence .
 After Algerian independence in 1962, Bouteflika was appointed minister for youth, sports, and tourism . A year later he was made foreign minister . He was made Algerian foreign minister in 2006 .
 Bouteflika participated in the 1965 coup, led by Houari Boumedienne, that removed Algerian Pres. Algerian President Mohamed Boutefelika . Boutefalika was a member of the Algerian government .
 Bouteflika continued to serve as foreign minister in the new government . By the time of Boumedienne’s death in 1978 he seemed well positioned to replace him in the presidency .
 Bouteflika lost his position as foreign minister . The army instead appointed Defense Minister Chadli Bendjedid, and soon afterward .
 He won the presidency in 1999 but the election was marred by claims of rigging and the subsequent withdrawal of the other candidates . Although he won the election in 1999, he won't be allowed to hold office again .
 As president, Bouteflika focused on rebuilding the country and strengthening Algeria's international reputation . As president he focused on building Algeria's reputation .
 He also granted wide-ranging amnesty to militant Islamist groups within the country in an effort to resolve a longstanding civil conflict . The amnesty is part of a wider-ranging plan to end a long-running civil conflict in Iraq .
 During his second term insurgents re-formed as an arm of al-Qaeda and were responsible for a number of suicide bombings . Though his previous efforts to reduce the country's rebel activity were somewhat successful, they were not successful .
 In 2005 Bouteflika experienced health problems, which led to continued speculation about his physical well-being . Boutefluka has had health problems since 2005, including health problems .
 In November 2008 the Algerian parliament approved a constitutional amendment abolishing presidential term limits . Algeria's parliament approved the amendment in November 2008 . Algerian president Mohamed El Touadoun was elected in 2007 .
 The arrangement gave Bouteflika the opportunity to run for his third consecutive term . The arrangement gives him the chance to win his third straight term .
 At the 2009 Academy Awards ceremony, Danny Boyle was named best director for Slumdog Millionaire . Boyle's unconventional romance that had become an unlikely international sensation .
 The film is a modern take on Charles Dickens's Oliver Twist set in India with elements of Bollywood . The film earned seven other Oscars, including best picture .
 Slumdog had almost failed to receive a theatrical release after its initial distributor folded . The film was almost released in theaters after it was pulled out of the picture .
 Many questioned whether audiences would see a movie that contained scenes of extreme child abuse and torture . The movie featured extensive dialogue in Hindi with English subtitles, and cast first-time performers who actually lived in Mumbai slums . It eventually landed at Fox Searchlight .
 Boyle crafted an energetic and ultimately optimistic film that connected with both moviegoers and critics . Such doubts proved unfounded, however, as Boyle crafted the film .
 In addition to winning the Oscars, he and his film also received BAFTAs, Golden Globes, and a host of other awards .
 He served as artistic director at the Royal Court Theatre Upstairs . He also served as deputy director and artistic director of the theatre's Upstairs theatre .
 The crime thriller was noted for its bold visual imagery, which became a trademark of Boyle's work . It was written by John Hodge, who became a frequent Ken McKay—Rex USA/Everett Collection Biographies collaborator .
 The darkly humorous look at heroin addicts, written by Hodge and featuring Ewan MacGregor, became an international hit and one of the U.K.’s highest-grossing films . Shallow Grave is one of Britain's most popular films .
 MacGregor reteamed with Boyle on the romantic comedy A Life Less Ordinary . The film failed to match the success of their previous efforts . The pair starred in a romantic comedy .
 Boyle next directed his first big-budget Hollywood film, The Beach . The Beach is based on Alex Garlands popular novel about a seemingly utopian community on a remote Thai island . Boyle directed the film which featured a screenplay by Hodge based on the novel .
 Despite starring Leonardo DiCaprio, it earned mixed reviews and failed to find an audience . The film was released in 2012 .
 Boyle had a sleeper hit with the postapocalyptic zombie film 28 Days Later . He continued to show his versatility with Millions, a heartwarming story about a motherless boy who finds the proceeds of a bank robbery .
 Boyle received the greatest accolades of his career for Slumdog . After directing the science-fiction thriller Sunshine, he directed the film for the first time .
 Some charged that it romanticized poverty, others complained that child actors were exploited . Two of the young stars continued to live in the Mumbai slums .
 Boyle purchased homes for the children’s families and donated over $750,000 to a fund to help other Mumbai children . Boyle subsequently purchased homes and donated more than $1 million to the children's families .
 Susan Boyle appeared as a contestant on an episode of the British television talent show Britain’s Got Talent . The virtually unknown Scottish singer appeared on the show on April 11, 2009 .
 Boyle’s unconventional appearance belied her stunning singing voice, and her rendition of the song ""I Dreamed a Dream” from the musical Les Miserables immediately silenced the cynicism of both the judges and the audience, earning her a standing ovation and quickly transforming her into
 Boyle was the youngest of nine children born to two middle-class Irish immigrants . Boyle grew up in Blackburn, a small Scottish industrial town, as the youngest . Boyle was born in Blackburn and raised in a middle class Irish immigrant family .
 Owing to complications during her birth, she was briefly deprived of oxygen, which left her with mild brain damage . In school Susan Boyle was diagnosed with learning disabilities, for which she was frequently teased and bullied .
 Boyle was drawn to music and singing as a young child . At age 12, he began participating in musical productions at school . Boyle has a long list of musical interests .
 Her talent was quickly recognized by her teachers, who encouraged her to persist . Her talent has been recognized by many of her teachers .
 Boyle worked briefly as a cook trainee at West Lothian College . Boyle studied at Edinburgh Acting School before studying at the Edinburgh acting school .
 She continued to cultivate her voice, singing in her church choir, at local karaoke bars, and at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe, the largest arts festival in the world .
 Boyle unsuccessfully auditioned for the British TV talent show My Kind of People in 1995 . Boyle unsuccessfully tried to find fame on the British television talent show . Boyle is currently in a relationship with the late actor and director of My Kind Of People .
 Four years later her rendition of “Cry Me a River” received positive reviews . The song had been featured on a local charity CD, and received favorable reviews .
 She used her savings to record a professional demo tape, which she mailed to record companies, radio and TV networks, and various talent competitions . She won't be able to compete in a talent competition .
 Boyle’s career ambitions were put on hold in 2000 after her sister died . Boyle's sister died in 2000 . Boyle is still working as a model and actress .
 Devastated by the death of her mother in 2007, Boyle withdrew from singing for nearly two years . Boyle was devastated by her mother's death in 2007 . Boyle has since retired from singing .
 In late 2008, she applied to audition for Britain’s Got Talent to honour the memory of her mother, who had been a fan of the show and had encouraged her to become a contestant .
 She placed second in the final competition and then briefly disappeared from the limelight during a period of exhaustion .
 Boyle performed during the show's talent stage tour in June and sang on the finale of its counterpart in the U.S. in September . Boyle performed on America’s Got Talent, which aired in September, in June .
 Her first studio album, I Dreamed a Dream, debuted at number one on the Billboard charts in late November . The album was the second-best-selling album of 2009 with more than 3. million copies sold .
 Early in the 2009-10 season, he racked up the 1,000th game of his professional career . He is the only goalie other than Roy to have achieved that milestone .
 Brodeur traveled with his father, Denis, a member of Canada’s 1956 bronze-medal-winning Olympic team . As a boy, he traveled with Denis, who was a longtime photographer for the NHL Montreal Canadiens .
 The younger Brodeur was a firstround choice of the 1990 NHL entry draft and signed with the New Jersey Devils . The younger goalie was drafted with the Devils in 1989 .
 In 1993-94 he won the Calder Memorial Trophy as the leagues top rookie, having recorded a 2.40 goals against average for the season and a 1.95 GAA during the 17 play-off games . In 1994 he recorded a .40 GAA in 17 playoff games .
 Brodeur compiled a record of 19 wins, 11 losses, and 6 ties in 1994-95 . Brodeurs helped his team win the Stanley Cup championship with the Devils .
 Between 1997-98 and 2007-08 seasons, he played in at least 70 regular-season games each year . After that season he became a fixture in goal for the Devils and in the NHL’s All-Star Game .
 Brodeur in 1997 became the second goaltender in NHL history to have scored a goal in a play-off game . He became the only player to score in a game in the NHL's most successful play-offs .
 Brodeur was a member of Team Canada in the Olympic Winter Games of 1998, 2002, and 2006 . He played a significant role in the team’s gold-medal win in 2002 . He was also a major part in Team Canada's win in the Winter Olympics of
 He also represented his home country at the 1996 and 2005 IFF world championships . Canada took the silver both times at the IFF World Championships .
 Quentin Bryce enjoyed a lively first full year as Australia’s governorgeneral . Bryce, Quentin, was elected in 2009 . Bryce was elected to Australia's highest-ranking politician .
 Bryce was appointed governor-general by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd in 2008 . She became the first woman to hold the high-profile post of Queen Elizabeth IPs viceregal representative in Australia . Bryce is a noted lawyer, educator, and human rights activist .
 Bryce’s historic appointment was hailed by numerous Australian media outlets, as well as many government officials . Bryce was appointed by the Australian Prime Minister in 2011 .
 Bryce was to serve a five-year term, during which she intended to devote much of her attention to human rights issues . Bryce indicated that she would place “special emphasis” on promoting and protecting the rights of the country’s indigenous peoples .
 She married architect and graphic designer Michael Bryce in 1964 . The couple eventually had five children . She was admitted to the Queensland bar the following year .
 In the late 1980s and early 1990s, she worked for the Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission . She worked as the commission’s Queensland director and then as a federal sex discrimination commissioner .
 Bryce became the founding chairperson and CEO of the National Childcare Accreditation Council in 1993 . She led efforts to ensure and improve the quality of child-care services in Australia . Bryce is the founder of the Australian Childcare Commission . She is also the founder and former chairperson of
 Bryce was appointed governor of Queensland in 2003 . She was made a Companion of the Order of Australia in the same year that she was made Companion of Australia .
 Her five-year appointment as Queensland’s governor was extended for an additional two years in January 2008 . It was only three months later that Rudd announced his selection of Bryce for the governor-general's post . Bryce has been in charge of Queensland since 2008 .
 Bryce maintained a busy travel schedule, visiting troops in Afghanistan, addressing the World Future Energy Summit in Abu Dhabi, U.A.E., and undertaking a diplomatic trip to nine African countries in March and April .
 After the deadliest bushfires in Australia’s history, Bryce toured both states and made a national televised address on February 10 . She urged her fellow Australians to “do whatever needs to be done” to help survivors of the disasters .
 Burnett was unimpressed with the sound quality of the final recording . Raising Sand boasted impressive sales and near-universal critical acclaim . Burnett was unhappy with sound quality .
 Burnett returned to the basics of audio engineering with his XOAE technology . Burnett's music mixes music to be louder and denser for the low-fidelity iPod and ringtone markets .
 CODE offered a listening experience that replicated the original studio master recording as faithfully as possible, with no additional cost to the consumer . CODE audio DVDs were included in the standard CD package, and listeners could compare the two formats side-by-by .
 Moonalice is a psychedelic rock supergroup with psychedelic rock . The band's first album was released in 2009 . The album was the debut album of the supergroup .
 Joseph Henry Burnett spent his childhood in Fort Worth, Texas . Burnett was a guitarist with local blues bands and the founder of his own recording studio . Burnett is credited with his nickname "T Bone"
 He moved to Los Angeles in the early 1970s and recorded his debut solo album . The B-52 Band & the Fabulous Skylarks is a straightforward collection of bluesy rock tunes .
 In 1975 he toured as a guitarist on Bob Dylan’s Rolling Thunder Revue tour . In 1975, he received his major break into the music industry .
 Burnett’s second solo album, Truth Decay, showed his maturation as an artist . Burnett found greater success in the production booth than he did as a performer . Burnett's second album was Truth Decay .
 Burnett produced the critically acclaimed major label debut from Los Lobos, How Will the Wolf Survive? Burnett also worked with Elvis Costello, whose King of America and Spike featured Burnett as both producer and performer .
 Burnett continued to record solo material, with the Grammy-nominated The Criminal Under My Own Hat providing an excellent window into his lyrical sensibilities . Burnett remained outside of the mainstream of popular music .
 Buzek would relinquish power to a socialist candidate halfway through the five-year term in a power-sharing compromise . Buzek is the centre-right Buzek, who has been in office for more than a decade .
 Buzek’s victory was considered a positive, if symbolic, indication that stigmatization of former Soviet bloc countries was on the wane . While the post was primarily ceremonial, Buzek's victory was seen as symbolic .
 He ascended to power rapidly, chairing the union’s first National Congress the following year . He then chaired the union's first national congress the next year .
 Buzek presided over three more congresses as Solidarity worked to secure political legitimacy . Buzek emerged from Solidarity’s underground years unscathed by communist persecution .
 Buzek was also appointed representative to the International Energy Agency’s Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme . Buzek served as director of the Polish Academy of Sciences until 1997 .
 Buzek initiated discussions for accession to the EU in 1997 and negotiated Poland’s NATO membership in 1999 . Buzek, a Protestant Protestant, was greeted skeptically in predominately Roman Catholic Poland .
 His economic reforms, enacted in part to facilitate EU and NATO acceptance, entailed rapid downsizing and privatization and privatization . The reforms proved to be unpopular as the cost in jobs became apparent .
 In 2000 the UW dissolved the coalition, leaving Buzek with a minority government for the remainder of his term, which ended in 2001 . Compounding matters, Buzek's government was a coalition government .
 Buzek was elected to the European Parliament in 2004 . He was vice president of the European Energy Forum . Buzek has been Poland's energy minister since the country joined the EU .
 Brazilian race-car driver Helio Castroneves capped a tumultuous year in triumphant fashion by winning the U.S. premier auto race in Indianapolis 500 . 2009 .
 His victory came just five weeks after a United States federal jury acquitted him on six counts of incometax evasion . Prosecutors dropped a remaining conspiracy charge against him two days after prosecutors had dropped a conspiracy charge .
 The 34-year-old Castroneves turned in a stirring performance before some 300,000 fans at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway . The Brazilian was finally able to put his monthslong legal battle behind him .
 Castroneves was involved in motor sports from a young age with the support of his father, an auto dealer in Sao Paulo who owned a stock-car-racing team . He was involved with his father's team, which he owns in Brazil .
 As a teenager, Castroneves won a national go-kart-racing title in Brazil before advancing in 1994 to Formula Three auto racing in Europe . As a teen, he went on to become a national champion in go kart racing in Brazil .
 He attracted the attention of Brazilian racing great Emerson Fittipaldi, who helped him get started on the Championship Auto Racing Teams IndyCar circuit in 1998 .
 Castroneves signed with Penske Racing in 2000 . He quickly became one of the team’s dominant drivers . The Brazilian has won the IndyCar Series since 2000 .
 He was the youngest driver ever to accomplish the back-to-back feat and the first to win the classic race in each of his two initial attempts . He was also the first driver to win in each race in the classic classic race .
 By this time the immensely affable Brazilian had become one of the Indy Racing League's most popular drivers . The Brazilian driver is known for his affable style of driving .
 In 2007 he appeared on the hit American television show Dancing with the Stars . He won the competition with professional dance partner, Julianne Hough .
 A federal indictment handed down in 2008 alleged that he had helped create a Panama-based shell company with the intention of avoiding paying taxes on some $5 million in income . The indictment was filed in 2008 .
 Following his acquittal, he tearfully expressed his relief at being able to return to racing . He tearfully said he was 'relieved' to be able to race again .
 Since the early 1990s, Cave had been immersed in fashioning the Soundsuits that qualified as fashion, sculpture, and performance art .
 Nick Cave's Soundsuits were fabricated through a complex layering of found materials . The wearable mixedmedia constructions are named for the sounds made when worn by performers .
 These hybrid objects referenced Cave’s ongoing interest in the construction and concealment of identity . Equally reminiscent of African religious ceremonial costumes and high fashion garments, these hybrid objects were created by the artist .
 Cave's Soundsuits won numerous awards, including the Joan Mitchell Foundation Award in 2008 . The Soundsuits were an interdisciplinary and transformative nature that won Cave numerous awards .
 He studied at Alvin Ailey’s modern dance company . During his time there he also studied with Alvin . Ailey's modern dance .
 He earned a master's in fine arts at the Cranbrook Academy of Art, Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and later became chairman of the Fashion Design program at the School of the Art Institute .
 Throughout his career, Cave made use of found and ready-made materials to reference cultural, political, and autobiographical issues . Cave's work is published by Simon Cowell, a self-taught author .
 He made his first Soundsuit out of twigs in the early 1990s by wiring cut and drilled sticks to a handmade cotton undergarment . He realized its performative potential only once it was completed .
 He later employed a myriad of techniques and traditions to create the Soundsuits . Soundsuits range from formfitting bodysuits composed of intricately sewn fabrics and beads to ceramic headdresses . The Soundsuits are made of amorphous suits made of woven hair .
 Soundsuits conceal and transform the identity, race, and gender of their wearer . When worn, the Soundsuits create sounds that correspond to their chosen materials and construction .
 The Soundsuits’ meanings shift and multiply with each exhibition and performance, set in places as varied as the theatre stage, fashion runway, and city street . The Soundsuit’s meanings shift .
 Cave used these contexts to emphasize his reliance on community to activate his work . Cave recruited skilled professionals and friends to assist him in the creation of the suits .
 Cave continued to borrow from a wide range of disciplines and cultures in an effort to examine and challenge notions of personal and cultural identity . With these objects and his Soundsuits, Cave continued .
 Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry resumed his duties as chief justice of the Pakistan Supreme Court more than a year after he was dismissed by the Pakistani Pres. Muhammad Khan . In March 2009, he resumed duties after being dismissed by Khan .
 Chief justice's entire tenure on the court had been filled with drama and eventdefining moments . Chaudhry’s reinstatement served as the focal point of sustained efforts to pressure Musharraf into vacating his role .
 He established a legal practice as an advocate in 1974 and became an advocate for the Balochistan High Court in 1976 . He established his practice as a lawyer in 1974 . He was also a member of the Supreme Court in Pakistan .
 Chaudhry was then named advocate general of the Balochistan High Court . He has held several other judiciary positions, including an advocate general .
 He was twice presiding officer of the Balochistan Local Council Bodies Authority . While serving simultaneously as chairman of the  Local Council Election Authority, he was also serving as chairman .
 Chaudhry played a key role in the establishment of the Circuit Bench of the Balochistan High Court at Sibi . After being appointed chief justice, he was the first chief justice of the High Court .
 He was named to the Pakistan Supreme Court in 2000 . He was elevated to chief justice in 2005 . He is Pakistan's most senior Supreme Court judge .
 Chaudhry presided over the court during much of the military dictatorship headed by Musharraf, who seized power in 1999 . Never one to avoid controversy, he presided over many controversies during the dictatorship .
 Chaudhry was removed from his post as chief justice in late 2007, ostensibly because he appeared to threaten Musharraf’s political authority . He became the lightning rod for sustained efforts by Pakistan's legal community to seek his reinstatement and also to drive the former president out
 Pres. Musharraf resigned in August 2008, and after elec77 Pakistani jurist Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry Aamir Qureshi was held .
 Asif Ali Zardari is the widower of slain former prime minister Benazir Bhutto . He was the prime minister of Pakistan's first prime minister . He is the widow of assassinated former Prime Minister Benazur Bhuttto .
 More than a year of unrelenting demonstrations followed Chaudhry’s dismissal . Demonstrators led by former prime minister Nawaz Sharif led by political leaders led by Musharraf .
 Zardari's hesitation in returning Chaudhry to the court caused a rift between himself and Sharif . The former prime minister was eventually restored to office after a rift with Sharif . Zardar finally relented and restored the former minister .
 In May 2009 the court, again led by Chief Justice Chaudhry, lifted the ban on Sharif’s ability to run for political office . The court appeared to lay the groundwork for yet another confrontation between Sharif and Zardari .
 The decision also reinforced Chaudhry’s authority and the role of the Supreme Court in sustaining an independent Pakistani judiciary . The decision, however, also reinforced .
 Spanish cyclist Alberto Contador won the Tour de France in 2009 . Contador claimed the 23-day, 3,460-km race on July 26 in Paris . The Spaniard established himself as the greatest stage racer in the world .
 Contador dominated the 2009 Tour’s overall standings, finishing 4 minutes 11 seconds ahead of runner-up Andy Schleck of Luxembourg . Former champion Lance Armstrong of the U.S. placed third in the race .
 Contador won the Tour of Italy (Giro d’ltalia) and Tour of Spain (Vuelta a Espana) in 2008 . The win was his fourth victory at a major national national tour . Contador was just 26 years old .
 Followers of cycling marveled at the Spaniard’s versatility, regarding him as a ""complete rider” Many believed he had the potential to challenge Armstrong's record of seven Tour de France titles .
 Contador competed as an amateur from his mid-teens and made his professional debut in 2003 . Contador made his debut as a professional cyclist in 2004 .
 In 2004 his future was left in doubt after he suffered a fall during a race and underwent brain surgery to remove a blood clot . He showed early promise, winning a time trial that year at the Tour of Poland .
 He made a remarkable recovery in 2005, winning a stage of the Tour Down Under in Australia and earning his first overall victory as a professional rider at the Catalan Cycling Week . He won a stage in Australia, and won the overall overall victory in 2005 .
 His Discovery Channel team disbanded at the end of the 2007 season . His emergence as one of the elite figures of road cycling came in 2007, but he has since retired .
 Contador was the defending champion in the 2008 Tour de France . His new team, Astana, was excluded from the race for prior doping offenses . Contador won't be allowed to compete in 2008 Tour because his new team was excluded .
 During the 2009 Tour, reports surfaced of a rift between Contador and teammate Armstrong over the leadership of Astana . Armstrong and Contador were teammates at the Tour in 2009 .
 Spaniard produced the fastest climb in Tour history, making the final ascent to the Alpine village of Verbier, Switz., at an estimated rate of more than 1,850 m per hour . The Spaniard made the climb to Verbier at a rate of over 1,800 m
 Contador seized the leader’s yellow jersey on that stage and never relinquished it . Contador won't relinquish it .
 Armstrong left Astana at the end of the Tour, vowing to assemble his own team in 2010 . Armstrong left the Kazakh team after the Tour Tour ended in July .
 Contador, meanwhile, celebrated his victory and fielded offers from several other teams eager for his services . Contador won the Tour de Clasquer in the opening stages of this year's race .
 Spanish actress Penelope Cruz solidified her international stardom in 2009, earning rave reviews for her performance as an ill-fated actress .
 Cruz also appeared in the musical film Nine, in which she portrayed the mistress of a movie director played by British actor Daniel Day-Lewis . Cruz was known for her classic beauty and her sultry roles .
 In February, Cruz won her first Academy Award for supporting actress . She starred in Woody Allen's Vicky Cristina Barcelona alongside Scarlett Johansson .
 At age 15 she won a modeling agency competition and began appearing in music videos and on Spanish television . She has appeared in several music videos, on television and on music videos .
 She came to international attention with Belle epoque , a film about an army deserter taken in by an elderly man and his four enchanting daughters .
 She starred alongside Matt Damon in All the Pretty Horses and Blow . She also starred opposite Johnny Depp in Blow, a film based on the life of George Jung, a prolific cocaine dealer .
 In 2001 Cruz also appeared in Vanilla Sky —a remake of a successful film in which she had earlier starred, Abre los ojos (1997) —and afterward was involved in a highly publicized relationship with Tom Cruise .
 In the early 21st century, Cruz continued to act in both English and Spanish-language productions .
 After performing in Head in the Clouds, she appeared as an unhappily married mother in Almodovar’s critically acclaimed Volver (2006; To Return), for which she received an Academy Award nomination for her role .
 British film and theatre director Stephen Daldry’s hybrid talent was on full display in 2009 . He propelled both a film, The Reader and a stage musical, Billy Elliot to their respective zeniths of professional acclaim .
 The Reader was adapted by playwright David Hare from German author Bernhard Schlink’s novel . The Reader peers at the spectre of the Holocaust in post-World War II Germany through the lens of an affair between an illiterate woman, played by Kate Winslet, and
 The film earned 2009 Academy Award nominations for best picture and for Daldry’s direction, as well as an Oscar for Winslet . Winslet won the Oscar for best actress in 2009 .
 Billy Elliot, the Musical, won the Tony Award for best musical and securing best director honours for Daldry . The musical was adapted from the 2000 film Billy Elliot about a boy who finds refuge in ballet . The Tony Award was given the musical director's first Tony Award .
 Michael Chabon’s Pulitzer Prizewinning novel The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay was still stalled as 2009 came to a close . Daldry maintained that the project would prevail .
 Daldry’s father, a bank manager, died when he was 15, encouraged his interest in theatre . He died when the actor was just 15 .
 By age 15, Daldry had resolved to direct at the age of 15 . Abetted by his cabaret singer mother, however, he joined a theatre troop in Taunton . He directed a play at the centre of his career .
 At Sheffield he directed the university theatre company and cultivated his radical bona fides . He cultivated forays into socialism and a penchant for wearing pillbox hats . He directed a theatre company at Sheffield University .
 Daldry then further flouted convention as an apprentice clown in Italy . He then went on to become a professional clown in the country .
 Priestley’s An Inspector Calls for the National Theatre earned him a Laurence Olivier Award and, when the production traveled to Broadway, a Tony Award . Priestley's An Inspector calls for the national theatre earned him Laurence .
 He returned to Broadway in 1999 as the director of David Hare’s one-man show Via Dolorosa . He returned in 1999 to direct David Hare's one-woman show .
 Daldry was credited with one short film, but was then unexpectedly tapped to direct Billy Elliot . Billy Elliot was the first film to be directed by a director credited with a short film .
 The film was nominated for several Academy Awards, including best director . The film won't win any of the Oscars .
 The Hours was Hare's adaptation of Michael Cunningham’s Pulitzer Prize-winning novel . Daldry then helmed The Hours . Hare directed The Hours, which won a Pulitzer Prize for the novel .
 Julianne Moore, Meryl Streep, and Nicole Kidman starred in Dalloway . The film was based on the fictional home of the author of the novel .
 Daldry again received a best director nomination for best director . Kidman claimed best actress honours for her role in the film .
 American opera singer David Daniels continues to perform at Glimmerglass Opera in Cooperstown, N.Y., 15 years after his debut . Daniels’s performances remain full .
 The planned 2009-10 season included European recitals with his longtime collaborator, pianist Martin Katz . Opera productions in Atlanta and Houston and opera productions . Holiday-season tour of Canada and the United States with Les Violons du Roy .
 Daniels was best known for his lead roles in Handel's operas, including Giulio Cesare, Rinaldo, and Radamisto .
 The 18th century's popular castrati were men who had been castrated as boys in order to maintain their soprano voices as they grew . They were popular among men who were castrating as boys to keep their voices growing .
 When the Baroque operas of Handel and others were revived in the 20th century, female mezzo-sopranos played the male roles . Handel's operas were revived when they were revived .
 Daniels and other modem countertenors sang the roles by using their trained falsetto voices . Daniels and others used to sing the roles in the roles . Daniels sang the songs with his trained falsettto voice .
 The son of two voice teachers, he became an accomplished boy soprano . He attended performances by a number of acclaimed singers .
 By age 17 he was studying voice as a tenor, and in his senior year of high school he won a major voice competition . He won a senior voice competition in high school . He is now a top tenor singer .
 Although he was formally a tenor, he continued to be happiest singing in his higher range . He continued to sing in his high range .
 Nearly at the end of his studies, at age 25 he made the switch to the higher voice .
 He studied with countertenor Drew Minter . He immersed himself in the performance of 17thand 18th-century music .
 He made his debut at Glimmerglass Opera and was launched onto the world stage . Within a few years he made his first opera debut in New York . He is now a successful opera artist .
 Daniels performed regularly in operas by Claudio Monteverdi, Christoph Willibald Gluck, Mozart, and Benjamin Britten . Daniels' Handel roles were the mainstay of his repertoire . In addition to Handel, Daniels also performed regularly for the opera company .
 Countertenor sang Bach, Handel, and Berlioz, among others . In recitals he stretched countertenor repertoire to sing mezzosoprano works by Ravel, Ralph Vaughn Williams, and other 19thand 20th-century composers .
 Daniels won the 1997 Richard Tucker Award, conferred by the Richard Tucker Music Foundation to an emerging American opera singer . Daniels was named Vocalist of the Year by Musical America magazine . Daniels has appeared on Broadway in several operas .
 Daniels was praised by music critics and fans alike 79 Biographies for his solid acting and commanding stage presence, as well as for his ""luminous"" ""flexible and true,” and ""impeccably controlled” voice . Daniels was also praised for his
 The Decemberists scored an unexpected hit when in March 2009 a new album, the hour-long rock opera The Hazards of Love, debuted at number 14 .
 Some questioned the band's decision to produce their second record on a major label as a concept album . The album was viewed by the Decemberists’ numerous fans as simply a logical step in the band’s musical progression .
 Jenny Conlee (b. Oct., 1974, Helena, Mont.) is keyboardist and accordionist . Conlee is a member of the band . She is also a keyboardist .
 The band had gained a reputation earlier in the decade for its highly stylized, literate songs .
 The Decemberists were formed in 2000 in Portland, Oregon . They initially hewed to a primarily folk-pop sound built around acoustic guitar melodies .
 Their first album, Castaways and Cutouts, featured the baroque instrumentation and narrative song structures that would become the band’s hallmarks .
 In 2003 the group released Her Majesty the Decemberists, which built on the first album's sound to include prominent horn and string sections . In 2003, Her Majesty The Decemberists was released by the group .
 The Tain consisted of a single song broken into multiple movements and foreshadowed the Decemberists’ future direction . Their EP (a format intermediate in length between a single and an album) was a single .
 As the band grew more successful, its live shows developed a distinct theatrical bent . The Decemberists became one of indie rock’s most popular concert draws .
 Picaresque is the band's third full full record . Their songs tell the stories of a diverse cast of characters, including a widowed peddler, spies who tragically fall in love .
 “The Mariners Revenge Song” was an eightminute epic in the style of a sea shanty . When played live in concert with a massive papier-mache whale, it became one of the band’s signature numbers .
 The Crane Wife is the group’s first album with Capitol . It was released in 2010 .
 It featured elegant ballads about a man falling in love with and marrying a wounded crane . It featured sprawling prog-rock-infused jams and ballads .
 The Crane Wife cracked the Billboard top 50 and was atop many critics’ lists of the year’s best albums . It was topped by many critics' lists .
 Dennard was credited with the invention in the late 1960s of the one-transistor cell for dynamic random-access memory . In the early 1970s, he pioneered the set of consistent scaling principles that underlie the improved performance of increasingly miniaturized integrated circuits .
 DRAM consists of an array of semiconductor memory cells that are integrated on a silicon chip . DRAM is a form of memory that can be stored in a chip that is integrated into a chip .
 Onetransistor-cell DRAM was extensively used in computers and other electronic devices . It was introduced in the 1970s .
 With miniaturization, it was possible to develop DRAM chips that contain billions of memory cells . The chip is now being developed in the form of DRAM memory chips .
 He joined IBM Research in 1958 as a staff engineer . He first worked on memory and logic circuits and the development of data communication techniques .
 In 1968 Dennard was granted a patent for the design of wire mesh and magnetic rings . The wire mesh-based memory system was then in development . It was then used in the development of computer memory .
 It was one of more than four dozen patents that he was eventually issued .
 Dennard was given the title of IBM fellow in 1979 . He held several positions over the length of his career of more than 50 years .
 Dennard was inducted into the United States National Inventors Hall of Fame in 1997 . He was elected to the U.S. National Academy of Engineering in 1984 . He is also inducted to the United .
 Dennard received the United States National Medal of Technology from Pres. George W. Bush . He was awarded the U.S. National Medal for Technology from President Bush .
 Mick Dodson, an Aboriginal political activist and scholar, was presented the Australian of the Year Award in 2009 . Dodson's work to help better the lives of the country’s indigenous peoples .
 He was also a moving force behind the organization Reconciliation Australia . He pushed for the historic formal apology that Rudd delivered in February 2008 for wrongs committed by past governments against generations of Aborigines .
 Dodson has long campaigned for the establishment of a national indigenous representative body . He was appointed at the end of 2008 to be a key adviser to the federal government on the formation of such a body .
 Aboriginal activist Mick Dodson was the 2009 Australian of the Year Deaths in Custody . He later directed the Northern Land Council and, from 1988 to 1990, served as counsel to the Royal Commission into Aboriginal National Australia Day .
 In 1993 he was appointed the country’s first Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander social justice commissioner, a post he held until 1998 . He held the post until 1998, when he was the first Aboriginal social justice chief .
 In 2003 he became the first indigenous Australian to be named a law professor at the ANU College of Law . He is the first Indigenous Australian to have been named an ANU law professor .
 Dodson was also involved in advocating for the rights of other indigenous peoples around the world . Dodson's work on behalf of Australian Aborigines included advocating for other indigenous people .
 Dodson assisted in drafting the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples . The Declaration was adopted by the UN General Assembly in September 2007 . Dodson is the author of the UN Declaration on Indigenous Peoples.
 He welcomed the greater public visibility that the award afforded him and hoped to use it to raise awareness of problems facing both indigenous and nonindigenous Australians . He said he wanted to use the award to highlight issues facing indigenous Australians .
 He was particularly concerned with the lack of access to quality education in many communities . He embarked on a national schools tour in mid-2009 as part of his stated goal of having every Australian child enrolled and adequately equipped for the 2010 school year .
 Twitter was co-founded by Evan Williams, Christopher Isaac Stone, and Jack Dorsey . The application received a Webby Award for Breakout of the Year in 2009 . Twitter is now a mainstream means of communication adopted and endorsed by celebrities, news outlets .
 Twitter did not charge a fee for its service and had no discernible income . Williams, Stone, Dorsey and Dorsey said that Twitter would eventually introduce a financial plan to generate revenue .
 In the mid-1990s, he briefly ran a company that he and his father set up to provide instructional material about the World Wide Web .
 Pyra Labs makes project-management software . Co-founder worked as a Web developer for several Californian companies .
 Williams developed a side project at the company into a software tool for publishing personal commentary on the Web . Williams developed the software into a tool for writing personal commentary .
 The software, which he called Blogger, formed the basis of the wave of Web logs, or blogs, that soon swelled over the Internet . Blogger's software was the basis for many of the Web logs or blogs .
 Blogger.com was bought by Google in 2003 . Williams' new company, Blogger, was bought in 2003 by Google .
 Williams left Google in 2004 and became a cofounder of Odeo, a podcasting company . Williams is a former Google co-founder .
 Twitter was a side project from Odeo, which was launched in 2006 . Twitter was the first Twitter app to be created by the company . Twitter is now a major social network .
 He formed a new parent company, Obvious, that acquired Odeo and then spun off Twitter, Inc., as a separate entity in 2007 . He formed Obvious and formed a parent company that acquired Twitter, which was spun off in 2007, and Obvious .
 Williams was initially chairman of the board of Twitter, but he moved to the role of CEO in late 2008 . Williams has been CEO of Twitter since 2008 .
 He was creative director at Xanga, a Weblog community that he had helped 81 Biographies form . He was also creative director of Xanga .
 Stone joined new owner Google in 2003 but then left to join Williams in shaping Odeo . Williams invited him to take a role in developing Blogger, and Stone joined Google in 2004 .
 After cofounding Twitter, he served as creative director for the company . He co-founded Twitter in 2009 .
 As a teenager Dorsey created taxi-dispatching software that was adopted by taxicab companies . Dorsey's software was used by taxi companies as a teenager .
 In 2006 he approached Williams and Stone with the idea of using text messaging and instant messaging (based on the principles of dispatch software) to keep in touch with friends .
 Twitter is the first time Twitter has been used by a major social network . Twitter was created by Twitter co-founder Eric Schmidt in the early 1950s . Twitter is now used by millions of people worldwide .
 Dorsey served as CEO of the new company until October 2008, when he became chairman of the board . Dorsey is now the CEO of a new company, which he joined in 2008 . Dorseys is also the chairman of a company he founded in 1983 .
 In late 2009 he began beta testing Square, an iPhone device for accepting credit-card payments . Square is a mobile device that accepts credit card payments .
 Duffys father was a trade unionist, and her mother was a gifted storyteller, known for her rhymes . Duffys' mother was also a talented story teller .
 By age 10, encouraged by teachers, she was filling notebooks with poetry . She was encouraged to write by teachers .
 Duffys verse appeared in pamphlets until 1983, when she won the National Poetry Competition and landed a publishing deal . Duffys won the competition and published a book in 1983 .
 Duffy also became an acclaimed playwright {Take My Husband and Little Women, Big Boys, and children's author {Underwater Farmyard and The Tear Thief . Duffy's poetry was incorporated into school curricula .
 Duffy's at times radical feminism and the occasional controversy her poetry inspired did little to impede her ascent to the ranks of Britain’s best-loved poets . Duffy's radical feminism was at times at times controversial and her poetry sparked controversy .
 While her rhymes and everyday language made her a favourite with the public, her literariness and range of styles impressed critics . Her range of style and rhymes impressed critics with her writing .
 Famous for her ""voicings" or dramatic monologues of characters from Mrs. Mrs. Robinson, she is best known for her dramatic monologue .
 She also excelled in using traditional sonnet and ballad forms as vehicles for postmodern themes .
 The World’s Wife, published in 1999, won less critical acclaim than some of her earlier volumes . It challenged the dominance of men in written history by retelling events from a female perspective .
 Duffy’s volume Rapture , a sequence of poems narrating a love affair from its beginning through its demise, was widely celebrated for its emotive power and extraordinary craftmanship . Duffy's work Rapture was widely acclaimed for its empathetic power .
 Dave Eggers' novelization of Where the Wild Things Are was released concurrently with Spike Jonze’s screenplay, which he had cowritten with director Spike Juzze . The long-awaited film version of Maurice Sendak's Where The Wild Things are was released in 2009 .
 The movie and book were loose adaptations of Sendak’s original, inspired as much by its wistful beauty and loving approach to the child mind as by its story .
 In 2009 the prolific Eggers also saw the film Away We Go, which he cowrote with his wife, Vendela Vida, appear on the big screen .
 His nonfiction book Zeitoun was also released in 2009 . Zeitoun is an account of a Syrian American man and his experiences in New Orleans following Hurricane Katrina .
 The two moved to California, where Eggers cofounded the short-lived satiric Might magazine . The two co-founded the satiric magazine .
 The memoir, which was enriched with postmodern writing techniques and fictionalized encounters, detailed Eggers’s experiences raising Toph . Eggers's memoir was published in October 2013 .
 The work earned Eggers instant acclaim and literary stardom, as well as a Pulitzer Prize nomination . Eggers was nominated for the Pulitzer Prize for literature .
 Dave Eggers founded McSweeney’s publishing house, which started with the 1998 launch of the literary magazine . Eggers is a former member of the U.S. Senate of Representatives from New York .
 In 2003 it was joined by fellow publication The Believer, a journal of literary reviews and interviews and other, often esoteric, pop-culture musings . In 2003 the Believer joined by The Book, a magazine of pop culture and literature .
 McSweeney’s also served as a book imprint . In 2005 originated the DVD “magazine” Wholphin, featuring new or underexposed short films .
 It was a volunteer-based writing laboratory devoted to developing kids’ creativity and love of books through programs that included free tutoring and writing workshops .
 The Heinz Family Foundation made Eggers the youngestever recipient of its arts and humanities award in 2007 . Eggers was made the youngest recipient of the Heinz family Foundation's award .
 The Templeton Foundation saw such a contribution in d’Espagnat’s notion of a ""veiled reality” beyond the reach of science . The Foundation said such a . contribution was made in the notion of ‘veiled . reality’ beyond the
 D’Espagnat’s research into the philosophical foundations of quantum physics addressed the conflict between the realist and instrumentalist views of the results of quantum mechanics . The realist view is whether the results reflect underlying physical reality or are merely rules for predicting the outcomes of
 D'Espagnat's work on Bell’s theorem (which indicates that the realist interpretation is not viable) led him to reject conventional realism, but the fact that scientific theories remain falsifiable by experiment steered him to the idea that a veiled reality underlies the phenomena
 D’Espagnat was educated at the Lycee Condorcet and the Ecole Polytechnique in Paris . He was educated in France and at the University of Paris .
 Fosso transformed himself into people and characters drawn from popular culture and politics . In fact, these 14 images were "autoportraits," as Fososso created them from his work .
 Fosso’s work was regularly featured in solo and group exhibitions around the world, including the 2008 edition of the “Festival des rencontres de la photographique d’Arles’ in France .
 Fosso lived in Nigeria as a child, but was forced to flee to Bangui after the Biafran war forced his family to flee . He settled there after the war destroyed their Nigerian home .
 He discovered photography in his early teens while working as a shoemaker . After apprenticeship with a local photographer, he had opened his own studio .
 He lived and worked at the studio, creating portraits of the local residents by using studio lights fashioned from pots and backgrounds made from traditional African fabrics .
 At the end of the day, he would often step in front of the camera to finish a roll of film . At the day’s end he often stepped in to finish the film .
 Fosso used these images to communicate his wellbeing to his grandmother in Nigeria . The staged self-portraits became agents of transformation and expression for the artist .
 In many of his early images, Fosso borrowed elements from popular culture that he admired, even having local tailors replicate outfits worn by celebrities . In many early works, he borrowed elements of popular culture from his work .
 In 1993 these images were discovered by French photographer Bernard Deschamps, who was looking for photographers to be included in the first edition of ""Rencontres de la photographic africaine” in Bamako, Mali .
 The 1994 exhibition launched Fosso’s career as an artist . He later went on to win the Afrique en Creation award in 1995 .
 Fosso evolved and expanded the scope of his autoportraits, using these constructed images to critically narrate and reference cultural and political events . The autoportrait is a form of art that has been used in more than 50 years .
 In the Tati series, Fosso depicted himself as characters ranging from an African chief draped in gold jewelry and leopard skins to a glamorous African American woman . The series was commissioned by the Parisian department store Tati .
 Fosso continued to live and operate his photography studio in Bangui, where the local community remained largely unaware of his achievements .
 Initially he had been narrowly beaten in the November 2008 election by the incumbent senator . Though initially he had narrowly beaten him, he was re-elected in 2008 .
 Coleman contested the result, but on April 13, 2009, Franken was again declared the winner . Coleman contested this year's election .
 Minnesota's Senate seat was left vacant for six months while the matter played out in the courts . Coleman’s term had expired on January 3 . Coleman's term expired January 3, but his seat has been vacant since .
 Franken worked for that show as a writer and performer until 1980, again during 1985-95, and briefly in 2008 . Franken also appeared briefly on the show in 1985 and again in 1985 . Franken appeared in the 1980s and 1990s .
 He shared four Emmy Awards for writing on the show . He shared nine nominations for writing .
 After leaving SNL in 1995, Franken became an outspoken political satirist for the left . Franken has published a number of books, including a book .
 The program used interviews and commentary to advance Franken’s progressive political views . George W Bush ‘unelected’ was “unelected,” according to Franken .
 The show’s final episode, on Feb., 2007, ended with a bang when Franken announced his candidacy for the Minnesota Senate seat . The show's final episode aired on Feb. 27, 2007 .
 It would have been easy to mistake the announcement for a joke in line with comedian Stephen Colbert’s later 2008 presidential bid .
 Franken gained respect for his tireless campaigning and emerged as a real threat to incumbent Coleman . Franken, however, gained respect—if grudgingly, from some quarters .
 Mauricio Funes was elected president of El Salvador on March 15, 2009 . He was elected with a five-year term to begin on June 1 . Funes is the first president of the Salvadoran nation .
 There he was influenced by sociology professor Francis Miguel Hasbun, a leftist activist . He studied sociology at the University of San Francisco .
 The violent death of his older brother, who was killed by police during a student protest in August 1980, induced Funes to leave the university before completing his degree . Funes' older brother was shot dead by police at a student demonstration in 1980 .
 Despite leftist leanings, he did not join a political party or participate in guerrilla warfare . He did not participate in the ongoing guerrilla warfare in Afghanistan .
 He taught literature in Catholic schools, where he emphasized audiovisual methods of communication . Instead of teaching literature, he taught literature .
 In 1986 Funes became a reporter for the state educational channel, launching a highly successful career in television journalism . Funes has been married to his wife, Mariana, since 1988 .
 In 1987 he moved to Channel 12, where he became popular for his analytic coverage of Salvadoran politics . He was known for his analysis of the country's leftist and working class .
 He interviewed leaders of the FMLN and other leftist parties, as well as leftist leaders from abroad . He also interviewed leaders from outside of Colombia .
 He also was a longtime correspondent for CNN TV's Spanish-language telecasts . He was also a longtime CNN TV correspondent .
 Funes’s investigative reporting on Channel 12 won him several awards, including the prestigious Maria Moors Cabot Prize in inter-American journalism in 1994 . Funes's investigative reporting won him an award in 1994.
 He was promoted to news director at Channel 12 in 1997, but his harsh criticism of the ARENA government led to censorship and death threats . In 2005 Channel 12 fired him and several other journalists, including several journalists .
 Funes continued to appear on other channels, however, and remained a national celebrity among leftists . Funes appeared on several other channels .
 With Hasbun as his adviser, Funes exploited his popularity to become the FMLN candidate for the presidency in September 2007 . Funes was the first FMLN presidential candidate who had not been a guerrilla fighter in the 1980s .
 In the long electoral campaign, Funes criticized ARENA for doing nothing for the Salvadoran people in its nearly 20 years reign . Funes says ARENA has done nothing for Salvadorans in its 20 years .
 He promised social justice, economic reform, improved standards of living, universal health care, and better access to education, housing, and pensions . He promised to stem crime and gang violence, as well as policies to stem the rising crime .
 Once elected, he took a pragmatic and conciliatory tone toward the opposition . Once elected he took the position of taking a pragmatic approach to his opponents .
 El Salvador's Funes said he was not a Marxist or even a socialist . He pledged not to align the country’s foreign relations too closely with either Venezuela or the United States . Shortly after his inauguration, he signed a document that provided for the reestablishment of diplomatic relations with
 Timothy Geithner has been nominated to serve as secretary of the United States Department of the Treasury in the administration of Pres. Obama .
 As treasury secretary, he was tasked with leading the administration’s efforts toward financial recovery amid the ongoing global economic crisis . He has been in office since 2001 .
 In March he laid out a comprehensive plan to help free banks from bad housing loans and mortgage-related securities . The move ignited a stock-market rally .
 On December 9, Geithner announced that the $700 billion financial bailout program would be extended until October 2010 . Congress had approved the bailout program in the fall of 2008 . The extension of the program was announced in December 2009 .
 Geithner defended the 84 Biographies extension as necessary in order to assist homeowners and small businesses . Critics had argued for the program to be shut down . The extension was necessary to ensure that the government would be able to respond if financial conditions worsened .
 Geithner took a job as a research assistant at Kissinger Associates, an international consulting firm founded by Henry Kissinger . After completing his education, he took the job as an assistant to Kissinger Associates . The firm was founded by former U.S. secretary of state .
 Geithner joined the Treasury Department in 1988 . He has held a number of positions within the agency’s international affairs division .
 Geithner worked closely with Lawrence H Summers, who identified him as a gifted official with a deft political touch . Summers was a Treasury official at the time .
 In 1999 Geithner was promoted to undersecretary for international affairs . He represented the Treasury Department at meetings of the Group of Eight .
 While not formally trained as an economist, Geithner brought to the position extensive experience with international monetary policy . He became an advocate for greater transparency and increased government oversight .
 As the government’s unofficial liaison to Wall Street, Geithner was a key participant in the response to the credit crisis that began in 2007 . As the U.S. Treasury Secretary, he was the government's unofficial liaison with Wall Street .
 He oversaw JPMorgan Chase’s federally backed takeover of failed investment bank Bear Steams in March 2008 . He spent the rest of the year helping to craft the Federal Reserve's response to a series of corporate meltdowns .
 In 2009, a year after its publication, Amitav Ghosh’s epic novel Sea of Poppies continued to draw accolades . The novel was published in 1956 in Calcutta [now Kolkata], India .
 Among the books against which Ghosh’s novel was competing was The Enchantress of Florence by Salman Rushdie . Rushdie was another Indian-born writer to whose work Ghosh's had often been compared .
 As a child, Ghosh, whose father was a diplomat, lived in India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and Iran . Ghosh's father was also a diplomat and he lived in Sri Lanka and India .
 Ghosh’s ambitious novels use complex narrative strategies to probe the nature of national and personal identity, particularly of the people of India and Southeast Asia . Ghosh's ambitious novels are published in India, Southeast Asia and India .
 His first novel, The Circle of Reason, follows an Indian protagonist who, suspected of being a terrorist, leaves India for northern Africa and the Middle East .
 Postcolonial in its marginalization of Europe and postmodern in its nonlinear structure and thick intertextuality . Blending elements of fable and picaresque fiction, it is distinctly postcolonial . It is a novel that is postmodern and postcolonial in terms of its structure and
 The Shadow Lines is a sweeping history of two families (one Indian and the other English) that are deeply shaped by events following the departure of the British from India in 1947 .
 The Circle of Reason and The Shadow Lines, both written in English, were widely translated and gained Ghosh an international readership . Ghosh was a prolific writer and published internationally .
 A Novel of Fevers, Delirium, and Discovery represented his foray into science fiction and earned him the Arthur C Clarke Award . This densely layered novel offers an alternate history of the discovery of malaria .
 Ghosh's subsequent novels include The Glass Palace and The Hungry Tide . Ghosh’s subsequent novels are set in Bengal and featuring American and Indian characters .
 Sea of Poppies shows Ghosh turning away from his earlier novels’ formal experimentation and toward a more traditional form of storytelling . Ghosh’s earlier novels have been experimental and experimental, but his new novel is a classic .
 This novel describes individuals who are on a ship in Southeast Asia carrying coolies (indentured labourers) and opium . The first book of a projected trilogy, this novel is the first of a trilogy .
 Ghosh straddles several genres: travel writing, autobiography memoir, memoir . Ghosh also wrote In an Antique Land .
 The appointment was also a kind of homecoming for Gilbert, the son of longtime Philharmonic violinists Michael Gilbert and Yoko Takebe . Gilbert is known for programming contemporary music along with traditional repertoire .
 In 1997, he won the Seaver/National Endowment for the Arts Conductor Award . He was assistant conductor of the Cleveland Orchestra .
 Gilbert became chief conductor and artistic adviser of the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra in 2000 . He held the post until 2008, when he was chief conductor of the orchestra .
 It was in Stockholm that he developed a reputation for venturesome programming . It included festivals devoted to such living composers as Henri Dutilleux, Hans Werner Henze, and John Adams .
 In addition to that orchestra he recorded music by Daniel BOrtz and Christopher Rouse . In addition, he recorded works by Christopher Rouse and Daniel Ortz . He also recorded music for the orchestra .
 In 2004 Gilbert became the principal guest conductor of the NDR Symphony Orchestra of Hamburg . Gilbert was the principal conductor of NDR's NDR symphony orchestra . In 2004 he was principal guest conductor of the Hambambian symphody .
 During this period he also conducted a number of other major orchestras, including the Berlin Philharmonic, the Royal Concertgebouw of Amsterdam, the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, the Los Angeles Philharmonica, and orchestras in Japan and China .
 His debut took place in 2001, when he led the orchestra in music of Charles Ives, part of a festival devoted to the composer .
 In 2008 he conducted a concert in Carnegie Hall honouring Leonard Bernstein . He conducted a solo concert in honour of the late Bernstein .
 Gilbert was the first holder of the newly created William Schuman Chair in Musical Studies in 2009 . He was to serve as guest conductor of the Juilliard Orchestra . In 2009 he was appointed as the first person to hold a number of teaching duties at the school . Gilbert is the first
 The book cites paragons of success such as the Beatles, who often played eight-hour sets at a Hamburg bar before they achieved international fame . It argues that ascendancy of the pop star sort is due more to extraordinary circumstance and effort than to extraordinary talent .
 Gladwell's critics dismissed some of his conclusions as spurious and found his simplistic rhetorical style patronizing . Gladwell’s critics found some conclusions spurious .
 Malcolm Gladwell was a popular-culture journalist and intellectual . Gladwell's staying power of his ideas remained to be seen, but he had already proved himself adept at treading the delicate boundary .
 Gladwell moved to the U.S. in 1984 and obtained a position at the conservative magazine The American Spectator . Gladwell graduated in 1984 with a degree in history and moved to America in 1990 .
 After being fired in 1985, he worked for a conservative think tank in Washington, D.C., while freelancing for several periodicals . He worked for the think tank and freelanced for several periodsicals .
 Social epidemics result from a combination of seemingly arbitrary contextual details and the actions of a few key types of people . How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference is a new book on social epidemics .
 The Power of Thinking Without Thinking extols the untold virtues of snap judgment . It's a new book, "Think Without Thinking," that extolles the virtues of snapping judgment .
 The retrospective spanned more than 40 years of Graham's works, including films, videos, installations and photography, photography, writing, and architecture designed to defamiliarize spectators .
 As a teenager he was an avid reader and was influenced by the writings of French nouveau roman writers, including Alain RobbeGrillet and Michel Butor . As a teen he was heavily influenced by writings of Alain .
 The following year he cofounded and directed the John Daniels Gallery, which exhibited the works of new conceptual and minimalist artists, such as Sol LeWitt, Robert Smithson, and Donald Judd .
 Graham closed the gallery in 1965 owing to insolvency and began instead to create his own artworks . Graham's artworks showed heavy literary influence . The gallery was closed in 1965 and he created his own own works .
 During the 1970s Graham delved into film and video performances featuring actors, including himself, in what he termed pavilions . The technique was intended to allow individuals to view themselves as others viewed them .
 His examination of modern art themes and popular culture gained him a cult following among younger artists . His documentary Rock My Religion focused on rock-and-roll music and culture .
 Graham's works were featured in several important exhibitions, including Public/Private, which opened at the Moore College of Art and Design in Philadelphia .
 Dan Graham, Works 1965-2000, a major retrospective opened in 2001 at the Museu Serralves in Porto, Porto . A major retrospective of works by Dan Graham opened in 2002 .
 The following year he completed the commissioned Yin/Yang Pavilion at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . He also completed a commissioned Yin and Yang Pavilion at MIT .
 Gromov’s principal results were the compactness the compactness . He also developed the theory of complex integration in theory of partial differential equations . Among his principal results are Gomov's compactness theorem, the Gromova-Hausdorf convergence, the
 In addition to the Abel Prize, Gromov was the recipient of the Elie Cartan , Wolf , Steele , Lobatchewski , Balzan , and Kyoto prizes .
 Grybauskaite announced her decision to leave her EU post to run as an independent candidate in Lithuania’s May 17 presidential election . She announced the decision in January after violent protests in the Lithuanian capital of Vilnius .
 Lithuanian presidential candidate wins largest-ever margin of victory for presidential candidate . She swept to an overwhelming victory, capturing more than 69% of the vote to 12% for her nearest rival .
 Lithuanian Pres. of Vil87 European Communities, 2009 Lithuanian President . After serving as the plenipotentiary minister at the Lithuanian embassy in the U.S., she returned to Vil87 .
 Dalia Grybauskaite nius to assume the office of deputy finance minister . She became Lithuania’s chief negotiator with the IMF and the World Bank . Grybauskas is also Lithuania's chief negotiator .
 She supported privatization and liberalization efforts, among other reform measures . She was named finance minister in which position she strongly supported privatization .
 Grybauskaite was Lithuania's "Iron Lady," a reference to former British prime minister Margaret Thatcher . She also developed a reputation for toughness and blunt talk; numerous media outlets called her Lithuania’s “Iron Lady"
 In 2004 Grybauskaite was tapped to serve in Brussels as the European commissioner responsible for financial programming and budget . Her stellar performance in this role was recognized when she was selected as EU Commissioner of the Year .
 Grybauskaite aimed to lift Lithuania's economic fortunes in part by stimulating exports and cutting public expenditures . He also worked to efficiently implement EU aid, and offer tax relief to owners of small businesses .
 On the foreign policy front, she was expected to pursue improved economic relations with Russia as well as to strengthen the country’s alliances with other EU member states .
 Grybauskaite also appeared to be eager for Lithuania to take a more visible role on the international stage . Lithuania's president is keen to see Lithuania take on a bigger role in international football .
 Lithuania has pledged Lithuania’s help in promoting UN values and objectives . Addressing the UN General Assembly in September, she declared that large and small countries shared equal responsibilities toward global society .
 American zoologist and television personality Jack Hanna continued to exhibit his passion for wildlife and his inexhaustible energy in 2009 . Hanna made personal appearances across the United States with his diverse assortment of animal ambassadors . Hanna, Jack Hanna, is a zoologist, television personality .
 Jack Hanna’s Emmy Award-winning television series Into the Wild entered its third season, and his newest book, Jungle Jack’�s Wackiest, Wildest, Weirdest Animals in the World, was published . Hanna won an Emmy Award for his television series,
 Jack Bushnell Hanna was raised on a farm in Tennessee and showed an early interest in pursuing a career with animals . He volunteered to work for his family’s veterinarian at the age of 11 .
 Hanna and his wife opened a pet shop in Knoxville, Tennessee . Hanna earned a bachelor’s degree from Muskingum College, New Concord, Ohio .
 He began his zoological career in Florida as director of the Central Florida Zoo in Sanford, Fla.
 In 1978 Hanna became director of the Columbus Zoo, which he transformed from a small run-down facility to a nationally acclaimed zoological park . Hanna transformed the zoo into a national acclaimed zoo in 1978 .
 Zoo owner Jack Hanna is trying to raise zoo attendance by offering nu“Jungle’s" first order of business was to increase zoo attendance . Hanna: "Jungle" is a place to raise money for zoo visitors by offering free admission .
 Rick A Prebeg of World Class Images merous educational programs and hosting events that also provided entertainment . He also hosted events that included educational programs .
 In addition, he networked with local business leaders to raise funds to develop larger, more natural habitats to replace the zoo’s antiquated cagelike animal enclosures .
 To increase public awareness of the zoo after the birth of twin gorillas there in 1983, he accepted an invitation to appear on the television program Good Morning America .
 Hanna visited with his critters on Late Night with David Letterman and Larry King Live . Hanna was a wildlife correspondent for FOX News, CNN, and other news programs . His visits with the critters led to numerous other TV opportunities .
 Hanna's likable, easygoing character and the fun and entertaining way in which he showed off the zoo's animals made him extremely popular . Hanna’s likable and entertaining manner of showing off the animals at the zoo made him popular .
 In 1992 he was named director emeritus of the Columbus Zoo so that he could dedicate more time to his media obligations . In 1992, he was given the title of emeritus at the zoo .
 Columbus Zoo added a manatee exhibit in 1999 . Zoo and Aquarium expanded to include Zoombezi Bay water park, Jungle Jack’s Landing amusement park, and Safari Golf Club . Zoo name changed in 1999 to Columbus Zoo & Aquarium .
 Hanna was honoured with the Association of Zoos and Aquariums’ R Marlin Perkins Award for Professional Excellence in 2008 . In February 2009 the USA Travel Guide named the Columbus Zoo the country's number one zoo . Hanna has been named the top zoo in the world .
 Saudi-born businessman and politician Saad al-Hariri was named prime minister of Lebanon in June 2009 . He is the son of former Lebanese prime minister Rafiq al-hariri, a former prime minister .
 With relatively little political experience, the younger Hariri had entered politics following his father’s assassination in February 2005 . The younger politician was faced with the task of forming a unity government in 88 Biographies one of the world's most complex political environments .
 Hariri received his elementary education at the school of Freres Maristes in Rmaila , Leb. (near Sidon), and completed his secondary education in France and Saudi Arabia . Hariri was born in Lebanon .
 Hariri helped orchestrate Saudi Oger’s acquisition of Turk Telekom . Hariri gained the position of general manager at age 26 . He also worked to extend the business into the telecommunications sector .
 After his fathers assassination in a Beirut car bombing, Hariri was selected by his family to follow in his father’s political footsteps . Hariri is the son of assassinated assassinated by his father in Beirut .
 The Future Movement was the largest contingent within the March 14 coalition (named to commemorate the date, in 2005, of massive anti-Syrian protests in Beirut), which opposed Syrian influence in Lebanon’s affairs .
 Hariri did not consider himself politically mature enough to serve as prime minister . Instead, he supported Fouad Siniora, a former finance minister and close ally of his father, for the position .
 During the next four years, Hariri worked to forge and refine his own political identity . Hariri was elected to the Senate in 2006 .
 His lobbying helped secure a sizable financial aid package from the U.S. to assist in Lebanese reconstruction . In late May 2007, the United Nations Security Council approved the establishment of a special court in which to try suspects linked to his father's assassination .
 In May 2008, Lebanon was in the midst of a dangerous political stalemate that had followed the departure of Pres. Bashar al-Assad . The country was in a dangerous state of instability .
 Hariri helped negotiate a unity government and navigate the country away from violent confrontation . Emile Lahoud was ousted from office in November 2007 . Hariri was the prime minister of Lebanon in 2007 .
 In June 2009, Hariri again led the March 14 coalition to victory in elections in June 2009 .
 Michel Suleiman to take on the complex task of forming a new government . Michel Suleiman will be tasked with forming a government . The new government will be the first of its kind .
 In early November Hariri announced that a unity government had been successfully formed . Despite setbacks that threatened to derail the negotiations, Hariri said in early November that he had successfully formed a new government .
 The LDP had dominated political life in the country since the mid-1950s for all but a brief period in the 1990s . Its public standing had faltered since the popular Junichiro Koibumi stepped down as prime minister in 2006 .
 By July 2009, when Prime Minister Taro Aso announced the date on which the general election was to be held, it had become clear that the LDP was in trouble .
 As the DPJ candidate, Hatoyama promised to end wasteful spending and move toward government decentralization .
 LDP lawmakers were swept from office in a landslide victory . Scores of DPJ lawmakers were wiped out of office . DPJ is expected to win a landslide majority of seats in Tokyo .
 His great-grandfather Kazuo Hatoyama served in the Imperial Diet in the 1890s . He is a member of the Japanese Imperial Diet .
 His grandfather Ichiro Hatoyama founded the LDP and served as the prime minister . He founded the party and served in office in Japan .
 Hatoyama’s maternal grandfather, Shojiro Ishibashi, was the founder of the tire manufacturer Bridgestone Corp. His maternal grandfather also founded the tire company . The company is based in Tokyo, Japan .
 He began his own political career as a member of the LDP . He won election in 1986 to the lower house as a representative from Hokkaido .
 Hatoyama held his seat in the Diet through consecutive elections thereafter . He was elected to the Diet again in the 1980s and 1990s . His seat was re-elected in 2009 .
 Hatoyama served under Hosokawa until the coalition government collapsed in 1994 . He served as the prime minister of Japan from 1994 to 1994 . Hatoyam served as a cabinet minister until the end of the coalition .
 Hatoyama was a founding member of the DPJ and rose through the party’s ranks . He is now a prominent figure in Japan's political scene . Hatoyamas is a member of Japan's Democratic Party Party .
 From September 1999 to December 2002, he served as president of the party . He was president from September 1999 until December 2002 .
 He was elected again to that position in May 2009, only days after the resignation of powerful DPJ leader Ichiro Ozawa . Ozawa resigned amid a financial corruption scandal in 2009 .
 In February 2009 British comedian Lenny Henry made his stage debut in the lead role of Othello at the West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds .
 One critic called it “one of the most astonishing debuts in Shakespeare ever seen” The production was transferred to London’s celebrated West End theatre district in September .
 As a teenager, Lenny Henry performed a comedy act in local nightclubs . Henry promotes the charity organization Comic Relief’s Red Nose Day . Henry is a British actor-comedian .
 Suzan Suzan made an appearance on the television talent program New Faces when he was 16 years old . Suzan was 16 when he appeared on the talent show New Faces .
 The Fosters is the first British situation comedy with an all-black cast . The national exposure he gained from that show helped to secure him a role in The Fosterers . It was the first UK situation comedy to have an all black cast .
 Henry was given his own series on the BBC, The Lenny Henry Show . That same year he was given a series of his own show on BBC One . Henry is best known for his work as a stand-in comedian .
 The program consisted of a mix of stand-up comedy and sketches . It featured him playing a number of offbeat, catchphrasespouting characters .
 The popular show went through a series of cancellations and relaunches, including a short-lived format change to a pseudositcom in 1987 .
 That same year he attempted to break into Hollywood by starring in the film True Identity . The film was both a critical and commercial flop .
 Henry rebounded by returning to the BBC to star in the sitcom Chef! . He played against type as the imperious perfectionist chef-restaurateur Gareth Blackstock .
 He was given the Radio and Television Industry Club Award for BBC Personality of the Year in 1993 .
 In 1988, Henry began hosting the annual charity telethon Comic Relief . He soon became one of the most public faces of that organization’s annual fundraising Red Nose Day .
 In 1999 he was made CBE in honour of his entertainment and charity work . He was knighted in 1999 for his charity work and entertainment work .
 Protect Protect highlighted her ongoing practice of utilizing original and borrowed text as a primary medium . Her works were alternately soothing and unsettling, meditative and confrontational, and seductive and frightening .
 Holzer emerged in the early 1980s as part of a generation of artists who gained recognition for employing and appropriating aspects of mass culture in an effort to explore and question contemporary issues .
 Her critical texts take form as objects ranging from ephemeral posters to stone benches . She is best known for flashing electronic LED sign sculptures that display carefully composed yet fleeting phrases .
 Holzer originally presented as phrases on anonymous posters and later on T-shirts, billboards, and electronic signs . The works, composed of seemingly familiar slogans such as “Abuse of power comes as no surprise,” were originally presented by Holzer .
 The Living series and Survival series were seamlessly integrated into various urban landscapes as plaques and signs . These texts, fraught with cynicism and political implications, were followed by the more structured and complex Inflammatory Essays series .
 In the mid-1980s, Holzer began inscribing her texts on stone benches, sarcophagi and floor tiles .
 Her LED signs accompanied her LED signs in numerous exhibitions and were installed independently as site-specific works .
 Holzer’s installation for the United States Pavilion at the 1990 Venice Biennale won the Golden Lion Award . The juxtaposition of texts set in austere marble tiles and benches and flashing across commercial LED signs .
 From 1996 Holzer expanded her installations to include large-scale outdoor light projections . She chose public locations that demanded viewer attention .
 Beginning in 2001, she started incorporating borrowed texts in her work, including poetry, literature, and bureaucratic documents .
 These paintings underscore the impossibility of fixed meaning and the multiple viewpoints always present in her work . Similar to her original texts, these paintings underscore her original meaning .
 Holzer continued to use words to question the relationship between the private and the public . With these projects and others, Holzer used words to ask questions about the relationship .
 Forbes magazine named Arianna Huffington to its list of the most influential women in media in 2009 . Citizen journalism was at its height during the 2008 U.S. presidential election .
 Huffington—editor in chief and cofounder of The Huffington Post, a blog turned respected online news outlet—led the charge . Huffington opened every article on HuffingtonPost.com to reader comments.com .
 Huffington’s left-wing Web site served as a forum for discussion and, frequently, vociferous disagreement . In a politically contentious time, Huffington's site was a place for debate and discussion .
 While at Cambridge she served as president of the esteemed debate society, the Cambridge Union . She was the first foreign-bom student to do so .
 She started her political and journalistic career as a Republican and a proponent of small government and limited welfare . After graduation she lived for a time in London before relocating in 1980 to the United States .
 Huffington wrote for the TV show Politically Incorrect . She also tried her hand in front of the camera, as when she took a bit in the film Edtv .
 She presided over frequent salons and hosted the television talk show Critical Mass . She also presided over salon salons .
 She also worked on her husband’s 1994 campaign for a Senate seat, which he failed to gain . She worked on his 1994 Senate campaign for the Senate seat .
 Huffington’s place on the political spectrum had already begun to shift in the 1990s, starting with her opposition to U.S. intervention in the civil wars in former Yugoslavia . Huffington: “I’m proud to be able to continue to be a strong voice in
 In 2003 she ran in California’s gubernatorial race as an independent, but she later withdrew her candidacy . In 2003, she ran as a candidate for California's governor .
 It was structured as a ""group blog,"" which published the words of hundreds of guest contributors . The group blog is now known as a "group blog"
 The next year HuffingtonPost.com received its first Webby Award, for best political blog . The award-winning blog received a second Webby award for its political content .
 Huffington announced in August 2008 the blog's first local outpost, HuffPost Chicago, was introduced . Huffington announced her intention to roll out cityspecific ""HuffPosts"" all over the United States .
 Australian actor Hugh Jackman was host of the 2009 Academy Awards . Jackman hosted the Academy Awards at the Los Angeles International Film Festival .
 He had been chosen as People magazine’s Sexiest Man Alive the previous November, but in a ceremony that drew rave reviews .
 The show opened with an elaborately choreographed musical number that paid tribute to each of the best picture nominees . The show ended with a tribute to the nominees .
 Wolverine, was one of the most hotly anticipated action films of the year . The film was released in December .
 Hugh Michael Jackman made his acting debut as King Arthur in a production of Camelot when he was just five years old . Jackman grew up in Sydney, and made his first acting debut in Camelot as a child .
 Jackman was offered a role in the long-running television soap opera Neighbours . Jackman chose to further refine his acting skills at the Western Australian Academy of Performing Arts in suburban Perth .
 Jackman won fans as attractive bad boy Kevin Jones . He starred as an inmate who begins a dangerous flirtation with his psychologist .
 Jackman and Furness continued their relationship offscreen, and the two were married in 1996 . Furness was married to Jackman in 1994 .
 The lead in the Australian premiere of Andrew Lloyd Webber's musical adaptation of Billy Wilder’s Sunset Boulevard .
 Jackman next turned to film, making his Hollywood debut in X-Men . Jackman's portrayal of the tortured antihero Wolverine established him as a bankable action star .
 Jackman made his Broadway debut in 2003 as singer-songwriter Peter Allen in the biographical musical The Boy from Oz . Jackman appeared in the musical in 2003 in The Boy From Oz .
 Jackman’s flamboyantly spot-on performance in Oklahoma! won him a Tony Award in 2004 . For American filmgoers who were unfamiliar with his work in Oklahoma!, Jackman's performance was a revelation .
 In 2008 he starred opposite Nicole Kidman in Baz Luhrmann’s lush historical epic Australia .
 The film met with mixed reviews . Jackman's performance was widely praised for his performance .
 LeBron James of the Cleveland Cavaliers piloted his team to a franchise record 66 wins and a place in the playoffs . James was awarded the league's Most Valuable Player award in the 2008-09 NBA season .
 He also published a memoir in 2009, Shooting Stars, that chronicles his years as a high-school standout .
 A locally known basketball prodigy in Akron since elementary school, James was named Ohio’s high-school player of the year three times . He led his school to three Ohio state championships in four years . James has led his high school team to three state championships .
 James was the consensus national high-school Player of the Year in his senior season . He was selected directly out of high school by the Cavaliers with the first overall selection of the 2003 NBA draft . James was drafted with the Cleveland Cavaliers in 2003 .
 He signed an unprecedented $90 million endorsement contract with the Nike shoe company before he ever played a professional game . Additionally, he also signed a $90million endorsement contract .
 James led the Cavaliers in scoring, steals, and minutes played over the course of the 2003-04 season . James was named the youngest player ever to be named the league’s Rookie of the Year .
 James had unmatched athleticism and well-muscled body that presented a strong challenge to opposing teams . A 2.03-m “point forward” who was as adept at taking the ball down the court as at playing near the basket, James had an unmatched athleticism .
 He was a member of the United States men’s Olympic basketball team that won the bronze medal at the 2004 Athens Games . After the season ended, he was a part of the U.S. men's Olympic team .
 He was voted one of the starting forwards on the Eastern Conference All-Star team during his second season . In his third season, he led the Cavaliers to their first play-off berth in nine years .
 James guided Cleveland to the NBA finals in the 2006-07 season . The Cavaliers were swept by the San Antonio Spurs in the finals . James has been named one of the best players in the NBA .
 He led the NBA in scoring during the 2007-08 season and in February 2008 became the youngest player to have scored 10,000 career points . In February 2008, he was the youngest NBA player to score 10,500 career points.
 Cavaliers lost to the Boston Celtics in a dramatic seven-game series in the Eastern Conference semifinals . He also earned first team All-NBA honours, but the Celtics won the series .
 Before the start of the 2008-09 season, James again joined the United States men’s Olympic basketball team, which this time won the gold medal at the 2008 Beijing Games . James again played for the U.S. men's basketball team in 2008-2009 season .
 On June 4, 2009, Randy Johnson recorded the 300th victory in his career as a Major League Baseball pitcher .
 Randall David Johnson excelled in basketball as a youth, but he soon began to focus on his first love, baseball . Johnson was born in New York City, New Jersey .
 The MLB National League Montreal Expos drafted him after his junior season, and he made his major league debut in Sept. 1988 . He was drafted by the Expos .
 Johnson quickly built a reputation as the pitcher major leaguers most feared facing . The physically imposing 2.08-m (6-ft 10-in) Johnson quickly became a star in the Major League Baseball .
 The novelty of his height at first overshadowed Johnson’s work on the mound, but as his pitching improved, the accolades increased . Johnson has been named the best pitcher in the Major League Baseball .
 He was named to the first of his 10 All-Star games in 1990 as a member of the American League Seattle Mariners . He had acquired the Mariners from the Expos the previous season .
 Johnson led the AL in strikeouts for four consecutive years . In 1995 he won the Cy Young Award as the league’s best pitcher . Johnson won the AL Cy Young award in 1995 .
 Johnson and the Mariners management began to have contract disagreements on a regular basis . He was traded to the Houston Astros at the 1998 trading deadline .
 Johnson led the NL in earned run average, innings pitched, and strikeouts on his way to the 1999 NL Cy Young . A free agent at the end of the 1998 season, Johnson signed with the Arizona Diamondbacks .
 Johnson won Cy Youngs in each of the following three seasons . His most impressive feat took place at the 2001 World Series, where he tied a record with three wins in a single World Series and earned coMost Valuable Player honours .
 Rebiya Kadeer was born near the Altai Mountains of far northwestern China . Her father worked as a gold miner . Uighur activist was born in China's Altai mountains .
 She helped support her growing family by sewing undergarments and shoes and selling them on the black market . She married at the age of 15 and subsequently helped to support her family .
 When she was 28, Kadeer founded a laundry business out of her home . She was motivated by her separation from her children, she founded the business .
 She invested some of her earnings in trading commodities, modestly at first and eventually on a larger and larger scale . After several months she closed that thriving business, she invested her earnings .
 In July 1978 she married Sidik Rouzi, an intellectual and activist who had been jailed for leading a Uighur resistance movement against the Chinese authorities in the late 1960s .
 Kadeer continued to develop her trading enterprise, and in the 1980s she expanded into real estate . She continued to trade in the 1970s and 1980s .
 In March 1987 she opened a women's bazaar in Urumqi, and in the 1990s she followed with a department store and an accompanying apartment complex .
 By 1993 she had become the wealthiest woman in China . Soon she had enlarged her operations to include subsidiaries throughout Central Asia .
 Kadeer capitalized on her business by employing and mentoring Uighur individuals . Long concerned with aiding and advancing her people, she is now a businesswoman .
 She was appointed to influential organizations and committees, including the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) and the National People's Congress .
 In 1995, she served as a delegate to the UN Fourth World Conference on Women, held in Beijing .
 Kadeer utilized her increased financial means and social stature to continue campaigning on behalf of the Uighur population .
 She was detained in August 1999 en route to meeting a congressional delegation from the U.S. and was imprisoned . She was imprisoned and imprisoned in 1999 .
 She was sentenced to eight years in prison, but pressure from the international community helped to achieve a reduced sentence . She was freed in March 2005, after pressure from international pressure helped to reduce her sentence .
 After her release K. K.S. left China for the U.S., she continued her campaign for human rights in China .
 While imprisoned, Kadeer was awarded the 2004 Rafto Prize by Norway’s Rafta Foundation for Human Rights . She was nominated for the 2006 Nobel Prize for Peace for Peace .
 South Korean figure skater Kim Yu-Na was in a class by herself at the world figure skating championships in Los Angeles in March 2009 . She gave her homeland its first senior-level figure skating title .
 Kim was a stunning 16. points ahead of silver medalist Joannie Rochette of Canada . Asada, the defending champion, finished fourth behind 2007 winner Miki Ando of Japan .
 Kim began skating at age six and gained her first international experience six years later, when she won the novice competition at the Triglav Trophy in Jesenice, Slvn. Kim began skating at age 6 and won her first competition at age 16 .
 In 2003 she captured her first South Korean national title and won the novice competition at the Golden Bear of Zagreb in Croatia . The following season she reached the age requirement for skating internationally at the junior level the following season .
 Kim won the gold medal at the Junior Grand Prix in Hungary in the 2004-05 season . Kim also won silvers at the junior Grand Prix finals in China and Hungary .
 At the 2005 junior world championships, Kim completed her first triple-triple combination jump in competition but again finished second to Asada Asada . Kim finished second in the event at the 2005 world championships .
 Kim remained on the Junior Grand Prix circuit in 2005-06 and won events in Slovakia and Bulgaria . Kim won her second Junior Grand Grand Prix Final in 2006 . Kim continued her career on the circuit in 2007-2010 .
 Kim won the gold medal in the 2006 world junior championships . Kim competed against defending champion Asada Asada in the world junior championship .
 Kim moved up to the senior level in 2006-07, taking the bronze medal at Skate Canada and winning gold at the Trophee Eric Bompard to qualify for the Grand Prix Final . Kim won the overall title and Asada took the silver in the overall competition . Kim moved
 Soon thereafter she began training in Canada under twotime Olympic silver medalist Brian Orser . She began training under Orser, who won a silver medal in the 2008 Olympics .
 Kim captured the Cup of China and Cup of Russia in 2012 . The following season she won the Grand Prix title in China . Kim won the Cup in China and Russia in 2013 .
 She won a bronze medal at the 2008 world championships in Rio de Janeiro . She also won another bronze medal in the same year at the world championships .
 Kim dominated with victories at Skate America and the Cup of China in the 2008-09 season . She failed to win her third straight Grand Prix title, finishing second to Asada Asada .
 Kim went on to win the Four Continents event in February 2009 before her amazing performance at the world championships . Kim won the world championship in 2009 .
 Mervyn King was governor of the Bank of England in the summer of 2009 . Evidence was mounting that the U.K. might be the first of the world’s major economies to emerge from the global recession .
 King had insisted that his ambition was to make monetary policy boring . After he became governor in 2003, King insisted that he wanted to make policy boring.
 In 2007 and 2008, as the banks collapsed and the world recession started, King became a familiar fixture on British television . King's wry humour and perfectly formed sentences became a popular British television show .
 Cambridge graduate is one of the brightest economists of his generation . His intelligence and drive took him via Wolverhampton Grammar School to Cambridge .
 Through the 1970s and '80s, his academic career blossomed on both sides of the Atlantic . Through the '70s and 80s, he was a major success in Europe .
 King's special area of interest was taxation . He co-authored a book on the British tax system . He was professor of economics at the London School of Economics from 1984 .
 In 1990 King was appointed one of the BOE’s nonexecutive directors; the following year he became the bank’�s chief economist . King was also appointed as the bank's chief economist in 1994 .
 This gave him a platform for preaching in favour of placing the fight against inflation at the heart of economic policy . It gave him the platform to preach against inflation .
 He was deputy governor in 1998 and governor in 2003 . No one was surprised when he became BOE’s deputy governor .
 At first the U.K.’s economy grew steadily, and inflation remained under control . At first, inflation remained in control . But now, inflation is under control in the UK .
 In September 2007, one of Britain’s main mortgage lenders, the Northern Rock Bank, collapsed . Northern Rock collapsed .
 For the first time in more than a century, there was a run on a major British bank as anxious savers formed long lines to withdraw their money . Eventually, the government nationalized the bank .
 A year later King faced criticism for keeping interest rates too high for too long as the economy started to contract . King faced similar criticism for raising interest rates a year after the recession .
 In response, King and his colleagues on the BOE’s Monetary Policy Committee acted boldly . They expanded the money supply sharply and cut interest rates in successive months from 5% in October 2008 to 0.5% by March 2009 .
 Kirill I was enthroned on February 1 as the Russian Orthodox patriarch of Moscow and all Russia . He became the first head of the church to be elected after the fall of the Soviet Union . Kirill was elected in January 2009 .
 He inherited from his predecessor, Aleksey II . The church had experienced revitalization and growth following the end in Russia of official atheism .
 Kirill shared with Aleksey an outspoken belief that the church should play a dynamic role in Russian life . Kirill said that the Church should play an important role in life .
 Kirill for more than a decade hosted his own weekly television show on religious topics . Kirill also enjoyed a reputation as a modernizer .
 He graduated from Leningrad Theological Academy, where he served a year as lecturer in dogmatic theology .
 Kirill was appointed representative of the Russian Orthodox Church to the World Council of Churches in Geneva in 1971 . Kirill is a member of the Church of Russia .
 Returning to Russia in 1974, he became rector of Leningrad Theological Academy, a post he held until 1984 . He was rector at the academy until 1984, when he returned to Russia .
 He was named archbishop of Smolensk and Kaliningrad in 1988 . He was elevated to metropolitan of that province in 1991 . He has been in charge of the Russian city since 1991 .
 He expressed his long-standing desire for increased dialogue to end the church’s millennium-old rift with the Roman Catholic Church .
 Heidi Klum is the hostess of Germany's Next Topmodel and Project Runway . She hosted two reality TV shows, Germany’s Next Top Model, Project Runways .
 The inaugural 2009 episode of Project Runway reportedly drew 4. million viewers . Klum served as a judge and executive producer for the show .
 Models of the Runway, also Fashion diva Heidi Klum Alexander Tamargo/Getty Images 94 Biographies, hosted by Klum, offered their behind-the-scenes impressions .
 In 1992, 18-year-old Klum entered the “Model 92“ German beauty contest . Her parents Gunther, a cosmetics company executive, and Erna, a hairdresser, were her parents .
 Her breakthrough came when in 1994 she appeared on the cover of Mirabella magazine .
 In the mid-1990s Klum achieved increased visibility as a cover model for Vogue, ELLE and Marie Claire magazines . She graced the Feb. 20, 1998, Sports Illustrated cover of Sports Illustrated .
 She eclipsed that feat in 1999 by achieving global recognition as one of the original ‘Angels,” the troupe of Victoria’s Secret lingerie models who appeared in annual televised runway shows .
 Klum continued to work as an Angel and also designed an eponymous lingerie and cosmetics collection .
 Klum reigned as one of the world’s highest-paid models, according to Forbes magazine . Klum increased her wealth by pursuing a host of other lucrative business ventures .
 She launched her own swimsuit calendars and signature scent in Europe, which achieved sales totaling €1 million in July 2002, its first month of sales .
 The following month the Caribbean island of Grenada issued a set of six $1.50 stamps emblazoned with an image of Klum . Grenada also issued six stamps with the image of the singer .
 By the spring of 2003, Klum had simultaneously launched a diamond and coloured gemstone collection with the fine jeweler Mouawad for the TV home shopping network QVC . QVC also launched three exotic styles of casual Birkenstock shoes in 2003 .
 Klum went on to host an adventure program for the Discovery channel . She landed some small film roles as well as spots in video games .
 The 1.77-m (5-ft 91/2-in) blonde, renowned for her sunny disposition, also worked as a model .
 On May 10, 2005, Klum married British soul singer Seal, with whom she had several children . She legally took Seal’s surname, Samuel, shortly before she legally took it .
 Klum's daughter resulted from an earlier liaison with an Italian businessman . Klum considered Seal Seal Seal her father . Seal was Seal's father .
 In 2007 she recorded with her husband the romantic duet Wedding Day with him . Klum also took a turn as a singer; in 2007 they recorded a duet .
 Akshay Kumar's star in the Bollywood pantheon showed no sign of dimming in 2009 . He was slated to appear in seven films, a feat for even this prolific actor .
 The year also marked his receipt of one of the Indian government’s highest civilian honours, the Padma Shri, in recognition of his contribution to India’�s cultural life . He received the award for his contributions to cultural life in India .
 Akshay Kumar was born Rajiv Hari Om Bhatia . He was the son of a government worker . Kumar is a Bollywood actor .
 Kumar worked at a Bangkok food stall, tried his hand at modeling, and appeared in several films before being offered a starring role in Deedar by director Pramod Chakravarthy .
 Akshay Kumar took his professional name after his early days as a professional footballer . He took the professional name 'Akshay' during his early years of his career .
 Kumar played in a steady stream of thrillers and fast-paced dramas, including Kduladi . Kumar was a rising star in a number of films and dramas .
 His athleticism and daredevil nature were well displayed in action films such as Main khiladi tu anari . Kumar played a police inspector protecting a star witness in the film .
 Mohra was one of the most popular Indian films of 1994 . He again portrayed a conflicted policeman in Mohra . Mohra is one of India's most popular films .
 Despite his success in these high-intensity roles, Kumar's good looks also led him to star in romantic comedies such as Yeh dillagi .
 Ajnabee was a change of pace for the usually charming actor . His turn as a philandering husband and murderer won him his first Filmfare award .
 Garam masala garnered him a second Filmfare award, for best actor in a comedic role . Kumar continued to appear in comedies with comedies such as Garam Masala .
 Pixar’s pioneering use of computer animation created memorable images for films such as Toy Story and Finding Nemo . Up was marketed to a youth-obsessed culture yet featured a septuagenarian as its hero . Pixar's success was indicative of its success .
 Lasseter was the driving force behind Pixar’s lucrative formula . He was a combination of cuttingedge computer animation and classic Disney-style storytelling that appealed to children .
 In October 2009 the Producers Guild of America announced that in recognition of his body of work, Lasseter would receive the 2010 David O Selznick Achievement Award in Motion Pictures . It was the first time a producer of animated films had been so honoured .
 Lasseter won a drawing contest at the age of five, encouraged by his mother, an art teacher .
 In high school he read a book about the making of Disney’s animated film Sleeping Beauty . He was inspired to pursue a career as an animator .
 John Lasseter attended animation courses at the California Institute of the Arts . He attended col95 Biographies .
 Lasseter was fired in 1983 . His growing enthusiasm for nascent computer animation technology put him at odds with some of his superiors, however .
 Later that year Lasseter was hired by Lucasfilm to work in the computer graphics division at Lucasfilm . He was later hired by the studio to work on computer graphics .
 His first assignment was to direct an animated short film, The Adventures of Andre and Wally B . It was the first movie to feature computer-generated characters . He directed a short film that was first animated movie with computer generated characters .
 In 1986 the division was sold to Apple Computer Inc. cofounder Steve Jobs and became an independent company called Pixar . Pixar focused primarily on developing and selling animation software .
 Pixar also produced television commercials and short films, with Lasseter serving as director . The company also produced several short films and television commercials .
 In 1991 Lasseter got a second chance to show Disney executives the value of computerized animation . Pixar struck a deal with the entertainment giant to produce movies for them .
 The initial effort, Toy Story, was directed by Lasseter and was the first fully computer-animated feature film in history . Toy Story is the first computer animated feature film to be made using computers .
 Toy Story was the highest-grossing film of 1995, selling $362 million in tickets worldwide . It resulted in a second Academy Award for Lasseter, this time for special achievement .
 Pixar continued to generate hits for Disney, including A Bug's Life and Toy Story 2 . Lasseter directed both Toy Story and A Bug the Life .
 When Disney purchased Pixar in 2006, Lasseter made a triumphant return to the company that had fired him more than 20 years earlier . He became chief creative officer of both Pixar s and Disney’s animation operations .
 The next day he renounced the peace process adopted at the Annapolis conference in 2007 . He renounced it the next day .
 Lieberman was named on Time magazine's list of the year’s most influential people . Lieberman's prominence in the new government earned him a place on the list .
 Evet Lvovich Lieberman (or Liberman) immigrated to Israel with his parents when he was 20, taking the new name Avigdor . He took his new name after his parents moved to Israel from Russia .
 In 1988 he moved with his wife to the Jewish West Bank settlement of Nokdim . He moved to the settlement in 1988 with his family .
 In 1993 he masterminded Netanyahu’s successful campaign for the Likud party leadership . That same year he allied himself with Benjamin Netanyahu, and in 1993 he allied him with him .
 Lieberman was appointed director general of the prime minister's office in 2010 . Lieberman has been in charge of the office since then-Prime Minister Netanyahu became prime minister .
 Lieberman left Likud to found the nationalist party Yisrael Beiteinu . Lieberman had a falling out with Netanyahu after a falling-out with Netanyahu .
 The party, which drew its membership mainly from Russian immigrants, won four Knesset seats in the 1999 national election .
 Israeli Arab towns bordering the West Bank would be ceded to Palestine and West Bank Jewish settlements bordering the 1967 Green Line would be part of Israel . In late 2004 Lieberman outlined his ""Populated Area Exchange Plan"
 Everyone remaining in Israel, including Arabs, would be required to take a loyalty oath or lose the right to vote . Arab population would be under pressure to take loyalty oath, including Arab citizens .
 Lieberman's party won 11 seats in the March election . Lieberman was brought into the new coalition as minister for strategic threats in 2006 .
 Lieberman resigned in January 2008 over the Annapolis process with the Palestinians . Lieberman's service in a top security portfolio gave him national leadership credibility . Lieberman resigned over Annapolis plan with Palestinians .
 Lieberman sharpened his questions about Israel’s Arab minority in the run-up to the 2009 election . He expressed doubts about their loyalty to the Jewish state and threatened to make citizenship dependent on an oath of allegiance .
 In May 2009 Yisrael Beiteinu introduced such a citizenship law and other legislation perceived as anti-Arab legislation .
 Lieberman also was interrogated by police on suspicion of money laundering, bribery, and obstructing justice . Lieberman was questioned by police soon after taking over as foreign minister . Lieberman's controversial career threatened to end his controversial political career .
 Sebastien Loeb continued his remarkable run at the top of his sport in 2009 . Loeb was born in 1974 in Haguenau, France .
 2008 World Rally Championship driver’s title was a record fifth consecutive title . He has won the first five WRC races in early 2009 to start his push for a sixth world championship .
 Loeb narrowly edges Mikko Hirvonen of Finland for yet another WRC title . Loeb took first place in the final race of the season, the Wales Rally of Great Britain .
 Loeb won five gold medals at the French national gymnastics championships by the time he was 15 . Loeb discovered a new love for auto racing after winning five golds at gymnastics .
 In 1995 he took up rally driving with co-driver Daniel Elena of Monaco . In 1998 he started racing in the French Citroen Saxo Trophy Series, winning twice that season . The following year he took the title in the series .
 The 2002 season was Loeb’s first as a WRC driver with Citroen Total World Rally Team . He was runnerup in his first race and won his second, the Rally of Germany . Loeb won his first WRC race and was runner-up in 2002
 During his first full season in 2003, he captured three events to finish just one point behind Petter Solberg of Norway . During the 2003 season, he won three races to finish one point ahead of Solberg in 2003 . He won three titles in 2003 and 2013 .
 He won the first of his five straight world driver’s championships in 2004 by tying the WRC season record with six victories . He tied the record for the season with six wins in 2004 .
 The next season proved to be even more dominant, as Loeb had a record-setting run to the title . Loeb went on to win the title in 2012 .
 He posted 10 victories, becoming the first driver to win 6 in a row . He took the title by 56 points to break a 25-year-old record . He became the first person to win six straight races .
 In 2006 Loeb raced for the private team Citroen Xsara WRC and beat the record of 26 career victories set by Carlos Sainz of Spain, scoring 8 more wins to register 28 wins .
 He took the title despite missing the last four rounds of the championship owing to a broken shoulder that he suffered in a biking accident . He took a third consecutive drivers' title, despite missing four rounds due to the injury .
 Loeb returned to Citroen Sport and drove the new C4 WRC in 2007, but learning to handle a new car did not prevent him from winning eight events . Loeb won his fourth consecutive WRC title in 2007 and 2008 .
 Loeb set a record with 11 wins in one season to give him 47 career victories . Loeb won his fifth consecutive WRC title in 2008, with Elena still at his side .
 In May 2009 Loeb suffered a disappointing loss in the sixth race of the season, but he had some consolation when he was awarded the Legion of Honour by French Pres. Nicolas Sarkozy .
 Joanna Lumley, a tall, blonde British comedic actress, achieved something that is achieved by very few people—including individual MPs . Lumley was born in 1946 in Srinagar, Kashmir, British India .
 She pressured the U.K. government to abandon a specific policy and change course . The U.S. government has been forced to abandon specific policy .
 Her cause was that of supporting the Gurkha soldiers from Nepal who had fought for the British army and were seeking to settle in Britain . Her tenacity that impressed many impressed many, she got her way .
 During fierce fighting in Burma in June 1944, his life was saved by a Gurkha during a battle that saw a number of Gurkhas earn awards for bravery . During the battle in Burma, he was awarded a bravery award for his bravery .
 Lumley’s family returned to Britain, where she was educated at private schools . From Lucie Clayton finishing school she emerged with a posh accent and upperclass bearing .
 She escaped the social restrictions of her upbringing, becoming an unmarried mother at 21 . Nevertheless, she escaped social restrictions, becoming a single mother .
 Though she failed an exam at 16 to enter the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, she appeared in a series of small roles, including one in the James Bond film On Her Majesty’s Secret Sen’ice .
 In Ab Fab, as it came to be known, she played Patsy, an aging, sexually aggressive, chain-smoking, heavy-drinking, drugtaking fashionista .
 For Lumley, it was a gloriously outrageous, show-stealing, award-winning performance . Lumley won the award for her role in the film .
 Lumley’s celebrity status helped power the campaign to give all Gurkhas who had fought for the British army the right to settle in Britain . Lumley helped to persuade the British government to give the Gurkas the chance to settle .
 Labour government that won power in 1997 granted permission to all future Gurkha soldiers . Prior to 1997, none had that right, but Labour won power that year .
 Lumley’s trenchant support for lifting of all restrictions led to a rare government defeat in the House of Commons on April 29, 2009, and the government announced that the right of settlement would be extended to all Gurkhas with more than four years' military service . Lum
 The thousands of people and charitable foundations who invested with Madoff, directly or indirectly through “feeder funds,” spent the early months of 97 Biographies 2009 assessing their often-huge financial losses .
 Investigators continue to pursue other suspects, including Madoff’s accountant and some other members of the Madoff family . United States federal investigators continued to pursue Madoff's accountant .
 Estimates of losses range from $50 billion to $65 billion . Investigators acknowledged that locating the missing funds might prove impossible .
 On June 26, a federal court ordered that Madoff forfeit more than $170 billion in assets . Madoff was convicted of defrauding millions of millions of dollars in fraud .
 Bernard Madoff founded Bernard L Madoff Investment Securities with his wife . He studied law briefly at Brooklyn Law School . Madoff invested in Bernie Madoff's Ponzonzi scheme . He founded Madoff Securities with wife .
 He also burnished his reputation by developing relationships with regulators .
 Madoff exploited an air of exclusivity to attract serious, moneyed investors . Not everyone was accepted into his funds, and it became a mark of prestige to be admitted as a Madoff investor .
 Investigators later posited that Madoff’s pyramid, or Ponzi, scheme, originated in the early 1980s . Investigators later said Madoff's pyramid scheme began in the '80s and '90s . Madoff was convicted of fraudulently defrauding his
 As more investors joined, their money was used to fund payouts to existing investors . Madoff’s firm and, allegedly, his family and friends allegedly, paid fees to Madoff's firm .
 Some skeptical individuals concluded that his promised investment returns (10% annually, in both up and down markets) were not credible . Others questioned why the firm’s auditor was a small storefront operation with few employees .
 In 2001 Barron’s financial magazine published an article that cast doubt on Madoff's integrity . Financial analyst Harry Markopolos repeatedly presented the Securities and Exchange Commission with evidence .
 Still, the SEC took no actions against Madoff . Large accounting firms such as PricewaterhouseCoopers, KPMG, and BDO Seidman reported no red flags in their financial reviews . JPMorgan Chase bank ignored possible signs of moneylaundering activities in Madoff’
 Madoff's operations collapsed in December 2008 amid the global economic crisis . He reportedly admitted the dimensions of the scam to members of his family . Madoff reportedly told family members about the extent of the fraud .
 Later he acknowledged his guilt in court and issued a public apology to the many victims of his massive swindle . Later he issued an apology to many victims .
 Fiat gained control of the American car company following its emergence from bankruptcy . Marchionne was placed at the helm in hopes that he could produce a similar transformation at Chrysler .
 Marchionne was bom into an Italian military family, but when he was 14, his family immigrated to Toronto . He was born into a military family and moved to Canada at the age of 14 .
 After completing his law degree, Marchionne immediately began working as a tax specialist and chartered accountant for Deloitte & Touche LLP in Toronto . He has been married to Sergio Sergio Sergio Agroschi for more than 20 years .
 From 1985 to 1988 he served as group controller and then director of corporate development for the global packaging company Lawson Mardon Group Ltd. in Toronto . In 1988, he was the head of the company's packaging division .
 The following year Marchionne became the executive vice president of the conglomerate Glenex Industries Inc. The next year he was the executive VP of the company . Marchionnne is now the CEO of the Italian-owned company .
 He served as vice president of finance and chief financial officer for the accounting firm Acklands Ltd. from 1990 to 1992 . He was vice president and chief executive of the firm's accounting division .
 Marchionne quickly moved up through the ranks at the new company . In 1997 he became the CEO and managing director of Algroup . He is currently the CEO of the company .
 He was appointed CEO and then chairman of the spin-off company Lonza Group Ltd. Following the firm’s merger with the Montreal-based production company Alcan Inc. in 2000, he became CEO and chairman .
 In 2002 Marchionne was named CEO of Swiss testing, verification, and certification company Societe Generale Generale de Surveillance Group .
 He quickly returned the troubled car company to profitability, however, by downsizing and restructuring management . He also sped up the introduction of new models, notably the retro-styled minicar sensation Fiat 500 . Fiat 500 is among the most popular models in the world .
 Marchionne was appointed chairman of SGS in 2006 . He was knighted as a Knight of the Order of Merit for Labour, an Italian honour bestowed upon entrepreneurs .
 In 2008 he was among the winners of the CNBC Europe European Business Leaders Awards . In 2008, he was named one of CNBC Europe's European Business leaders .
 Ricardo Martinelli of the opposition Democratic Change party prevailed in the May 3, 2009, Panamanian presidential election . Martinelli, Ricardo Boosted by a campaign that promised 98 Biographies ""real change,” .
 Martinelli’s triumph went against the recent trend gaining momentum across Latin America that saw voters showing a preference for leftist anti-U.S. candidates . Martinelli's triumph goes against a recent trend of leftist candidates in Latin America .
 He went on to study finance at the Central American Institute of Business Administration in San Jose, Costa Rica .
 Martinelli owned Super 99, Panama's largest chain of supermarkets . He joined Super 99 in 1981 after a stint at Citibank . Super 99 is Panama's biggest supermarket chain .
 He was director of the Chamber of Commerce of Panama before serving as the country’s director of social security . He was also director of national security .
 Martinelli made his first bid for the five-year, one-term presidency in 2004 . He finished last among four candidates, receiving only 5.3% of the vote . Martinelli has been in office since 2004 .
 For his 2009 run, he led a coalition of right-wing parties and contributed significant funding to his own cause . He presented himself as an outsider vying for the office that had been held by traditional political powers since 1989 .
 Martinelli's message of change resonated among poor voters in Panama . PRDP candidate Balbina Herrera was considered the favourite .
 The early challenges of Martinelli’s presidency included fighting an escalating crime rate and stabilizing the economy . In 2008, the economy had grown at a 9.2% annual rate but was forecast to rise only 3.2 percent .
 He aimed to influence the initiation of a free-trade agreement that had already been signed with the United States but had stalled in the U.S. Congress .
 Martinelli was also relying on a $5.25 billion project to expand the Panama Canal to provide some short-term benefits to the economy . The Canal project was expected to create thousands of jobs .
 Northern Ireland Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness of Sinn Fein (the IRA’s political wing), a former IRA commander, worked harmoniously with his former enemies to run the province .
 McGuinness turned down offers of special police protection . McGuinness himself was considered a possible assassination target .
 In 1973 a Special Criminal Court in the Irish Republic sentenced him to six months in prison . He had been caught in a car containing large quantities of explosives and ammunition .
 McGuinness was one of the IRA's most important members during the 1970s, '80s, and '90s . The IRA kept secret the membership of its seven-man Army Council .
 McGuinness was involved in spasmodic secret talks with British government ministers and officials to end the conflict . He was reportedly planning attacks on civilians in Northern Ireland and the British mainland .
 In 1972 McGuinness, with fellow IRA leader Gerry Adams, privately negotiated with British Secretary of State for Northern Ireland William Whitelaw, but these and other talks over the next two decades came to nothing .
 McGuinness was the IRA's chief negotiator in the deliberations, also secret, that culminated in 1998 in the Good Friday Agreement . McGuinness has been a key figure in negotiations between the IRA and the British government .
 Sinn Fein joined a coalition government to rule Northern Ireland . This pact finally ended the conflict and brought Sinn Fein into a government . Sinn Fein was the party to end the Northern Ireland conflict .
 McGuinness was elected to the new Assembly and was appointed minister of education . McGuinness won the election to the Assembly in 2011 . He was also elected as the new Minister of Education in Northern Ireland .
 Northern Ireland’s Executive and Assembly was suspended for some years . Disagreements over policing and the decommissioning of arms caused the suspension . But a fresh agreement in 2006 paved the way for them to be revived .
 When Paisley retired in 2008, he was succeeded by the DUP’s Peter Robinson, who was considered to be even more militantly anti-Republican .
 A shared need to rebuild the province’s economy and attract international investment led to cooperation between former opponents . Once again, however, a shared need for rebuilding the province's economy and attracting international investment was the cause .
 Showing Pre-Algebra Who's Boss was issued in a paperback edition in June 2009 .
 In her senior year she took advanced course work in mathematical analysis . With the encouragement and supervision of Lincoln Chayes, McKellar and McKellar, she conducted research .
 McKellar testified in 2000 before a United States congressional subcommittee on ways to increase the number of women in mathematics-related fields . McKellar chose not to pursue postgraduate studies, but found a voice in advocating math education .
 How to Survive Middle-School Math Without Losing Your Mind or Breaking Your Nail? Help girls grasp fractions, decimals and percentages .
 Kiss My Math provides insight into more advanced math topics, such as exponents, inequalities, and solving for a variable . She also discusses exponents and inequalities .
 McKellar attributed some of the motivation for writing the books to her own early difficulties with math . McKellar argued that it could be sexy as well as empowering for women to be smart and good at math .
 From about age seven McKellar lived in Los Angeles, where she studied at the Diane Hill Flardin Young Actors Space, a performing-arts academy . McKellar is best known for her role in the upcoming HBO series "Broadway"
 Before landing her role in The Wonder Years, McKellar appeared in commercials and in two episodes oiThe Twilight Zone .
 McKellar was the lead role she played in the 2003 San Diego Repertory Theater production of Proof . The Pulitzer Prize-winning play is about a mathematically gifted but troubled woman .
 Lionel Messi scored 38 goals in 51 appearances in the 2008-09 season with FC Barcelona . He helped his team to a treble of trophies in winning the Spanish La Liga championship, the Copa del Rey, and the 2009 Union des Associations Europeennes de Football Champions League final .
 Cristiano Ronaldo was runner-up in the balloting for both the Federation Internationale de Football Association World Player of the Year and France Football Magazine Golden Ball as best European player of the year .
 Messi was also voted Federation Internationale des Associations de Footballeurs Professionels Young Player of the Year for the third year in succession . Messi won the award for the second year in a row with Barcelona .
 In December 2009 Messi won the Golden Ball and FIFA Player of the Year honours . Messi also won FIFA's Golden Ball for the first time in a year .
 By age 21 Messi had achieved fame on two continents that had seemed impossible 10 years earlier . Messi has achieved fame by age 21 . Messi is now the world's No. 1 most famous footballer .
 He started playing soccer as a boy and in 1995 joined Newell’s Old Boys . He has been in the Premier League since 1995 and is now a professional footballer .
 Messi attracted the attention of the club River Plate, but he was diagnosed with growth hormone deficiency . For his working-class family it was impossible to find the money for his expensive medical treatment . Messi attracted interest from River Plate but was unable to afford treatment .
 Messi's potential was spotted on a scouting mission in South America . Carles Rexach, then the sporting director of FC Barcelona, recognized Messi’s potential and arranged for him to receive treatment if he was prepared to move to Europe .
 Messi arrived in Barcelona at the age of 13 and began playing for the club’s Under-14 team . Messi joined Barcelona's Under-16 team at age of 14 . Messi has been a prolific goalscorer since his arrival in Spain .
 He scored 21 goals in 14 games for Barcelona's junior team . He quickly graduated through the C and B teams until given his informal debut with FC Barcelona at age 16 .
 Messi, then 17, became the youngest official player and goal scorer in the Spanish La Liga in 2004-05 season . Messi is now the world's top scorer and official official player in the La Liga .
 Though only 1.69 m tall and weighing 67 kg , he was strong, well balanced, and versatile on the field .
 Messi is a left-footed, quick, and precise in control of the ball . Messi displayed distribution and could thread his way through packed defenses . Messi showed distribution and ability to thread through packed defences .
 In 2005 he was granted Spanish citizenship by the Spanish government . The honour was greeted with mixed feelings by the Catalan supporters of Barcelona .
 Messi established himself as a full Argentine international with 36 appearances, beginning in 2005 . Messi’s ties with his homeland remained strong, however, and he played 36 times for Barcelona . Messi has been linked with a move to Real Madrid in the summer .
 Argentina midfielder scored two goals in five matches as Argentina swept to the gold medal at the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games . He distinguished himself as a member of Argentina's victorious 2005 FIFA World Youth Championship squad, and represented his country in the 2006 FIFA World Cup finals .
 Maya Arulpragasam, better known by her stage name M.I.A.A., helped raise awareness of the Tamil insurgency in Sri Lanka in 2009 .
 Her efforts to support humanitarian aid for civilians in the Tamil region of Sri Lanka were opposed by the Sri Lankan army . Critics claimed that her lyrics and music videos betrayed a veiled sympathy for the Tamil separatist movement .
 Arulpragasam was born in London, but spent much of her childhood in northern Sri Lanka . She was raised in Sri Lanka and spent most of her life in the north .
 When the civil war between the Tamil minority in the north and the Sinhalese government in the south intensified in the 1980s, her father joined the militant Tamil Tigers . The rest of her family fled the country, eventually returning to London .
 There Arulpragasam studied visual art, often creating works that were influenced by the conflict she had witnessed as a child .
 She received her first exposure to the music industry as the graphic designer for British pop punk group Elastica . She familiarized herself with the recording equipment used by producers .
 Anticipation of a full-length album intensified among her fans with the release of Piracy Funds Terrorism, a 2004 mix tape produced with American songwriter DJ Diplo .
 Parts of M.I.A.'s 2005 debut album had been circulating on the Internet for almost a year . Its release was still greeted with much critical interest .
 The album title, Arular, was the name her father adopted while a Tamil Tiger . The album cover featured Arulpragasam’s face surrounded by a collage of cartoon tanks and AK47s .
 The compilation was a huge success on the club circuit, based on the strength of singles such as ""Galang” and ""Bucky Done Gun" M.I.A.’s politics lent a new gravity to the dance music genre .
 M.I.A.’s second album, Kala, was released in 2007 . It featured guest production appearances by Diplo and American hip-hop icon Timbaland .
 John Evans Atta Mills was officially sworn in to succeed John Agyekum Kufuor as president of Ghana in 2009 . Mills was sworn in as president on Jan. 9, 2009 .
 The election marked the second time in Ghana’s history that one legitimately elected leader had handed over power to another .
 Democracy had been established and reinforced in the West African country, despite occasional eruptions of ethnic conflict and political tension . It demonstrated that after an era of coups and dictatorship , democracy had established .
 On his return to Ghana, he taught law at his alma mater, where he remained for some 25 years . He taught at the law school for 25 years before returning to Ghana .
 Mills eventually left academia to establish a distinguished career in public service . Mills eventually became a prominent public figure in the world of politics .
 He was appointed in 1988 as acting commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service . He eventually became substantive commissioner . He was the first person to become substantive commissioner of IRS .
 Jerry Rawlings's running mate in the 1996 elections was Jerry Rawling's vice president . He took office in 1997, as vice president, a post he held until 2001 .
 Mills was roundly criticized for statements that if elected he would consult with Rawlings, but in 2008 Mills distanced himself from his former mentor . During subsequent presidential campaigns, Mills was criticized for his comments .
 Mills embraced a political platform that was more comprehensive and less divisive than that of either Nkrumah or Rawlings . Mills was a social democrat who believed in the concept of social welfare espoused by Kwame Nkumah .
 Ghanaians ranked among the world’s poorest people, with an average daily income of $2.32, a 60% literacy rate, and 10% unemployment . After his inauguration he set about to improve the socioeconomic situation of ordinary Ghanaians .
 In his first state of the nation address on February 19, Mills announced an austerity program . Mills promised steep cuts in government spending, beginning with cutbacks in wages and the use of two presidential jets .
 He instituted policies to eliminate four cabinet ministries and reduce the size of the presidential convoy . He also instituted policies that eliminated four Cabinet ministries .
 In 2009 former Botswanan president Festus Mogae continued to have an impact on politics but on a global scale . He took centre stage as a speaker or panelist at various international conferences .
 His father was a headman of the Talaote, a Kalanga clan among the Ngwato . He was born in the Kalanga tribe of Ngwata .
 He joined the Development Planning (later the Finance and Development Planning) Ministry of newly independent Botswana, under Vice Pres. Mandela . He then joined the Ministry of Newly Independent Botswana .
 Ketumile Masire became a key figure in Botswana's remarkable rise to economic prosperity . He was the head of the ministry's permanent staff . Masire was Botswana’s most successful minister .
 Mogae was recruited by the International Monetary Fund in Washington, D.C., as alternate executive and then executive director for Anglophone Africa . Mogae has been in charge of the IMF since 1976 . In 1976 Mogae worked as an alternate executive at the IMF in Washington D.
 He returned home to serve as governor of the central bank of Botswana and permanent secretary to Masire . Masire had become president in 1980 and became president in 1994 .
 He was appointed Masire’s vice president in 1992 after the resignation of Peter Mmusi . He subsequently stood as an MP for Palapye, where his father had been headman, where he had been .
 Mogae succeeded Masire as president in April 1998 . He recruited Ian Khama, substantive chief of the Ngwato, as his vice president . He appointed BDP faction leader Ponatshego Kedikilwe as minister of finance and development planning .
 Mogae continued the policies of his predecessor and successfully steered the BDP through the 1999 elections . Mogae succeeded in other respects .
 He made himself internationally distinctive among the African leaders by acknowledging the international scientific consensus surrounding the HIV/AIDS epidemic .
 President Mogae described the epidemic as a national crisis that threatened the very survival of his people . Mogae invited international assistance in a June 2001 speech before the UN General Assembly .
 Mogae viewed as shy but principled technocrat who did not shrink from the highest responsibilities . Mogae was viewed as a shy, principled technologist who didn't shrink from responsibilities .
 His background at the IMF and criticism of the repressive regime of Robert Mugabe in Zimbabwe, however, left him open to being seen as too pro-Western . His criticism of Mugabe's repressive regime in Zimbabwe leaves him open .
 Mogae relinquished the presidency to Khama in April 2008 . Mogae was elevated to the status of elder statesman after relinquishing presidency .
 Alan Moore's Watchmen debuted in theatres in March 2009 . Watchmen was the highly anticipated film . Moore's name was conspicuously absent from the film's credits .
 Moore took legal steps to ensure that his name would not appear in any press materials related to the project . Moore collaborated with artist Dave Gibbons to create what was widely regarded to be the most influential graphic novel of all time .
 Moore was committed to the idea that his creations could best be served by remaining on the printed page . Moore's creations were best served by the printed pages, he said . Moore said that Moore's work should be printed on the pages of his creations .
 This opinion is reinforced by his previous ill-fated dealings with Hollywood . This opinion was reinforced by the fact that he has a history of failed relationships with Hollywood stars .
 Moore’s From Hell was turned into a straightforward action film with an unlikely happy ending . Moore's The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen was stripped of its literary sensibility . New characters were added to the film to appeal to an American audience .
 Moore celebrated the July settlement of one of the longest-running legal disputes in the comics world . Moore was disinterested in Watchmen, but Moore celebrated his settlement .
 Marvelman had languished in intellectual property limbo for more than a decade as parties fought over who owned the rights to the original stories . Marvelman was revived by Moore in the early 1980s .
 Marvel Comics inked an agreement with Marvelman’s 93-year-old original creator, Mick Anglo, to return to the page . Marvelman is set to be back on the pages of Marvel Comics .
 Moore entered the publishing industry in the early 1970s . Moore worked as a writer and artist for a number of independent magazines .
 He broke into the mainstream with stories for Doctor Who Weekly and 2000 AD . His gift for deconstructing the superhero genre first appeared in 1982, when he resurrected Marvelman for Warrior magazine .
 Moore imagined Marvelman as a middle-aged reporter who had forgotten his role as the world’s pre-eminent superhero . Moore's later stories examined how an individual with godlike powers would interact with human society .
 Moore’s next project, V for Vendetta, placed near-infinite power in the hands of a ruling political party (modeled on Britain's National Front) and an erudite terrorist in a Guy Fawkes mask as the protagonist . Moore's next project is a
 DC Comics hired Moore to write Swamp Thing in 1983 . Moore transformed the monster comic into a monthly meditation on life and death . Moore's Swamp Thing is now a monthly series of comics that focuses on the subject of death .
 It pushed the boundaries of what could be done in a mainstream book, and led to Watchmen . His success with it led to his success with Watchmen, which he wrote in the comic book .
 Watchmen helped define the term graphic novel to many readers . Its mature story line sampled from the dystopian visions of both Marvelman and V for Vendetta .
 Moore’s later work continued to examine the psychology of the superhero, most notably in the Image Comics title Supreme . Moore's later work focused on the psychology behind the superhero .
 He launched his own publishing imprint, America’s Best Comics, in 1999 . He launched the imprint in 1999, America's Best Comics .
 Moss set a number of I-AA receiving records in his freshman season at Marshall . Moss helped lead Marshall to a national championship . Moss also led Marshall to the national championship in 2012 .
 Moss set a I-A record by catching 25 touchdown passes during his sophomore year . Moss caught 25 touchdown catches during his senior season at Marshall . Moss set the record for most touchdown catches in Division I A (later the Football Bowl Subdivision)
 Moss was considered one of the most talented players available in the 1998 NFL draft . He was not selected until the 21st pick of the first round (by the Minnesota Vikings) because of concerns about his character . Moss was drafted with concerns about the character of Moss .
 Moss’s mix of incredible speed and outstanding leaping ability in a 1.93-m (6-ft 4-in) frame made him a sensation in his first year with the Vikings . Moss was a sensation for the Vikings in 2012 and 2013 . Moss is expected to be
 He set an NFL rookie record with 17 receiving touchdowns . He was named NFL Offensive Rookie of the Year . He also earned first-team All-Pro honours .
 Minnesota scored the most points in NFL history that season . The Vikings posted a 15-1 regular-season record before losing in the National Football Conference championship game .
 Moss scored only 11 total touchdowns in two seasons with the Oakland Raiders . Moss was traded to the New England Patriots in 2007 . Moss scored 11 touchdowns in his two seasons as a member of the Patriots .
 In 2007-08 he teamed with quarterback Tom Brady to form the core of a high-powered offense that broke the Vikings’ singleseason scoring mark . The New England Patriots posted the first 16-0 regular-season record in NFL history .
 Moss broke Rice’s 20-year-old NFL single-season record by catching 23 touchdown passes . Moss also set a new NFL record for catching 23 touchdowns in a single season .
 Former Iranian prime minister Mir Hossein Mousavi returned to the political fore in 2009 with his entry into Iran's presidential election . Mousavi was elected to the presidency of Iran in 2009 .
 Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s controversial behaviour and rhetoric had damaged Iran's image abroad, he said . He argued that the president's controversial rhetoric and policies had damaged his country's image .
 Mousavi's campaign focused on economic concerns and personal freedoms . Economic concerns, increased personal freedoms, and the confrontation of corruption were also focal points of Mousavi’s .
 Mir Hossein Mousavi announced that he had won the election outright by a large margin . However, officials made a similar announcement in favour of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad .
 Ahmadinejad insisted that the election had been fair, but his opponents alleged electoral fraud . The vote was held in Iran's capital, Tehran, on December 11, 2007 . Ahmadinemad insisted that his election was fair, his opponents said fraud was widespread .
 Mousavi urged his supporters to protest the election results, and in the days following the election, demonstrations unfolded in the capital and elsewhere . Mousavi's supporters protested the results, but Mousavi died in 2009 .
 Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, publicly backed Ahmadinejad’s victory on June 19 . On June 19 he publicly backed his victory .
 Mousavi continued to urge supporters to demonstrate peacefully . But subsequent protests were greeted with increasing brutality as well as threats of further confrontation . Mousavi's supporters continued to protest peacefully, but the protests were met with brutality .
 Ahmadinejad was sworn in for his second term on August 5 . The election results were confirmed after a partial vote recount . The vote recount was completed following a partial recount .
 Mousavi participated in the underground resistance movement that challenged the regime of Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi . Mousavi was elected to the presidency of Iran in the 1980s .
 He briefly served as foreign minister during the hostage crisis with the U.S. in Iran . Militants seized 66 American citizens at the United States embassy in Tehran, holding them hostage for more than a year .
 Mousavi's tenure as prime minister was coloured by competition with Ali Khamenei, then president of Iran, who had strongly opposed his appointment . Mousavi was favoured for the position by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini .
 Following the abolition of the premiership in the late 1980s, Mousavi largely receded from the political spotlight . Mousavi's political career has spanned more than 30 years .
 He dedicated himself to the arts and held several lower-profile positions within the government, including that of presidential adviser to both Hashemi Rafsanjani and Mohammed Khatami .
 In 1998 he cofounded the Iranian Academy of the Arts in Tehran . He subsequently served as its president and the editorial director of Kliiyal .
 2008 United Nations Human Rights Prize, the 2008 Olof Palme Prize for outstanding achievement in promoting peace, and selection by the Nigerian newspaper Daily Trust as its 2008 African of the Year .
 The awards helped to bring global attention to what Mukwege and others had described as an “epidemic" of sexual violence in the eastern DRC . The awards were brought to attention to the systematic rape of women and girls in the region .
 As many as 27,000 sexual assaults were reported in just one of the eastern provinces, South Kivu, in 2006 . Experts say the vast majority of attacks were likely to go unreported .
 The Panzi Hospital of Bukavu represented the "front line" in the treatment of rape victims in the region . Mukwege founded the hospital, where he served as director and chief surgeon .
 Mukwege first became aware of the need for better medical care in the region while visiting sick parishioners with his father, a Pentecostal minister, in Bukavu, where he grew up . He says he was inspired by his father to become a doctor .
 After studying medicine in Burundi, Mukwege returned to the Congo and worked at a hospital in the village of Lemera . He is the founder of the Congolese Democratic Party .
 He switched his focus to obstetrics and gynecology after observing the harsh circumstances that many rural women faced while giving birth .
 He pursued further study in Angers, France, and established obstetrics and gynecology service in Lemera . In 1989 he established an obstetric service in the city of Lemera, France .
 Mukwege resettled in Bukavu after hospital in Lemera was destroyed during civil war in 1996 . He moved to the city during the civil war that erupted in late 1996 .
 Panzi Hospital was founded to provide maternity care that was lacking in the area . The hospital began to receive large numbers of sexual-assault victims, some as young as three years old and many with extreme injuries and mutilations .
 Among the perpetrators of the violence were Rwandan Hutu rebels based in the eastern DRC, government soldiers, and various armed gangs, according to reports .
 He urged greater involvement on the part of the international community, including a stronger UN mandate in the DRC, to end the violence .
 Mukwege hoped to use prize money to establish services aimed at helping survivors of sexual violence rejoin society . He hoped to set up services to help those who have been sexually assaulted re-enter society .
 On Jan. 2009, Michelle Obama became the first African American first lady of the United States . Barack Obama formally took office as the 44th president of the country .
 The new first lady has generated headlines seemingly with her every move . She shared an extraordinary embrace with Queen Elizabeth II in April . She also made a highly publicized speech in Copenhagen in October .
 The first lady also earned high praise for her fashion sense and appeared on the covers of such magazines as Vogue and Glamour .
 She used her public visibility to attract attention to a number of causes that were important to her . Most notable was her wish to improve the lives of the families of U.S. military personnel .
 In November she helped launch Mission Serve, a military-oriented community service organization . On several occasions, she visited with the spouses of soldiers who were serving overseas .
 Returning to Chicago, she took a job as a junior associate at Sidley & Austin . She specialized in intellectual property law .
 In 1989, while at the firm, she met Barack Obama, who had been hired as a summer associate . She met him as an associate at the time .
 In 1991 she became an assistant to Chicago Mayor Richard M Daley . Seeking a more public-service-oriented career path, she moved on to be assistant to the mayor .
 In 1993 she founded the Chicago branch of Public Allies, a leadership-training program for young adults . She founded Public Allies in 1993 . In 1993, she founded Chicago branch Public Allies .
 Michelle scaled back her professional career to devote herself to her husband's 2008 presidential campaign . Michelle stepped down from her job to focus on the 2008 campaign .
 Barack and Michelle Obama have two young daughters, Malia and Sasha . At the same time, she won many admirers for her dedication to her family .
 Michelle's openness on the campaign trail and in interviews endeared her to many . Michelle’s openness in interviews and openness on campaign trail endeared many to her many .
 Michelle later clarified that she meant to say that she was proud that Americans were eagerly engaging in the political process during the 2008 election . She continued to have an active role in her husband's campaign .
 aides referred to her as ""the closer" for her persuasiveness on the stump among uncommitted voters who attended rallies . Indeed, aides called her 'the closer'
 Her personal popularity remained high in 2009, with one poll conducted in April finding that 76% of Americans had a favourable opinion of her .
 At 13 he dropped his given name, Gideon, in favour of George (and added it officially to his name by deed poll) in what he subsequently described as a rare act of rebellion . At age 13, he added the name George to the name of his own, adding it officially
 In 1994 he joined the Conservative Research Department, which had served for many years as a kind of '‘nursery’ for leading politicians . He joined the Conservatives' Research Department .
 The following year he was appointed special adviser to Douglas Hogg, agriculture secretary in the then Conservative government . Mr Hogg was appointed as special adviser in the 1980s and 1990s . He was also appointed as agriculture secretary of the Conservative Party .
 In 1997 the Conservatives lost power and chose a new leader, William Hague, who hired Osborne as his political secretary . William Hague was the new leader of the Conservatives and Osborne joined him in 1997 .
 Osborne entered Parliament in 2001, and he was quickly seen as a rising star . Osborne is seen as one of the country's most powerful politicians . Osborne was first elected to the Commons in 2001 and has served as a minister .
 Michael Howard, the party’s leader from 2003 to 2005, appointed Osborne to the shadow cabinet in 2004 and to the senior post of shadow chancellor in 2005 . Osborne was also appointed to shadow chancellor and shadow chancellor by Howard in 2004 .
 David Cameron confirmed Osborne as shadow chancellor in 2010 . Osborne's friend David Cameron was elected Conservative leader later that year . Osborne’s friend Cameron confirmed him as the shadow chancellor .
 They wanted to rid the party of its right-wing image and its reputation for not caring about public services or people with average and below-average incomes . The party's image has been tarnished by its image of not caring for public services .
 Osborne promised to stick to Labour government’s spending plans on health and education . Osborne also promised to delay tax cuts until they could be afforded .
 In 2007 he committed the party to reducing inheritance taxes, but this was to be offset by a levy on wealthy foreigners living in Britain . In 2007, he did commit to reducing the party's inheritance taxes .
 Many people warmed to his message, while others disliked what they felt was his strident, youthful arrogance . Many people warm to him while others dislike what they feel is his youth arrogance .
 Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling regained their lead in the opinion polls as the team best able to run the U.K. economy . By spring 2009, Osborne and Cameron were once again ahead, despite being deliberately vague about what they would do if they were elected .
 The charismatic ""PacMan" was the idol of his people and a unifying force in the Philippines . His unprecedented popularity led to commercial endorsements, movies, TV shows, CDs, a postage stamp, and a failed bid for a congressional seat in 2007 .
 The fight sold approximately 1.25 millions buys, generating roughly $70 million in PPV revenue . The fight was the third largest PPV gross in nonheavyweight history . It was the fight's third largest gross gross gross ever .
 He won his first major title on Dec., 1998, knocking out Thailand’s Chatchai Sasakul to capture the World Boxing Council flyweight title . He won the title in 1998 with a knock-out from Chatcha Sasakur .
 He lost the title to Medgoen Singsurat (or Lukchaopormasak) of Thailand in September 1999 .
 Pacquiao won the International Boxing Federation junior featherweight title in June 2001 .
 The Ring magazine featherweight championship was won in 2003 . He knocked out Mexico’s Marco Antonio Barrera on Nov., 2003, to win The Ring Magazine featherweight title .
 Pacquiao won titles in a series of high-profile fights in the early 2000s . He won the WBC lightweight and featherweight titles in his career . The Filipino boxer also won the IBF featherweight and junior lightweight titles .
 Boxing Writers Association of America and The Ring’s Fighter of the Year in 2006 and 2008 . Boxer was The Ring's fighter of the year in 2008 and 2006 .
 A few days later he formed a new ""local” political party, the Peoples’ Champ Movement, back in the Philippines . The Peoples' Champ Movement is based in Manila .
 The victory brought Pacquiao’s record to 50 wins , 3 losses, and 2 draws, to 50 . The victory brings Pacquio’S record to three wins and three draws .
 Stefan Persson held his position in 2009 as one of the wealthiest individuals in the world . Persson, Stefan, is a retailing executive in Sweden .
 Persson learned fashion retailing from his father, Erling Persson, who founded a women’s clothing store, Hennes, in Vasteras, Sweden in 1947 .
 The company added a store in Stockholm and soon became a fixture of fashion in the Swedish market . It has since extended its reach to other European countries .
 Persson, who joined the family firm in 1972, helped lead its European expansion . Persson was present when the first British store opened in London in 1976 .
 He assumed leadership as H&M’s managing director and CEO in 1982 when his father became chairman of the board . His father was chairman of board when he became chairman .
 By the late 1990s, H&M had become Europe’s largest retail clothing chain . The chain is now the world's largest clothing retailer .
 As it grew, H&M built its reputation on “fast fashion”—inexpensive trendy designs with wide appeal . In-house designers initially created in-house designs, which were quickly transformed into mass-market garments . The chain is based in Turkey, Bangladesh,
 Persson recognized the business potential of—as well as the cultural interest in— global fashion . H&M did not alter garment designs for specific national or regional markets .
 By 2009 H&M operated more than 1,800 stores in 34 countries, with some 73,000 employees . By 2009 the company had more than 70,000 stores .
 Most of the brands sold through H&M were in-house labels . Persson tapped star appeal by soliciting design lines from Karl Lagerfeld, Stella McCartney, and Jimmy Choo .
 Persson's son Karl-Johan was named H&M’s CEO in July 2009 . Persson remained chairman of the company until he was named CEO .
 Maria Ramos took charge as the new CEO of the South African financial group Absa in March 2009 . Ramos, an economist and businesswoman, took charge on March 1, 2009, .
 In taking the post, she stepped down from the chief executive position with South Africa’s Transnet Ltd., where she had served since 2004 .
 Absa Group is one of South Africa’s ‘big four’ banks . Barclays is said to be considering a reduction of its 57% stake in Absa .
 Ramos was named outstanding businesswoman of the year in the African Business Awards granted by the Commonwealth Business Council and African Business magazine . Ramos won the award in July . Ramos has been awarded the best businesswoman award in the world for her achievements .
 Maria Da Conceicao Das N C Ramos moved to South Africa with her parents when she was a child . She later became a citizen of South Africa and is now a permanent citizen .
 Ramos worked in banking and finance (in both private and public-sector jobs) Ramos also taught economics and served as an economist for the African National Congress’s Department of Economic Planning .
 In 1996 she was appointed as the country’s director general of finance . She was appointed in 1996 as a director general general of the country .
 In that position she worked closely with Finance Minister Trevor Manuel to strengthen the country’s economy by increasing exports and cutting debt . The two effectively guided South Africa toward a free-market economic model .
 She had devoted most of her career to fiscal policy and economic planning . Her move in 2004 to Transnet appeared to be an unlikely choice . Transnet is operator of ports and shipping operations, bus and other passenger transit systems .
 Ramos was appointed as CEO of the state-controlled state-run transport company . Ramos has a near monopoly on transportation within South Africa . The company has more than 75,000 employees and has near monopoly in transportation .
 Unions resisted by demanding job guarantees, and strikes in 2006 forced changes in some of Transnet’s restructuring plans . Unions in 2006 led to a series of strikes against Transnet .
 Ramos was unable to restructure South Africa Airways . She transferred the money-losing SAA division to a different government entity . Ramos also strengthened Transnet's balance sheet .
 In 2009 best-selling American romance novelist Nora Roberts opened the Inn BoonsBoro, a cozy boutique hotel-bed and breakfast, in her home state of Maryland . Roberts has a penchant for creating charming settings not only for characters in her stories but for real-life couples .
 During renovations in 2008 to restore the structure to its former grandeur, a fire broke out in the hotel . Roberts and her contractors were forced to start from scratch .
 Roberts outfitted each room with furnishings theme-related to characters in great love stories with happy endings . The Shakespeare room is based on the lovers Oberon and Titania from A Midsummer Night’s Dream and the Pride and Prejudice suite .
 As a child, Roberts was an avid reader and frequently formulated her own stories . Roberts was also an avid writer and often formulated her stories .
 Her passion for creating fiction resulted in her extremely disciplined practice of writing up to eight hours, five days per week . Her passion was to create fiction and write for eight hours a week .
 She penned her first novel, Irish Thoroughbred, published in 1981 by Silhouette . Confined to her home with her two young sons during a blizzard in 1979 .
 Roberts enjoyed phenomenal success as she continued to whet her audience’s appetite with dozens of enthralling romance novels . Following that debut, Roberts has written dozens of novels .
 Robb to differentiate her romance books from these new suspense titles . Robb's new books include a new line of suspense titles called "Sneared" Robb .
 Sanctuary , The Reef and Midnight Bayou were adapted as made-for-television movies . Many of Sanctuary and The Reef were adapted into television movies . Sanctuary was Sanctuary .
 Roberts showed no sign of slowing down in 2009, releasing several new titles, including Bed of Roses, Black Hills, Kindred in Death, Promises in Death .
 She was the first inductee into the Romance Writers of America Hall of Fame . For her 100th novel, Montana Sky, she received the first recipient of its Centennial Award .
 Roberts received lifetime achievement awards from Waldenbooks and the Romance Writers of America . Roberts also received lifetime Achievement Awards .
 Funny People is the latest in a string of collaborations with writer-director-producer Judd Apatow . The film is about a friendship that blossoms between two comedians .
 At age 13 he began doing standup on the local comedy-club circuit . Three years later he auditioned for Freaks and Geeks, winning the role of the sardonic Ken .
 In 2001, Rogen was hired as both an actor and a writer on a new college-themed sitcom . The series proved to be short-lived, but Apatow was impressed by Rogen's ease in front of the camera and talent .
 Rogen and Evan Goldberg landed jobs writing for the Sacha Baron Cohen showcase Da Ali G Show . When that show met a similar fate, Rogen, along with childhood friend Evan Goldberg, landed jobs .
 Rogen also surfaced in an episode of the teen-centred drama Dawson’s Creek .
 The Legend of Ron Burgundy and The 40-Year-Old Virgin steal scenes from Steve Carell in the latter from Carell's character .
 Rogen put in another supporting performance in You, Me, and Dupree . Rogen's next film, "You, Me" was the film that made him a household name .
 In Knocked Up, Rogen starred as an oafish pot-smoking slacker whose one-night stand with an attractive career woman inadvertently results in her pregnancy .
 The crude yet heartwarming movie grossed more than $200 million worldwide . Rogen’s appeal established his A-list credentials .
 Superbad is a raunchy comedy of teenage misadventures that he and Goldberg had originally scripted when they were teenagers themselves . Rogen had long desired to make his own movies, however, and finally got the chance .
 The writing duo returned with Pineapple Express the following year . Rogen and Franco teamed up to star in the comedy .
 Rogen kept busy with a lead role in Zack and Miri Make a Pomo and a handful of animated features . At the same time, Rogen also starred in a number of animated films .
 Fans anticipated his turn as the Green Hornet in a Rogenand-Goldberg-penned adaptation of the comic-book franchise . The film is set to be released in 2010 .
 By year's end it was apparent that Rogen had become not only one of Hollywood’s premier goofballs .
 Cristiano Ronaldo was voted the Federation Internationale de Football Association Player of the Year for 2008 . Ronaldo won the award in January 2009 . Ronaldo was the first Portuguese footballer to win the award .
 The deal represented a substantial profit for United, which had paid £12.24 million when in 2003 it signed him from Sporting Club . United had previously signed him for Sporting Club in 2003 .
 Ronaldo scored a penalty goal on his La Liga debut against Deportivo de La Coruna in August . The Real Madrid star has been linked with a move to the Bernabeu in the summer . Ronaldo has been at Real Madrid since 2006, and has scored four goals in all competitions
 Ronaldo's father, Jose Dinis Aveiro, was equipment manager for local club Andorinha . Ronaldo was born in Portugal, Portugal and Portugal .
 At age 15 Ronaldo had a heart condition that required surgery, but he was sidelined only briefly and made a full recovery . Ronaldo has a history of heart problems, including surgery at the age of 15 .
 He played for Clube Desportivo Nacional of Madeira and then transferred to Lisbon, where he debuted for Sporting in 2002 . He made his debut for Sporting before moving to the Portuguese capital city .
 Ronaldo was an unusually tall player—at 1.85 m and 84 kg . Ronaldo was given a football he became transformed into a formidable athlete . Ronaldo is now an international star for Real Madrid and Portugal .
 He developed into a foraging forward with a freereined attack . Originally a right-winger, he developed into an attacking midfielder . He was a left-footed right-winger before becoming a central defender .
 He became famous for his triple step-over technique and dragbacks . He was able to mesmerize opponents with a ""sleight of foot’’ that made sufficient space to provide openings in opposing defenses .
 Ronaldo made 39 appearances for Manchester United in his first season with the club . He scored eight goals in 39 appearances, including one in the FA Cup final . Ronaldo scored one goal in the final of Manchester United's first season in charge .
 His finest season with United came in 2007-08 when he scored 42 League and Cup goals and earned the Golden Boot as Europe’s leading marksman, with 31 League goals .
 Manchester United went on to win the Champions League in 2009 . The team lost in the 2009 final to Barcelona in the final to reach the final .
 By late 2009 he had made 65 appearances and scored 22 goals for Portugal . He subsequently became the captain, and by late 2009 had played 65 times . He has since become the captain of Portugal's national team .
 Turkish-born American economist Nouriel Roubini was named to the "Power 50" list of influential people in finance .
 Roubini’s subscription Web site, RGE Monitor, began in 1997 as a single page of Web links . The site has become known as a central source for economic analysis of the ongoing global credit crisis .
 Dr. Doom was known for his dire economic predictions in 2006 . He convinced even those economists and pundits who had dismissed his pessimistic outlook that he had been right .
 Roubini was born to Iranian Jewish parents . He moved with his family to Iran and Israel before they settled in Italy in 1962 .
 Roubini began looking for the next national economy most likely to collapse . Out of curiosity, he began looking at the next country's most likely economic collapse .
 Many in the audience laughed when he predicted a deep, painful recession marked by the burst of a housing bubble, mortgage defaults, a collapse in real-estate values, and economic repercussions that would shock financial markets .
 Some say Roubini was a chronic pessimist who used any number of reasons over the years to predict and explain a market collapse . When his predictions came true beginning in 2007, some critics said it was a lucky call .
 Roubini's consulting firm and Web site benefited from the publicity . Meanwhile, he had a successful consulting firm . He says the publicity was good for him .
 By mid-2009 he had softened his worst-case scenario . He still criticized those who were predicting a recovery later in the year .
 Roubini expected more financial shocks, especially from bank insolvencies, to persist through 2009 . He said he expects more shocks to continue through 2009, especially in the coming years .
 He predicted that a somewhat normal, U-shaped economic recovery would begin in 2010 . More optimistically, he predicted that the economy would begin a normal recovery in 2011 .
 Wallace Shawn's first new play in more than 10 years premiered in 2009 at London's Royal Court Theatre . Grasses of a Thousand Colors premiered in the spring of 2009 at the Royal Court .
 Shawn Shawn had long been a critical darling in the British theatre . His oft-surreal, probing plays led some critics to call him America’s leading contemporary dramatist . Shawn is best known in his home country for his lengthy career as a character actor .
 His first produced work was Our Late Night, which premiered in 1975 . He won an Obie Award for playwriting for play .
 In 1979 he made his on-screen acting debut with a small role in director Woody Allen’s Manhattan . His “second career” soon led to his first brush with international fame .
 Shawn and Andre Gregory starred in the film My Dinner with Andre . The film was an art-house sensation upon its release and became a cult classic in later years . My Dinner With Andre was released in 1995 .
 Shawn won a second Obie Award for Aunt Dan and Lemon . He took a third for The Fever, a caustic 90-minute monologue that dissects the power relations between the world’s poor and elite .
 The Designated Mourner touched on similar ground, telling the story of educated and privileged people who grapple with their humanity during a chaotic civil war in an unnamed country .
 Sigurdardottir was the country’s first female prime minister and the world's first openly gay head of government . She was also the world’�s most openly gay prime minister .
 Sigurdardardottir worked as a flight attendant for Loftleidir Icelandic Airlines . She was active as a labour union organizer before becoming an activist .
 She twice served as chairman of the board of the Icelandic Cabin Crew Association . She was also chairman of board of board for the Icelandic cabin crew Association .
 She took an office job with a packaging company in Reykjavik in 1971 . She later sat on the board of the Commercial Workers’ Union .
 She quickly gained a reputation as an advocate for social justice . She has called for the strengthening of Iceland’s welfare system .
 She was named minister of social affairs in 1987 . She held a position until 1994, when she unsuccessfully campaigned for leadership of the Social Democrats .
 Icelandic Prime Minister Johanna Sigurdardottir formed her own party, Icelandic Ministry of Social Affairs and Social Security . The party captured four seats in the subsequent parliamentary election in Iceland . The election was the result of a split in the Icelandic parliament .
 The two parties eventually reconciled in 1999, when they joined with the Women's Alliance and the People's Alliance to contest that year's election . In 2000, the coalition formally became the Social Democratic Alliance .
 Sigurdardottir established a civil partnership with her companion, Jonina Leosdottir, a noted playwright and journalist, in 2002 .
 In public opinion surveys, she was consistently rated as Iceland's most popular politician . In Iceland, she has been Iceland's top politician since 2008 .
 The Social Democrats and the Left-Greens won 34 seats, capturing a slim majority in the 63-seat legislature . After she was sworn in as prime minister, she called for new parliamentary elections to be held .
 Iceland submitted its formal bid for EU entry on July 17 . Shortly thereafter Sigurdardottir announced that one of her top priorities as prime minister would be securing Iceland’s membership in the EU .
 Barack Obama nominated federal appeals court judge Sonia Sotomayor to the Supreme Court in order to fill the vacancy left by departing justice David Souter . Obama nominated the federal appeals judge to fill Souter's vacancy .
 Sotomayor’s confirmation hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee in July went smoothly, and the following month she was confirmed by the Senate .
 Sotomayor was the first Hispanic and the third woman to serve on the Supreme Court . She was also the third Hispanic and first Hispanic Supreme Court member .
 After the death of her father, her mother worked long hours as a nurse to support the family . Her mother was also a nurse and mother worked hard to support her family .
 Sotomayor credited the episodes of the television crime show Perry Mason with influencing her decision to become a lawyer . The judge said she watched the show as a child and that Perry Mason influenced her career .
 As a federal judge, Sotomayor received national attention in 1995 when she ruled in favour of Major League Baseball players, then on strike, who were suing because of changes to the free agent system and salary arbitration rules .
 Sotomayor issued an injunction against the team owners, effectively bringing the eightmonth strike to an end . The case is the result of an injunction issued by the Supreme Court .
 Sotomayor was nominated to be a judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in 1997 . Republican senators delayed her appointment for more than a year because of their concerns that the position might lead to a Supreme Court nomination . Bill Clinton nominated her to be
 Sotomayor is known for her candid, direct speaking style and for her carefully reasoned decisions . She was appointed to the appeals court in 1998 .
 In 2001 she ruled in favour of a woman with dyslexia who wanted more accommodations under the Americans with Disabilities Act in order to take the bar exam .
 In 2003 in Ricci DeStefano, a group of white firefighters from New Haven, Conn., sued the city for having discarded a test, which had in effect barred all African American firefighters from promotion .
 Aksel Lund Svindal won his second overall Federation International de Ski Alpine World Cup title in March 2009 . Svindal narrowly defeated his closest rival, Benjamin Raich of Austria, in the final event of the season at Are, Swed. Svindal's second overall title .
 Svindal won the title by a record-low two-point margin, with a record low winning-point total . Svindal's win was the lowest total of all-time winning points in the world ski racing . The Norwegian won the world championship by a two point margin .
 The narrow victory completed a triumphant comeback from a devastating crash in 2007 that had left him seriously injured and inactive for nearly a year . The win was a narrow victory for the Spaniard .
 Svindal’s parents, both skiers, bought him his first pair of skis for his third birthday . By age nine he was racing competitively, Svindal was racing at age nine . Svindal's parents bought him an ice skis at age three .
 He attended high school in Oppdal, a ski resort that hosted World Cup slalom skiing events, which enabled him to study and work on his technique on the slopes at the same time . He went to Oppdal high school, where he studied and worked on technique .
 He won the national under16 slalom title and was chosen to ski for the Norwegian junior national team . He won a national championship title and has been chosen for the junior team .
 At the FIS junior world ski championships in 2002, Svindal collected four medals, including a gold in the combined event . Svindal posted his first European Cup win, taking the gold in a giant slalom at San Vigilio, Italy .
 In March 2005 he earned his first world Alpine ski championship medal at Bormio, Italy, when he won the silver in the combined . He won the combined medal in March 2005 at the world championships in Italy .
 Svindal’s first trip to the Olympic Games, in February 2006, did not result in any medals . Svindal's first Olympic appearance, in 2006, was in the men's downhill at the Winter Olympics .
 He finished second overall overall in the World Cup behind Raich . His performance the following month, however, hinted at what was to come .
 Svindal crashed during a downhill training run at Beaver Creek, Colo. in November . Svindal had hoped to repeat his World Cup success in 2007-08 season .
 He suffered a severe abdominal injury and fractures to his face and did not ski competitively for 11 months . He suffered abdominal injury, fractures and was forced to retire from competitive skiing .
 In December 2008 Svindal returned to Beaver Creek, and in a courageous performance he won the downhill and the super G . At the 2009 world championships in Val disere, France, Svindal took the gold in the super combined and the bronze in super G; he then completed his remarkable
 Svindal's 1,009 points for the season beat out Raichs 1,007 to end the tightest World Cup race in history . Svindal’s victory was the longest World Cup win in history for the first time in a World Cup .
 Swift, Taylor Swift dominated the industry award circuit in 2009 . Swift won the most prestigious music awards in the country music industry . Swift was crowned the best singer of all time in February 2009 .
 Her sophomore album Fearless was recognized as album of the year by the Academy of Country Music in April . She topped the best female video category for “You Belong with Me” at the MTV Video Music Awards in September .
 Swift won all four categories she was nominated for at the CMA Awards in November . Swift won the most of the four categories nominated for her country singer .
 Her recognition as CMA entertainer of the year made her the youngest-ever winner of that award . She is also the first female solo artist to triumph since 1999 .
 Swift showed an interest in music at an early age, and she progressed quickly from roles in childrens theatre to her first appearance before a crowd of thousands . Swift has appeared in a number of musicals since she was just five years old .
 She was just 11 years old when she sang “The Star-Spangled Banner” before a Philadelphia 76ers National Basketball Association game . The following year she picked up the guitar and began to write songs .
 Swift crafted original material that reflected her experiences of "tween" (preteen) alienation . Swift took inspiration from artists such as Shania Twain and the Dixie Chicks .
 Swift’s parents sold their farm in Pennsylvania to move to Hendersonville, Tenn., when she was 13 . Swift moved to Nashville so she could devote more of her time to courting country labels in Nashville .
 She performed many of the songs that she wrote at venues in the Nashville area .
 Swift signed by record executive Scott Borchetta to his fledgling Big Machine label . She was at one such performance that she was noticed by record exec Borcheta .
 Her first single, ""Tim McGraw,” was released in the summer of 2006 . The song spent eight months on the Billboard country singles chart .
 Swift followed with a self-titled debut album, and she went on tour, opening for Rascal Flatts . Swift's first album was released at the age of 16, when she was 16 .
 Swift was certified platinum in 2007, having sold more than one million copies . Swift continued a rigorous touring schedule, opening for artists such as George Strait, Kenny Chesney, Tim McGraw, and Faith Hill .
 On Fearless she demonstrated a refined pop sensibility, managing to court the mainstream pop audience without losing sight of her country roots .
 In November 2009 Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy was appointed the first permanent president of the European Council, the EU’s chief decision-making body .
 His twoand-a-half-year term of office (which could be renewed once) would officially begin on Jan. 2010 .
 In 1972 he began his career as an economist at the National Bank of Belgium . He has been in charge of the Belgian National Bank since 1972 .
 The following year he entered politics, serving as the vice president of the youth section of the centre-right Flemish Christian Democrat party .
 Van Rompuy left banking in 1975, and within three years he was working in the Christian Democrats’ national office . He was working for the party's national office in the 1970s .
 He left office after the Christian Democrats’ defeat in the 1999 general election . The Christian Democrats were defeated in 1999 general elections .
 In 2004 he was named minister of state . That year he entered the legislature as a member of the Chamber of Representatives .
 With the return of the Christian Democrats to the majority in July 2007, Van Rompuy was named leader of the Chamber of Representatives . With the re-election of the party in 2007, he became the leader of his party's majority .
 King Albert II designated a reluctant Van Rompuy to replace him . Yves Leterme resigned in 2008 amid allegations of improper conduct in the disposition of Belgian-owned shares in failed Fortis bank .
 Albert had previously entrusted Van Rompuy with brokering deals between Belgium's estranged Walloon (Frenchspeaking) and Flemish communities . The former prime minister's term as prime minister saw a lessening of tension between the regions .
 Van Rompuy's light diplomatic touch has been noticed by other European leaders . The former French president's light touch was noticed by others in the region .
 After ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in November 2009, he became the compromise choice for the European Council presidency . He earned the appointment despite bids for the post by several higher-profile candidates, including Tony Blair and Felipe Gonzalez .
 In 2004 he had openly declared his opposition to the possible EU membership of Turkey . Turkey gained EU candidate status in 1999, on the basis of what he perceived to be religious differences . In 2004, he openly declared opposition to Turkey's possible membership .
 Alice Waters is a chef, restaurateur, and food activist . She championed an overhaul of the public-school lunch system . Waters is known for her efforts to bring organically grown food to the mainstream .
 Waters was co-owner and chef of the famed Berkeley, Calif., restaurant Chez Panisse . Waters had long fought to overturn the elitist stereotypes surrounding the ""slow food” movement .
 She participated in the 1960s Free Speech Movement, and the idealism that was prevalent at Berkeley was reflected in her ideology .
 She studied abroad for a time in France, and it was there that her love of farm-to-plate dining took hold . She studied in France .
 Following graduation, she spent a year at the International Montessori School in London . She then returned to California to teach .
 In the 1970s the U.S. was still years away from the “foodie revolution,"" which by 2009 had brought farmers’ markets and organic foods to a larger audience . By 2009 organic foods were available at farmers' markets .
 Waters’s prescient passion for whole foods inspired her and her friend Lindsey Shere to found a market-inspired restaurant, despite having little capital and no experience as restaurateurs . Waters and Shere are the owners of the restaurant in New York .
 Waters wanted to create meals by using only locally grown seasonal ingredients . Waters said she wanted to forge relationships with the producers and suppliers . Waters says she wants to use locally grown ingredients to make meals .
 Waters's restaurant was in debt for its first eight years of business . It was frequently saved from bankruptcy by loans from Waters's friends . The restaurant was often in debt during its first 8 years .
 Waters had time to devote herself to other facets of food activism, such as the Garden Project . The Garden Project provided produce to the San Francisco county jail and work opportunities to former inmates .
 In 1996, to celebrate the restaurant’s 25th anniversary, Waters founded the Chez Panisse Foundation . The foundation funded programs that educated young people on responsible agriculture .
 The Edible Schoolyard was established in 1995 . The advocacy group was founded in 1995, and is best known for its advocacy work . She is also known for her advocacy work on the edible arts movement .
 Waters began the program by planting a garden in the yard of Berkeley’s Martin Luther King Jr. Waters planted the garden in a garden at the King's home .
 A cooking classroom was installed a few years later, and by 2009 the Edible Schoolyard was a thriving educational tool, though not a source of lunchroom produce . A cooking class was installed in 2009 .
 Waters's new cause is persuading the government to increase funding for school lunch programs . Waters hopes to increase the government's support for school lunches to improve the quality of school lunch .
 Waters' dedication to providing schoolchildren with more healthful eating options earned her fair share of detractors . Waters' detractors argued seasonal food was a luxury for already underfunded schools .
 Canadian environmental warrior Paul Watson and his crew sailed into the second season of their popular program Whale Wars on the Animal Planet cable television network .
 The Sea Shepherd Conservation Society’s expeditions to protect and defend marine wildlife from illegal poaching . The Canadian environmental warrior Paul Watson Chantal Henderson/Sea Shepherd Conservation society in Bebeto Matthews' book .
 Watson's direct-action approach to saving whales caused some whalers to label him as an ecoterrorist . Watson's ship, the Steve Irwin, was positioned between the whaling and a targeted pod of whales .
 At the age of nine he would seek out and destroy leghold traps that were set by beaver hunters, interfere with deer and duck hunters, and foil the attempts of other young boys to shoot birds .
 During the late 1960s he joined the Canadian Coast Guard . He gained sailing experience with the British, Canadian, Norwegian, and Swedish merchant marines .
 Watson often employed daring and innovative tactics to defend wildlife from hunters . Watson often positioned his inflatable Zodiac boat in between a pod of sperm whales and the harpoon of a large Soviet whaling vessel . Watson forced sealing ships to halt by standing on the ice in their path .
 He was also known to handcuff himself to a pile of seal pelts being hoisted up onto a sealing vessel .
 Watson left Greenpeace and established the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society . Owing to conflicts concerning such unconventional protest methods, Watson left the group . Watson established Sea Shepherd conservation Society .
 In 2000 Time magazine named him one of the environmental heroes of the 20th century . Time magazine also named him an environmental hero of the 1990s .
 Wu claimed that his upbringing in Vancouver, B.C. was instrumental to his success . Wu's family moved to Vancouver in the early 1990s after leaving Taipei, Taiwan . Wu said he was inspired by his upbringing .
 His mother hired a fashion student to teach her young son the art of pattern cutting and sewing . His mother says he was “always sketching and drawing"
 Wu’s parents knew that boys in Taiwan were expected to study business . They believed that Canada would offer a more relaxed environment for him to explore his interests . Wu's parents decided to move to Canada .
 Wu operated his business in a Seventh Avenue studio near one run by Rodriguez . Once he established his own eponymous label in 2006, Wu operated there .
 Manhattan socialites, including Vogue contributing editor Marina Rust and business tycoon Ivanka Trump, were early fans of the polished ready-to-wear line Wu had produced even before he designed Obama's gown .
 Wu was commissioned to create the inauguration gown by Ikram Goldman, a Chicago high-fashion retailer from whom Obama purchased most of her clothing and who sold her designs .
 Jason Wu recollected that he was asked to sketch three formal looks and that even though he was unaware that the designs were intended for inauguration day, he presumed he was being commissioned for a major occasion . Wu said he was not aware that he had been commissioned for inauguration .
 Swarovski crystals embellished the floorlength white silk chiffon column . Handmade organza flowers enhanced by sparkling Swarovs crystals . Floor length white silk silk column embellished by Swarovsky crystals .
 Michelle Obama appeared in Wu’s designs at a series of historic occasions . Michelle Obama also appeared in his designs at several historic events .
 The March 2009 cover of Vogue magazine featured Obama clad in another sleeveless Wu dress . Obama wore the dress on Vogue's Vogue cover .
 At Wu’s spring-summer 2010 show, his line attracted a fashion ‘executive elite,” including top buyers from Saks Fifth Avenue and Bergdorf Goodman, where Wu sold his work . Wu's work was sold at Saks 5th Avenue and
 His collection ran the gamut from sharp-tailored separates in lush materials to flirty cocktail frocks and long chiffon evening gowns .
 The pages below RECAPTURE the lives and achievements of those we remember best . RecapTure the lives of those you remember best in these pages .
 May 15, 2009, Rome, Italy, served as the first female foreign minister of Italy . She was the first woman foreign minister to hold the post .
 The granddaughter of Giovanni Agnelli, the founder of the carmaker Fiat, is a strong force in Italian politics . Her memoirs detail her upbringing in Italy and how she became a force in politics .
 Her philanthropy centred on education and the environment . In 1990, she established Italy’s annual research-funding charity telethon .
 Agnelli was also known for her years as an advice columnist for Oggi, a weekly magazine . She was known for writing advice columns for Italian magazine Ogga .
 Vasily Pavlovich Aksyonov is a Russian novelist and short-story writer . He is also a Russian short storywriter . He was also a short story writer .
 Aksyonov was the son of parents who spent many years in Soviet prisons . He was raised in a state home and raised in the Soviet Union .
 He graduated from medical school in 1956 and worked as a doctor for a few years . He has been married for more than 60 years .
 In the cultural thaw of the late 1950s and early ’60s, he published a number of short stories and novels .
 Aksyonov excelled in fast-moving narratives dealing with youthful rebels who are attracted to Western culture even though they share the collectivist ideals of the previous generation .
 In 1980 he was forced into exile in the West because of his reputation and involvement in the attempted publication of Metropol, an uncensored literary journal, in 1980 . He was forced to flee to the West .
 Aksyonov’s citizenship was restored by decree in 1990, and he later lived in Moscow .
 Hafez graduated from military school and fought in the Arab-Israeli war of 1948-49 . Hafez fought for Israel in 1948-48 and fought for the Israeli government .
 In the late 1950s, inspired by the fervent pan-Arab nationalism of Egyptian Pres. Hosni Mubarak, was inspired by Egypt's President Mohamed El A. Mubarak .
 After Nasser outlawed political parties from the union, the Ba'thists grew disillusioned with the arrangement . In 1961 the U.A.R. in Syria collapsed, and in 1961 the union collapsed .
 He was overthrown in a coup three years later, he eventually took refuge in Iraq . He remained in Iraq until Saddam Hussein's Ba'thist regime was toppled in 2003 .
 Alfonsln, Raul (RAUL RICARDO AlFONSlN Foulkes), Argentine politician (b. Raul) Raul was a member of the Argentine House of Representatives .
 Argentine politician Raul Alfonsln ran unsuccessfully for the UCR nomination in the 1973 presidential election . He was a member of the Peronist party, which was overthrown by the military .
 Alfonsln wrote La cuestion Argentina and cofounded the Permanent Assembly for Human Rights . In response to human rights abuses during the dictatorship, he cofounded a group of human rights activists .
 Argentina's discredited military allowed a freely contested presidential election after the Falkland Islands War . After the U.K. defeated Argentina in the Falklands War, Argentina's government allowed a free presidential election .
 The singer was part of the post-World War II wave of African American singers on the international stage . He died June 22, 2009, in Valhalla, New York .
 She completed her vocal training at Hartford School of Music . She made her City Opera debut in 1954 as Queenie in Jerome Kern’s Show Boat .
 As a lowerrange mezzo-soprano, Allen was more often cast as the brooding or matrony character than the dainty heroine . Allen was Jocasta in Igor Stravinsky's Oedipus Rex and Mistress Quickly in Giuseppe Ver
 Rhinebeck, N.Y. produced experimental electronic musical works that incorporated multiple aspects of acoustics and hearing .
 Meir Amit, Meir was Israeli military leader, intelligence chief, and politician . He was Israeli Prime Minister of Israel . He died in 1972 . Meir served as Israeli President of Israel, Prime Minister Israel .
 Only person in Israel's history to lead foreign intelligence agency Mossad and military intelligence simultaneously . He credited with modernizing Mossad's intelligence gathering .
 Amit fought during Israel’s 1947-49 war of independence and was wounded while leading an attack . He rose to the military rank of major general .
 Andersson set world records in both the 1,500-m and mile distances, especially in races against his countryman Gunder Hagg . Andersson and Hagg were considered the worlds best middle-distance runners, with 19 world records between them .
 Andersson’s world-record 1,500-m time, 3 min 44. sec, was set on Aug., 1943, and held for 11 months until broken by Hagg . Andersson set the world record in August, 1943 . Hagg broke Andersson's world
 In 1946 both men were stripped of their amateur status for having accepted payments from race promoters . In 1946 they were stripped for accepting payments from promoters . Both men were later stripped of amateur status .
 Aquino, Corazon (MARIA CORAZON Cojuangco Aquino), Philippine political leader (b. Corazon) Aquino . Aquino was Philippine President of Philippines . Corazon Aquino died in 1992 .
 Philippine political leader Corazon Aquino Val Rodriguez Val Rodriguez/AP province, Phil. Jan. 1933, Tarlac . Val Rodriguez: "Aquino was a great leader of the Philippines"
 President of the Philippines restored democratic rule in that country after the dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos . Marcos was a dictator who ruled the Philippines during the dictatorship .
 She was born into a wealthy, politically prominent family . She graduated from the College of Mount St. St. in New York .
 She remained in the background during her husband’s subsequent career, rearing their five children at home . She remained the background of her husband's career .
 Her husband, who had become a prominent opposition leader, was jailed by Marcos for eight years . In 1980 Aquino accompanied him into exile in the United States . Her husband’s assassination upon his return to the Philippines in 1983 galvanized opposition to Marcos government .
 When Marcos called for presidential elections in February 1986, Aquino was the opposition’s candidate . Aquino became the unified opposition's candidate in 1986 elections . He is now the leader of the Philippines .
 Aquino and her supporters challenged the results, charging widespread voting fraud . Though she was officially reported to have lost to Marcos, Aquino's supporters said widespread fraud was widespread . The results were disputed .
 High officials in the military renounced Marcos and proclaimed Aquino the rightful president . Aquino was declared the president of the Philippines by the military .
 On Feb., 1986, both Aquino and Marcos were inaugurated as president, but that same day Marcos fled the country . Marcos fled that day .
 Aquino appointed a commission to write a new constitution, which restored the bicameral Congress . Aquino appoints a commission, which appointed a new commission .
 She broke up monopolies held by Marcos’s allies over the economy . She then held elections to the new Congress and broke up the monopolies . The economy experienced steady growth for several years .
 Aquino failed to undertake fundamental economic or social reforms, however . Her popularity steadily declined as she faced continual outcries over economic injustice and political corruption .
 She followed it with three more novels that established her as a literary star in Quebec and France . Her novels were published in Quebec, France and Canada .
 Like her first book, her second, Folle was semiautobiographical and scandalous . Her own fragile beauty contributed to the public fascination with her .
 Actress Estelle Getty portrayed an outspoken, acerbicic-tongued feminist in the television sitcom Maude . The Golden Girls often explored such hot-button issues as abortion, homosexuality, infidelity, gun control, and aging .
 Arthur, who garnered 11 Emmy Award nominations, won an Emmy in 1977 for her role as Maude Findley . In 1988 she was awarded the statuette for her portrayal of Dorothy Zbornak in The Golden Girls .
 Ayala went into exile during the Spanish Civil War and then moved to Argentina, where he taught and published a sociology textbook . Ayala was a sociology professor and author of a sociology book .
 In 1949 he published two collections of short stories, Los usurpadores (The Usurpers, 1987) and La cabeza del cordero . He also published two short stories .
 The Francisco Ayala Foundation was established in 2006 in honour of his 100th birthday . The foundation was set up by Ayala in 2006 after his centenary .
 Ballard began writing of dehumanized sex and technology at their most extreme . Ballard's novel, "Exodus," is based on the story of a U.S. export of technology . Ballard also wrote a novel about the rise of technology in the 1990s .
 The Kindness of Women follows the alternately dissipated and transcendent later life of the protagonist of Empire of the Sun . It follows the alternate life of a woman who becomes a woman in the later life .
 Singer excelled at performing classical and semiclassical South Asian vocal music, especially ghazals, thumris and dadras .
 Although Bano sang in both Urdu and Persian, she was especially admired for her renditions of Urdu poet Faiz Ahmed Faiz’s verse .
 In 1974 Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's government granted Bano the national Pride of Performance award . Bano was awarded the award in 1974 .
 One of five men arrested for breaking into the Democratic National Committee headquarters in the Watergate complex, Washington, D.C.; the ensuing scandal prompted the investigation of U.S. Pres. George W. Bush .
 Barker was found crouching under a desk in the Watergate complex the night of June 17, 1972 . Barker pleaded guilty to seven charges of conspiracy, burglary, and wire-tapping .
 He was sentenced to up to six years in prison by Judge John Sirica in 1974 . He was allowed to appeal in 1974 and was released less than a year later .
 Bat Masterson was the debonair star of the television series Bat Mastersons . He was a millionaire who luxuriated in chauffeurriven rides in his Rolls-Royce as he solved crimes .
 For his role as Amos Burke, he won the 1965 Golden Globe best actor award . He won the Golden Globe for his role in the 1965 film Amos Burke .
 In the TV series The Name of the Game, he donned another suave persona, publishing tycoon Glenn Howard . In the series he played publisher Glenn Howard.
 Bashung, Alain (ALAIN CLAUDE BASCHUNG), French singer, songwriter, and actor (b. Bashung) Bashung was born in France . He is also a French singer and actor .
 He was known as ""the gentleman rocker of French chanson’s" for his distinctive French-language take on rock music .
 Serge Gainsbourg co-wrote and recorded the album Play Blessures with Serge Gainbourg . The album was co-written and recorded with Serge .
 He also acted in the 1973 stage musical La Revolution franpaise and in a score of movies and television shows .
 He continued to perform after he was diagnosed with lung cancer in 2007 . He released his last album, Bleu petrole, in 2008 .
 Bashung received the Legion of Honour in January 2009 . On February 28, just two weeks before his death, he performed live at the Victoires de la Musique ceremony, where he won 3 awards, bringing his career total to a record 11 . Bashung died at the age
 Her dramatic choreographed works include dance, speech, music, and fantastical sets . Her works include works incorporating dance and speech . She was born July 27, 1940, Solingen, Ger .
 Her best-known works include Cafe Muller inspired by her childhood at her parents’ hotel and restaurant . Her version of Igor Stravinsky’s ballet Le Sacre du printemps performed on an earth-covered stage .
 In 1969 she became the company director and choreographer of the ballet company . She also choreographed for the company .
 In 1973 she took charge of the Wuppertal Dance Theatre, where her first choreographed piece there, Fritz, was poorly received by those who disliked its intensely bleak subject matter .
 Bausch’s avant-garde dance theatre later earned acclaim, however, and the company toured to India, Japan, and Britain .
 Dame Heather (ISOLEEN Heather Begg) is a New Zealand opera singer . Begg was born in Auckland, New Zealand . She is also an opera singer and opera singer from New Zealand. Begg is a former New Zealand Opera singer .
 Mezzo-soprano voice and dramatic talent for playing matrons, confidants, and spinsters . May 12, 2009 .
 She made her singing debut in 1954 as Azucena in Verdi’s II trovatore with the National Opera of Australia . She was a principal mezzo-soprano .
 Begg was especially known for her humour and often appeared in Gilbert and Sullivan's works, notably as Lady Jane in Patience, Katisha in The Mikado and Duchess of Plaza Toro in The Gondoliers .
 Begg became a principal at the Opera Australia in 1976, and her 53year career ended in 2006 . Begg was a principal for Opera Australia from 1976 to 2006 .
 She was made OBE and became a Distinguished Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit . In 2009 she was redesignated Dame Companion .
 Hildegarde Behrens powerfully in dark soprano roles, most notably as Briinnhilde in Richard Wagner’s The Ring of die Nibelung . She performed in Tokyo, Japan, in 2009 .
 She made her debut as the Countess Almaviva in Mozart’s Le nozze di Figaro in 1972 . In 1972 she joined the Deutsche Oper am Rhein in Dusseldorf .
 She made her debut at Covent Garden as Leonore in Beethoven’s Fidelio . She appeared in the musical at the age of 50 .
 She received international recognition at the 1977 Salzburg Festival in the title role of Richard Strauss’s tragic opera Salome .
 Her performances in passionate lead roles in Tristan und Isolde and Strauss's Elektra were similarly distinguished by the dramatic fervour of her acting and stage presence as well as her voice .
 Louie Bellson, Louie, is an American musician . Bellson was born in New York City . He is the son of Italian musician Francesco Antonio Balasoni .
 He was an extraordinary drummer who electrified audiences with his solos . He was the inventor of the double-bass drum kit that became his trademark .
 Bellson’s playing was characterized more by restraint than flamboyance . Bellson was a tasteful accompanist for popular singers such as Tony Bennett and Ella Fitzgerald .
 Benedetti, Mario (MARIO ORLANDO Hamlet Hardy Brenno Beneditti FARUGIA), Uruguayan novelist and poet (b. Benedetti) Benedetti was born in Uruguay and Uruguay . Benedetti is a famous Urugayan poet .
 The Uruguayan author has written more than 40 years of literary work . He explored themes of love, daily life, and political unrest in his work .
 Benedetti was best known for his poetry and novels . He also wrote short stories, essays, and plays . Benedetti edited several literary journals, including the political Marcha .
 Many of Benedetti’s Uruguayan novelist and poet Mario Benedetti poems were set to music, notably El sur tambein existe . Joan Manuel Serrat featured on an album by Catalan singer .
 Benedetti was active in leftist politics . He staunchly supported the Cuban Revolution and Cuban Pres. Fidel Castro . Benedetti died in 1966 .
 Fidel Castro advocated independence for Puerto Rico, and criticized the U.S. for its foreign policy and consumer-driven society . Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader of Cuba, advocated for Puerto Rican independence .
 In Uruguay he helped to organize the Broad Front, a coalition of leftist groups . He was exiled for his politics following the military coup in 1973 .
 Spector’s reverberant “wall of sound” technique relied on layered vocals and elaborate orchestral arrangements . The group's biggest hits were characterized by Spector's reverberant "Wall of sound" technique .
 Ronettes were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2007 . The Ronettes have been married for more than 50 years .
 Wilco was best known for shaping the sound of the alternative rock band Wilco . He was found dead May 24, 2009, in Urbana, Illinois .
 Bennett was recruited by Jeff Tweedy to join Wilco in 1994 . After recording with a number of bands, Bennett recorded with Titanic Love Affair . Wilco is the latest band from the band to have recorded with Bennett .
 Wilco's sound expanded with the addition of Bennett . Bennett is a multi-instrumentalist and gifted producer . Wilco has a history of playing with musicians .
 The apex of Bennetts influence on the bands sound was the 2002 release Yankee Hotel Foxtrot . Bennett was asked to leave the group just prior to the album's release . The relationship between Tweedy and Bennett was strained .
 Bennett released a string of solo albums that showcased his skills as a producer . Bennett rarely toured, but he rarely toured .
 His first directing job was Le Poulet (1962; The Chicken), which won the Academy Award for best live-action short film . His first film to win an Academy Award was The Chicken, which he directed .
 The Theatre of the Oppressed is a form of interactive theatre intended to transform lives as spectators become performers, acting out solutions to social problems . Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, created the theatre in 2009 .
 Boal began his career with the Arena Theatre in Sao Paulo in 1956 . He was its director until 1971, during which time he developed his theories . Boal is credited with developing his theories about the theatre .
 He was arrested in 1971 by the military junta then ruling Brazil . He spent the next 15 years in exile in Brazil . The ex-president spent the rest of his life in exile .
 During this period he published Teatro del oprimido y otras poeticas politicas . Set up a centre for the practice of his theory in Paris, and organized international Theatre of the Oppressed festivals in the early to mid-1980s .
 Boal returned to Brazil in 1986 and established a Centre for the Theatre of the Oppressed in Rio de Janeiro as well as several community theatres . Boal set up the Centre for The Oppressed Theatre in 1986 .
 The Ventures are the most successful instrumental band in rock history . Led guitarist Don Wilson co-founded the Ventures .
 The group was founded in the Seattle area and toured throughout the Pacific Northwest .
 Unsuccessful in their efforts to secure a record contract, Bogle and Wilson created their own label . Bogle & Wilson were unsuccessful in securing a record deal .
 In 1960 the Ventures’ single “Walk—Don't Run” reached number two on the pop charts . The Ventures went on to record some of the most recognizable songs of surf rock .
 The Ventures sold some 40 million albums in that country alone . The Ventures were hugely popular in Japan, selling 40 million album albums .
 Bogle and the Ventures were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2008 . Bogle was inducted in 2008 with the Ventures .
 American James Rainwater and American-born Ben R Mottelson shared the 1975 Nobel Prize for Physics . Their work in determining the asymmetrical shapes of certain atomic nuclei .
 He gained international recognition while working in Ghana, where he designed the Bolgatanga Regional Library .
 Bongo, Omar (EL Hadj Omar BONGO Ondimba; Albert-Bernard Bongo) is Gabonese political leader . Bongo was born in 1961 . He was born Albert Bongo .
 Leon M'ba died on November 28, 1967, and when Bongo died, Bongo took over . Bongo became president in February 1967 .
 He took the name El Hadj Omar Bongo when he converted to Islam in 1973 and added Ondimba in 2003 . He took his new name after converting to Islam .
 Long-serving Gabonese head of state Omar Bongo bility in Gabon despite periodic accusations of corruption, money laundering, election rigging, and intimidation of political opponents .
 Norman Ernest Borlaug, Norman Ernest, was an American agricultural scientist and plant pathologist (b. Norman Ernest) Norman Ernest . Norman Ernest was an agricultural scientist in the United States . He was also an American .
 Nobel Prize for Peace in 1970 for his contributions in laying the groundwork of the so-called Green Revolution, the agricultural technological advance that promised to alleviate world hunger .
 His work was founded on earlier discoveries of ways to induce genetic mutations in plants .
 These methods led to modern plant breeding, with momentous results that included the tailoring of crop varieties for regions prone to climatic extremes . These methods were used in the creation of modern crop varieties .
 At a research station at Campo Atizapan, he developed strains of grain that dramatically increased crop yields . The strains were developed by scientists in the Philippines .
 Borlaug ultimately developed short-stemmed wheat, a key element in the Green Revolution in less-developed countries . Short-stressed wheat is a key ingredient in the green revolution .
 He served as director of Inter-American Food Crop Program and director of International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center, Mexico City .
 In 1986 Borlaug created the World Food Prize as a way to honour individuals who had contributed to improving the availability and quality of food worldwide . The prize is given to individuals who have contributed to improve the availability of food in the world .
 He performed in early vaudeville circuits with Charles Cook in the dance duo Cook and Brown . He performed as a member of the Original Copasetics .
 By age 12 Brown was appearing with the traveling vaudeville group Mammy and Her Picks . He soon teamed up with Cook and joined the touring touring touring group .
 Their comedic routine featured acrobatic choreography, with the impish Brown (standing at about 1. m [4 ft 9 in] tall) often being tossed around the stage .
 In 1949 Brown became one of the founding members of the Original Copasetics dance group, which formed upon the death of Bill Robinson . Brown was also a member of the original Copasetic dance group .
 The troupe John Sundlof/Alamy American tap dancer Ernest ""Brownie" Brown brought the raw energy of improvisation to its engagements, often in small theatres, and showcased the individual styles of its star ensemble .
 Brown and Cook were inducted into the American Tap Dance Foundation’s International Tap Dance Hall of Fame . Brown was inducted by the foundation . Cook and Brown have been inducted to the hall of fame .
 South Africa was suspended from the 1964 Olympic Games and later expelled from the Olympics . The country did not compete again until 1992 . Brutus Brutus was responsible for the expulsion .
 In 1963 his refusal to abide by the ban resulted in an 18-month prison term . In 1963 he was sentenced to 18 months in prison for refusing to comply .
 In 1983, after a protracted legal struggle, he won the right to remain in the U.S. as a political refugee . He won't be allowed to leave the country again, but he remains in the country .
 Brutus’s first collection of poetry, Sirens, Knuckles, Boots, Boots was published in Nigeria while he was in prison . Brutus's first collection, published in prison, was published while in prison. Brutus was in jail .
 He assumed leadership of the Bissau branch of the PAIGC after his brother’s assassination in 1973 . He became president when Guinea-Bissau gained independence a year after independence .
 Deposed in 1980 in a coup d’etat led by Prime Minister Joao Bernardo Vieira . Cabral was briefly imprisoned before going into exile in Cuba and then in Portugal .
 Caracas, Venezuela, served as president of Venezuela and helped establish democratic stability . He helped establish a democratic stability in Venezuela .
 As COPEI's candidate for the presidency in 1947, Caldera made the first of four unsuccessful bids for the office . Caldera has made four unsuccessful attempts at the presidency .
 Following the fall of a military dictatorship in 1958, he was one of the signatories to an agreement between the three largest political parties . The agreement was intended to ensure the soundness of the country's democracy .
 Caldera’s first term as president, he restored ties with the Soviet Union, Cuba, and Latin American military dictatorships (Argentina, Panama, and Peru) Caldera also granted amnesty to leftist revolutionaries .
 Calisher was the recipient of numerous O Henry shortstory awards . Calisher excelled in producing well-plotted, psychologically perceptive short fiction .
 Cardiff received the International Award from the American Society of Cinematographers in 1993 . Two years later he was given a lifetime achievement award from the British Society of Cameratographers .
 In 2001 he was granted an honorary Oscar for his artistic achievements in cinematography . In 2001, he was awarded an honorary award for his work in the film .
 Carradine studied music and earned a living as a painter before following his father, John, into an acting career . He followed his father into acting after studying music and painting .
 He landed the role of Kwai Chang Caine in the surprise hit Rung Fu . Following a stint in the army, he performed on Broadway and television .
 Jim Carroll, Jim (JAMES DENNIS CARROLL), is an American author and rock musician . He is also a musician and author . He was born in New York City .
 Tabor City Tribune in Wilmington, N.C. published a series of articles and editorials to curb the presence of the Ku Klux Klan .
 The Tabor City Tribune in 1953 earned a Pulitzer Prize for public service . For its efforts, the Tribune was awarded the Pulitzer Prize .
 Carter wrote 22 books and scores of articles about the outdoors . After leaving the newspaper in the 1970s, he wrote scores of books and articles .
 He was posthumously awarded the Orden del Sol, Peru’s highest honour for achievement .
 Chambers, Marilyn (MARILYN ANN BRIGGS), American adult-film actress (b. Marilyn) Chambers was born Marilyn Chambers . Chambers was an adult film actress .
 The hard-core film, for which she negotiated a payment of $25,000 and a percentage of the profits, was credited with establishing a mainstream market for pornography .
 She went on to become a softand hard-core pornography star on film and video . She was a soft-core porn star .
 Formerly imprisoned for more than six years during China's Cultural Revolution . He was imprisoned during the Cultural Revolution in China .
 In Life and Death in Shanghai, she bore eloquent witness to both her continued defiance and the severe hardships she had endured . She bore witness to the harsh hardships she'd endured .
 She was a widow when she was arrested, and upon her release she discovered that her only child had been killed by the Red Guards . After her release, she was forced to live with her husband .
 Chessex gained early recognition for his work, publishing a poetry collection at the age of 18 . He came to be known for his prose, which he wrote in French .
 He was also a painter, and his works were prominently exhibited in Switzerland .
 Linguistically sophisticated work explores the interconnections of language, fiction, and reality .
 She graduated from Vejle Gymnasium in 1954 and studied at Teachers’ College in Arhus . She was born in Denmark .
 While a student she began publishing poems and met the poet and critic Poul Borum, who was her mentor and husband .
 She briefly taught briefly at the College for Arts in Holbaek before devoting herself exclusively to writing .
 Christensen’s early collections include Lys and Grces —translated within the same volume as Light and Grass —both of which explore the relationship of language to the natural world . Christensen's early collections, including Lys, Grces, include both of his early collections .
 The publication of her long poem Det brought Christensen international acclaim . Christensen's poem Det was published in 1996 .
 Alfabet builds on her earlier analogies between language and physical reality by applying alphabetic and numeric structures, such as Fibonacci numbers, as principles of creative order . Alfabet: "Alfabet is an artist who uses language to make sense of the world"
 Christensen also wrote novels, short stories, essays, children's stories, radio and stage plays, and opera librettos . Christensen was a prolific writer .
 Clancy originally immigrated to the United States to become an actor . Instead he began performing in folk clubs with two of his brothers, Tom and Paddy .
 Irish Songs of Rebellion and Come Fill Your Glass with Us first appeared on The Ed Sullivan Show in 1961 . The band then appeared on television for the first time in 1961 on the Ed Sullivan show .
 Clancy pursued a solo career, starred in a Canadian TV program, and reunited as a duo with Makem . Clancy and Makem reunited in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Clancy made a comeback in 2005 and released his last album, The Wheels of Life, in 2008 . Clancy's last album was released in 2008 and Clancy released in 2005 . Clancy made his last public appearance in 2007 .
 He served as a chaplain in the U.S. Navy and dean of the Episcopal Theological School . He taught high-school dropouts in Harlem before taking the high-profile position of rector .
 Coburn served as the 13th bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Massachusetts until his retirement . Coburn subsequently served as Bishop of the Massachusetts Diocese, Massachusetts .
 Crawford, Hank, Hank (BENNIE ROSS CRAWFORD, JR.) is a jazz and blues musician . Crawford was born in New York City, New York, New Jersey .
 Alto saxophonist played alto saxophone with a fervently emotional sound and phrasing that fused gospel music with blues . He improvised fluently on standard material in a Charlie Parker style .
 Crawford often worked with tenor saxophonist David Newman and coled combos with organist Jimmy McGriff . Crawford often played tenor jazz with Newman . Crawford also played in the jazz world .
 The first tuberculosis researcher to use a three-drug approach to the disease . Tuberculosis initially had proved resistant to drug treatment .
 Crofton earned a bachelor and doctorate in medicine from Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, before receiving further training at London’s St. St. Peterborough St. Mary’University of Cambridge . He earned a doctorate and bachelor degree in medicine .
 His tuberculosis studies began in 1946, when he joined a team conducting trials on the use of an antibiotic against the then often-fatal disease . He joined the team in 1946 to conduct trials on an antibiotic .
 Walter Cronkite, Walter (WALTER LELAND CRONKITE, Jr.), American journalist (b. Walter) Cronkites, Walter, Jr., was a journalist and radio personality . He was also a radio personality and radio host .
 When the U.S. entered World War II, UP elevated Cronkite to overseas war correspondent . He was assigned to cover fighting in the North Atlantic in 1941 .
 He was reassigned to London, where he reported on German bombing raids on the city . He was soon reassigned .
 In 1944, he reported on the Allied landing on the beaches of Normandy, France, on D-Day . He flew in bombing raids over Germany and in 1944 reported on Allied landing .
 After the war's conclusion, he remained in Europe, covering the Niirnberg trials and helping to set up numerous UP bureaus .
 Throughout the 1950s Cronkite hosted the CBS shows You Are There, an imaginary broadcast of historical events; The Morning Show, and The Twentieth Century .
 CBS Evening News was the first half-hour nightly news show on American network television . The 15-minute broadcast was expanded to 30 minutes . Cronkite took over CBS from his predecessor, Douglas Edwards .
 From the CBS anchor chair, he reported on the assassination of U.S. Pres. George W. Bush .
 John F Kennedy, the Apollo 11 Moon landing, the Watergate Scandal and the resignation of U.S. Pres. John F. Kennedy . The Apollo 11 landing was the first time the moonwalk was made .
 The Egyptian-Egyptian conflict is the result of historic negotiations between Egyptian Pres. Richard M Nixon and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak . Egyptian President Mohamed Abd Abd Abdallah was assassinated in Cairo in 1968 .
 Anwar el-Sadat famously denounced the Vietnam War as unwinnable in 1968 . He famously denounced it as "unwinnable" and called it unwindable . He also denounced Israel's Menachem Begin, Anwar Sadat and the Vietnam war .
 He won several Emmy and Peabody awards, including in 1981 U.S. Pres. Bob Greene . Greene was awarded a Peaody award in 1981 for his role in the series .
 Merce Cunningham, Merce (MERCIER Philip CUNNINGHAM), American dancer and choreographer (b. Philip Cunningham) Cunningham was choreographer, choreographer and dancer . Cunningham was born Philip Cunningham in 1926 . Cunningham died at the age of 92 . Cunningham is credited with
 Cunningham began instruction in dance at age 12 . He studied for two years at Cornish School in Seattle . He also studied with Lester Horton at Mills College, Oakland, Calif. Martha Graham invited him to join her group .
 He also had already started collaborating with Cage and presented his first solo concert, with music by Cage .
 Cunningham developed ""choreography by chance," a technique in which selected isolated movements are assigned sequence by such random methods as tossing a coin . Cunningham developed the technique in the 1970s . Cunningham's technique is called "choreographic by chance"
 The sequential arrangement of the component dances in Sixteen Dances for Soloist and Company of Three was determined, and in Suite by Chance the movement patterns themselves were so constructed .
 Many of Cunningham's works were associated with Dadaist, Surrealist, and existentialist motifs . Cunningham's work was associated with the works of Dadaists and Surrealists . Cunningham was a prolific artist .
 In 1974 he abandoned the repertory that had been built over a 20year period for what he called ""Events,"" excerpts from old or new dances, sometimes two or more simultaneously . In 1974, he abandoned all his work over the next 20 years .
 Cunningham left the performance stage soon after Cage’s death in 1992 . Cunningham continued to lead his dance company after Cage's death .
 He was archbishop of Armagh and primate of all Ireland from 1990 until he retired as archbishop emeritus in 1996 . He was the archbishop of Armagh .
 He publicly denounced as ""sinful” the violence advanced by the Irish Republican Army . He censured Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, while he advocated peace with Protestants .
 Daly, the son of a rural schoolteacher, studied classics and philosophy at St. Paul's College . Daly is a graduate of the University of Cambridge, England, where he studied philosophy .
 After ordination, he studied scholastic philosophy at the Catholic Institute in Paris and in Connecticut . He returned to the faculty at St. Louis University .
 He was appointed archbishop of Armagh in November 1990 and was elevated to cardinal the following June . He was also elevated to the cardinal in June 1990 .
 Daly was criticized for not being sufficiently proactive when the church faced a series of sex scandals . Daly was credited as a strong voice for peace, but was accused of not taking action .
 In 1960 Dannenberg joined NASA, where he contributed to the development of the Saturn launch vehicle . The launch vehicle proved to be the mainstay of the Apollo and Skylab space programs . In 1960 he joined NASA where he helped develop the Saturn vehicle .
 Dannenberg retired from NASA in 1973; that same year he was awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal . He was awarded that medal in 1973 .
 She inspired women struggling against domestic and sexual oppression with her honest assessments of sexual desire and marital problems . She has written more than 20 books .
 Das was part of a generation of English-language Indian writers whose work centred on personal rather than colonial experiences . Her short stories, poetry, memoirs, and essays brought her both respect and notoriety .
 She grew up primarily in Calcutta in a family of artists, where she felt ignored and unloved . She felt ignored, unloved and felt unloved, she says .
 Das wrote in English and, under the pen name Madhavikutty, in the Malayalam language of southern India . Das was born in India and wrote under a pen name in Malayam .
 Dausset, Jean (JEAN-BAPTISTEGabriel-Joachim Dusset) is a French hematologist and immunologist . Hematologist Jean was born in France and studied in France .
 French hematologist and immunologist Jean Dausset was born in Toulouse, France, in 1916 . Hematologist was a member of the Royal Family of Medicine in France .
 Nobel Prize winner of 1980 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for studies on the genetic basis of the immunological reaction .
 Dausset cofounded the Human Polymorphism Study Center (CEPH) in 1984 . He retired as president in 2003 .
 Davis excelled in track for Barberton High School . Davis often scored more points individually than entire opposing teams . Davis was a standout athlete at Barberton .
 At the 1956 Olympic Games in Melbourne, he pulled away from teammates Eddie Southern and Josh Culbreath after the seventh hurdle to take the gold medal . It was the first United States sweep of the event in the event since 1920 .
 Davis won the James E Sullivan award as the country’s top amateur athlete in 1958 . In 1958, Davis was awarded the James Sullivan award for the best amateur athlete . Davis was the first person to win the award .
 She was known for her elegant, focused, and subtle performances, especially of works by Mozart and by Spanish composers .
 Her appearance onstage was often remarked upon because of the unassuming and unusually petite pianist (well under 1. m tall) at times played virtuosic repertory that demanded a large reach . The shape of her hand and her assiduous stretching exercises allowed her to
 Frank Marshall, director of the Academia Marshall, reluctantly accepted her as a pupil . De Larrocha, began taking piano lessons at age three when she was three .
 At age 11, she was soloist in a Mozart concerto with the Madrid Symphony Orchestra . She made her first recording at age 9, and first recording was at age 11 . Bach and Mozart at the International Exhibition in Barcelona in May 1929 .
 de Larrocha did not make her first European tour until 1947 . Because she could not easily travel during the Spanish Civil War and World War II, she did not travel until 1947.
 She returned to Spain in 1959 to succeed her mentor as director of the Academia Marshall . She succeeded her mentor in 1959 when she returned to the country .
 De Larrocha won four Grammy Awards (1974, 1975, 1988, and 1991), and in 1995 was awarded the International Music Council/UNESCO Prize, the only Spanish artist to be so honoured .
 Dearie was initially trained as a classical pianist . She gravitated to jazz while performing with a high-school band . Dearie is a Grammy-winning jazz soloist .
 Dearie insisted that her nightclub audiences refrain from smoking during her performances so that she could preserve her tender voice .
 DeCarava initially took up photography to record images he would use in his painting, but he came to prefer the camera to the brush .
 DeCarava was awarded a Guggenheim fellowship in 1952 . He was the first African American photographer to receive the grant . In 1952 he was awarded the first American to receive a fellowship .
 The monetary award allowed him to devote himself to photographing Harlem full time . Many of these images were compiled in the book The Sweet Flypaper of Life (1955; reissued 1988)
 He also taught at the Cooper Union School of Art and at Hunter College from 1975 .
 Actor Burt Reynolds, who died May 4, 2009, died in Santa Monica, California . He starred in dozens of movies, especially in association with Mel Brooks, director Mel Brooks and actor Burt .
 DeLuise began his career on the stage and in children’s television shows in the 1950s . He became a staple on TV variety shows during the 1960s and later on TV .
 DeLuise also wrote two cookbooks as well as several children's cookbooks . She also wrote several cookbooks for children .
 Des Forges, Alison (ALISON B LlEBHAFSKY), American human rights activist and historian (b. 18th-century American), was a prominent advocate for women's rights . She was also an activist for the U.S. House of Representatives in Washington, DC
 She also sharply criticized the failure of leading countries to intervene in the tragedy . Genocide in Rwanda ; .
 Senegal's first prime minister was a protege of Leopold Sedar Senghor . He served as the first Prime Minister of Senegal .
 Dia, a Muslim, studied at the William Ponty School and worked as a teacher and journalist . Dia entered politics in the early 1940s and became a politician in the 1940s . Dia is a Muslim and a father-of-one .
 He represented Senegal in the French Senate and then served as vice president and president of Senegal’s Government Council before becoming prime minister in April 1959 .
 He was ousted in December 1962 by then president Senghor in a power struggle . He retained the latter post after Senegal gained independence in 1960 .
 Dia, who had obtained an M.B.A. in 1969, took a post with the World Bank in 1976 . Dia was born in 1961 and has since graduated from the University of California .
 DiMaggio, Dom (pronounced "The Little Professor") is an American baseball player . He was born in New York City, New York, New Jersey . He is one of the most famous baseball players .
 Dom DiMaggio was a centrefielder for the Boston Red Sox . He was born in San Francisco, California, in 1917 and died in 1946 .
 The following year DiMaggio batted safely in 34 consecutive games, establishing a franchise record; it remained unbroken at the time of his death . The following . year he set a record for 34 consecutive consecutive games .
 Amae no kozo was perhaps the first Japanese expert to analyze the Japanese idea of amae (""indulgent dependency"") and the first to exert wide influence on Western psychiatric thought .
 In 1950 he traveled to the United States to study psychiatry, and the culture shock he experienced prompted his investigation of the Japanese psyche . He traveled to Japan in 1950 to study the psychology of the country .
 Doi’s groundbreaking theory centred on the concept of amae, which he defined as a culturally ingrained dependence on authority figures that retained a pervasive influence on all social structures .
 He was a leading figure for decades at opera houses around the world . He died July 10, 2009, Zurich, Switzerland .
 He also conducted the first performance at the iconic Sydney Opera House . He also served as music director of the Australian Opera, where he conducted first performance .
 French author, politician, and man of letters (b. Maurice-Samuel-Roger) Druon . Druon was a French politician, author, and writer .
 Les Grandes Families won the 1948 Prix Goncourt . The playwright died April 14, 2009, in Paris .
 Maurice Druon is best known for co-writing the lyrics to “Chant des Mehdi Fedouach” The stirring unofficial anthem of France’s World War II Resistance movement .
 In 1966 he was elected to the 40-member French Academy, of which he was perpetual secretary from 1985 to 1999 . He was perpetual Secretary of the Academy from 1985 until 1999 .
 The artist created abstract works in clay and bronze that ranged from small ceramic pieces to large scale public installations and murals .
 Duckworth moved from Germany to England to study at the Liverpool School of Art . Duckworth spent her early years as an artist carving decorations on tombstones .
 After enrolling at London’s Central School of Arts and Crafts in 1956, she turned her attention to ceramics . Soon won recognition for pieces that abandoned traditional utilitarian techniques for a sculptural approach .
 Dunne entered show business as a stage manager and associate director of television shows in the 1950s . Dunne is best known for his role as an associate director on television shows .
 Dunne went on to become a film producer in the 1970s . His credits include The Boys in the Band, The Panic in Needle Park and Play It as It Lays . Dunne's brother, John Gregory Dunne, and his sister-in-law, Joan Did
 By the mid-1970s, however, excessive drinking had extinguished his career . The singer's career was over due to excessive drinking .
 Grenvilles, based on a 1955 murder, is based on the Simpson trial . People like Us, An Inconvenient Woman and Another City, Not My Own are also on the list . The Simpson trial was the subject of several films, including People Like Us .
 A Father’s Account of the Trial of his Daughter's Killer""" was a highly personal narrative of the trial of the man who had in 1982 murdered Dunne's daughter, actress Dominique Dunne . Dunne was a father of actress Dominica Dunne, who
 Founders and Sons criticized Israel’s founders for discounting the wishes of Arab residents . The work was considered the first critique of its kind written by an Israeli .
 Elon moved to Palestine with his family in 1933 and grew up in Tel Aviv . He learned English and Hebrew while speaking German at home . Elon was born in Germany and later moved to Israel .
 He was well known for his criticism of Israel’s militancy, extremism, and relations with both Palestinians and poorer Mideast Jews .
 Elon published nine books on both Israeli and German history and social criticism . Elon also published books on social criticism and social history .
 Former Panama President Manuel Noriega was credited with leading the country back to democracy . He served as Panama’s president after the United States deposed the military strongman . He is credited with helping Panama return to democracy after the U.S. deposed him .
 Endara, as the candidate of a coalition opposed to the rule of Noriega, was elected president in May 1989 . Endara's election was annulled by the president, who installed his own candidate in the election .
 Endara led a protest demonstration during which he and his vice presidential candidates were beaten by Noriegas Dignity Battalions . Endara's vice presidential candidate was beaten during the demonstration by the battalion .
 The United States invaded in December 1989, and Endara was sworn in as president . Endara's government was overthrown by the U.S. in December 1990 .
 He dissolved the armed forces and replaced them with a civilian police force . Within two months he dissolved the army and replaced it with the civilian police .
 Endara joined the political party of three-time president Arnulfo Arias in 1961 . Endara took the post of planning and economic policy in Arias’s third presidency in 1968 . 11 days later, however, Arias was overthrown for the third time .
 Endara was briefly imprisoned in 1971 before going into exile . He returned to Panama and politics in 1977 . Endara is a former Panamanian politician .
 The element on the high bar known as the “Endo roll” was named after him . He won seven Olympic medals, including five golds, as well as 10 world championship medals .
 Endo led the Japanese teams that claimed the Olympic men’s gymnastics team titles in'1960, 1964, and 1968 . Endo won three gold medals at the Olympics in 1960s and '60s .
 At the 1964 Games, held in his home country, he also won the individual all-around title . He also won gold on the parallel bars and silver in the floor exercise .
 Endo returned to the Olympics in 1972 as coach of the Japanese men’s squad . Endo won four consecutive gold medals at the 1972 Olympics .
 He was inducted into the International Gymnastics Hall of Fame in 1999 . He is now a member of the Olympic Committee of Athletes .
 The architect was internationally recognized for his original and varied designs . He was characterized by his use of concrete, glass, and neutral colours . He also used concrete and glass to blend concrete with their surroundings .
 Erickson's design for Robson Square in Vancouver incorporated waterfalls, a roof garden, plazas, and stairs with integrated ramps . Erickson designed a large civic centre in Vancouver, Vancouver .
 Among his other notable works were the Canadian embassy in Washington, D.C., and the Museum of Glass in Tacoma, Wash. He also worked on the Canadian Embassy in Washington and Seattle .
 He also designed the prizewinning Canadian pavilion at the Expo ’70 fair in Osaka, Japan .
 Escalona was celebrated in Colombia as “el maestro” of the vallenato, an accordion-based folk music that originated in the country's Caribbean coastal region . Many of his songs were regarded as classics of the genre, including ""La casa en
 InRussian human rights activist Natalya Estemirova documented illegal torture, kidnappings, and murders to give a voice and publicity to victims of political violence in the Russian republic of Chechnya .
 Estemirova was born to a Chechen father and Russian mother and moved to Chechnya at age 19 . She was born in Russia and later moved to the Chechen republic .
 In 2000 she started officially working with the human rights group Memorial . She started investigating civilian deaths and kidnappings in Chechnya .
 Estemirova was very critical of the Chechen and Russian authorities . She was personally threatened by Chechen Pres. Chechen President Chechen . She died in 2003 .
 Human Rights Watch report accuses Chechen government of burning homes of suspected rebels' families . The report also accuses the government of having burned the homes of more than two dozen families of those suspected rebels .
 Her murder came just hours after she had been kidnapped, and prompted Memorial to withdraw its services from Chechnya . Memorial Memorial withdrew its services after the murder of the Russian princess .
 Evdokimova was the daughter of an American UN employee (through whom she qualified for U.S. citizenship) and her Bulgarian husband . She was born in the United States .
 Evdokimova studied ballet at the Bavarian State Opera in Munich . She trained at the Royal Ballet School in London under the direction of Maria Fay . She also trained in Copenhagen with Vera Volkova while dancing with Royal Danish Ballet .
 Evdokimova excelled in coveted leading roles in such ballets as Giselle and La Sylphide . She often partnered with Rudolf Nureyev .
 Some of her greatest roles included the Gardener’s Daughter in Scarecrows, the title role in Cinderella, and the lead role in Verklarte Nacht .
 She was assistant instructor and head of English at Cheltenham Ladies’ College in Gloucestershire and then a hospital receptionist in Bristol .
 Her collections issued by the small publisher Peterloo Poets received widespread recognition . Her collections were published in Peterloo, London, in the 1930s .
 Fanthorpe was the first woman nominee for the post of Oxford Professor of Poetry . In 1999 she was considered a contender for poet laureate . She was considered to be Oxford's Poet laureate .
 Fanthorpe was made CBE in 2001, and awarded the Queen’s Gold Medal for Poetry in 2003 .
 Farrah Fawcett, Farrah (MARY FARRAH Leni, Leni and Farrah Majors) is an American actress . She was born in 1941 . Farrah was an actress and co-producer .
 Her feathered blond hair inspired the style adopted by legions of fans in the 1970s . Her look vaulted her to superstardom in the hit television series Charlie’s Angels .
 Fawcett was married to actor Lee Majors at the end of her career . She starred in her first film, "The Queen of the World," which was released in 2003 .
 A poster of her clad in a wet onepiece red bathing suit and flashing her dazzling smile became iconic and sold some six million copies . The poster sold some 6 million copies and became iconic . She was the first woman to be photographed wearing a onepiece and a bathing suit .
 Fawcett gained kudos for her serious role in the big-screen film The Apostle . She was best known for her role alongside Robert Duvall in the 1980s TV series .
 Gani Fawehinmi, Gani (GANIYU OYESOLA FAWEHINMl), Nigerian human rights lawyer (b. Gani) Gani is a Nigerian lawyer who has worked in Nigeria since 2003 . He is also a lawyer for human rights
 As a tireless advocate for justice, he made many enemies among Nigeria’s military and civilian regimes . He devoted his life to fighting for the rights of the Nigerian people .
 He began practicing law in Lagos in 1965 and quickly became known as ""the people’s lawyer" Fawehinmi took on such cases as the mysterious killing in 1986 of a newspaper editor . He blamed the military junta in power at that time .
 He founded the Nigerian Weekly Law Reports . He also published several books and founded several law reports .
 Fawehinmi was awarded the Bruno Kreisky Prize in 1993 in honour of his work in advancing human rights . The award was awarded in 1993 for his work on human rights in Nigeria .
 In 2001 he was made a senior advocate of Nigeria, the country’s highest title in the legal profession . He was made Senior Advocate of Nigeria .
 Fehn’s corpus of completed works reflects the influence of such modernists as Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier, Louis I Kahn, and Frank Lloyd Wright . Fehn's corpus of works reflects influence of modernists but also particularizes the Scandinavian setting .
 His Norwegian Pavilion captured first prize in the design competition at the World Exhibition in Brussels in 1958 .
 Fehn’s Nordic Pavilion at the 1962 Venice Biennale won the Golden Lion Award for national pavilions . Fehn's Nordic Pavilion was awarded Golden Lion at the Venice Biennial .
 Feoktistov, Konstantin Petrovich, Russian spacecraft designer and cosmonaut . Feokstistov was born in Moscow, Russia . He is also a Russian space designer and a Russian spacecraft engineer .
 When Voronezh was occupied in World War II, Feoktistov worked as a scout for the Soviet army . He was then only 16 years old when he became a scout .
 Shot through the neck, he feigned death and escaped from a burial trench . He feigned his own death, escaping from the burial trench and escaping .
 He later attended Bauman Moscow Higher Technical School and worked as a factory engineer . He later went on to work as an engineer in a factory .
 In 1955 he earned the equivalent of a Ph.D., and from that time he worked in the Soviet space program designing spacecraft and equipment . From that time, he worked for the space program .
 Feoktistov carried out extensive scientific experiments and observations beyond the capability of previous cosmonauts . During the flight of Voskhod 1 he carried out experiments beyond the capabilities of previous spacewalkers . The Russian cosmonaut carried out a number of scientific experiments .
 After the flight he returned to engineering and played a major role in designing the Salyut and Mir space stations . He was a major contributor to the design of the Mir space station .
 Ferrante performed with Lou Teicher in the popular two-piano act Ferranti & Teichers . He performed in the late 1980s with Lou .
 The Detroit Tigers pitcher had a phenomenal rookie year as a pitcher for Major League Baseball’s Detroit Tigers in 1976 . His quirky approach to the game that endeared him to fans .
 His won-lost record that season was 19-9, and he had an earned run average of 2.34 and 97 strikeouts . He also had a won-loss record of 19.9 and had a 2.33-2.34 .
 Fidrych was named the American League Rookie of the Year and was the starting pitcher for the All-Star game . He was the first pitcher to pitch in that game and the second pitcher in that year .
 His career was cut short by a knee injury in spring training in 1977, followed by a rotator cuff injury in an early season game . The injury was not diagnosed until 1985, and he was diagnosed with it in 1985 .
 Danish ballet dancer, choreographer, and company director (b. Flindt, Flemming, Danish dancer and choreographer) was Danish dancer .
 The Lesson (1963) was an adaptation of a Eugene Ionesco story and depicts a power-crazed ballet teacher as he abuses and murders female students who fail to meet his exacting standards . Ballet was first performed on television as Enetime, first performed as En
 Several of Flindt's other ballets featured nudity, notably the Ionesco-inspired The Triumph of Death and Salome . He later created such characterbased ballets as The Overcoat and Death in Venice for the aging Rudolf Nureyev .
 Flindt studied with the Royal Danish Ballet and in 1955 joined the RDB as a soloist . He was awarded a gold medal for his work in ballet .
 He excelled at demanding virtuoso leading roles with the RDB and other ballet troupes, including the Paris Opera Ballet . He then turned to choreography, before turning to directing .
 As RDB artistic director he introduced modern new productions to the repertoire and worked to broaden the company’s appeal .
 Flindt and his ballerina wife formed their own short-lived ballet company before settling in Texas, where he was artistic director of the Dallas Ballet .
 Albert Foote, Horton (ALBERT HORTON Foote Jr.) was a playwright and screenwriter . Foote was also a screenwriter and playwright . He is credited with many notable works .
 Horton Foote Conn.), evoked American life in beautifully observed minimal stories . The playwright's stories are set in the early 20th century in the fictional small town of Harrison, Texas .
 Foote’s best-known work, The Trip to Bountiful, was written as a television play and broadcast in 1953 . Later that year it was staged on Broadway, and in 1985 it was produced as a film, for which Foote also wrote the Oscar-nom
 His 1954 play The Travelling Lady, with his screenplay, became the film Baby, the Rain Must Fall in 1965 . His screenplay, with the play, is the film that became the movie Baby, The Rain must Fall .
 He wrote an acclaimed nine-play cycle called The Orphan's Home . He was honoured with a Pulitzer Prize for drama in 1995 for The Young Man from Atlanta .
 In 1945 he became the youngest composer to have won a Guggenheim fellowship . Foss published his first work at age 15, and in 1945 he was the youngest to win a Gugsgenheim Fellowship . Foss died in 2003 .
 Foss’s early works include symphonic music (Ode; first performed in 1945), cantatas, and chamber music, as well as a ballet score (Gift of the Magi, 1945) Foss's early works were neoclassical— tonal and well
 An opera, Griffelkin, was commissioned by the National Broadcasting Company and first performed on television . An opera was first performed by the BBC on television in 1960s .
 His later chamber pieces, including Echoi and Elytres, were considered avant-garde . He ordered musical events by means of chance operations and left many decisions about the performance to the performers .
 March 25, 2009, Durham, N.C., was noted for his scholarly reappraisal of the American Civil War era and the importance of the black struggle in shaping modern American identity .
 He helped fashion the legal brief that led to the historic Supreme Court decision outlawing public school segregation, Brown Board of Education of Topeka . He was instrumental in the development of African American studies programs at colleges and universities .
 Bill Clinton honoured Franklin with the Presidential Medal of Freedom . Two years later Clinton appointed Franklin to the seven-member Race Initiative Advisory Board . Franklin was honoured with the medal of Freedom in 1993 .
 While completing her studies in philosophy and English literature at Hofstra College, Hempstead, Long Island, N.Y., she married Robert French . She supported her husband while he completed his law degree .
 The following year French received a B.A. from Hofstra . She later went on to earn an M. at Hofstra, where she graduated with a M. A. from the same school .
 As French pursued a writing career, her marriage failed, and she and her husband divorced in 1967 .
 The Women’s Room sold more than 20 million copies and was translated into 20 languages . An eponymous television movie based on the novel debuted in 1980 .
 A History of Women and a number of essays and articles written under the pseudonym Mara Solwoska . Mara Soloska is the author of a series of essays, articles and essays .
 The principle of the organization was based on sweat equity, involving future homeowners in the construction of their own homes . Future homeowners will be able to contribute to their own home .
 Manual labour was provided by thousands of support volunteers, including celebrities and United States Presidents Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton . The latter awarded Fuller the Presidential Medal of Freedom .
 Fuller resigned from Habitat’s board of directors in 2005 to launch a new organization . Fuller Center for Housing is Fuller's new center for housing . Fuller is a philanthropist who founded Habitat in 2005 .
 Louis J Ignarro and Ferid Murad shared the 1998 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for the discovery that nitric oxide acts as a signaling molecule in the cardiovascular system . May 19, 2009, Seattle, Wash., shared the Nobel Prize with Louis Ignarro .
 Their combined work uncovered an entirely new mechanism by which blood vessels in the body relax and widen .
 Furchgott demonstrated that cells in the endothelium, or inner lining, of blood vessels produce an unknown signaling molecule . In the work for which he shared the Nobel Prize, he demonstrated cells in blood vessels produced an unknown signal molecule .
 The molecule, which he named endothelium-derived relaxing factor, signals smooth muscle cells in blood vessel walls to relax . It dilates the vessels, dilating the vessels .
 Furchgott also received the Albert Lasker Basic Medical Research Award . The award was awarded to Furchhott for his work at the University of Cambridge .
 Yegor Timurovich, Russian economist and government official (b. Gaidar, Yegar, Gaimar) was Russian economist . Timurov is a former Russian government official .
 Russia instituted sweeping economic reforms in the early days of post-Soviet Russia . The reforms aided the country’s transition from communism to capitalism .
 Shortly before the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, he was appointed deputy prime minister and economics minister . He was appointed economics minister under Pres. Boris Yeltsin .
 In June 1992 Gaidar was named acting prime minister, though he was never approved by the legislature . He was eventually ousted by the parliament .
 He adapted from Robert Altman’s 1970 blockbuster film M*A*S*H . He created the pilot for the enormously influential TV smash hit program .
 During M*A*S*H’ s 11-year TV run (Gelbart remained involved for 4), the show blended comedy and tragedy while following the lives of staff working in a Korean War military field hospital .
 Gelbart’s credits include The Notorious Landlady, Oh, God! and Tootsie . The latter two garnered him Academy Award nominations . Gelbart's screenwriting credits include the NotoriousLandlady .
 His work in integral geometry provided the mathematical foundations for computed tomography . His representation theory became the foundation used by physicists working with quantum mechanics .
 Among his most important results are the Gelfand representation of a Banach algebra . He also developed the Bernstein-Gelfand resolution for representation of simple Lie groups .
 Tudy in the County of Cornwall; “Steady Eddie” was British economist and central banker (b. Tudy) Tudy . Tudy is a former central banker and author of a series of books .
 Tudy, Cornwall, Eng., guided the U.K. central bank to independence and thus full control over the country’s monetary policy without undue political influence from the elected government . Tudy led the Bank of England to independence from the government .
 George served briefly in the Royal Air Force . After studying economics at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, he studied at Emmanuel .
 He joined the BOE in 1962 and worked mainly in its international section . He was a member of the Board of Education, which he joined in 1962 .
 He was seconded to the Bank of International Settlements in the mid-1960s and the International Monetary Fund in the early 1970s .
 George was promoted to BOE executive director in 1982 and deputy governor in 1990 . George was also promoted to executive director of the BOE in 1982 .
 George faced criticism for his role in the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International in 1991 . Inquiry uncovered a series of failures in BOE’s systems of supervision and communication .
 He reestablished his reputation by his adept handling of the U.K.’s embarrassing withdrawal from the European exchange-rate mechanism in September 1992 . He reestablished his reputation .
 In 1960s television variety show Rowan & Martin’s Laugh-in . He won audiences over with his placid reciter of ridiculous self-penned poetry .
 Nobel Prize for Physics in 2003 for his work in the 1950s on superconductivity . He won the Nobel Prize in 2003 .
 He shared the award with Alexey A Abrikosov of Russia and Anthony J Leggett of Great Britain .
 Ginzburg was also noted for his work on theories of radio wave propagation, radio astronomy, and the origin of cosmic rays . Ginzberg was also known for his theories on radio waves and radio astronomy . His work on radio astronomy and cosmic rays was published in 1998 .
 Ginzburg was a member of the team that worked under physicist Igor Tamm to develop the first Soviet thermonuclear bomb . The bomb's design was first proposed by Andrey Sakharov in 1948 and refined in 1949, and tested on Aug. 31, 1949 . Ginz
 Ginzburg received the State Prize of the Soviet Union in 1953 and the Lenin Prize in 1966 . Ginzberg received the Lenin prize in 1966 and received State Prize in 1953 .
 Big Brother star turned a stint in 2002 on the British reality TV show Big Brother into a lucrative high profile public life . Her equally public struggle with cervical cancer was cut short by her equally public battle with cancer .
 Gottschalk was witness to pervasive anti-Semitic intimidation in Nazi Germany . In 1939 he fled with his family to the United States . He studied at Brooklyn College and Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion .
 He was named president of Hebrew Union, where he preserved its reputation as the intellectual locus of Judaism’s liberal Reform movement until his retirement in 2000 .
 Robert Engle was corecipient (with the American economist Robert F Engle) of the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 2003 for his development of techniques for analyzing time series data with common trends .
 Granger’s books cover such subjects as time series analysis and forecasting, statistical theory, and applied statistics . Granger's books cover subjects such as statistical theory and time-series analysis .
 In his seminal work, conducted in the 1970s and '80s, he developed concepts and analytic methods to establish meaningful relationships between nonstationary variables such as exchange rates and inflation rates .
 Fundamental to his methods was his discovery that a specific combination of two or more nonstationary time series could be stationary . He invented the term cointegration, which he invented for his methods .
 The dynamics in exchange rates and prices are driven by a tendency to smooth out deviations from the long-run equilibrium exchange rate and short-run fluctuations around the adjustment path .
 Granger was granted a knighthood in 2005 after spending most of his career in the U.S. He retained his British citizenship and was granted his knighthold in 2005 . Granger was knighted in 2005 for his services in the United States .
 American Folklife Center at the Library of Congress was created in 2009 . Folklore is a collection of songs, customs, beliefs, rituals, rituals and craft associated with union labourers .
 Grene was one of the first to offer an interpretation of the philosophical meaning of random events that occur in the course of evolution . She was known for her innovative theories on the nature of the scientific study of life .
 She also addressed the philosophical impacts of the inevitable increase in the understanding of evolutionary science . She also contributed to new ideas in epistemology—the philosophy of the nature of knowledge .
 Grene received a degree in zoology from Wellesley College and a Ph.D. in philosophy from Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Mass. Grene also received a M.S. degree in Zoology . Grene was awarded the title of the best zoologist in the world
 His meteoric rise to fame began with the construction of his parents' home in Amagansett, N.Y., completed in 1966 . His meteor rise to prominence began with his family's home .
 Gwathmey Siegel & Associates was noted for bridging the divide between small and large projects . Founded in 1968 with fellow architect Robert Siegel, the firm that he founded with Siegel .
 Hakim Hakim, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al, was Iraqi political leader (b.50, Al-Najaf, Iraq—d.50) Hakim was a prominent Iraqi politician . He was assassinated in 1991 .
 Iraq’s largest Shi'ite political party after years of opposing the regime of Saddam Hussein . Became head of Iraq's largest Shi’ite party .
 Hakim and his brother established the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq in Iran . Hakim was a member of the Ayatollah's brother, Muhammad Baqir alHakim . In Iran, Hakim established the Islamic State of Iraq .
 Hakim Hakim commanded the Badr Organization, which fought with Iran in the Iran-Iraq War . Hakim was the brother of his brother, who chaired the organization . He commanded the organization's military arm, Badr .
 Both brothers returned to Iraq shortly after the U.S.-led invasion in 2003 . Both brothers are still in Iraq . Both returned to the country after the invasion .
 Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim Council was appointed by the Coalition Provisional Authority . In July of that year, Hakim became a member of the Iraqi Governing .
 When his brother was killed by a car bomb in August, Hakim took over the leadership of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq . Hakim built the Shi'ite political coalition the United Iraqi Alliance, which came to power in the December 2005 elections .
 Pierre Harmel, Pierre (PIERRE-CHERLES) Harmel was a Belgian statesman . He was a member of the Cabinet of Belgium . He died in 1953 .
 He was best known for promoting NATO as a peacekeeping organization in a document that became known as the Harmel doctrine .
 The influence of this doctrine was felt in the introduction of the 1975 Helsinki Accords, which aided in the easing of relations between the Communist bloc and the West . The influence was felt by this doctrine .
 Harmel began his career as a lawyer and professor before entering the political realm as a UN delegate in 1949 . Harmel is a former UN delegate and a UN representative .
 He held a number of governmental posts before serving an eightmonth term as prime minister . He was prime minister for eight months .
 It was in his role as Belgium’s foreign minister that he began to examine NATO and its objectives . He began examining NATO's objectives as a foreign minister .
 His career includes stints as speaker of the Belgian Senate and minister of state . His career also included stints in Belgium's Senate and in Belgium itself .
 Harvey’s no-nonsense approach to news and editorials, laced with long pauses for suspense, created a personal connection with listeners . The genuine warmth and humour that he brought to human-interest stories, he said .
 By 1976 Harvey had begun producing a new show, The Rest of the Story, which featured short biographical accounts of famous people whose identities were not revealed until the end of the program .
 Aside from a brief hiatus in 2001 due to a throat malady, he continued to broadcast until shortly before his death .
 Norwegian resistance leader played a prominent role in the Norwegian resistance during World War II . Later captured the public's imagination as a member of the fabled Kon-Tiki expedition .
 Haugland’s feats of bravado earned him numerous decorations, including Norway's War Cross with Sword and Britain's Distinguished Service Order . He was awarded the War Cross in Norway and the Medal of Honor .
 Following the war, he was a radio operator on the Kon-Tiki, a balsa-wood raft that sailed from Peru to French Polynesia to test a theory about pre-Columbian migration patterns .
 Governor of the Bank of Japan introduced striking reform to the Japanese banking system in a bid to revive the country’s slumping economy . Former governor of Japan .
 He left the bank in 1981 and assumed a position as senior managing director at Nissho Iwai Corp., a Japanese trading firm . He then became president of the corporation three years later .
 In his term as governor of the BOJ, Hayami cut interest rates to zero . Hayami led the bank to buy $24 billion in stock holdings from commercial banks in Japan .
 He directed its first televised evening news broadcast, with Douglas Edwards, and Edward R Murrow’s See It Now news show . He directed the first TV broadcast of its first evening broadcast .
 He also served as the first executive producer of the CBS Evening News featuring Walter Cronkite . He produced the first-ever televised U.S. presidential debate .
 Other credits include screenplays written under the pseudonym Edmond Dantes . Dantes has also written screenplays under the name Edmond .
 His style was marked by legible letters filled with colourful designs and often included rock music lyrics . His style of writing was often filled in with colourful letters .
 In 1975 a poster for the Broadway musical The Wiz inspired his name and trademark tag . He began spray painting, or tagging, at age 14 .
 In the mid-1980s Iz retired to Florida, where he suffered from financial troubles and drug abuse, but in the 1990s he resumed work in spaces approved for graffiti . Iz is known for his work in Miami, Florida, in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The late singer was the most popular entertainer in the world in the early and mid-1980s . He died June 25, 2009, Los Angeles, California .
 Jackson began his lifelong performance career as the youngest and most talented of five brothers known as the Jackson 5 . Jackson 5 was the youngest of the five brothers and the Jackson brothers .
 Michael topped the pop charts as a solo performer with “Ben,” and “Rockin’ Robin” reached number two on the charts . Michael also topped the charts in the 1990s with ‘Ben’
 As Michael matured, his voice changed, family tensions arose, and a contract standoff ensued . Michael Jackson's voice changed as he grew up and matured .
 Michael Jackson's first solo effort with Epic, Off the Wall, exceeded all expectations and became the best-selling album of the year . The album had since sold more than 20 million copies and yielded the international hit singles ""Don’t Stop 'til You Get Enough” and
 Thriller was released in 1993 and became a worldwide superstar . Thriller came out three years later in 2004, starring in a number of guest stars .
 The album’s second single, ""Billie Jean,” an electrifying dance track, topped the pop charts . ""Beat It, “” featured a raucous solo from famed guitarist Eddie Van Halen . The album's second single was the vehicle for
 "Beat It" helped to break down barriers between black and white artists on the radio and in the emerging format of television music videos . The electrifying 14-minute “Thriller” video became a cultural icon and set a new standard .
 His reunion tour with his brothers was one of the most popular concert events of 1984 . His much-anticipated Victory reunion tour was a popular concert event .
 ""Jacko’s” dominance in pop music solidified with his solo albums Bad and Dangerous . Further solo albums—notably Bad and Dangerous —solidified ""Jacki’’S” popularity in pop .
 In 2001 he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . Jackson 5 had been inducted in 1997; the Jackson 5 were inducted .
 Jackson’s eccentric, secluded lifestyle grew increasingly controversial in later years . Allegations of child molestation in 1993, two brief marriages (one to Lisa Marie Presley and the other to Debbie Rowe) and a financial collapse nearly resulted in the loss of Neverland ranch .
 Janet Rosalie Rosenberg was American-born Guyanese politician (b. Jagan) Jagan . Jagan was born in Georgetown, Guyana, and later died in prison .
 President of Guyana from Dec., 1997, to Aug., 1999, was the country’s first white president . She was the first elected female president in South America .
 She was born into a middleclass Jewish family . She attended college in Michigan .
 In 1942, while working as a student nurse in Chicago, she met Cheddi Jagan, a dentistry student from what was then British Guiana . She met Jagan while working in Chicago as a nurse in 1942 .
 The following year they married and moved to Georgetown, British Guiana, where he set up a dental practice . The next year they were married and set up their dental practice there .
 She officially became a citizen of Guyana that year, having been stripped of her U.S. citizenship more than 20 years earlier . Her Marxist political views led her to Guyana, where she was stripped of citizenship .
 While her husband served as prime minister and president, Jagan held several cabinet posts and served in the parliament . Jagan was also a cabinet member .
 After her husband died in office, Jagan accepted the PPP's nomination for the presidency . She was hesitant at first to run for the president .
 Despite criticisms of her ethnicity and age, she defeated People’s National Congress leader Desmond Hoyte in the election on Dec., 1997 . Despite criticisms, she won the election in 1997 .
 Hoyte’s supporters protested the result so vehemently that in an effort to quell the unrest, Jagan and Hoyte reached an agreement in January 1998 to hold new elections in 2000, two years earlier than required . Hoyte's supporters protested so vehemently, in an attempt to
 In July 1999 Jagan suffered a mild heart attack, and the following month she stepped down . Jagan was forced to step down from her post in 1999 .
 Three years later she was one of the 13 founding members of the Ladies Professional Golf Association . She went on to compete in LPGA events until 1970 .
 As a professional, Jameson won a total of 12 tournaments . She also won 14 amateur titles, including United States amateur championships in 1939 and 1940 .
 In 1951 she was inducted into the Hall of Fame of Women’s Golf, and in 1967 she was one of the six original inductees of the LPGA Tour Hall of . Fame . In 1967 she was one of six original inductees of the
 In 1999 Jameson was named to the Women’s Sports Foundation Hall of Fame . In 1999 she was also named to a Women's Sports Foundation .
 For many, his best-known work was the balalaika-infused song “Lara’s Theme,” which was drawn from the Doctor Zhivago score . For many people, however, his work was his best known work .
 Jarre studied engineering at the Sorbonne before transferring to the Paris Conservatory . Jarre served as music director for the Theatre National Populaire for more than a decade .
 His first movie sound track was for the short documentary Hotel des Invalides . He was soon in demand by filmmakers on both sides of the Atlantic .
 Jarre was sensitive to the needs of the script and often incorporated exotic motifs, ethnic instruments, and electronic effects to enhance the drama onscreen . He was especially known for his lush melodies, but he was sensitive .
 In February 2009 he was awarded the Berlin Film Festival’s Golden Bear for Lifetime Achievement . Jarre was an officer of the Legion of Honour .
 Jeanne-Claude (JEANNE-CLAUDE DeNAT DE GUILLEBON), French environmental artist (b. Jean Claude) DeNAT DeNAT de GU GUNABON, French artist .
 JeanneClaude was born in Morocco, where her father was a general in the French army . Her father was also a French general .
 In 1958 she met Christo Javacheff, who was already working in Paris as an artist . The next year she left her then husband to marry Christo . In 1958, she left his then husband for Christo and married him the next year .
 The couple installed 1,340 giant blue umbrellas across the Sato River valley in Japan and 1,760 giant yellow ones in Tejon Pass, California .
 He won the European heavyweight title in 1956 against Francesco Cavicchi . In 1958, he scored a one-round knockout over Eddie Machen, a leading American heavyweight .
 Johansson won the European heavyweight championship again in 1962 against Dick Richardson . Johansson then forfeited the title in 1963 for failing to defend it . He retired in 1963 with a record of 26 wins and 2 losses—to Patterson .
 As general secretary of the Transport and General Workers' Union, he guided one of the world’s largest trade unions . In 1978, he had a membership of some two million workers . He was a central figure in the Trade Unions Congress .
 Labour Prime Minister Harold Wilson’s second government earned the nickname ""Emperor Jones" for his extraordinary control of pro-labour regulations and parliamentary legislation . Jones's power was so great, especially during Harold Wilson's second government .
 In the 1970s Jones supported the controversial Social Contract, which proffered wage restraints in partnership with the government . Jones deplored the widespread strikes during the Winter of Discontent that led to the election in 1979 of Thatcher .
 Jones was made MBE in 1950 and appointed Companion of Honour in 1978 . He was made a Companion of Honor in 1978 and was made an MBE .
 In the 1940s and ’50s, the actress starred in roles that alternated between fresh-faced naifs and vixens . She starred in Malibu films in the '50s and '60s, '70s, and '80s .
 Motown beat beat beat for numerous Motown hits while playing as a member of the label’s house studio band, the Funk Brothers . Funk Brothers played in the house studio .
 Jones’s interest in music began during his troubled teenage years while at the Moore School for Boys . He first experimented with the trombone until he found his true calling .
 During the early 1960s Jones toured with Marvin Gaye’s band . His biggest success came when he was recruited by Motown to play drums for the Funk Brothers .
 Jones and others were finally recognized for their contributions in the documentary film Standing in the Shadows of Motown . They were honoured in 2004 with a Grammy Award for lifetime achievement .
 Architects created futuristic organically inspired designs that challenged some of the most basic ideas of modern architecture . The Prague-based firm was founded in 2009 .
 His best-known designs were for the spaceshiplike semimonocoque Media Centre at Lord’s Cricket Ground in London and Selfridges department store in Birmingham .
 In 2007 Kaplicky’s undulating “blob"" design won the international competition to build a Czech National Library, but the Czech government refused to fund the project .
 Russian-born Israeli scientist and politician . Katzir, Ephraim (EPHRAIM KATCHALSKl) Katzir was a scientist and Israeli politician . He was born in Israel .
 Ephraim Katzir attempted to close the wide gap that existed in education and social welfare between Sephardic and Oriental Jews and Ashkenazic Jews . Katzir wanted to promote understanding between Israeli Jews and Arab neighbours .
 In 1949 Katzir was appointed acting head of the department of biophysics in the Weizmann Institute of Science at Rehovot . He later became its director . Katzir became director of the institute in 1949 .
 He was the first Israeli elected to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences . A recognized authority on proteins, he was a recognized authority . He was also the first person to be elected to National Academy .
 From 1966 to 1968 he was chief scientific adviser to the Israeli Ministry of Defense . He was Chief Scientific Adviser to Israel's Ministry of Defence .
 Philadelphia Athletics, Detroit Tigers, Boston Red Sox, Chicago White Sox, and Baltimore Orioles . In each year from 1946 to 1953 he topped .300; in 1949 he edged out Ted Williams for the AL batting title . Career batting average of .306 .
 Kell was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1983 . Kell also was named to 10 AL All-Star teams . Kell is a two-time All-Stars of his career .
 After he retired as a player, he served (1959-96, with the exception of 1964) as the easygoing announcer for the Tigers .
 The son of a cowman, he marked his debut as a fiction writer with Hot Iron . His many subsequent novels earned him numerous prizes . In 1995 the Western Writers of America voted him the best western author of all time .
 Ex-NFL star represented suburban Buffalo, N.Y., for nine terms in the U.S. House of Representatives . Was the Republican nominee for vice president in 1996 .
 He led the Bills to the AFL championship in 1964 and again in 1965 . He also won the league’s most valuable player award twice .
 He was named seven times to the AFL All-Star team and retired from the game in 1969 as the AFL's all-time leader in passing yards with 21,130 . He retired in 1969 from the AFL in 1969 .
 He lost his job when he was arrested on suspicion of planning to assassinate a government minister . The minister was promoting a ban on driving on the Sabbath in Israel .
 Kenan was acquitted and in 1954 moved to Paris, where he worked as a sculptor, wrote plays, and contributed articles to publications .
 Returned to Israel in 1962, composed a column for the newspaper Yedioth Aharonoth . He wrote more than a dozen volumes of Hebrew-language fiction, poetry, and essays .
 Kenan was a longtime supporter of the so-called two-state solution . In 1970 he cofounded the Israeli-Palestinian Council . Kenan co-founded the Council in 1970 .
 Kennedy is the youngest child of Rose and Joseph P Kennedy and the last surviving brother of Pres. Kennedy . He is the son of Rose Kennedy and Joseph Kennedy, the youngest son of Joseph Kennedy and Rose Kennedy .
 John F Kennedy, was also a noteworthy spokesman for the policies that had come to be associated with his family name . He was a notable spokesman for social welfare legislation and active participation in world affairs .
 He campaigned for his brother John in the 1960 presidential race . Two years later he was elected to the president's former Senate seat representing Massachusetts .
 Kennedy was swept back into office for a full six-year term by a landslide vote in 1964 . An injury prevented him from campaigning actively for reelection in 1964, but he was re-elected in 1966 .
 Early in 1969 he was elected Senate majority whip, and he became an early front-runner for the next Democratic presidential nomination . He was elected majority whip in 1969 .
 Ted Kennedy accidentally drove his car off an unmarked bridge on Chappaquiddick on July 18, 1969, near Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts, and his companion in the car, 28-year-old Mary Jo Kopechne, was drowned .
 He announced that he would not seek the presidency in 1972 . Although he was reelected to the Senate in 1970, he decided not to run for the presidency . He was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1971 .
 He was a serious contender for the presidential nomination again in 1980 but withdrew from the race during the convention . He was serious contenders for the 1980s presidential nomination but withdrew during convention .
 Kennedy won reelection to eight full terms as senator, the last time in 2006 . Kennedy was known as the “lion of the Senate” serving as a leading advocate for many liberal causes, including voting rights and national health insurance .
 On March 4, 2009, he was granted an honorary British knighthood . On August 12, 2009 he was awarded the United States Presidential Medal of Freedom .
 Sir Ludovic Henry Coverley was a Scottish broadcaster and investigative journalist . He was known for his work in Scotland as a radio and television presenter . He also worked for BBC Scotland's Radio 4 Scotland and BBC Scotland .
 The victim of state-ordered execution and wrongful imprisonment was sentenced to death in 2009 . She campaigned tirelessly against injustice, most notably in the areas of state ordered execution . She was convicted of wrongful imprisonment .
 His efforts in several high-profile cases contributed to the governments abolishment of capital punishment in Britain . His efforts helped to abolish the death penalty .
 Ted Kennedy, Ted (THEODORE KENNEDY; ""Teeder”), Canadian ice hockey player (b. 1952) Ted Kennedy . Ted (theodore KENNedy) was Canadian . Ted Kennedy played ice hockey .
 In 1955, he was awarded the Hart Memorial Trophy as the NHL’s most valuable player . He made the AllStar team five times and made the NHL AllStar Team five times . In 1955 he won the NHL's most valuable award as a player .
 April 14, 1922, Shibpur, East Bengal, British India [now in Bangladesh]—d.d. April 14th, 1922 . Shibpur was Shibpur in East Bengal .
 The sarod player is one of the world’s most honoured sarod players and composers . He brought classical Indian music to Western audiences .
 Khan began serious study of music at age three and became an ustad of the fretless 25-stringed sarod . Khan is the world's leading sarodist .
 He was the music director of All-India Radio in Lucknow, broadcasting as a solo artist and composing for orchestras, before becoming a maharaja’s court musician in 1943 .
 As a composer he was known for his film scores, Satyajit Ray’s Devi and the Ismail Merchant-James Ivory production The Householder . He was also known as the creator of many ragas .
 He was best remembered as a heroic action star in a series of Bollywood “curry westerns” that earned him comparisons to American actor Clint Eastwood .
 Khan is the son of a Pathan Afghani immigrant and his Iranian wife . Khan moved to Bombay as a youth to pursue an acting career . Khan was born in India and moved to Mumbai to pursue a career in acting .
 Khan also served as producer and director on some of his most accomplished films . The Godfather-inspired hit Dhannatma was the first Hindi-language movie filmed on location in Afghanistan .
 Khatibi, Abdelkebir, was a Moroccan educator, literary critic, and novelist . He was born in El Jadida, Morocco, and died in 1953 . He is credited with a novel that inspired the work of several generations .
 Maradoun, Morocco, was a member of the angry young generation of the 1960s . He was born March 16, 2009, Rabat, Morocco .
 The abstruse prose employed by this young generation of Maghribian authors reflected the desire to reject French culture by destroying and re-creating the French language . Khatibi called a litterature sauvage .
 Khatibi pursued a sociology degree at the Sorbonne in Paris . He was born in Morocco and studied in Morocco .
 In his doctoral dissertation, Le Roman maghrebin, he raised the question of how the committed writer can avoid becoming a propagandist, especially in a postrevolutionary society . In his dissertation, he asked how committed writers avoid becoming propagandists .
 His first novel, La Memoire tatouee, deals semiautobiographically with the typically Maghribian themes of acculturation and decolonization .
 Two plays, La Mort des artistes and Le Prophete voile, and the novel Le Livre du sang, demonstrate his theoretical approach to literature . Two plays and a novel are examples of the theoretical approach .
 Mokp'o, Haeui Island, Korea [now in South Cholla province, S.Kor.]—d. Jan. Jan., 1924? The island is now in South . Cholla Province of S. Korea .
 Kim was a charismatic political opposition leader for more than three decades before serving as South Korean president . He was the first opposition leader to win election to that office .
 During his administration he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace for his efforts to restore democracy in South Korea and improve relations with North Korea . He was also awarded the Peace Prize for restoring democracy in the South Korea .
 Kim’s ""sunshine” policy allowed South Koreans to visit relatives in the North . The policy also eased rules governing South Korean investment in the country .
 Kim became a wealthy businessman after taking over a Japanese-owned shipping company . Kim took over the shipping company and became a successful businessman .
 During the Korean War, he did not serve in the military and confessed to having adjusted his birthdate to Dec. 3, 1925, to avoid conscription . He was captured by communist forces but managed to escape .
 Kim finally won a seat in the National Assembly, but the election was nullified following a military coup . After five attempts to win elective office, Kim won't be allowed to serve in parliament again . Kim's election nullified after a coup led by Major Gen. Gen. Kim
 In 1973, he was kidnapped from his hotel in Tokyo by agents of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency . He was returned forcibly to South Korea, where he was placed under house arrest .
 In 1976 Kim was again arrested, but he was released from house arrest in 1979 . In May 1980 he was arrested in May 1980 on charges of sedition and conspiracy . He was sentenced to death, but President Kim was freed from prison .
 Chun DooHwan commuted the sentence to life imprisonment and later to 20 years . The sentence was originally set to be life imprisonment, but was later commuted to life in prison .
 He was allowed in 1982 to seek medical treatment in the U.S., but on his return home in 1985, he was placed under house arrest . He is allowed to seek treatment in 1982, but returned to the United States in 1985 .
 Kim called for democracy and denounced members of the government who trampled on the rights of citizens . Kim called on the government to stop trampling on citizens' rights .
 In 1987 he allowed student demonstrators to take refuge in Seoul’s main cathedral . He refused to allow military authorities to seize the students . In 1987, he allowed students to stay in the cathedral .
 Kim was ordained a priest in 1951, became bishop of Masan in 1966 and archbishop of Seoul in 1968, and was elevated to cardinal in 1969 . Kim was also archbishop in Masan, Korea, and later became cardinal .
 Hungarian uprising against Soviet forces took place in Hungary in 1956 . Leader of 1956 uprising led freedom fighters in the brief 1956 Hungarian uprising .
 He was captured by the Soviet army, but he escaped and walked back to Hungary . He escaped and returned to Hungary after being captured .
 After having been promoted to general in 1950, he was arrested and given a death sentence on charges of subversion . The charges were widely believed to have been fabricated by the Hungarian Stalinist government .
 In 1956 he was one of many prisoners granted parole in an attempt to stem rising popular unrest regarding Soviet influence . His sentence was changed to hard labour for life, but he was granted parole . In 1956, he was given parole in a bid to stem unrest against Soviet influence in Russia .
 Kiraly was appointed commander in chief of the National Guard and chairman of the Revolutionary Council for National Defense by Prime Minister Imre Nagy, who was negotiating for Soviet withdrawal from Hungary . Kiraly is still weak from prison .
 Kiraly organized civilians into a fighting force, an act of political significance in spite of the inadequacy of Hungarian weaponry . The Hungarians organized civilians to fight against the Nazis in 1944 .
 The resistance lasted approximately two weeks . Soviet tanks surrounded Budapest on Nov., 1956, and Kiraly and his forces fled over the Austrian border .
 Kiraly spent the next 33 years in the United States . After the collapse of the communist government, he returned to Hungary, where he served in the National Assembly .
 He studied philosophy at the Universities of Lodz and Warsaw (Ph.D., 1953), where he served as chair of the department of the history of philosophy until 1968 .
 When he was sent to Moscow for a course for promising intellectuals, he became disenchanted with the Soviet Marxist system . He was sent home to Moscow, where he became disillusioned with the system .
 He joined the movement for democratization that led to the Polish workers’ uprising of 1956 . Upon his return home, he joined the Polish movement for democraticization .
 His revisionist critique of Joseph Stalin, What Is Socialism? , was officially banned in Poland but widely circulated nonetheless . His critique of Stalin was widely circulated in Poland .
 A speech given by Kolakowski on the 10th anniversary of the uprising led to his expulsion from the PUWP; he also was dismissed from his professorship and soon afterward left Poland . A speech he gave to commemorate the uprising was also dismissed from the professorship .
 In 1970 he accepted a senior research fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford, where he remained until his retirement in 1995 . He remained in Oxford until 1995 .
 He was the author of three plays and three volumes of stories . He also wrote on religion and the spiritual basis of culture .
 Among Kolakowski’s many honours were the Erasmus Prize and the Order of the White Eagle . The first John W Kluge Prize for Lifetime Achievement in the Humanities and Social Sciences was awarded by the Library of Congress in 2003 .
 Barney Clark was a pioneering biomedical engineer who invented the kidney dialysis machine . He led the medical team that implanted the first artificial human heart in Dec., 1982 . Barney Clark died in Newtown Square, Pennsylvania, in 2009 .
 His first artificial heart was implanted in a dog in 1957 and kept the animal alive for 90 minutes . First artificial heart implanted in 1957 kept the dog alive for a 90 minute period .
 Kolff designed other artificial organs, including eyes, ears, and limbs, until his retirement in 1997 . In addition to the artificial organs he also designed eye, ears and limbs .
 In 1946 and 1947, he was on the victorious American Davis Cup teams . He won the AllEngland singles and men’s doubles titles, captured the United States singles . He also won the U.S. singles, men's doubles and mixed doubles titles .
 Kramer was plagued by an arthritic back from 1952 . Kramer eventually ceased competing and became a tennis promoter . Kramer retired from tennis after retiring from the sport in 1986 .
 He was instrumental in the organization of the Association of Tennis Professionals . He was the first executive director of the union for men players .
 1992 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine was awarded with Edmond Fischer . Dec., 2009, Seattle, Wash., was awarded (with Edmond H Fischer)
 Krebs and Fischer discovered reversible protein phosphorylation . It is a biochemical process that regulates the activities of proteins in cells . It governs countless processes that are necessary for life .
 St. Louis, Mo., before conducting research there under the biochemists Carl and Gerty Cori . Dr. Cori was born in the United States and later moved to the U.S.
 Krebs and Fischer also showed that phosphorylase is inactivated by the removal of a phosphate group . This process is catalyzed by enzymes called phosphatases .
 Neosphere founder and leader of the neoconservative movement in the U.S. was best known as an intellectual founder . He died in Arlington, Va. Sept. 2009 .
 He married Gertrude Himmelfarb, later a distinguished historian, in 1942 . He died at the age of 92 .
 Irving Kristol fied with the journal The Public Interest, which he cofounded with sociologist Daniel Bell . He was most closely identified with the neo-Neoconservative movement .
 Kristol was an avowed enemy of secular liberalism, which he blamed for causing alienation and moral degeneracy among U.S. youth during the 1960s . Kristol: "Secular liberalism" caused alienation among American youth . He blamed secular liberalism for causing moral degeneration among American
 Concerts in Bar Harbor, Maine, were held in 2009 . Organist brought orchestral music to national audiences .
 He led the much-recorded Cincinnati Pops Orchestra from its founding in 1977 . He conducted the National Symphony Orchestra in annual televised patriotic concerts from the U.S. Capitol .
 His sold-out concerts were renowned as variety shows featuring arrangements of show tunes and movie themes with costumed performers . Costumed performers and theatrical lighting effects were used in his performances .
 Kirov Ballet lead soubrette for more than three decades . She danced for the Kirovs Ballet in St. Petersburg, Russia, for three decades.
 Kurgapkina graduated from the Vaganova Ballet Academy . She joined the Kirov Ballet, where she quickly became a featured soloist .
 She was the first partner of ballet stars Mikhail Baryshnikov and Rudolf Nureyev . She was also the first couple of ballet star Barysnikov and his partner .
 With Nureyev, she danced as Kitri in Don Quixote, as Princess Aurora in The Sleeping Beauty, and as Odette-Odile in Swan Lake .
 Throughout her career Kurgapkina was known for her vivacious charm and stunning technical precision, especially in leaps . She was also known for stunning leaps and stunning leaps .
 Lang displayed her dancing talent at an early age and created her own dance when she was 10 years old . Lang is now a professional dancer and choreographer .
 By the time she reached 16, she had choreographed and danced to Mozart’s serenade Eine kleine Nachtmusik . By the age of 16 she was choreographing and dancing to the music by Mozart .
 His election in March 1974 was accompanied by violence, political assassinations, and accusations of fraud . He was elected president in 1974 .
 Upon being inaugurated on July 1, he announced an economic austerity program . He announced an austerity program.
 He launched a colonization program to settle landless peasants in the Peten region . Landless peasants were settled by the government in Peten .
 Throughout his administration he conducted a vigorous campaign to reestablish Guatemalan sovereignty over neighbouring Belize . The Guatemalan government was hindered by international opposition to his efforts .
 Laugerud obtained international loans, managed the distribution of relief supplies, and maintained order with efficiency . Following the disastrous earthquake of 1976, Laugeru obtained international . loans, obtained international relief supplies and managed to maintain order .
 The political unrest that accompanied his election, however, continued to grow during the next four years . The president was elected in 2008 .
 Amnesty International has repeatedly condemned the actions of the White Hand, a right-wing civilian death squad with some paramilitary elements . Laugerud has been accused of tacitly condoning the terrorism .
 The first American Alpine skier to win two gold medals in a single Winter Olympics . She was also the first American to do so .
 At the 1952 Games in Oslo, she easily won the giant slalom for her first gold medal . She captured the second gold medal with a comeback performance . She also won the second medal in the second, the second in the alom .
 Her Olympic victories, coupled with her United States championship titles in the downhill, slalom, and Alpine combined in 1950, 1952, and 1955, led to her induction into the International Women’s Sports Hall of Fame .
 Leonard, Hugh (John Keyes Byrne) was Irish dramatist (b. 18th century) Hugh Byrne was Irish actor and playwright . He was born in Dublin, Ireland, in 1926 .
 Play was first produced in 1973 in an amateur theatre in Maryland . It triumphed on Broadway for almost two years and won four Tony Awards, including best play .
 Two of his other plays earned Tony nominations . The Au Pair Man (produced 1973-74) and A Life (produced 1980-81) featured some of the characters from Da.
 While working for more than a decade in the Irish civil service, Hugh Leonard took the pen name Hugh Leonard to prevent his employer from learning about his literary aspirations . He took the pseudonym to avoid his employer knowing about his aspirations .
 He was able to quit his job, however, after the Abbey Theatre’s 1956 mounting of The Big Birthday .
 Leonard also wrote 16 plays for the Dublin Theatre Festival, notably A Walk on the Water . He adapted dozens of television scripts, including several miniseries based on Dickens novels .
 He was one of the preeminent ethnologists of his time . He was a leading exponent of structuralism, the analysis of cultural systems in terms of their structural relations .
 Levi-Strauss viewed cultures as systems of communication . He constructed models based on structural linguistics, information theory and cybernetics to interpret them .
 He attained popular recognition with Tristes tropiques (1955; A World on the Wane, 1961), a literary intellectual autobiography . He achieved popular recognition for his work in France and France .
 His massive Mythologiques appeared in four volumes between 1964 and 1971 .
 He created drawings for Esquire, Time, Esquire and Time .
 His work was in the permanent collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Library of Congress, and National Portrait Gallery, London .
 Levitt began her career in photography at age 18 with work in a portrait studio in the Bronx . Levitt has been photographing since her 18th birthday .
 She struck up friendships with the two men, occasionally accompanying the former on his photo shoots in the city .
 Included in this show are images from her visit in 1941 to Mexico City, where she photographed the city’s street life . Included in the show were images of her visit to the city .
 Levitt collaborated with filmmaker Sidney Meyers and painter Janice Loeb in the mid-1940s on The Quiet One, a prizewinning documentary about a young African American boy, and In the Street .
 In 1959 and 1960 she received Guggenheim fellowships to investigate techniques using colour photography . She received two fellowships in 1960 and 1960 .
 The slides that resulted from the project, shown in 1963 at MoMA, were stolen from her apartment before they could be duplicated . The slides were stolen before they were stolen .
 Levitt focused for the rest of the 1960s on film work . He resumed photography in the 1970s, with a major MoMA show in 1974 . Levitt's work was exhibited at MoMA in New York .
 Locklin, Hank (LAWRENCE HANKINS LOCKLIN) is a country and western singer . Locklin was born and raised in New York City .
 He was known for his tremulous tenor voice on such chart-topping hit singles as ""Send Me the Pillow You Dream On” and ""Please Help Me, I’m Falling” He also helped to establish the classic Nashville Sound of the 1950s and
 Locklin recorded 65 albums, sold 15 million records, and produced 70 charted singles . 6 of which 6 reached number one on the Billboard country singles chart .
 He played with the influential Ink Spots in a musical career that lasted more than seven decades . He died June 10, 2009, in Houston, Texas .
 Long began performing professionally when he filled in as banjo player for the Frank Davis Louisiana Jazz Band . Long played banjo for the band during his career .
 During the 1930s he moved to Chicago, where he played big band music and jazz . He performed at the 1933-34 Century of Progress world’s fair, and recorded several albums .
 He played alongside innovative jazz and bebop musicians Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie in Earl Hines’s band and as the leader of his own trio .
 In 1945 Long became a member of the Ink Spots, replacing their second guitarist for nine months until his predecessor returned . Long became the second guitarist in the band .
 He played professionally in big bands and orchestras from his teenage years . He was born in New York City, New Jersey .
 Lopez became a bassist with the Cuban national symphony in the 1950s . Lopez later taught for many years at the Guillermo Tomas Music Conservatory in Havana .
 He was prominently featured in the film Buena Vista Social Club . The film documented the making of its 1997 album .
 Lopez also achieved notable success with his 2001 solo album, Cachaito, which in 2002 earned a BBC Radio 3 World Music Award . Lopez also had success in 2002 with the release of his solo album "Cachaito", which earned him an award .
 Chinese general was one of the 57 first generals designated in 1955 by the People's Republic of China . He was a hero of the Sino-Japanese War and one of China's first generals .
 Though he was purged in 1967 during the Cultural Revolution, he was fully rehabilitated in 1974 . He was rehabilitated from purgusting in 1967 to be rehabilitated .
 In 1961 he joined an Ottawa television station as a freelance writer and performer . He began to work in radio, notably with comic Rich Little, but in 1961 he worked on television .
 Lye’s international break came when You Can’t Do That on Television was picked up by U.S. cable network Nickelodeon . It became one of that network's most popular shows and continued in reruns until 1994 .
 In 2003 Lye, with Luxton, was awarded a lifetime achievement award by the Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and Radio Artists .
 Right-wing military junta took over Greece in 1967 . Held the posts of deputy prime minister and minister for coordination . Was a leading member of the junta .
 Makarezos served in the Greek army artillery during World War II . After the Nazis invaded the country in 1941, he escaped to Egypt with the Greek government-in-exile . He was killed by the Nazis .
 In April 1967 he and two fellow officers seized power after leading a coup in Greece . The king was forced out of the country by year's end .
 The ensuing dictatorship, led by Papadopoulos, imposed strict martial law on the country and was responsible for the jailing, torture, and exile of thousands . Thousands were jailed, tortured, and exiled until a second military coup in late 1973 removed Papadopolopolopolas .
 Makarezos was sentenced to death for mutiny, but this sentence was later commuted to life imprisonment . After democracy was restored in 1974, he was later sentenced to life in prison . Makarezo was sentenced in 1974 to death, but his sentence was commuted .
 Malden acknowledged that his looks, especially his bulbous twice-broken nose, would prevent him from being cast as a handsome leading man . Malden: 'I'm not sure if I'm going to be a good actor'
 Malden was presented with the 2003 Screen Actors Guild’s Life Achievement Award . Malden is best known for his role in the film series "Malden" Malden won the award for directing and acting .
 John B Keane reportedly wrote his play Big Maggie specifically for her . Manahan joined the local Waterford Dramatic Society as a girl and worked in the professional theatre almost continuously thereafter .
 Manahan received a Tony nomination for her 1968 Broadway debut in Brian Friel's Lovers . In 1977 she won the Evening Standard award for most promising newcomer for her performance in a revival of Sean O’Casey's The Plough and the Stars .
 Martin created the role of Lucky (a characterization he claimed to have based on Parkinson disease sufferers) in the original 1953 production of Samuel Beckett’s En attendant Godot at the Theatre de Babylone in Paris . Four years later Martin was the original Clov in Beck
 His other stage appearances included the French premiere of Harold Pinter’s The Caretaker . He also appeared in a 1970 revival of Beckett's one-man play Krapp's Last Tape directed by Beckett .
 "Spanish Eyes" was one of nine songs of his that reached the U.S. top 40 between 1963 and 1967 . More hits followed, notably “Spanish Eyes” and “Rock and Roll’s” The song was released in 1964 .
 Folk, jazz, blues, rock and roll, reggae and reggae, and avant-garde elements into his music . Developed a distinctive slurred vocal style .
 Despite ongoing struggles with alcoholism and drug abuse, Martyn released more than 20 albums . Solid Air was named one of the all-time best British albums by Q Magazine .
 In 2009, the singer embraced Romantic styles in defiance of contemporary musical trends . She was born in Takoma Park, Maryland, and performed in 2009 .
 He was perhaps best known for his 96minute Odyssey, which took 14 years to write, and for his 2002 opera adaptation of William Styron’s 1979 novel, Sophie's Choice .
 Maw began composing at the age of 15 and studied at the Royal Academy of Music in London . He studied in Paris with Nadia Boulanger and Max Deutsch . Maw is a British composer and composer .
 Maw’s first major success was Scenes and Arias , a passionate piece for three female vocalists singing love poems . Maw's first major work was Scenes And Arias . Scenes andArias is set to be released in November 2015 .
 His vibrancy as a composer came from the blending of 20th-century atonality and serial techniques that he studied at school with a revival of Romantic style influenced by German Romantic composer Richard Strauss .
 Violin Concerto written for and performed by American virtuoso Joshua Bell received a Grammy Award in 2001 . Composer continued composing operas, symphonies, and shorter pieces .
 Maximova, Ekaterina (YEKATERINA Sergeyevna Maximova), Russian ballerina . Maximova was born in Moscow, Russia, in 1994 .
 The Russian singer, born April 28, 2009, is famous for her spirited dancing . She has performed for more than 20 years .
 Maximova began ballet school at age 10 . In 1958 she joined the Bolshoi Theatres ballet company as the lead dancer in The Stone Flower .
 Maximova excelled in varied roles, ranging from the tragic title character in Giselle to the exuberant female lead Kitri in Don Quixote .
 Maximova and her husband performed with the Bolshoi, most notably in Spartacus, and later in their own company . Maximova was one of the longest-running dance partnerships with her husband .
 Maximova left the Bolshoi in 1988 to serve as a coach at other companies . When she retired in 1994, she returned to Moscow, where Vasilyev directed the theatre .
 In 1941 his father left for England, but the family never received the money he had promised to send . In 1941 he left for the UK, but his father never received any money he promised to pay .
 In Danger Man, McGoohan refused to allow his character, John Drake, to carry a gun or indulge in sexual dalliances . He refused to let his character carry guns or have sexual relations .
 The Prisoner is an allegorical Kafkaesque series in which he portrayed Number Six, an unnamed agent who angrily resigns and is held captive in a place called the Village . It also provided the leverage he needed to produce the series, which also provided him with leverage to produce The Prison
 McGoohan’s later work included the short-lived medical mystery series Rafferty and the Broadway spy drama Pack of Lies . He also made four guest-villain appearances on Columbo, two of which earned Emmy Awards .
 McMahon, Ed (EDWARD PETER LEO McMahon, Jr.) is an American television personality and actor . McMahon was born in New York City, New Jersey . He is also a television personality .
 McMahon joined Dick Clark as a host of TV’s Bloopers & Practical Jokes in the 1980s . McMahon was the emcee on the TV talent show Star Search . McMahon has a long run of TV appearances .
 McNair grew up in Mississippi and chose to attend Alcorn State, a nearby historically black Division I-AA school . McNair chose to play quarterback, rather than serve as defensive back at a major university .
 McNair led the Titans in 2000 to Super Bowl XXXIV, where the team came back from a 16-point deficit . McNair evaded a number of defenders before completing a pass that took the Titans within a yard of the tying touchdown, only to lose .
 McNair passed for 31,304 yd, rushed for 3,590 yd and played in three Pro Bowls . McNair was named joint Most Valuable Player in 2003, along with Peyton Manning .
 The married McNair was found dead in a condominium alongside a woman who police believed killed him and then herself . Police believed the woman killed McNair and then killed herself . McNair had been married for 18 years .
 Robert Strange is a former U.S. government official and businessman . McNamara, Robert Strange, was a government official . Strange was also a businessman and entrepreneur . Strange died in 2003 .
 Defense Secretary George W. Bush was secretary of defense in Vietnam . He played a major role in the country's military involvement in the Vietnam War .
 McNamara developed logistic systems for bomber raids and statistical systems for monitoring troops and supplies . McNamara served in the Army Air Corps during World War II, but poor vision disqualified him from combat duty .
 McNamara was one of the ‘Whiz Kids’ hired to revitalize the Ford Motor Co. After the war McNamara worked with Ford to develop a new line of cars .
 McNamara eluded the institution of strict cost-accounting methods and the development of both compact and luxury models . McNamara rose rapidly in the corporate ranks .
 In 1960 he became the first person outside the Ford family to assume the presidency of the company . In 1960, he was the president of the Ford Motor Company .
 McNamara resigned to join the incoming administration of Pres. Ford . After just one month as Ford’s president, McNamara resigns to join incoming President Obama .
 McNamara successfully gained control of Pentagon operations and the military . He refused to spend money on what he believed were unnecessary or obsolete weapons systems .
 McNamara was also at the centre of a drive to alter U.S. military strategy from the “massive retaliation” of the Eisenhower years to a “flexible response,” emphasizing counterinsurgency techniques and second-strike nuclear-missile capability .
 As early as 1965 he secretly began to question the wisdom of U.S. military escalation in Vietnam . By 1967 he was openly seeking a way to launch peace negotiations .
 He became the government’s chief spokesman for the day-to-day operations of the war . He acted as Pres. George W. Bush's spokesman .
 He left the Pentagon on Feb. 22, 1968, to serve as president of the World Bank . He was president of World Bank from 1968 to 1992 .
 Award-winning author celebrated for his attention to minutiae . Died July 25, 2009, in Nottingham, Nottinghamshire .
 Nearly all settings in Middleton’s novels were modeled on his native Nottingham (the fictional Beechnail) and told of the intricate lives of ordinary people . Nearly all of the settings in his novels are modeled on Nottingham .
 In 1998 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature . Though his no-frills style of writing fell out of literary style, his large body of work attracted critical acclaim .
 Moscow's national anthem cowrote and then twice rewrote his country’s national anthem . He also composed popular verses for children .
 In the early 1940s Mikhalkov and Gabriel El-Registan devised lyrics praising Joseph Stalin, then Soviet prime minister, and entered them into a contest for a new national anthem . Their submission was chosen by Soviet authorities .
 In 1977 he was asked to revise the lyrics, which he did, removing references to Stalin and adding praise for Lenin . In 1977, he added praise to Lenin and added praise for Stalin .
 Vladimir Putin asked for another revision, and Mikhalkov once again obliged, this time purging Lenin and adding religious overtones . The new version of the book was published by Vladimir Putin in 2007 . Vladimir Putin has asked for the book to be published again .
 Mikhalkov was equally known in Russia for his children's literature . The 1935 poem Dyadya Styopa is about a tall policeman who always does good deeds . The poem is a short story of a policeman who is always good .
 Mikhalkov, who also wrote plays, won several state awards for his work . He also won state awards in Russia .
 Bertelsmann reversed the fortunes of his family’s ailing publishing house, Bertelsman, making it into one of the world's leading media empires .
 Bertelsmann’s holdings included magazines, television channels, and other publishing companies, including Random House and Doubleday . At the time of Mohn's death, Bertelsman's holdings included magazine, TV channels, publishing companies .
 During World War II, Mohn served in the Wehrmacht Afrika Korps until his capture by American forces in 1943 . Mohn was captured by U.S. forces in 1942 .
 He was held in a prisoner-of-war camp in Kansas where he acquired English language skills . He acquired Englishlanguage skills as well as knowledge of American business practices .
 German media mogul Reinhard Mohn returned home to Gutersloh and the war-damaged buildings of Bertelsmann . Upon his release, Mohn was a provincial publisher primarily of religious books .
 Mohn in 1950 applied the American model of book clubs to the German market . Mohn offered discounted books to customers who committed to serial purchases .
 By the mid-1950s membership numbers of Bertelsmann’s book clubs topped seven figures . Membership numbers of the book clubs were at the peak of the 1950s .
 He received many honours, notably Spain's Prince of Asturias Prize in 1998 . He was named Entrepreneur of the Century by Die Zeit magazine .
 Athol Fugard was an award-winning black performer most closely associated with the white anti-apartheid playwright . Fugard died in 2009 in Las Vegas, Nevada .
 Mokae was invited by Fugard to join his interracial drama group in 1960 . The two men appeared onstage together in the first interracial production of a play in South Africa .
 Mokae left South Africa in 1961 after having been banned for his appearance in The Blood Knot . He was banned from appearing in South Africa for his role in the film .
 He made his Off-Broadway debut in 1970 in Fugard's Boesman and Lena . He eventually settled in the U.S. and made his debut Off-broadway debut .
 Mokae earned a Tony Award in 1982 as best featured actor in a play for his Broadway performance as Sam in the world premiere of Master Harold and the Boys . He also won a Tony for his role in Fugard's Master Harold .
 Mokae received another Tony nomination in 1993 for Tug Yourgrau’s The Song of Jacob Zulu . He received a Tony nomination for his role in the 1993 film .
 Ricardo Montalban, Ricardo (RICARDO Gonzalo Pedro MontalbAn y Merino), Mexican actor (b. Ricardo) Ricardo (Ricardo) is a Mexican actor . Ricardo is a member of the cast of Mexican television series "Ricardo Gonzalo
 He appeared as a Native American in Across the Wide Missouri . He was more often typecast as the stereotypical Latin lover . He appeared in Sombrero and Latin Lovers in 1953 .
 In 1970 he established the nonprofit organization Nosotros to help aspiring Hispanic actors . He set up the organization to help actors in the 1970s .
 Hossein Ali (HUSAYN-'ALI MUNTAZIRl), Iranian cleric (b.22, Najafabad, Iran—d.d. Montazeri) Hossein was Iranian cleric . He was a prominent cleric in Iran's Islamic Revolution .
 Ayatollah Montazeri was emphatic in his defense of human rights in Iran . He spent long periods under arrest during both the regime of Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi and the Islamic republic that he himself helped to establish .
 Montazeri was the son of a farmer who taught the Qur’an . He began studying Arabic grammar and Persian literature at age 7 . At 12 he enrolled in theological school in nearby Esfahan .
 At 19 he moved to Qom, were he studied under the future Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini . At 19, he studied in Qom and studied in Iran .
 Montazeri helped maintain his mentor’s antiregime message and campaigned for Khomeini's return . After the shah exiled him from Iran, he campaigned for his return to Iran .
 Montazeri was arrested a number of times and was often exiled within Iran . He was arrested several times and often exiled .
 After his arrest in 1974, he was imprisoned in solitary confinement for several months and tortured . He was tortured by police in the 1970s and imprisoned for months .
 Khomeini named him his deputy in Iran in 1978 . Released in 1978, he traveled to Paris, where he was named his deputy .
 Following the overthrow of the shah, Montazeri was instrumental in drafting of a new constitution . In 1985 he was designated as Khomeini's successor .
 Montazeri contended that human rights abuses persisted in Iran, however, and when Ali Khamenei—a junior cleric—succeeded Khomeini upon his death in 1989, he denounced Khamenei’s relatively low status .
 Howard Morrison was one of New Zealand’s most beloved vocalists as the leader of the Howard Morrison Quartet and then as a solo crooner . Morrison died in Rotorua in 2009 .
 Morrison was the son of Temuera Morrison of the All Black national rugby team . Morrison was of mixed Te Arawa Maori, Scottish, and Irish ancestry .
 He sang with local Maori cul147 Obituaries tural groups before founding his quartet . The quartet recorded its first single, "There’s Only One of You”/""Big Man” in 1958 .
 The group released more than a dozen singles and two albums in 1960 alone . The group became hugely popular performing live across the region .
 After the quartet disbanded in 1964, Morrison established a solo career as a cabaret singer and on tour in Australia, New Zealand, and parts of Asia .
 Sir Howard Morrison was also active in Maori affairs and was the founder of a foundation for college-bound Te Arawa youth . He was also a member of a Maori Maori community .
 Morrison was made OBE in 1976, named New Zealand's Entertainer of the Decade in 1989, and awarded a knighthood in 1990 . Morrison was also made an MB in 1976 and awarded an OBE .
 Horace Rumpole, the crusty old barrister of the Bailey, was best known as the creator of the long-running TV series . He wrote plays for the stage, television, radio, and motion pictures, as well as novels .
 Mortimer was educated at Harrow and at Brasenose College, Oxford . He published his first novel, Charade, before he was called to the bar in 1948 . Mortimer died in 2003 .
 Many of his short stories and novels drew on his legal experience . The 1962 television production of his play The Dock Brief established his reputation .
 One of his finest works is A Voyage Round My Father . The play is an autobiographical play about his relationship with his blind father . He is best known for his work on his own .
 New Zealand rugby player and coach . Ces Mountford, Ces (CECIL MOUNTFORD; “the Blackball Bullet”), is a former rugby player . Mountford was born in New Zealand . He is the son of former rugby star .
 Former stand-off half was considered one of the best in the sport of rugby league . He was considered to be one of Australia's best rugby league halves .
 As Warrington manager Mountford steered the team to seven trophies, including a Challenge Cup and a Lancashire Cup . Mountford also steered the club to seven other trophies including the Challenge Cup . Warrington won the League Cup twice in the last five years .
 After a brief sojourn back in New Zealand, he returned to England to coach Blackpool Borough . He returned to New Zealand after a brief stint with New Zealand .
 Mountford was made MBE in 1987 and in 1990 was one of the inaugural inductees into the New Zealand Sports Hall of Fame . Mountford is one of New Zealand's first ever sportsmen to be inducted into the hall .
 Naess’s philosophical views evolved from an early pragmatist-inflected logical empiricism to a sympathetic metaskepticism . Naess's philosophy evolved from a pluralistic view of the history of philosophy, to a version of skepticism .
 In 2005 he was knighted and made a Commander with Star of the Royal Norwegian order of St. St. Nope . In 2005, he became a Commander of the Norwegian Order of the St. Norwegians .
 The latter work was discontinued by Neuhaus in 1992 owing to lack of funding, but it was reinstated in the early 2000s after being acquired by the DIA Foundation .
 George W Bush on a range of issues, including abortion, same-sex marriage, and stem cell research . He is one of the guiding forces behind a conservative coalition of evangelicals and Roman Catholics .
 He was actively involved in the U.S. civil rights movement, marching alongside the Rev. Rev. Jesse Jackson .
 Neuhaus later became a noted peace activist and helped found the antiwar group Clergy and Laity Concerned About Vietnam . Neuaus was a member of the anti-Vietnam War Committee .
 In the 1970s, Neuhaus began increasingly to shift his political activism to conservative causes . In the 1980s, he began to focus his activism to the right .
 He denounced the 1973 ruling in Roe Wade that legalized abortion, supported the presidential candidacy of Ronald Reagan in 1980 . He attacked the secularization of American life in his 1984 book The Naked Public Square .
 Neuhaus converted to Roman Catholicism and was ordained a priest in 1991 . Neuha converted to Catholicism and became a priest . He was ordained to be a priest after converting to the Roman Catholic Church .
 Toward a Common Mission is credited with helping to establish a politically powerful alliance of churchgoers of differing faith traditions . Toward A Common Mission was credited with establishing an alliance with the church of differing faiths .
 Tenor-saxophone soloist in Ray Charles' small and big bands and in subsequent reunions with Charles’s bands . He wedded harmonic sophistication of bop to blues melody .
 Ray Charles Presents David Newman was the first of many albums led by David Newman . The album was released by Charles and Newman in 1964 .
 Nimeiri, Gaafar Mohamed el(JaTar Muhammad al-Numayri) or Nimeiry, was Sudanese military leader and politician . He was born in Sudan . He is a former military leader .
 He overthrew the civilian regime of Isma'il al-Azhari, until he was himself ousted in a bloodless coup in 1985 . He governed The Sudan from 1969 until 1985, when he was overthrown in a bloody coup by himself .
 Gaafar Mohamed el-Nimeiri was credited with the negotiations that led to a settlement of a 10-year conflict in the southern Sudan region . He was granted autonomy in 1972, but his attempts to impose Islamic law alienated many in the predominantly Christian southern region alienated many .
 After graduating from the Sudan Military College, Nimeiri acted as commander of the Khartoum garrison . He led campaigns against rebels in southern Sudan . He is the current president of Sudan .
 In 1966 he graduated from the United States Army Command College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas . In 1966, he was awarded the U.S. Army Command Command College .
 He was briefly overthrown by a communist coup in July 1971 . He put down a right-wing revolt in March 1970 but was overthrown in July 1970 .
 Two months later he was elected president in a plebiscite with 98.6% of the vote . Two months after he was re-elected, he was in office in November .
 Nimeiri dissolved the RCC and established the Sudanese Socialist Union party . He became president of the party, which he became president .
 In April 1985, while he was in the U.S., Nimeiri was overthrown by his defense minister . He was ousted by the defense minister in April 1985 while in the United States .
 This autobiographical novel, written in the third person, tells the story of Joseph Meehan, whose life closely resembles Nolan's . It is written in third person and written in a third person .
 During childhood Nolan began taking a drug that permitted him some control over his head and neck . During childhood he began taking the drug which allowed him to control his neck and head .
 At the suggestion of a physical therapist, Nolan’s family made him a “unicorn stick,” which they strapped to his forehead . Nolan's family strapped the stick to the forehead .
 In 1981 a collection of Nolan’s plays, stories, poems, and autobiographical material was published as Dam-Burst of Dreams .
 After the success of Under the Eye of the Clock, he wrote the novel The Banyan Tree . The novel took him 12 years to complete . He also wrote Under the eye of the clock, which he has since died .
 The novel chronicles the life of Minnie O’Brien, a rural Irish woman born at the beginning of the 20th century . It is a departure from his previous autobiographical work, the novel .
 As in his previous work, Nolan’s mesmerizing and melodious prose displayed his linguistic agility and his genius for coining new words and innovative turns of phrase . Nolan's mesmerizing . and melodic prose .
 Robert Novak, Robert (ROBERT DAVID SANDERS Novak), American political journalist and commentator . Novak was born in New York City, New Jersey, New York, New Hampshire, New England, Massachusetts, and Washington, DC . He is also a New York
 John Sutter wrote the influential syndicated newspaper column “Inside Report” for more than 40 years . From 1980 pugnaciously espoused a conservative viewpoint on a number of political television talk shows, notably CNN’s Crossfire .
 In 2003 Novak ignited a firestorm of controversy with a column in which he identified Valerie Plame as a CIA operative . Her husband, Joseph Wilson, had publicly asserted that the administration of Pres. Bush's administration had targeted her husband .
 George W Bush distorted intelligence to justify the 2003 invasion of Iraq . Bush had distorted intelligence in order to justify Iraq invasion, says George W. Bush .
 Novak was known for his combative demeanour on political talk shows, including The Capital Gang, The McLaughlin Group, and Face the Nation . He stormed off the set of Crossfire in 2005 .
 The trainer of numerous winners of top European hurdle and flat races between 1943 and 1994 . He was the founder of the famed Coolmore Stud breeding empire .
 Four Cheltenham Gold Cups, three Champion Hurdles, three Grand Nationals, and Thoroughbred achievements encompassed wins at 16 English classics and 27 Irish classics .
 In 1951 O’Brien purchased Ballydoyle House, a farm in County Tipperary, and transformed it into a training ground at which he lived and trained horses for 45 years . O'Brien purchased the farm in 1951 and lived at the training ground for more than 45
 He became known for his attention to detail, knowledge of bloodlines, and astounding ability to handpick champions, becoming a national hero .
 Nijinsky won the English Triple Crown in 1970, winning the English triple crown . The Russian won the title in 1970 with a win of three English races .
 O’Briens Coolmore Stud breeding operation was credited with infusing European breeding with the pedigree of Northern Dancer, a Canadian-bred Thoroughbred whose bloodline was among the most famous in racing world .
 A 2003 poll by the Racing Post ranked O’Brien as the single most important figure in horse racing . O'Brien was ranked as the most important horse racing figure in the world .
 Parkinson later spent more than 30 years as ballet mistress with American Ballet Theatre . Parkinson later performed occasional character roles with the company . Parkinson also performed in the company's ballet films .
 Parkinson’s talent was discovered by the nuns at her convent school . After taking classes locally, she studied at Sadler's Wells Ballet School . She studied at the Sadler’�s Wells ballet school .
 Paul, Les (LESTER WILLIAM POLSFUSS), American musician and inventor (b. Les) Paul was born in 1946 . Paul was a member of the Paul Paul band . Paul is credited with inventing and inventing .
 Leo Fender had already mass-produced the Fender Broadcaster four years earlier . Fender beat Paul to popular credit for the invention of the solid-body electric guitar .
 Eric Clapton, Jimmy Page, and Peter Frampton were the favoured instrument of many guitarists . The Gibson Les Paul has a long history as a popular instrument .
 Paul was a working country and jazz musician . He performed with Bing Crosby and the Andrews Sisters in the 1940s .
 In the 1950s, Paul Ford pioneered the development of multitrack recording . He is credited with having invented the first eight-track tape recorder and the technique of overdubbing .
 In 1977 he earned a Grammy Award for Chester & Lester, an instrumental duet album with country legend Chet Atkins . After Paul and Ford divorced, his recording output tapered off .
 Patriarch of the Serbian Orthodox Church led some seven million adherents during the breakup of Yugoslavia and Serbia's subsequent loss of Kosovo .
 Pavle denounced ethnic violence between Orthodox Serbs, Catholic Croatians, and Muslim Bosnians . Pavle never publicly opposed Serbian ultranationalism . In 2000 he called for the resignation of Serbian Pres. of Serbia .
 After studying both medicine and theology, Pavle adopted the name Pavle . He entered monastic orders in the late 1940s . He was a doctor and theologian before becoming a monk .
 Pavle received a doctorate from the Theological Academy in Athens in 1957, the same year he was named bishop of Raska and Prizren . Pavle continued his studies, however, and received his doctorate in 1957 .
 He continued in this bishopric, which included Kosovo, until he was named patriarch . He continued to be the patriarch of his bishopric .
 Penn initially intended to become a painter, but at age 26 he took a job designing photographic covers for the fashion magazine Vogue . Penn is known for his work on the covers of Vogue magazine .
 He began photographing his own ideas for covers and soon established himself as a fashion photographer . He began to photograph his ideas for magazine covers .
 He also developed an array of colour techniques used in Vogue advertising to highlight various beauty products and fashion accessories .
 In 1950 he married Swedish model Lisa Fonssagrives, whom he photographed for much of his best work . In 1950, he married his Swedish model wife Lisa .
 This project eventually extended to places such as Nepal, New Guinea, Dahomey and Morocco . The project eventually expanded to Nepal and New Guinea .
 Penn’s later platinum prints of female nudes and of cigarette butts are characterized by tonal subtlety, compositional virtuosity, and serenity that mark his fashion photography and portraiture .
 An Introduction to the Music of Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern , presented Perle’s groundbreaking analysis and became the standard in the field . The book was published in 1998 .
 Perle's work on the opera Lulu led to the first complete performances of that masterpiece . Perle’s writings on Berg were seminal, and his work on Lulu .
 Although his body of musical work was relatively small, he was well regarded for his expressive, lyrical, and apparently uncomplicated pieces .
 Four of their joint screenplays earned Academy Award nominations, with La strada, Le notti de Cabiria, and 8 V 2 winning the Oscar for best foreign language film .
 French theatre pioneer led post-World War II French theatre . Found new meanings in classical texts for more than 50 years . Founded post-WWII French theatre company .
 Planchon staged daring productions, notably Shakespeare's Henry IV and Moliere’s George Dandin and Tartuffe . Inspired by Bertolt Brecht and a belief that classical texts should be challenged .
 Planchon’s strong directing choices of light, movement, staging, and costume elicited interpretations outside, and often unrelated to, the playwright's original message . The play is set in New York City .
 He began his theatre company, Theatre de la Comedie, in Lyon in 1950 . He moved to Villeurbanne in 1957 for better funding and renamed the company Theatre de Cite .
 Planchon refused to move to Paris, but by 1959 the company was touring abroad and presenting a regular season in Paris . By 1959, the company had toured abroad and presented a regular Paris regular season .
 When the French government abolished the Theatre National Populaire in Paris, they transferred its title, attributes, and funding to Planchon’s company . The theatre is now owned by the company .
 Planchon was also a producer, actor (starring in many of his own productions), and playwright . He was criticized for staging his own plays too often and for staging too often .
 Pnueli received a bachelor’s degree in mathematics from the Israel Institute of Technology and a doctorate from the Weizmann Institute .
 Pnueli returned to Israel as a senior researcher in the department of applied mathematics at the Weizmann Institute in Israel .
 Pnueli also cofounded the software company MiniSystems in 1971 and AdCad, a developer of computer-aided engineering software, in 1984 .
 Pokrovsky joined the Bolshoi in 1943 and became its artistic director in 1952 . He was the artistic director of the Bolzhoi's ballet company .
 His productions, notably of Tchaikovsky’s Eugene Onegin and Sergey Prokofievs War and Peace, reflected the traditional style of the company, with grand scale and realistic stagings .
 In 1972 he founded the Moscow Chamber Opera Theatre . He mounted less-lavish productions of new and more obscure Russian works . Most notably a revival of Dmitry Shostakovich's The Nose .
 He and Andriyan G Nikolayev were the first two men to be in space simultaneously . The two spacecraft came within five kilometres (three miles) of each other .
 Popovich graduated from a technical school in Magnitogorsk, Russia, U.S.R., in 1951, when he entered the army . Popovich was a herdsman in his early youth . He is a former herdsman .
 He graduated from military aviation training and became a pilot . After transferring to the air force, he transferred to become an air force pilot .
 Popovich was also the commander of the Soyuz 14 mission (July 3-19, 1974), on which he and flight engineer Yury P Artyukhin docked their craft with Salyut 3, a military space station that had been placed in orbit on June 25 .
 Popovich was deputy chief of the Yury Gagarin Cosmonauts Training Centre in Star City, near Moscow . Popovich spent the 1980s to 1989 as the deputy chief at the training centre .
 At the time of his death, Popovich was chairman of the board of the All-Russia Institute of Agricultural Aero-Photo-Geodesic Studies . Popovich died at the age of 92 .
 The works include works that encompass a variety of 20thcentury musical styles, particularly serial music, in which various musical elements are rigidly controlled, and aleatory music, involving many types of highly unpredictable events .
 Pousseur studied at the Liege Conservatory and the Brussels Conservatory . He composed his first piece, Sonatine for piano, in 1949, in Paris .
 Many of his best-known works reflect his aleatory style, notably Repons mobile pour sept musiciens . The course of the composition is partly determined by lottery and by the players' free choice based on moves on a checkerboard .
 In the operalike Le Miroire de votre Faust (1961-68) an audience vote determines which one of the four possible performances will be presented at a particular performance .
 Pousseur’s later compositions include Couleurs croisees, a series of variations on the civil rights song “We Shall Overcome” and Traverser la foret .
 Powell's work on the piano and Hammond organ underpinned the guitar work that was the band’s signature sound on five subsequent albums . The band's signature sound was the same on five albums .
 Powell survived a crash of a tour plane that killed several members of the band in 1977 . Powell survived the crash of the plane he was on board .
 The remaining members, including Powell, regrouped in 1987 and continued touring and recording . The remaining band members continued to tour and record .
 Lynyrd Skynyrd was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2006 . The band is currently on tour with the Aerosmith, which is based in Los Angeles .
 Powell, Jody (Joseph Lester Powell, Jr.) was American presidential adviser (b. J. Lester Powell Jr.) Joseph Lester Powell Sr. was American president of the United States . Jody Powell was married to Joseph Powell Jr. Powell, Sr. Powell Jr., who died in
 President Obama served as press secretary to U.S. Pres. George W. Bush .
 Jimmy Carter was known for his easy drawl and quick temper as well as his loyalty to the president . He became known for a quick temper and his quick temper .
 Powell entered the United States Air Force Academy after graduation but was expelled for cheating in his senior year . Powell was expelled from the U.S. Air Force academy for cheating .
 Powell, formerly Carter’s chauffeur, became his friend and most trusted adviser . Powell was once Carter's friend and confidante .
 After he left the White House, Powell headed two public relations firms . He headed two PR firms after leaving the administration . Powell is a former White House spokesman .
 Prabhakaran dedicated his life to the dream of establishing an independent homeland for the Tamil ethnic minority in northern Sri Lanka . Sri Lanka is a member of the Tamil minority .
 Between 1990 and 1995, the LTTE controlled the far-north Jaffna Peninsula . The LTTE eventually became a formidable force and became a powerful force .
 Over a 30-year period, Prabhakaran’s forces were held responsible for thousands of deaths . Tiger suicide bombers killed numerous high-profile victims, notably former Indian prime minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1991 and Sri Lankan Pres. Sri Lanka .
 Prabhakaran was killed in action in 2009 . After months of heavy fighting against government troops, the Tigers were crushed .
 The actor, who died June 30, 2009, was born in Santa Monica, California . He was a leading-man actor before becoming an austere character actor decades later .
 Presnell's acting career took off in 1960 with the Broadway opening of The Unsinkable Molly Brown . Presnell as the male lead in 1960's Unsinksie Molly Brown, with Presnell in the lead role . His acting career began in 1960s with the opening of
 Presnell returned to the stage in such shows as Annie Get Your Gun and the short-lived 1972 musical adaptation of Gone with the Wind . Film musicals were on the decline by the 1960s, however, and after Paint Your Wagon, Presnell was back on stage .
 March 13, 2009, Englewood, N.J., explored the American way of life in works that presented a vision of human alienation, indifference, and cruelty .
 Dream Palace, a novella —were rejected by a number of American publishing houses . Purdy was first offered by Purdy through a subsidy publisher . Dream Palace was first published in the U.S.
 Purdy’s fiction examines the relationships between individuals and the effects of family life . These books were published by Dame Edith Sitwell in the UK .
 Malcolm tells the story of the experiences of a 15-year-old boy in a fruitless search for his identity . Malcolm is the author of a book called "Malcolm"
 Purdy’s later works, such as The Nephew and Cabot Wright Wright Begins, further developed the bleak worldview that he first propounded in Malcolm .
 In his continuous novel cycle, Sleepers in Moon-Crowned Valleys, Purdy explores small-town American life and destructive family relationships .
 Qian Xuesen was known as the father of China's missile and space programs . He led the development of the country's first ballistic missiles and first satellite . He was known for leadership in development of China’s first ballistic missile and satellite programs .
 Qian in 1935 immigrated to the United States, where he became involved in the study and development of rocketry . Qian was a founding member of what became the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology .
 During World War II he served on the U.S. government’s Science Advisory Board . He was also on the United States government's science Advisory Board during WWII .
 In 1955 he was sent back to China, where he established the Institute of Mechanics in Beijing and worked within the Chinese Academy of Sciences . He was sent to China in 1955 and established a Chinese Institute of Mechanism .
 Led numerous American swimmers to collegiate and Olympic victory in a career of more than 30 years . Swimmer was born Jan. Jan. 1943 in Akron, Ohio .
 As an Olympic coach he worked with swimmers Matt Biondi and Janet Evans, who won four gold medals, and won eight gold medals . As a coach he also worked with Olympic medallist Matt Biondi, Janet Evans .
 Quick was also a successful college coach with 13 National Collegiate Athletic Association titles, more than any other Division I swimming coach . Quick also won 13 NCAA titles with 13 college titles .
 The College Swimming Coaches Association named Quick the NCAA Coach of the Year six times . Quick was honoured with its first Lifetime Achievement Award in 2009 . Quick has been named the NCAA coach of the year six times by the association .
 Assi and his brother collaborated on hundreds of songs and more than 20 musical theatre productions . Many of which they created as a showcase for Assi's wife, the vocalist and widely feted cultural icon Fairuz .
 The Rahbanis both worked as police officers while studying music and trying to establish a joint theatrical career . They both worked for the police while studying for a theatre career .
 Assi providing the music and Mansour adding the lyrics . The brothers began to compose European-influenced three-minute songs about everyday life and love .
 The Rahbani Brothers were often associated with Lebanon’s Christian community . They were largely successful in writing nonreligious pan-Arabic music that appealed to all .
 One of their plays, Biya el-khawatim, was made into a 1965 motion picture, directed by Egyptian filmmaker Youssef Chahine .
 After Assi’s death in 1986, Mansour maintained a successful solo career . Mansour's last of his dozen musical plays was a solo play . Assi died in 1986 .
 The Return of the Phoenix, was being produced in Beirut at the time of his death . It was due to be released at the end of the year .
 Rhone studied in London at the Rose Bruford Training College of Speech and Drama . He helped to found the Barn Theatre in Kingston, Jamaica, in the 1960s .
 In 1976 he directed the film version of Smile Orange . In 1988 he received the Canadian Genie award for best original screenplay at the Toronto International Film Festival .
 The Jamaican government named him a Commander of the Order of Distinction in 1980 . He was also a recipient of Jamaica's highest honour .
 Reverend Ike Joseph Joseph Eikerenkoetter II, American clergyman (b. J. Ike Joseph . Joseph. Joseph E. Joseph . Ike . Joseph Joseph . Eikeenkoetter . II was a preacher .
 Pastor Rick Perry built his ministry on the concepts of self-motivated prosperity and material satisfaction . Perry's ministry is based on the concept of self motivated prosperity .
 He set up Christ Community United Church in an old movie theatre in Harlem . There he set up the Christ Community U.S. Church .
 He purchased an old movie theatre for $500,000 and decorated luxuriously . Then he founded the United Church Science of Living Institute in an old church theatre .
 Ike's nontraditional philosophy encouraged his congregation to channel the “God in you” in the pursuit of happiness, success, and wealth . Ike’s nontraditionally philosophy drew criticism from traditional clergy and civil rights activists .
 The Rev. Rev. James Moore built a congregation of about 5,000 parishioners in the 1970s . Rev. Moore built the church in the 1960s and '70s .
 His sermons were broadcast on television and some 1,770 radio stations . He sold motivational books, tapes, magazines, videos, and videos .
 Ike became a multimillionaire, and he spent liberally on flashy clothing, expensive cars, and luxury goods . Ike spent lavishly on flashy clothes, cars, jewelry, clothing and cars .
 His business was investigated by the U.S. Postal Service and the Internal Revenue Service . The investigation was part of an ongoing investigation into his business .
 Rhone, Trevor, is a Jamaican playwright, screenwriter, actor, and director . Rhone was born in Jamaica . He is also a playwright and actor .
 Rhone’s works were noted for their keen explorations of racial, social, and social issues . Richard, Wendy (WENDY Emerton), Wendy Emerton, British actress .
 Richard left school at age 15, worked as a department store assistant, and studied acting at the Italia Conti Stage Academy . He left school aged 15, and worked as an assistant at a store .
 She played a series of small roles, notably in such hit sitcoms as Up Pompeii! Please, Sir! On the Buses, and Dad's Army, before getting her break .
 She was the elder daughter of director Tony Richardson and actress Vanessa Redgrave . She was also the daughter of Vanessa and Corin Redgrave, the sister of Corin and Lynn Redgrave and the granddaughter of silent-film actor Roy .
 Richardson made her debut (along with her younger sister, actress Joely Richardson) at age four in her parents’ film The Charge of the Light Brigade . Richardson starred alongside her sister Joely in the family film .
 She made her West End debut in 1985 opposite her mother in Anton Chekhov’s The Seagull . She won a London Drama Critics’ Award as most promising newcomer in 1985 .
 Later films include comedies The Parent Trap and Maid in Manhattan . Her mother and her aunt were also in supporting roles in The White Countess .
 In 1993 Richardson captured a Tony nomination for her performance in the revival of Eugene O'Neill’s Anna Christie costarring Liam Neeson, who became her second husband soon after . Richardson was nominated for a Tony in 1993 .
 Richardson died March 16 in what initially appeared to be a minor fall at a ski resort outside Montreal . Richardson died of a head trauma sustained on March 16 . Richardson was the first person to die of head trauma in a fall at the resort .
 He was widely recognized as one of the leading figures in Christianity in the U.S. during the latter half of the 20th century .
 The son of a Pentecostal minister, Roberts initially rejected his father’s faith . Roberts underwent a conversion experience at the age of 17 and thereafter served as a pastor in several towns in the South while studying at Oklahoma Baptist College . Roberts is a pastor who has served as
 Oral Roberts started Oral Roberts Evangelistic Association in late 1940s . He became itinerant preacher at revival meetings, giving fiery sermons and practiced faith healing .
 Roberts was frequently criticized for his luxurious jet-set lifestyle . In 1987, while his City of Faith medical centre was struggling financially, he was subject to public ridicule for having told his supporters that ""God could call Oral Roberts home"" if he did not raise $4. million within two
 Roberts assumed the chancellorship of ORU in 1993 . The facility closed two years later, and Roberts assumed his post in 1994 .
 Robson, Sir Bobby (SIR ROBERT William Robson), British association football player and manager (b. 1962) Robson was British footballer . Robson played for England, England, Wales, Scotland, England and Wales .
 Former England boss Roy Hodgson was one of England’s most respected players and managers . Hodgson died in 2009 at the age of 31 .
 Former Ipswich boss led Ipswich to FA Cup and FA Cup titles . He was appointed England manager after being appointed by the Football Association .
 He led PSV Eindhoven to the Dutch league championship for two straight years . He left England after eight years in that position . He led that club to the league championship two straight seasons .
 In 1997, Barcelona captured both the Spanish Cup and UEFA Cup Winners' Cup . Thereafter he worked in Portugal at Sporting Lisbon and FC Porto . He won the Portuguese Cup and league championships with Porto and Barcelona .
 Newcastle United manager Alan Pardew was forced to retire in 2004 . After a brief stint with PSV Eindhoven, he returned to England in 1999 to manage Newcastle United .
 Robson was knighted in 2002 and inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2003 . He was inducted in 2003 and knighted for his services in 2002 .
 French beauty empire has 2,000 stores worldwide . Founded cosmetics line that grew into beauty empire .
 Yves Rocher was an early advocate of using botanicals in cosmetics . Rocher's lines were known for their use of natural ingredients and for reasonable prices .
 Rocher’s company began as a mail-order service in his hometown of La Gacilly, where he also served as mayor from 1962 to 2008 . Rocher was mayor of his hometown from 1962-2008 .
 President of South Korea during a time in which he faced labour unrest and a faltering economy . Found himself in the midst of a financial scandal after several of his aides were accused of having accepted illegal campaign donations .
 He passed the bar exam and was appointed a judge and later became a highly respected human rights lawyer . Although he did not attend college, he passed a bar exam .
 Roh entered politics in the late 1980s at the invitation of then opposition leader Kim Young-Sam . Roh is a former South Korean president of the South Korean parliament . Roh was elected to the presidency in 1988 .
 Roh won a seat in the National Assembly and gained notice for criticizing the military regime of Pres. Kim Jong-Il Jong-Hunun . Roh won the seat in National Assembly .
 In 1990 Roh split with his party when Kim made an alliance with the general-turned-president, Roh TaeWoo . Roh split from his party in 1990 after Kim made a deal with Roh in 1990 . Roh is the current leader of North Korea .
 Roh MooHyun’s political fortunes seemed to crumble after his alliance with Kim Jong Jong-won . That alliance led to Kim's election as president, and Roh's political fortunes seem to crumble . Kim Jongwon was elected president of North Korea .
 He lost his seat in the National Assembly in 1992 and failed to regain it in 1996 . He was elected to the Senate in 1992 but failed to win it again in 1996.
 Roh eventually led a small opposition party into an alliance with Kim Dae-Jung . When Kim came to power in 1998, Roh served in his cabinet .
 In December 2002 Roh was successful in defeating Lee Hoi-Chang in a tightly contested presidential race . Roh was elected to the presidency in December 2002 . Roh won the presidential election in a tightly contested election .
 Roh was impeached by the parliament in March 2004 after allegations of election law violations and economic mismanagement . Roh was accused of economic and political mismanagement in 2004, but was never impeached . Roh is the current leader of the South Korean parliament .
 Though forced to temporarily step down, he was reinstated as president in May after the Constitutional Court overturned his impeachment . He completed his five-year term after being forced to step down .
 Roh was investigated over allegations of bribery, and in May 2009 he jumped off a cliff to his death . Roh was later investigated over bribery allegations, and was later found guilty . Roh jumped from a cliff in 2009 .
 Ronis moved away from formal portraits to work as a photojournalist until 1940 . Ronis escaped to the south from advancing German troops and took a job with a touring theatrical company .
 After liberation he and his wife, MarieAnne Lansiaux, returned to Paris, where in 1946 he joined the Rapho photo agency .
 The most decorated female snowboarder in the world, with two Olympic medals, six Federation Internationale de Ski world championship gold medals, and 67 FIS Snowboard World Cup victories . She won two Olympic gold medals and 67 World Cup wins .
 French snowboarder Karine Ruby became the first woman to win an Olympic medal in the sport of snowboarding at the 1998 Nagano Games . Ruby won gold in the giant slalom at the Nagano Olympics in 1998 .
 After a disappointing Olympic quarterfinal elimination in 2006, she retired to train as a mountain climbing guide . She is now a mountain guide .
 Ruby grew up in the French Alps and had a lifelong passion for mountaineering . She was killed in a climbing accident weeks before finishing her training . Ruby was a lifelong mountaineer and a lifelong love of climbing .
 Composer composed works teeming with melodic and rhythmic vitality . Lydian Chromatic Concept of Tonal Organization was first unveiled in 1953 .
 Russell’s LCCOTO began to influence Miles Davis and other modaljazz pioneers in the 1950s . Russell's LCCoto influenced Miles Davis .
 He led a noted sextet that played his songs in the United States and Europe . Composed Othello Ballet Suite and experimented with electronic music while living in Scandinavia .
 He formed big bands to play new compositions that often included electronic and rock elements . He then taught at the New England Conservatory of Music and formed big band .
 Safire won a Pulitzer Prize for commentary in 1978 and was a member of the Pulitzer Board . Safire was awarded the Pulitzer Prize in 1978 for commentary .
 Anton Engelbert (TONI; “THE Black Blitz from Kitz”), Austrian Alpine skier Anton Sailer (B.Sailer) Sailer, Anton Engelber, Anton Engbert (B). Anton Engelberg (B.) is Austrian skiier Anton Engel
 The first skier to sweep the gold medals in the Alpine competition at the 1956 Winter Olympics in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, was the first .
 Sailer was at the time the youngest skier ever to capture a gold medal in men's Olympic Alpine skiing . Sailer's 6.2-second margin of victory in the giant slalom set an Olympic record that still stood in 2009 .
 Sailer received three world championship titles and a world champion classification for the combined event . Winning the gold medals also meant that Sailer won three world championships titles . Sailer also won three gold medals and a classification classification for combined event.
 By the end of the 1958 season, he had secured an additional three world titles and one second-place finish . He had already won three of the world championships .
 In 1959 Sailer announced his retirement from amateur competition and said that he would not be participating in the 1960 Winter Games . Sailer said in 1959 he would be retiring from the sport .
 He rejoined the Austrian Alpine ski team as manager in the early 1970s . He joined the Austrian team in the 1970s and has since retired .
 Sales was especially known for his pie-throwing routines, and he once estimated that 20,000 pies had been hurled at him or his guests during the show’s run . Sales was known for the pies he threw .
 Salih, al-Tayyib , Sudanese novelist and short-story writer . Salih was born in Al-Shamaliyah province, Sudan .
 Arabic-language prose explores the intersections of traditional and modern life in Africa .
 Salih attended universities in Khartoum, Sudan, and in London and devoted much of his professional life to radio broadcasting . For many years he was head of drama for the BBC Arabic Service . Salih was born in Sudan .
 He was born in a rural background of small farmers and orthodox religious teachers . He attempted in his work to harmonize the traditions of the past with the worldliness of the ‘traveled man’
 His novel Mawsim al-hijrah ila al-shamal (1966; Season of Migration to the North, 1969), often referred to as a prose poem, reflects the conflicts of modern Africa . The tales collected in ' Urs al-Zayn (1967;
 In the 1970s Salih wrote two short volumes, translated into English as Bandarshah . Salih also wrote two volumes of his work, translated in English as 'Bandarshah'
 Thailand's prime minister of Thailand during Jan.-Sept., 2008. Nov., 2009, Bangkok), served as Prime Minister of Thailand . Nov. 2009, Thailand .
 Samak was the first Thai prime minister to be democratically elected since the ousting of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra in a September 2006 military coup . He was forced to step down after less than nine months in office after being found guilty of accepting payment for television cooking show appearances
 In 1992, after a military junta had toppled the government, Samak was appointed deputy prime minister . In May of that year he conspicuously supported a bloody suppression of pro-democracy demonstrators .
 In 2000 Samak won the Bangkok mayoral race, but his four-year term ended amid allegations of corruption . Samak is accused of corruption in a bid to win the Bangkok election .
 He returned to politics in 2006 with a run for the Senate . He briefly served until Thaksin's overthrow . He went on to host political talk TV shows as well as a popular cooking program .
 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences awarded in 1970 for contributions to nearly all branches of economic theory . Dec., 2009, Belmont, Mass., was awarded the Nobel Prize .
 He became a professor of economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1940 . He built MIT into a world-class centre of graduate studies in economics .
 Samuelson contributed to many areas of economic theory through powerful mathematical techniques that he employed essentially as puzzle-solving devices . He used these techniques to solve problems in economic theory .
 His Foundations of Economic Analysis provides the basic theme of his work . Universal nature of consumer behaviour is seen as the key to economic theory .
 Saxon, Sky (RICHARD Elvern Marsh; Sky Sunlight Saxon) Saxon is an American musician . Saxon was born in 1970s and 1980s . He is the son of Richard Marsh .
 The Seeds melded British pop style, freelove ideals, and abrasive rock rhythms to form the Seeds . The Seeds were a hallmark protopunk band .
 Saxon's musical career began when he moved to Los Angeles after high school, originally performing as Little Richie Marsh . Saxon moved to LA after moving to the city from high school to perform .
 The Seeds formed in 1965 and quickly became one of the most popular bands on the Los Angeles scene . Saxon Saxon sang, wrote, and played electric bass .
 Their single “Pushin’ Too Hard” reached the American Top 40 and endured as a rock-and-roll standard . Their single "Pushin' Too Hard" reached the U.S. Top 40 .
 The group's first two albums, Tl'ie Seeds and A Web of Sound, were both successes, but by 1968 the band could not compete with rivals such as Love and the Doors .
 Schulberg, Budd (SEYMOUR WILSON SCHULBERG) was American novelist, screenwriter, and journalist . Schulberger was born in New York City, New York .
 His first novel, What Makes Sammy Run? was about an unprincipled motion-picture studio mogul . He earned a 1954 Academy Award for his story and screenplay for the classic film On the Waterfront .
 He was the son of motion-picture producer Benjamin Percival Schulberg and grew up in Hollywood . He was born in Los Angeles .
 In 1950 his novel The Disenchanted won an American Library Award for fiction . In 1950 he won a Pulitzer Prize for fiction for his work .
 Anne (ANNE ELEANOR Scott-James; Lady Lancaster) was British journalist and writer . Anne was born in London, England, and married to Lady Lancaster . She was a journalist and author .
 One of the first female journalists and columnists on Fleet Street, the hub of the British press until the 1980s .
 Scott-James left Somerville College, Oxford, two years before graduating because she was impatient to pursue a career . She left the college because she wanted a career, leaving Somerville to pursue her career .
 She was hired at age 20 by Vogue magazine, where she later became beauty editor . She was a beauty editor at Vogue .
 She left Vogue during World War II to become the women's editor at Picture Post photojournalism magazine . She worked for Picture Post during the war .
 After the war she was editor of the magazine Harper’s Bazaar . She was editor and columnist for the Sunday Express (London) in the 1950s and for the Daily Mail during the 1960s .
 ScottJames’s columns were widely read by both men and women, and her articles ranged from social critique to interviews to investigations abroad . ScottJames' columns included social critique and interviews .
 An Illustrated History of British Gardening was illustrated by her third husband, Sir Osbert Lancaster . The book was published by her husband and her husband's third husband .
 She theorized that those who subscribed to the latter understanding were in favour of strong state injunctions against same-sex marriage .
 Folk music was a major influence in the folk music revival of the 1960s and later . The group collected and performed traditional American music from the 1920s and '30s .
 Seeger was a member of a prominent family in American folk music . His sister Peggy Seeger and half-brother Pete Seeger were also renowned musicians .
 He mastered several string instruments, including guitar, banjo, fiddle, and mandolin . He was a founding member of the New Lost City Ramblers, who performed traditional music in its original manner .
 Alto saxophonist was a leading figure in 1950s West Coast jazz . He was a pioneering modem-jazz flutist . He died in Tucson, Arizona, in 2009 .
 Shank played in Stan Kenton’s Innovations in Modern Music orchestra before becoming noted as a fluent Art Pepper-influenced altoist in the Lighthouse All-Stars . Shank also was showcased improvising on flute in duets with oboist Bob Cooper .
 Ravi Shankar was a saxophone soloist with symphony orchestras . He played saxophone with Indian sitarist and later as saxophonist . He was also a member of the Indian band that played for Indian sitar R. Four .
 Chinese opera singer and spy Shi Pei Pu engaged in a bizarre love affair with French embassy clerk Bernard Boursicot . The love affair became the basis for a Tony Award-winning play .
 Shi met Boursicot in 1964 while teaching Chinese to diplomats’ families in Beijing . Shi worked as an opera singer and as a librettist in Beijing, where he met the French diplomat .
 Shi convinced Boursicot that he was actually a woman disguised as a man . The two began a love affair that continued for 20 years, during which time Shi also became pregnant and had a son . Shi also said he had become pregnant and that he had also become pregnant .
 Shi and his ‘son, whom he had purchased from a doctor in China, joined Boursicot in Paris . Shi won acceptance in the French community with his cultural performances, even appearing on television .
 Both were sentenced to six years in prison, but since the documents passed were of minimal political significance, after 11 months both were pardoned and released . They were each sentenced to 6 years each .
 Shi’s story inspired the Tony Award-winning Broadway play M Butterfly (1988; film adaptation 1993) by David Henry Hwang . The story was recounted in the book Liaison by Joyce Wadler .
 Eunice Mary Kennedy was a social activist . Shriver was a prominent figure in American politics . She was married to Maria Shriver, who died in 1994 .
 Special Olympics provides a forum for the mentally disabled to compete athletically . Special Olympics was founded in 2009 .
 Kennedy was close to her developmentally disabled sister, Rosemary . John F Kennedy and Sen. Edward M Kennedy were also close to each other .
 In 1957 she became director of the Joseph P Kennedy, Jr., Foundation, the goals of the foundation were to seek the causes of mental retardation and improve the social treatment of the mentally challenged .
 The concept of the Special Olympics was bom in 1962 while Shriver hosted a summer day camp for intellectually disabled children at her farm in Maryland . The Special Olympics began in 1962 . Shriver's camp was held at her Maryland farm .
 The first Special Olympics were held in Chicago, sponsored by the Chicago Park District and the Kennedy Foundation, and saw the participation of 1,000 contestants from 26 states and Canada .
 John F Kennedy of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, now the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute . Kennedy was the first president of the country's first state-run hospital . Kennedy died in 1968 at the age of 92 .
 Shriver was granted the 1966 Albert Lasker Public Service Award, and in 1984 she received the Presidential Medal of Freedom . Shriver received the award in 1984 .
 The author has penned some 35 sociopolitical novels, as well as novellas, short stories, and a score of film screenplays .
 Simmel's carefully researched novels were best sellers in Germany and Austria, with more than 70 million copies sold, and were translated into 33 other languages . Simmel was best known for his espionage and intrigue set during World War II and the subsequent Cold War .
 His first publication was the story collection Begegnungen im Nebel . His wartime spy novel Es muss nicht immer Kaviar sein (1960; “It Can’t Always Be Caviar""; filmed 1961) His first novel, Es m
 The model was the first black model to appear on the cover of Ladies’ Home Journal in 2009 .
 Sims' heart-shaped face and long limbs inspired her to pursue modeling career . A counselor at the center encouraged the statuesque Sims to pursue a modeling career after she was encouraged by her counselor .
 Sims then made an agreement with former model Wilhelmina Cooper, who was forming her own agency, to send copies of that supplement to various advertising agencies . Cooper would earn a commission if agencies called her, with the caveat that she would receive a commission .
 Her star rose steadily; in addition to Ladies’ Home Journal, she appeared on the cover of Life and Cosmopolitan magazines . She did runway modeling for several top designers .
 Naomi Sims developed synthetic fibre that resembled straightened black hair . She launched the Naomi Sims Collection of wigs after her modelling career .
 Sims introduced her signature fragrance in 1981 . The business thrived, and in 1981 Sims introduced it .
 Naomi Sims launched Naomi Sims Beauty Products Ltd. in 1985 . By 1989 the company was grossing $5 million annually . Naomi Sims was a successful entrepreneur .
 John Sutter, a New York poet, wrote a book of poetry . His work was published in New York City, New York in 2009 .
 His first collection, Heart's Needle, won the Pulitzer Prize, was credited with ushering in the confessional poetry that became the hallmark of the 1970s and '80s .
 The collection After Experience continued these formal and thematic concerns . Collection After Experience continues to be the work of the British designer .
 In W.D.’s Midnight Carnival and The Death of Cock Robin, each poem is paired with a painting by DeLoss McGraw .
 Snodgrass's work includes numerous translations of European ballads and criticism . In Radical Pursuit is a volume of criticism .
 A Cycle of Poems in Progress is a collection of poems written as dramatic monologues by various Nazis who shared Adolf Hitler’s last days . The cycle was written as a dramatic monologue .
 Soderstrom was known for her superb acting, notably in Claudio Monteverdi and Mozart roles early in her career and later in operas by Tchaikovsky, Richard Strauss and Leos Janacek .
 Soderstrom studied at the Royal Academy of Music in Stockholm . She made her professional debut in 1947 at Drottningholm Court Theatre . She returned as artistic director after retiring .
 U.S. prosecutors at post-World War II Niirnberg trials of accused Nazi war criminals . Chief interpreter and sometime interrogator for American prosecutors at the post-WWII trials .
 Sonnenfeldt’s Jewish parents sent him to England to be educated, but in 1940 he was deported to Australia as an enemy alien . He was sent to Australia by his Jewish parents in 1940 .
 He was allowed to leave Australia, and after a harrowing journey across the ocean and three continents, he managed to reunite with his family in 1941 in Baltimore, Md. He became a United States citizen and worked as an electrician .
 Sonnenfeldt was a member of the American forces that liberated the Dachau concentration camp in 1945 . He was a private in the army while serving as a private . He served in the U.S. Army in World War II .
 His bilingual fluency led to his recruitment for the trials after the war . He was recruited by the British government to help trainees in France .
 She was known as “the voice of the voiceless” for her songs that spoke of the struggle for economic and political justice . She was born in 1935 in Buenos Aires .
 She was a leading proponent of the nueva cancion movement of the 1960s . The movement used traditional music to express political themes in traditional music .
 Sosa possessed a powerful and dramatic alto voice . He was known as a peerless interpreter of songs written by others . Sosa was known for his performance of many songs .
 Her first album, La voz de la zafra, appeared in 1959, but it was her 1965 performance at Argentina’s national folklore festival in Cosquin that brought her national attention and increasing popularity .
 After the military took power in 1976, she was subject to official harassment that culminated in the public arrest of Sosa, her band, and much of her audience at a concert in 1979 .
 Sosa went into exile, during which she began to expand her repertoire to include other forms of popular music . She returned to Argentina in 1982 .
 Storm, Gale (JOSEPINE OWAISSA COTTLE) is an American actress and singer . She is also known as Gale Gale . She was born in New York City, New Jersey .
 Storm broke into show business as the winner of the Gateway to Hollywood national talent contest . Storm also appeared in a number of films, including three with Roy Rogers, notably Red River Valley .
 Mrs. Edmonds, a former fashion editor, was born in Guildford, Surrey, England, in July 2009 . She has since become a cult sensation in the fashion world .
 Sugden also had continuing roles on Hugh and I , The Liver Birds , Come Back Mrs. Mrs. and Mrs.
 Noah, That’s My Boy, and My Husband and I are among her films . She co-starred with William Moore in the series .
 Helen Suzman was a South African legislator and anti-apartheid activist . Suzman, Helen, is a former South African state legislator . She was also an anti-Apartheid activist and a member of the ANC .
 Former South African Parliament member was outspoken advocate for non-white majority .
 Suzman was in constant conflict with her conservative colleagues . Suzman often cast the lone vote against apartheid measures . She was an advocate for the disenfranchised .
 Helen Suzman was president of the South African Institute of Race Relations . Suzman also served on the Independent Electoral Commission that oversaw the country's first multiracial election in 1994 .
 Her dedication to human rights and democracy garnered many honours . She led to the establishment of the Helen Suzman Foundation, which promoted liberal democracy . Suzman died at the age of 92 .
 Such films as The Outsiders, Red Dawn and Road House followed . Point Break followed in films such as Next of Kin .
 People magazine selected him as one of the 50 Most Beautiful People in the World in 1991 . People magazine in 1991 selected him among the 50 most beautiful people in the world .
 Swayze appeared as the rebel soldier Orry Main in the two-part miniseries North and South . In 2009, despite battling pancreatic cancer, he starred in the series The Beast .
 In the early 1950s, she moved to Chicago with Robert Taylor, whom she later married . She later moved to New York City and later married Robert Taylor .
 She worked as a housekeeper during the day and frequented blues clubs at night . She frequented the blues clubs in the early days .
 Koko Taylor lor was soon recording with such blues legends as Buddy Guy, Big Walter Horton, and Robert Nighthawk . TayJames F Quinn: “Queen of the Blues"
 Taylor's song, "I Love You," was released in May 2013 . It sold more than a million copies and reached the top five on the Billboard rhythm-and-blues chart . The song is Taylor's first mainstream hit .
 She garnered eight Grammy Award nominations and collected more than two dozen Blues Music Awards . The singer also collected eight Grammy Awards nominations . She garnered more than 2 dozen Blues Awards .
 Health issues slowed her recording output in the 2000s, but her final album, Old School, featured vocals as robust and brassy as ever .
 Tellado, Conn (MARIA DEL SOCORRO TELLADO Lopez) is a Spanish romance novelist . Tellado was born in Spain . She is also a Spanish author .
 Popular romance novellas were widely read in Spain and Latin America . Many were turned into radio and television serials . Many of the novels were made into radio serials.
 She published her first novella in 1946, and the following year the Bruguera publishing house engaged her to write one short novel each week . Her first novel was published in 1946 .
 In 1951, Tellado contracted with the Hispanic women’s magazine Vanidades to contribute two novellas a month . Tellado's first novel was published in 1951 .
 After Franco's death in 1975, she published several erotic novels under pseudonyms . After Franco died in 1975 she wrote several erotic books .
 Russian actor played a Soviet war hero or spy in dozens of films, most famously as a Soviet spy or war hero . He died in Moscow in 2009 .
 The aristocratically handsome, quintessentially Russian actor gained international renown for his turn as Prince Andrey Bolkonsky in Sergey Bondarchuk’s monumental film adaptation of Leo Tolstoy's novel War and Peace . The film won the Academy Award for best foreign-
 He left his job as a metalworker in 1945 to attend a state film school in Russia . He made his screen debut in Molodaya gvardiya while still a student .
 Tikhonov continued to win parts in various wartime dramas . Zhazhda marked his first appearance in the role of a spy .
 In the television series Semnadtsat mgnoveniy vesny (1973; “Seventeen Moments of Spring”), Tikhonov achieved cult status playing a spy masquerading as a high-ranking German officer .
 He earned a reputation for his intensity and force playing military men and dashing heroes in such films as Rob Roy, the Highland Rogue, The Dam Busters and The Hasty Heart . He received an Academy Award nomination for best actor .
 Todd, the son of an army officer, had a childhood that was split between England, India, and his native Ireland . Todd was born in India, England, and Ireland .
 He enrolled in drama school in the hopes of becoming a playwright but soon switched his focus to performing . He is now a national sensation in the U.S.
 Todd compares his experience parachuting into Normandy on D-Day to preparing for a stage show . Todd: "Caught in the Act" is a genuine war hero .
 After the war he won the part of the dying Scotsman in the 1945 Broadway production of The Hasty Heart . The role that he would later immortalize on-screen was the same role he later immortalized on film .
 World light heavyweight champion of 1965 . Defended his title four times before losing the last bout on Dec., 1966, in a 15-round decision to Dick Tiger .
 Torres lost a 15-round rematch with Tiger on May 16, 1967 . Torres lost the title rematch on May 17, 1967, on another 15-fight decision .
 He was president of the World Boxing Organization and inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 1997 . He was inducted in 1997 to the boxing hall of Fame .
 Dec., 2009, Los Angeles, Calif., was noted for his study of the history of ideas . He was particularly noted for studying ideas .
 In his work on ethics, Toulmin was concerned with describing prescriptive language . Ethics cannot be reduced to subjective or objective facts, he says . Ethics is a unique expression of duty or right .
 Toulmin studied mathematics and physics at Kings College, Cambridge . He then returned to Cambridge after his World War II military service to study philosophy .
 Peter, Paul, and Mary were known for smooth harmonies and earnest, often politically tinged anthems . They were part of the popular folk music trio Peter, . Paul and Mary .
 The trio's lyrics addressed the issues of the civil rights movement . In 1963 the trio performed at the Rev. Rev. Jesse Jackson's memorial service .
 It was her central role in the Greenwich Village folk scene that ensured her place in musical history .
 She began performing folk arrangements in 1961 with fellow singers Peter Yarrow and Noel Paul Stookey . Though quite shy, she was shy .
 The following year the group released its first album, the selftitled Peter, Paul, and Mary . The group's first album was released in 1987 .
 The group disbanded in 1970, and Travers embarked on a solo career . Though the group disbanded, Travers and the trio often reunited for concerts .
 Manto (Mantombazana Edmie Tshabalala-Msimang) was a South African physician and politician . He was born in Manto, South Africa . He is a physician and former politician .
 South Africa’s health minister earned the epithet Dr. Dr. Mandela . Mandela was South African President of South Africa, Mandela Mandela, Mandela, in 1994 .
 Beetroot for her insistence that AIDS could be treated with vitamins and a diet rich in such vegetables as garlic, potatoes, and beets . Beetroot was a pioneer in the field of AIDS treatment .
 Tshabalala-Msimang denied that HIV caused AIDS . She actively prevented the distribution in South Africa of antiretroviral drugs, which she denounced as poison . She denounced the distribution of anti-AIDS drugs as 'poison'
 Tshabalala-Msimang was active from an early age in the African National Congress . She spent many years living in exile in South Africa .
 She was elected to Parliament in 1994 and joined the government as deputy justice minister in 1996 . In 1996 she was named health minister before becoming health minister . She has been in charge of South Africa since 1996 .
 At the time of her death, she was reportedly preparing a presentation modifying her earlier stand on AIDS and denying that she had ever opposed the use of antiretroviral drugs . She died in 2007 after complications from a liver transplant in 2007 .
 "American, Protestant, small-town, middle-class" life depicted in Danvers, Mass. Jan. 2009 .
 Rabbit, Run is considered to be one of Updike's best novels . It concerns a former star athlete who is unable to recapture success when bound by marriage and small-town life . The novel is considered one of the best in the world .
 Three novels, Rabbit Redux , Rabbit Is Rich and Rabbit at Rest, follow the same character during later periods of his life . The latter two of which won Pulitzer Prizes, the latter two, won the same Pulitzer .
 Rabbit Remembered returns to characters from those books in the wake of Rabbit’s death . The book is set to be released in the spring of 2015 .
 In addition to Harry Angstrom, Updike expounded upon other characters from earlier novels . The author often omits decades of their lives only to place them in the middle of new adventures .
 The Witches of Eastwick (1984; filmed 1987), a black comedy about a coven of modern witches, was followed by The Widows of Eastwicks (1987) A black comedy of the women's coven followed by a film of the same name .
 Essays on American Art examines both art and its cultural presentation . Due Considerations collects later commentary spanning art, sexuality, and literature . Essays also examine art and sexuality .
 Auden and Stephen Spender credited Upward as a key influence on their own development . Auden: "Upward" was a formative influence on both Auden's and Spender's career .
 While attending Cambridge together, Upward and Isherwood crafted a series of stories set in a fictional English village called Mortmere .
 The Mortmere Stories were widely circulated in manuscript among the pair's friends . They were published in 1994 but were not published until 1994 . The often outrageous tales were first published in the early years of their days .
 Valenzuela raced quarter horses as a child and won his first Thoroughbred race at age 16 . He won the first race of his own at 16 .
 In 1958 he rode Tim Tam to victories in the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness Stakes . He matched the feat 10 years later aboard Forward Pass, riding Forward Pass to victory in the Derby .
 Valenzuela experienced his greatest success with Kelso, which he guided to 22 wins in 35 races between 1962 and 1964 . The five-time Horse of the Year honoree Kelso won 22 races in 35 wins in 1962-1964 .
 She worked closely with her husband, Pop artist Claes Oldenburg, on more than 40 Large-Scale Projects . Batcolumn in Chicago, Spoonbridge and Cherry at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, Minn., Shuttlecocks at the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas
 She first met Oldenburg in 1970, but it was not until 1976, when she was teaching at the Academy of Fine Arts in Enschede, that the couple reconnected . She and Oldenburg first met in 1970 .
 Photographer's work spanned decades and included coverage of such conflicts as the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the Moro rebellion in the Philippines . He was most famous for his 1975 image of evacuees lining up on a Saigon rooftop to board a helicopter .
 The photograph came to have iconic status as an encapsulation of the futility of the U.S. war effort . Often erroneously said to show the American embassy in Saigon .
 Photojournalist spent the rest of his life as a photojournalist in Asia . From 1972 to 1975 he documented the Vietnam War for United Press International .
 Cyclist was born in Saly, Senegal, on October 31, 2009 . Had an unsteady career marred by drugs and instability that overshadowed his celebrated skill as cyclist .
 Vandenbroucke won his first race at the age of 17 . He has a rural upbringing in a Belgian village .
 He dominated in more than 50 races, including the Paris-Nice and Ghent-Wevelgem in 1998 and Liege-Bastogne-Liege in 1999 . He emerged onto the professional scene in 1994 and dominated in over 50 races .
 Vandenbroucke's numerous attempts at making a comeback were repeatedly derailed . Additional drug arrests, suicide attempts, and his wife’s claims of domestic violence continually clouded his life . His numerous attempts to make a comeback have been derailed .
 Valentin Ivanovich was a Russian military officer and politician . Valentin Varennikov was a member of the Soviet Union . He was also a Russian politician . He served as a military officer .
 Russian nationalist leader helped lead the failed 1991 coup against Soviet Pres. Mikhail Gorchkov . Gorchov was born in Moscow, Russia, in 1987 .
 Varennikov was a veteran of the Battles of Stalingrad and Berlin . He rose to prominence during the Cold War and rose to fame in Russia .
 He was seconded to oversee the cleanup of Chernobyl following the 1986 nuclear accident . He then returned to Afghanistan, where he remained until Soviet forces withdrew in 1989 .
 He was awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union and promoted to deputy defense minister . He was also awarded the title of Soviet Union . He is now Russia's deputy minister of defense .
 Following the 1991 coup attempt, he refused a proffered amnesty and was subsequently acquitted of any wrongdoing . Following the coup attempt he refused to accept a pro-government amnesty .
 President of India was president of India from July 25, 1987, to July 25 1992 . In this largely ceremonial post, he provided relative stability amid a politically turbulent period .
 He became involved in India’s independence struggle and was consequently jailed by the British . He was jailed for being involved in the independence struggle .
 After his release he practiced law, founded the Labour Law Journal, and helped draft newly independent India’s constitution, which was adopted in 1950 . He helped draft the Indian constitution, adopted in the 1950s .
 Venkataraman was elected to the Provisional Parliament as a member of the Indian National Congress party . He was elected as an Indian National Socialist Party member . He is one of the most prominent politicians in the country .
 He was a member of the Lok Sabha (lower house of Parliament) during 1952-57 and from 1977 onward . He subsequently was a politician in India's first Lok Sabha .
 From 1957 to 1967 he was minister of industry and labour for the state of Madras . He was the first minister of the Madras state to become an industrial minister .
 Venkataraman eventually joined the central government, serving as minister of finance and industry, minister of defense and vice president . He was elected president by an electoral college after serving as vice president, vice president and minister .
 Vieira trained as an electrician before joining PAIGC and fighting in the liberation war against the colonial power, Portugal . Vieira is a member of the minority Papel ethnic community .
 After independence in 1974, he served as Guinea-Bissau's minister of defense and prime minister . In 1980 he took control in a bloodless coup against Pres. Manuel Cabarro . He was the prime minister of Guinea Bissau .
 Vieira won the country’s first multiparty presidential vote in 1994 and was reelected four years later . Having achieved a modicum of economic and political stabilisation, Vieira was re-elected in 2006 .
 He was overthrown in 1999, but another coup in 2003 expedited his return from exile in Portugal . The former leader was ousted in 1999 but returned to Portugal in 2003 .
 Vieira was unexpectedly returned to power in the 2005 presidential poll . Running as an independent, Vieira won the presidential election in 2005 . Vieira is a former president of Portugal .
 Vieira survived an assassination attempt in November 2008, but was shot dead in March 2009 . Vieira was shot by government soldiers one day after army chief of staff died in a bomb attack .
 Wahid, Abdurrahman, is Indonesian Muslim religious leader and politician . He was Indonesian religious leader . He is also Indonesian politician .
 Abdurrahman Wahid was a Muslim scholar and political leader . He was a leader in the Dutch East Indies . He died in 1940 .
 Indonesia's president was the first president to be elected through a vote by the People’s Consultative Assembly, as opposed to the earlier, consensus-seeking process . Indonesia's first president was elected in 2009 .
 He was a wellknown scholar who opposed radical Islamism . He encouraged interfaith dialogue for the promotion of world peace . He was an opponent of radical Islamicism .
 His father was Indonesia’s first cabinet minister for religion . He studied the Qur’an intensively at a religious boarding school founded by his paternal grandfather .
 He left without a degree, moved to Baghdad, where his religious writings attracted attention .
 Wahid returned to Indonesia in the early 1970s and became a scholar . Wahid was a member of the Indonesian parliament in the 1970s .
 He also headed the political discussion group Forum Demokrasi, which welcomed dissidents and human rights advocates . He was also known for his support for human rights activists .
 Wahid was honoured with the Magsaysay Award and was subsequently elected to lead the World Council on Religion and Peace . Wahid has been married to the world's most prominent Muslim leaders .
 President Suharto loyalists within the NU tried in vain to end Wahid’s chairmanship . Wahid was the chairman of the Indonesian parliament in 1994 . Suhartos loyalists tried to end his chairmanship in vain .
 Wahid was elected president in the wake of the forced resignations of Suharto and his successor, Bacharuddin Jusuf Habibie . But economic and political instability, coupled with a corruption crisis, led to his impeachment and removal from office in 2001 .
 Peter and Gordon was the lanky lower-voiced member of the pop-singing duo . He was part of the so-called musical British Invasion of the 1960s .
 Between 1964 and 1968, Waller and Peter Asher racked up nine top 20 hit records . Waller was Waller's school chum and singing partner, Peter . Asher .
 Their debut single, “A World Without Love"" (written by Paul McCartney) reached number one on the charts in both the U.K. and the United States . Peter and Gordon amicably split in 1968 . Asher became a successful record producer and manager, while Waller
 Sir Alan Arthur was British economist, government adviser, and educator (b. Walters) He was an economist and government adviser . He was also a government adviser and educator .
 He was noted for his endorsement of tax increases and spending cuts in the recession budget of 1981 and for his strong opposition to Britain's joining a common European currency .
 Prime Minister Edward Heath in 1970 offered Walters a part-time advisory position, which ultimately led to his job with Thatcher . He was offered a job by the Prime Minister in 1970 .
 In 1989 Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson accused Walters of interfering with his department . Nigel Lawson, who supported a common European currency, accused Walters .
 When Thatcher refused to dismiss Walters, Lawson resigned, as did Walters; the scandal contributed to Thatcher’s fall from power a year later . Lawson resigned and Walters resigned after the scandal broke out .
 In 1972 Wasserstein joined the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore, but in 1976 Joseph Perella lured him to the corporate acquisitions department of First Boston .
 The two men became dominant players in mergers and acquisitions at First Boston and later through Wasserstein Perella, a private equity firm they founded in 1988 . They founded the firm in 1988.
 Perella quit in 1993, and Wasserstein sold the firm for a total of $1.56 billion in 2001 . Perella left the firm in 1993 and sold it in 2001, when it was worth $1 billion .
 After moving in 2002 to Lazard Ltd., one of Wall Street’s most timehonoured investment banks, he wrested control of the firm from Michel DavidWeill (whose ancestors had founded Lazard in 1848)
 At the time of his death, Wasserstein was chairman of private investment firm . He died at the age of 92 .
 Crime Scene Investigation, and The Practice, for which he won an Emmy Award as outstanding guest actor in a drama series, he won the award for guest actor .
 Photographers captured Hollywood stars in unguarded moments during rehearsals or backstage .
 His candid photos were a departure from the glamour photos that were popular during the 1950s . His candid shots were a contrast to the glamorous glamour shots that were common during the '50s .
 Early in his career Willoughby compiled a portfolio that profiled dancers and jazz performers . He now has a portfolio of his work for CNN.com.com .
 Audrey: An Intimate Collection and Remembering Audrey 15 Years Later . Marilyn Monroe, Frank Sinatra, Dustin Hoffman, and Anne Bancroft .
 He lived in Ireland from 1972 until 1989 and then moved to the south of France . He spent most of his life in Ireland before moving to south France .
 Woods also was known for his pioneering research into the use of equines as models for better understanding of human disease . Woods was also known for research into using equine models to better understand human disease in the study .
 He had previously shot to fame in his native Britain playing another embittered spy on television’s Cattail . He won a BAFTA in 1970 for his role in the 1970s spy drama .
 Woodward studied acting at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art . He made his stage debut in 1946 . Woodward is best known for his roles in films and television .
 He performed Shakespeare in London and made his first appearance on Broadway in 1963 . This led to his being cast in Noel Coward’s long-running musical High Spirits . His first appearance in the musical led to him being cast on Broadway .
 Watercolourist and worker in tempera noted primarily for his realistic depictions of buildings, fields, hills, and people of his personal world .
 Wyeth was a wellknown illustrator who had studied under Howard Pyle . Wyeth, starting in 1932, served as his son’s only teacher .
 The subject matter of Andrew Wyeth's works came almost entirely from two localities, the Brandywine Valley around Chadds Ford and the area near his summer home in Cushing, Maine . Wyeth died at the end of his life at his Maine summer home .
 His work displays a strong linear quality, and within his limited palette—consisting mostly of earth tones -- he achieved a subtly extensive range of colour .
 His paintings are precise and detailed, yet he moved them beyond photographic naturalism by imbuing them with a sense of subjective emotion . The paintings are detailed and detailed yet to be photographed .
 Christina’s World is Wyeth's best-known painting . Wyeth knew a disabled woman whom he knew seemed trying to crawl up a hill . Christina's World achieves a note of melancholy .
 This work also exemplifies his use of unusual angles and his mastery of light . This work is also exemplified his work with unusual angles .
 Between 1971 and 1985 Wyeth secretly painted Helga Testorf, his neighbour in Chadds Ford, creating hundreds of images of her, including nudes . Wyeth painted hundreds of nudes of his neighbour, Helga .
 Other important exhibitions included a 1987 show of his “Helga pictures" organized by the National Gallery of American Art in Washington, D.C., and a 2006 retrospective at the Philadelphia Museum of Art in Philadelphia .
 In 1999, Amy was the first cloned farm animal in the U.S. to be cloned . Amy was a Holstein calf named Amy . She was a pioneer in cloning research in the United States .
 He was able to show that cloned animals could have a normal life span and also helped to determine that meat and dairy products from cloned animal would be safe for human consumption .
 His wife Gladys, the daughter of a British missionary to China, made a number of classical and modem Chinese works available in English .
 He also translated the works of Homer, Aristophanes, Jules Verne and George Bernard Shaw into Chinese . He was considered the foremost Chinese literary translator .
 In 1940 Yang returned to China with his wife, and together they began working as translators . They joined the Foreign Languages Press in 1952 . Yang was married to his wife .
 Yang was instrumental in founding the periodical Chinese Literature, a leading source of translations from the Chinese . Yang was also a leading translator of Chinese literature .
 Chinese Stories of the Xth to XVIIth Centuries, Poetry and Prose of the Tang and Song, and A Dream of Red Mansions . Liu E Yang’s autobiography, White Tiger, was published in 2002 .
 U.S.R.R.'s most popular figures of stage and screen . May 20, 2009, Moscow, Russia, died at age 50 .
 Yankovsky was admired for his ability to elicit complex emotions and to inhabit characters . His handsome features made him something of a sex symbol, he found it insulting .
 He graduated from the Solonov Actors Studio in 1965 and joined the Saratov Theatre Company . He is best known for his role in the film series "The Great Pumpkin" He has appeared in more than 50 films and television shows .
 In his final film, Tsar, he played Metropolitan Philip, the saintly adversary of the first Russian tsar, Ivan the Terrible . In his last film, he portrayed Metropolitan Philip .
 In 1991 Yankovsky was the last actor named a People’s Artist of the Soviet Union . In 1991 he was named the last person to be named an artist in the USSR . He was awarded a People's Artist in 1991 .
 Kay Yow was the head coach of the United States women’s team that captured a gold medal at the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul . Yow led North Carolina State to 20 appearances in the NCAA tournament, including a Final Four in 1998 .
 She was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2002 . She was also inducted in 2002 into the Basketball Hall-of-Hall of Fame .
 Yow, who waged a long battle with breast cancer, was known for her efforts to promote research and awareness of the disease . She helped establish the Kay Yow/WBCA Cancer Fund in 2007 .
 Co-discovered tRNA , a molecule essential for protein synthesis, and pioneered research into antisense DNA, which selectively inhibits the activity of genes .
 In 1990 he cofounded Hybridon, Inc. (now Idera Pharmaceuticals), a company that specialized in the development of antisense therapeutics . He served as a member of the board of directors until 2006, when he retired in 2006 .
 Cotton-top tamarin monkeys are shown at the Drayton Manor Theme Park and Zoo in Tamworth, Eng. England .
 Girls' school in Peshawar, Pakistan, destroyed in bombing carried out by suspected Islamist militants . Suspected militants targeted the girls' school on outskirts of Peshawar .
 U.S. Marines monitor the flight of an unmanned aerial vehicle in remote Afghanistan . The unmanned aircraft was launched by the Marines in 2009 .
 Dressed as a mariachi, a police officer wears a surgical mask as a precaution against the H1N1 virus as he monitors a tourist area in Mexico City . Police officer wears surgical mask to protect himself from the virus .
 A G-Wiz electric vehicle sits parked at a charging bay in London's Berkeley Square . The electric vehicle is powered by a battery pack .
 Twelve months after the Great Recession, the worst appeared to have been averted . Twelve months later, what many called the recession showed signs of coming to an end .
 On the whole, private economists applauded the U.S. response to the crisis at hand . But some of the remedies enacted there and in other countries seemed poised to haunt the world economy in years to come .
 Even if the financial crisis did not send the world back to the 1930s, it turned economic growth into contraction in many countries . The crisis slowed expansion practically everywhere else in the world and slowed expansion .
 The ripple effects of the financial crisis ranged far beyond the financial collapse . The ripple effect of the crisis was far beyond financial crisis .
 The Chinese brushed aside pleas for more accommodating human rights and currency valuation policies . The Chinese government has been criticized for its human rights policies .
 Most of the major industrial democracies adopted domestic government programs designed to awaken their slumbering economies . The U.S. package, at $787 billion, was the biggest .
 Most countries began growing again in mid-2009 after recessions that were, for most, the deepest since the Great Depression . The world's economic outlook brightened as the year proceeded, however, however .
 The Bank of England cuts its interest rate from 2% to 1.5%, the lowest since the bank's founding in 1694 . In a rare exception, China escaped the slump; if anything, the global recession burnished .
 Iceland's government falls owing to the collapse of the country's economy . Iceland's economy collapsed in 2008 and the government was forced to step down .
 It is reported that 3. million jobs have been lost in the United States since the recession began in 2007 .
 Officials use jackhammers during ceremonial groundbreaking for bicycle trail and highway reconstruction project in Lakewood, Colo., on June 30 . Bill Ritter and other officials use . Jackhammers .
 The project was funded by the $787 billion fiscal stimulus package passed by the United States Congress in February . The project is funded by a $787billion fiscal stimulus bill .
 China’s apparent ambition to challenge U.S. dominance in global economy . China's apparent ambition is to challenge United States dominance in the global economy.
 The United States housing market was the domino that, when it fell, toppled many of the worlds major economies and led the world into recession . The U.S. housing market led to the collapse of the world's major economies .
 For the first half of the decade, aggressive investing by homebuyers, mortgage lenders, lenders . Mortgage lenders have been aggressive in recent years . Mortgage lending has been a big problem for many of the past decade .
 Wall Street investment houses, and insurers had driven up the median price of a single-family home by almost 10% a year . Housing in some parts of the country is escalating even faster .
 When home prices headed back down in 2007, homeowners faced rising adjustable-rate mortgage payments and/or could no longer borrow against a rising home value to finance other expenses . Many of those faced rising mortgage payments .
 By the middle of 2009, the median home price had fallen close to its 2000 level . Median home price was close to the level of 2000 levels .
 Those with heavy investments in housing, including risky mortgage-backed securities, found them all but worthless . Those who invested heavily in housing found their investments worthless . Mortgage-backed investments are now worthless .
 The government stepped in with a massively expensive bailout program in late 2008 and continuing into 2009 . The bailout program was the largest in the country's history .
 The devastation to the U.S. economy spread far beyond housing . The devastation has also spread beyond the United States .
 Even financially secure banks, not trusting potential borrowers to pay them back, stopped lending . Even financial secure banks stopped lending to those who could not afford to repay .
 Small and new businesses could not find the credit that they needed to pay creditors or buy inventory or to pay their own workers, much less to hire new ones . Small businesses were unable to find credit to buy inventory, buy inventory and pay their workers .
 Even short-term interest rates close to zero did not fully thaw credit markets . Credit markets have been hit hard by low interest rates in recent years .
 Businesses that relied on their customers’ ability to secure loans had a rough time . Businesses relying on customers' ability to get loans have a tough time. Businesses relied heavily on loans to make money .
 General Motors and Chrysler both reorganized after brief trips through bankruptcy in 2009 . Automakers GM and Chrysler qualified for bailout money after going through bankruptcy .
 The overall economic slowdown sent stock prices reeling . The benchmark Dow Jones Industrial Average sank by about 54% in the 17 months from the market high in October 2007 to the trough in March 2009 . The market high was October 2007 .
 In the 1930s, national leaders generally pledged allegiance to fiscal policies based on balanced budgets . The 1930s was a period of national leaders pledging allegiance to a balanced budget policy .
 With tax revenue falling in tandem with economic growth, balancing budgets meant cutting spending . Cutting spending just when economies needed to stimulate business expansion and job growth .
 Political leaders poured money into such projects as road construction and schools . This time around, however, political leaders poured it into schools and roads .
 Although some governments were more aggressive than others, just about all countries joined the stimulus parade .
 In 1929 the U.S. Federal Reserve Board instituted a monetary policy of tight money and high interest rates . The policy was intended to restrain a speculative rise in stock prices .
 The Depression officially began that August . The economy predictably contracted, and the Depression began that year .
 The Fed further tightened its grip on the money supply in 1931, adding to the squeeze on the domestic economy . Nevertheless, the Fed continued to tighten its grip in 1931 .
 The Fed and many other foreign counterparts also injected capital into banks and bought their shaky loans . The Fed also bought shaky loans to shore up banks .
 When economies go haywire, there is a natural tendency to close ranks by tightening trade policy and refraining from buying foreign goods . The U.S. has a tendency to tighten trade policy when it is going haywire .
 Smoot-Hawley trade tariffs were introduced in 1930 . Smoot Hawley was introduced by the U.S. Congress in 1930 to protect American imports .
 The result was a decline in world trade volume estimated in late 1932 at about 30% and still growing . The outcome is almost universally seen as having fueled the Great Depression .
 This time there was no such rush to protect industry at home . Global trade actually dropped even more sharply in the current financial crisis than during the Depression .
 The Dow Jones Industrial Average closes at 6547.05, its lowest level of the year . This was not the result of new trade barriers; rather, the faltering global economy sapped the market . The market closed at 65.05 on Friday .
 Chrysler LLC files for bankruptcy protection; after merger with Italy's Fiat, it emerges on June 10 . Chrysler will emerge from bankruptcy after merging with Fiat . Chrysler's merger with Fiat is expected to be completed in June .
 General Motors, once the world's largest corporation, files for bankruptcy . It emerges on July 10 . General Motors was once the largest corporation in the world .
 Japan reports that its econ omy grew by 0.9% in the second quarter; thus, the country is no longer in recession . Japan is now in a recession .
 Enlightened decision making may have blocked another Depression, but it could not prevent a great deal of misery . Enlightened . decision making . may have prevented another Depression but it did not prevent great deal .
 Most of the developed countries had close financial and trade relations with the U.S. Most developed countries have close financial, trade ties with the United States .
 Of the 33 countries that the IMF considered to have ‘advanced economies, only Australia seemed likely to avoid a period of contraction . Australia is one of the only countries considered "advanced" economies in the world .
 The dynamic economies of Asia were well positioned, and three large Asian countries—India, Indonesia, and China—escaped relatively unscathed . The dynamic economy of Asia was well positioned .
 At least in the short run, India benefited from having isolated itself from the crosscurrents of the global economy . India's economy has been hit hard by the economic downturn in recent years .
 Japans economy, the largest in the world after the U.S., was fused to the West’s, and Japan marched alongside the West into recession .
 Japan pulled out of recession in the third quarter of 2009 . With a large economic stimulus package in place, Japan pulled from recession in 2009 .
 The Japanese government proposed weaker limits than those under discussion in Europe and the United States . Europe, with its close financial and trade ties to the U.S., stood in sharp contrast to Asia .
 Even Norway had invested its North Sea oil revenue with considerable prudence while the U.K. was spending its windfall on government programs . Even Norway could not escape recession .
 Norway slipped into a mild slump in late 2008 and emerged early in 2009 . Norway's economy has been in a mild recession since 2008 .
 Many countries approved economic stimulus packages to extricate themselves from recession . U.K., Spain, and others remained in recession for the first nine months of 2009 .
 The stimulus programs in Europe were smaller than those in the U.S. Perhaps more significant, the largesse stopped at national borders . Reflecting fears of future inflation, Europe's stimulus programs were smaller .
 Hungary's request that the EU's Western European members give $240 billion to members in Eastern Europe to combat the slump . Germany, France, and other wealthy European Union countries defeated Hungary’s request . Hungary asked for the EU to give members in eastern Europe the money to help combat
 Iceland became the first country to lose its government over the financial crisis . Iceland's government was overthrown by the collapse of the country's economy .
 Iceland’s three largest banks, privatized in the early 1990s, failed in 2008 when the financial crisis left them unable to pay a mountain of foreign obligations . The banks had grown fat on securities trading, but they failed when the crisis struck .
 The conservative prime minister resigned in January 2009 and was replaced by a leftist, Johanna Sigurdardottottir . She promptly recapitalized the banks . The leftist prime minister is now a leftist .
 Latvia boasted Europe’s strongest economic growth rate as recently as 2007 . Latvia had boasted Europe's strongest growth rate in 2007 . Latvia's economy had been booming in the past decade . Latvia is now struggling to cope with Latvia's economic woes .
 Latvian economy shrank at doubledigit rates in 2009—possibly the worst performance in Europe . Baltic neighbours, Lithuania and Estonia, were not far behind .
 In January, a street demonstration in Riga turned violent, and a month later the prime minister resigned . In the Latvian capital of Riga, a protest against economic decline turned violent . The prime minister of Latvia resigned a month after the demonstration .
 Greece's budget deficit reached nearly 13% of annual economic output . Fitch, Moody's, and Standard and Poor’s downgraded the country's debt . The budget deficit is even greater than the 11% in the U.S.
 At year's end Greece had the lowest credit rating of the 16 countries in the euro zone . Greece's credit rating is the lowest of 16 countries with a credit rating . Greece has the lowest rating of any euro zone country .
 Greece's debt at 130% of economic output was nearly the highest in Europe . That made it more expensive for Greece to finance its debt, which is 130% economic output . Greece has the highest debt in the European Union and Greece is one of the most indebted countries .
 Spain, whose budget deficit was rocketing toward 11%, was on the same path as Greece, although less far along . Spain's budget deficit is rocketing to 11%, while Greece's is expected to reach 11% .
 Standard and Poor’s also downgraded Spain, which started at a much higher level . Spain's credit rating has also been downgraded . Spain is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world .
 The fiscal problems that put Greece and Spain on a slippery slope were common across Europe . They were common among economies that had grown the most during the heady early years of the decade . Greece, Spain and Spain were among the countries that grew the most in the early years .
 Irish government proposes to raise taxes, cut benefits and trim government workers' pay . Irish government is determined not to let the budget deficit reach 13% .
 What emerged from the bailout was an extraordinary degree of government involvement in—and sometimes even majority ownership of—the private sector . Government involvement in the private sector was extraordinary, says CNN's John Sutter .
 By late 2009, the government had provided an estimated $4 trillion to keep the financial sector afloat . Altogether, by late 2009 had provided $4 billion to keep banks afloat . The government had given $4 million to keep financial institutions afloat .
 Many of the biggest bailout beneficiaries quickly paid the government back . The ultimate cost of the bailout to taxpayers was estimated at “only"" $1.1 trillion .
 The $787 billion stimulus bill was the first legislative triumph of Barack Obama's month-old presidency . It comprised $288 billion in tax cuts and $499 billion in spending . Most of it was for public-works programs such as school construction and highway repair .
 Budget Office: About three-quarters of $787 billion would be spent in 18 months . Republicans groused that checks for much of the $499 billion bill would be issued too late to do any good . The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office says the tax measures will be spent within months .
 Obama claimed that the bill would create or preserve 3. million jobs . Many of his opponents say that figure is far too optimistic . Obama claimed it would create jobs .
 The U.S. economy grew 3.5% in the third quarter and has emerged from recession . It is reported that the United States economy grew in the last quarter of the year .
 United States unemployment figures show an increase to 10.2% in October, the high for the year and the first doubledigit rate since 1983 . The increase is the first doubling of the unemployment rate in the country since 1983.
 The euro zone is no longer in recession, with a reported 1.6% annualized growth in the third quarter . Eurozone grew by 1% in the last three months of the year .
 Congress also played a role in the bailout of failing financial institutions . Congress played a key role in bailout of banks that failed banks .
 At the end of 2008, Congress enacted the Troubled Asset Relief Program . The Department of the Treasury can invest up to $700 billion by buying unproductive real-estate investments or even becoming part owners .
 The Fed, using authority that it already had, played an even bigger role . The Fed used authority that already had to use to make the decision .
 The central bank invested heavily in foundering institutions and guaranteed the value of their assets . Printing more money when not enough was available, the central bank invests heavily .
 By the end of 2009, the government owned almost 80% of American International Group . The insurer is the country’s biggest insurer, at a cost of $150 billion .
 It initially spent $111 billion to prop up Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . The companies were sponsored by Congress to buy mortgages from their issuers . The government spent that money to prop them up .
 The government promised to play no role in managing these companies . Government promised to sell its ownership stakes as soon as practical . The government will not be involved in managing the companies .
 TARP provided the Treasury with only a fraction of the funds used for the bailout, however . TARP gave the Treasury the funds needed to bail-out the economy .
 Even the massive AIG rescue was engineered entirely outside the legislated Treasury Department program . The Fed was responsible for the lion’s share, and the AIG was engineered outside the Treasury Department .
 Members of the government expressed outrage that some of the same executives who helped precipitate the financial crisis should make millions of dollars a year in salaries and bonuses .
 Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner appointed a ""special master for executive compensation” to review the compensation packages of top financial executives at firms that received bailouts . The special master will review compensation packages at firms receiving bailouts that received bailout funds .
 Many of the biggest bailout beneficiaries balked at the proposed salary limits . They strove to get out of under them by paying the government back . Many of them are now paying back the bailout money .
 Many members of Congress marched into 2010 with a determination to regulate financial institutions more closely . Financial institutions will be regulated more closely in the wake of the recession .
 The House passed a bill in 2009 that for the first time would bring exotic financial instruments under review by federal regulators . The bill was passed in 2009 .
 The bill would also establish a single agency to protect financial consumers . It would also guarantee shareholders a chance to vote on the compensation packages of corporate executives .
 Despite the yearend sighs of relief over the improving economy, the economic destruction had not necessarily run its course . The economic destruction is not necessarily running its course, says David Cameron .
 Many banks that survived the crisis were badly bruised by the collapse of the housing market . Banks that survived were less willing than before to provide the credit that greases all capitalist economies .
 Government budget deficits loomed like dark clouds on the horizon, threatening inflation and currency devaluations . Huge government budget deficits are designed to facilitate economic growth in the short term, but threaten inflation .
 Low interest rates encouraged immediate business activity, but, like budget deficits, they could ultimately feed inflation . Low rates encouraged by low interest rates, but they could feed inflation, say experts . Low inflation could feed the rate of inflation .
 International trade suffered as countries hunkered down and adopted ""me-first’s policies . International trade held below precrisis levels .
 Nearly one house in four was worth less than what the occupants owed on the mortgage . Similar problems in commercial real estate were mounting mounting .
 DJIA made up half of its losses by year-end 2009 . Stock markets turned robustly upward, with the DJIA making up half .
 Unemployment in the United States reached a peak of 10.2%, its highest level since 1983 . The 2.2% annual growth rate that the economy registered in the third quarter suggested future job growth . The U.S. unemployment rate was 10% in 2013 .
 Dubai World, a governmentowned developer in Dubai, U.A.E., could not pay back $3.3 billion in loans by a December 14 deadline . Economists even took heart from the plight of Dubai World . Dubai World was the first government-owned developer to fail to
 Just in the nick of time, fellow emirate Abu Dhabi bailed out Dubai with $10 billion . Dubai was bailed out by the emirates of Abu Dhabi and Dubai . Abu Dhabi also bailed out the country .
 Dubai World's default date has been extended beyond its default date . Dubai World proved that not every financial cough would mean pneumonia for the global economy .
 Joel Havemann is a Former Editor and National and European Economics Correspondent for the Washington, D.C., and Brussels bureaus of the L.A. Times . He is a former editor of the Los Angeles Times .
 Citigroup and Wells Fargo exit the Troubled Asset Relief Program . Wells Fargo and Citigroup are the last major U.S. banks to exit the program .
 DJIA closes 2009 at 10,428.05, up 18.8% for the year and 59.3% from the March low . Nasdaq composite is up 43.9% for 2009 . DJIA is up 18% for year .
 China’s booming economy during a worldwide downturn and its increasing visibility on the international diplomatic stage attested to its strong progress toward superpower status . These technical advances are combined with the country's booming economy .
 China’s economy in 2009 demonstrated extraordinary resilience with a return to rapid economic growth . The government attributed to its version of communism in contrast to laissez-faire capitalism .
 Millions of workers have been sent back to rural areas . The closure of export factories in south and east coastal areas has led to a flow of millions of workers .
 In 2008 the high cost of food and fuel had squeezed household budgets, and tight monetary and credit policies were adopted to prevent inflation and overheating .
 This caused a slump in Chinas construction industry and property markets . This caused the construction industry to suffer from a slump .
 Nearly half of the package was designated for development of the country’s infrastructure, much of it in the rural areas, including airports and railways . Another 25% was for reconstruction of Sichuan province, which was devastated by an earthquake in 2008 .
 This resulted in a 164% surge in renminbi/yuan loans in the first eight months of 2009 . This allowed the economy to rebound quickly in comparison with other large economies . The economy has recovered quickly compared with other economies .
 China looked to be on target to surpass Germany as the world’s top exporter . Exports were recovering well in the second half of the year .
 There was growing speculation as to whether China could return to the dominant position that it held until the early 19th century . China accounted for a third of the world’s manufactured output, compared with less than a quarter in the West .
 A year-end free-trade deal with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations made this outcome even more likely . The deal is expected to be finalized in December .
 China, as the world’s biggest creditor, had a mutually advantageous relationship with the U.S. that had become crucial in the rebalancing of the world economy . China is the world's biggest creditor .
 Zhou Xiaochuan, governor of the Peoples Bank of China, calls for the U.S. dollar to be replaced as the dominant world currency . Zhou calls for an international currency that would be unconnected with individual countries and stable over the long term .
 PBOC suggested that Special Drawing Rights, created by the IMF in 1969 for use between governments and international institutions, could be used much more widely and adopted for payment in international trade and financial transactions .
 This bold initiative was repeated in July in Italy at the annual summit of the Group of Eight advanced countries . It was repeated at the G8 summit in Italy in July .
 Members of the so-called Group of Five (China, India, Brazil, Mexico, and South Africa) emerging economies were invited to attend . China, with India and Russia, called for an end to dollar domination of the international monetary system .
 World Bank president Robert Zoellick says the U.S. dollar is under threat from the growing strength of the Chinese yuan and the euro . Zoellicks says the dollar is at risk from the strength of China's yuan and euro .
 China had overtaken Japan as the U.S.’s main creditor . Beijing expressed concern that United States indebtedness and falling confidence in the dollar would undermine the value of its $800. billion of United States Treasury securities and other dollar assets .
 China’s investments in some oppressive regimes there evoked criticism in the West . But its reputation as Africa's "best friend'’ was reflected in the November Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation meeting in Egypt . Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao was warmly welcomed by more than
 The World Bank welcomed China’s involvement in Africa, especially when many other aid donors were in financial difficulty . China is one of the world's most important aid donors .
 Trade between China and Africa exceeded $106 billion in 2008 . Nearly 10% of China’s overseas direct investment was destined for Africa .
 In early November 2009, several multibillion-dollar deals were made in swaps of minerals for infrastructure aid . China promised $10 billion in cheap loans in exchange for minerals .
 Angola had given loans of up to $20 billion by 2009 to fund post-civil war reconstruction . In return, Angola has benefited from millions of barrels of oil .
 China's financial strength enabled it to take a more benign view of investments that were more risky or in hostile environments than could many other heavily indebted countries . China's economic strength enabled the country to take more benign views of investments .
 In early November the state-owned China National Petroleum Corporation signed the largest oil deal with Iraq since the 2003 U.S.-led invasion of that country . The deal was signed jointly with the U.K.’s BP, jointly with China .
 Aynak copper field is believed to be one of the world’s largest undeveloped copper reserves . The field is located south of Kabul in a former al-Qaeda stronghold . China Metallurgical Group has begun development of the field .
 MCC won the concession with a $3 billion bid because of its promise to build a coal-based power plant and construct Afghanistan's first freight railway . MCC also promised to build the country's first railway and coal power plant .
 In August economic ties with Myanmar were strengthened through a $5.5 billion gas project in the Bay of Bengal . Myanmar's economic ties have been strengthened through the $5 billion project .
 The Shwe gas project was to supply the CNPC with gas for 30 years via a $2 billion pipeline to China’s Yunnan province border with Myanmar . CNPC will supply the project with gas from Shwe via a pipeline to the Yunnan region border .
 China remained a low-income country, a factor that could hinder its progress toward superpower status . Although it had experienced impressive economic performance, China still remains a low income country .
 Despite the rapid growth of China’s middle class, the gap between rich and poor continued to widen . Regional disparities continued to grow, regional disparities continued .
 Badly needed improvements to the infrastructure were being accelerated in 2009 . Job shortages persisted both in the rural areas and for the rapidly growing urban college-graduate workforce .
 A demographic time bomb also was looming as a result of China’s one-child policy . China's one-year-old policy has been criticized for being too restrictive .
 The working-age population was expected to start to shrink by 2015, and it was projected that in 2050 there would be only 1.3 million working age adults to support each person over age 60, compared with 7.7 million in 1975 .
 In July, the government took the first steps toward relaxing the one-child policy . But it could prove to be too little too late .
 China's preoccupation with its 55 official minorities was costly in time and money . Meanwhile, China’s preoccupations with its . 55 official . official minorities cost the country a lot more than it would otherwise have been .
 These peoples accounted for only 8.5% of the 1. billion population . They inhabited sparsely populated regions encompassing twothirds of the land, much of it rich in natural resources .
 In July the simmering problem of the minorities was drawn to international attention by the plight of the mainly Muslim Uighur people in Xinjiang region . Xinjiang is home to 20 million people from 13 major ethnic groups, home to more than 20 million .
 China’s inability to fully integrate the Tibetans also remained an ongoing concern . Tibetans are still not fully integrated into China's Tibetans . China's inability to integrate Tibetans is also a concern .
 While 2009 marked a watershed for China's global influence, it was difficult to judge the country's longer-term aspirations . China's economic growth in 2009 was a major turning point for China .
 The reputation of the U.S. was tarnished in the wake of the Iraq invasion and the collapse of many American banks . China's rapid economic progress had been enhanced by its rapid economic growth .
 For the vast majority of China’s population, the willingness of the communist government to develop an increasingly capitalist economic system was not incompatible . Most Chinese citizens lived comfortably in a society that was once again being encouraged to adopt the fundamental values of Confucianism, a philosophy that demands
 Janet H Clark is an editor, independent analyst, and writer on international economic and financial topics . She is also an editor and independent analyst on international issues .
 Despite China’s booming economy and growing middle class, the economic gap between the rich and the poor grew wider in 2009 .
 By 2009, 45,000 Mexican soldiers and 5,000 policemen had been dispersed across the country . Drug violence had led to the dispersal of 45,00 soldiers and five,000 police officers . Images of beheaded corpses featured in the international media .
 From December 2006 to October 2009, some 14,000 people in Mexico were executed by drug traffickers . More than 3,000 of those deaths occurred during the first half of 2009 alone .
 The Mexican government was at war with a very powerful enemy . The statistics underscored the enormity of the situation, the Mexican government says .
 Drug cartels have been fighting over territories in Mexico since the late 1990s . Domestic consumption of illegal drugs has increased in recent years . Drug cartels are fighting for control of new territories .
 As part of their preparations for war against other cartels, many drug-trafficking organizations hired trained mercenaries . The cartels often hire trained mercenaries to fight off other cartels .
 The Gulf cartel based in the border city of Matamoros recruited a group of former Mexican army commandos called the Zetas . They became known for their efficient use of violence .
 Other cartels recruited members of Central American street gangs, or maras, as well as former Guatemalan elite troops known as the Kaibiles . The cartels recruited Central American gang members and former elite troops .
 Most recent killings resulted from confrontations between the cartels . Most of the recent killings were confrontations with cartel cartels .
 The majority of the victims were policemen and soldiers, some of them probably involved in drug trafficking . The remainder were policemen, soldiers and a small number of civilians .
 The spike in violence between the cartels was one sign of the accelerating fragmentation of these organizations . The spike is one sign that the cartels are becoming more fragmented .
 The big cartels that appeared in the mid-1990s in Mexico did not exist in the same configuration . By 2009, the cartels were no longer the same size as they did in the 1990s .
 New groups emerge to challenge for control over the drug trade . Splits occurred in all of them, with new groups emerging to challenge control .
 This fragmentation along with the growth in the domestic market for illegal drugs led to more executions . This fragmentation has led to the increasing brutality with which killings were carried out . The killings have increased in recent years .
 Many bodies of those executed had been found with messages intended for other drug-trafficking organizations as well as for the Mexican authorities .
 The cartels also posted messages in public places accusing the government of having engaged in corruption or of having favoured one cartel over the others . In addition, they were said to sponsor popular protests against the presence of the army in some parts of the country .
 Over the past three years, criticism of the government’s use of the military forces in combating drug trafficking increased .
 This argument was based on the fact that during those years there were lower levels of drug-related violence . This argument is based on fact that there were fewer levels of violence during that period .
 It was tolerance that allowed the cartels to grow to the point that they became a serious national security threat . The cartels' tolerance was tolerance, however, that allowed them to grow, the author says .
 This policy was possible in an authoritarian system in which the rule of law did not exist . This policy could have been possible in the authoritarian system . This is possible in authoritarian systems such as authoritarian regimes .
 A simple indifference to the activities of drug traffickers would be impossible in a truly democratic system . A negotiation or even a simple indifference would be difficult in a democratic system, he says .
 The Mexican government in the short term decided to combat drag trafficking with the few resources it had .
 Mexican state historically had very poor law-enforcement tools . Institutions were weak, corruption was rampant, legal culture was virtually nonexistent, and human and material resources were insufficient .
 It was precisely the weakness of the Mexican state that precipitated the high levels of violence seen during recent years . The weakness of Mexico's weak state has led to the high level of violence .
 If the cost of tolerance is corruption is corruption and the aggravation of the problem, the problem is likely to be worse . The cost of confrontation is violence, and the result of confrontation will be violence .
 Calderon made the fight against drug trafficking a priority of his government . Calderon's government has been fighting drug trafficking for years .
 Some argued that this was an easy way to secure domestic legitimacy, given his close and contested victory in the presidential elections of 2006 . Some argued this was a way of securing domestic legitimacy . Some said it was easy to secure his close victory in 2006 .
 Eduardo Morquecho, a U.S. citizen with suspected links to the Arellano Felix cartel, was arrested in Tijuana in July . He is suspected of having ties to the cartel, which controls parts of the country . When he became president, there was a clear
 72% of Mexicans considered the government’s attempts to combat drug trafficking to be adequate, according to a poll conducted at the end of 2008 .
 51% of Mexicans believed that the government was going to win the war in the long run . Only 31% thought that the drug traffickers would win, according to a 2009 poll .
 Calderon promoted significant reforms of the police force and judicial system . Reforms were supported by all political parties, Calderon says . Calderon: Reforms are supported by domestic support .
 The proposed changes include the establishment of oral trials (rather than those conducted secretively through written briefs) and the strengthening of the federal police force . The changes promised to give the government more resources to fight organized crime .
 If security reforms approved over the past three years are successful, the Mexican government may be able to control the pervasive effects of drug trafficking . Security reforms have been approved in Mexico for three years .
 The goal is to transform the problem of drug trafficking into a public security issue rather than a national security threat . The goal of transforming the problem is to turn it into an issue of public security, not national security .
 If the government is unable to control corruption, the Mexican war on drugs will be lost . The temptation to go back to the policy of tolerance will be tremendous, the government says .
 Mexico decriminalized smallscale drug possession in August . This move only suggested that the government considers it pointless to prosecute small-time users . It does not mean that the legalization of drugs is imminent—a still very distant scenario .
 Mexican government has to continue to fight drug trafficking . Have faith that judicial and police-related reforms are put in place, they will be successful . Meanwhile, the only choice that the government has is to continue fighting drug trafficking.
 Jorge Chabat is Professor at the Department of International Studies of the Center for Research and Teaching in Economics in Mexico City .
 Some 80 people were killed in 2009 . Some 80 killed .
 Violent events were shaking Pakistani society at its roots, says Pakistanis . Violent events are occurring with increasing frequency in ever more numerous settings, he says .
 A consequence of both internal and foreign circumstances, the nuclear weapons-owning country found itself struggling to cope with forces that it set in train and imposed from afar .
 An interested observer would thus need a historical perspective to understand Pakistan’s long and thus far failed attempts to achieve a modicum of stability . Pakistan has a long history of instability in the country, which has been plagued by instability .
 By the start of the 21st century, Pakistan had never known true security . Many thought that might account for its long tryst with military dictatorships and the resulting stunting of its political process . Pakistan has never had true security, which many thought might be the result of its long
 Pakistan was established as a predominantly Muslim but supposedly secular state in the wake of the United Kingdom’s retreat from empire . Pakistan, like India, was the consequence of an outstanding South Asian personality .
 Mohammed Ali Jinnah shared the spotlight with Mohandas K Gandhi in the days leading up to the partition of British India in 1947 . Jinnah assumed the role as Pakistan's first head of state, and it was around him that the government took form .
 Gandhi's assassination soon after the transfer of power did not have the impact on India’s governance . Jinnah's death was hardly a year after Pakistan's independence . Gandhi was assassinated in 1947, but Jinnah died in 1947 .
 His vision of a progressive state could not be institutionalized, and the country drifted from its intended objective to a series of arbitrary maneuvers . The Pakistan army now dominates the political scene in the country .
 From the moment of independence, Pakistan found itself locked in a violent contest with India . Pakistan is one of the most violent countries in the world, with India leading the Taliban .
 Immediately following the transfer of power, India and Pakistan went to war over the northern Kashmir territory . Their conflict set the scene for a bitter relationship in the decades that followed .
 The two countries waged war again in 1965 and most notably in 1971 . The two nations fought again in 1966 and 1971 .
 Kashmir was largely played out in Pakistan’s Bengal province . It could not be kept from spilling over into Kashmir . Kashmir is a major source of conflict between Pakistan and India .
 New Delhi’s intervention in the Pakistan civil war, ended the original Pakistan . The loss of East Bengal (East Pakistan) ended Pakistan . New Delhi intervened in the war in Pakistan, ending Pakistan's independence .
 Pakistan army fell back on a substitute strategy that emphasized avoiding direct conflict with its larger, more powerful neighbour . The Pakistan army aimed at sustaining the struggle for Kashmir through clandestine means .
 Pakistan army's role in raising, equipping, and deploying jihadists for operations in Kashmir brought an end to the country's precivil war secular objectives . The Pakistan army’s role in . raising and equipping jihadists for . operations in . Kashmir brought . end to country’
 Islamist organizations, practicing obscurantist versions of religious expression, marginalized in the original Pakistan, came to assume mainstream roles in the army and throughout the country . Islamist organizations practicing obscerantist religious expression and marginalized in Pakistan, became mainstream in Pakistan .
 Still another dimension of Pakistan’s security dilemma was its ties to the U.S. Pakistan has a long-standing relationship with the United States .
 Pakistan's membership in the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization in 1954 and the Baghdad Pact in 1955 brought the country American military assistance, ostensibly to defend the region against communist forces . The Baghdad Pact was formed to balance the threat posed by India .
 Pakistan straddled both sides in the Cold War . During the 1965 war with India, the U.S. refused to support Pakistan in the war .
 Pakistan’s role as a frontline state when the Soviet Union invaded neighbouring Afghanistan in 1979 was significant . Washington judged Pakistan a proxy in its contest with Moscow . More significant, however, was Pakistan's role as frontline state .
 Washington’s decision to abandon the region left the Pakistanis to shape their future free of U.S. interference . Washington abandoned the region following the Soviet army's withdrawal in 1989, however, .
 Pakistan army’s determination not only to sustain the struggle for Kashmir but also to establish a sphere of influence over Afghanistan . The consequence of this was this was the Pakistan army's determination to sustain Kashmir struggle .
 Islamabad sought to bolster Pakistan’s defenses by developing more significant capabilities along the Pakistan/ Afghanistan frontier . Islamabad, which continued to perceive New Delhi as its number one enemy, wanted to bolster its defenses .
 Any attempt by the multiethnic and tribal Afghans to rebuild their country following the Soviet retreat was sabotaged by Pakistani military maneuvers . Pakistani forces sabotaged attempts to rebuild the country following Soviet retreat .
 The sustained chaos in Afghanistan allowed Pakistan to introduce a third force into the region, the Taliban . The Taliban is a still more virile jihadist array known as the Taliban, according to Pakistan .
 With the aid of substantial Pakistani resources in men and weapons, the Taliban gained control over most of Afghanistan . With the help of Pakistan's resources in Pakistan, Taliban took control of most of the country in 2001 .
 After seizing Kabul in 1996, the Taliban declared Afghanistan an Islamic Emirate guided by ultraconservative Islamic law . Islamabad quickly recognized the new order .
 Pakistan appeared to have achieved its most immediate national security objective . It seemed to gain control over the Pashtun peoples domiciled on both sides of their shared border with Afghanistan .
 The success of the austere Islamists and the formation of a chaste Islamic state in Central Asia drew the attention of Muslims from other parts of the world, among them Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaeda organization .
 The resurrected Afghan emirate is a base of operations ideally suited to press al-Qaeda's worldwide strategy . The latter, bent on forcing American influence from Islamic countries, saw in Afghanistan as a base for its operations .
 The terrorist attacks in the U.S. on Sept. 2001 were quickly traced to Afghanistan, where bin Laden and the Taliban emir had entered into cooperative and intimate association .
 Washington's decision to destroy the al-Qaeda/ Taliban combination, however, could not be implemented without logistic support from the military government in Pakistan . U.S. President Barack Obama has been in Pakistan since 2001 .
 Islamabad’s quest for security ended in failure when the U.S.-promoted “war on terrorism” enveloped the very region that Pakistan had hoped to bring .
 The first decade of the 21st century found Pakistan immersed in protracted and indecisive conflict . Pakistan has been engaged in protracted conflict on all its frontiers and throughout the country .
 Pakistan achieved nuclear weapons status in 1998 but weapons of mass destruction are of little value in multidimensional struggle . Pakistan achieved nukes status in 1997 but weapons are little of value in multi-dimensional struggle .
 Loss of East Pakistan in 1971 has done nothing to improve relations between Pakistan’s remaining ethnic groups . East Pakistan lost its East Pakistan territory in 1971 . The loss of the East Pakistan region has not helped improve relations with Pakistan's remaining ethnic group .
 Pashtuns of the NWFP and adjoining FATA formed the bulk of the by-now rebellious Taliban . Internal conflict remained intense and unyielding in Balochistan, while the Taliban remained in Pakistan .
 The dominant role played by the Punjabis in Pakistani life and government remained a continuing source of enmity in Sind province as well as among the Mohajir community of Karachi .
 Successive failures at deeper national integration, coupled with ineffective and corrupt government and repeated military coups, left the attentive public disenchanted . The vast semiliterate and undereducated population to seek salvation in spiritual experience mentored by opponents to anything resembling cosmopolitan culture .
 Pakistan's economy, like its political and social institutions, was in shambles . Pakistan's economic and political institutions were in a state of disrepair .
 Foreign aid does little to address a dilemma within Pakistan's government . Pakistan is increasingly dependent on external assistance, notably from the United States .
 New strains emerged in Pakistani-American relations . With many people fearful that the United States dependency diminished Pakistan’s sovereignty, new strains emerged .
 The stage appeared to be set for still another more deadly conflict with India . No less significant, in the wake of the terrorist assault in late 2008 on Mumbai (Bombay), which was mounted from Pakistan, the stage appeared set for yet another conflict .
 Nuclear deterrence, let alone mutually assured destruction, had limited value as policy in South Asia . Nuclear deterrence was limited to South Asia, writes Peter Bergen .
 The Kashmir dispute remained as intractable as it was in those first years following independence . The government in Kabul resolutely opposed Islamabad’s interference in Afghan affairs .
 Pakistan army's association with terrorist organizations exposed its long-term agenda . Pakistan army’s direct or indirect association with terrorists exposed its agenda . The Pakistan army has been accused of involvement in terrorism .
 The agenda is centred on perceived hostile forces in India and Afghanistan . It reinforced the need to preserve if not enhance relations with Islamic extremists . Islamic extremists will remain influential long after American forces withdraw from the region .
 The guardians of Pakistan’s security continued to view India as their mortal enemy and thus appeared determined to perpetuate their country's deepening insecurity . Trapped in circumstances largely of their own making, the guardians of the security continued .
 From Recruitment to Reintegration by Michael Wessells, from Mogadishu, Som. Somalia .
 Worldwide, armed forces and nongovernmental armed groups recruit and exploit children . Children are defined under international law as those under 18 years of age .
 At any time, there are estimated to be 250,000 child soldiers, many of whom are girls . Many recruiters hide their actions, and some children lie about their age in order to join political struggles .
 Although most child soldiers are teenagers, recruits also include children as young as six or seven years of age . Most recruits are teenagers but recruits include children aged between six and seven years .
 Lord’s Resistance Army, which abducted many children and fought against the government of Uganda, maintained military camps in southern Sudan . Its leader, Joseph Kony, sired many children who subsequently became soldiers .
 Commanders often select children because they are available in large numbers and can be recruited with impunity . Commanders know they can manipulate children easily by employing terror tactics and offering incentives for bravery and initiative in combat .
 Armed with small lightweight weapons such as AK-47 assault rifles, even young children can be effective fighters . Armed with lightweight weapons, such as small lightweight .
 They may also serve as spies who can slip behind enemy lines without suspicion . They can also be used as spies or spies . They may be able to slip into enemy forces without suspicion.
 Teenagers are often sought for their size and strength, their willingness to take risks that many adults would avoid, and their political consciousness . Teenagers often seek to be larger and stronger than adults in order to take political risks .
 In Sri Lanka the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Elam fought government forces in part by recruiting teenage girls to serve as suicide bombers . The Liberation Tigers recruited teenage girls for suicide bombers in part .
 Child recruitment is contextual and may involve force or decisions made by the child . Child recruitment may be contextualised and involve force and decisions made .
 LRA forcibly recruited as many as 60,000 children by abducting and subjugating them into obedience through a regime of terror . The LRA has been fighting for more than two decades since 2003 .
 To deter escape the LRA forced abducted children to surround recaptured escapees and beat them to death . The LRA was forced to beat children to death to deter escapees from escaping .
 Forced recruitment was also used in Sierra Leone, where the opposition group Revolutionary United Front forced young people at gunpoint to join and often required children to kill members of their own villages .
 Some children decide to join armed groups, but their choices may not be “voluntary,” since they are made in desperate circumstances and involve a mixture of “push” and “pull” factors . Some children join armed forces in desperate situations .
 In Colombia, for example, a boy who has been abused in his home may leave and seek an alternate "family" in the form of an armed group . A boy who is abused in Colombia may leave his home to seek an alternative "family," such as armed men .
 In other countries youths have been lured by propaganda and an ideology of liberation into believing that by becoming soldiers, they will help to liberate their people . In some countries youths are lured into thinking that by . becoming soldiers they will . help their people, they said .
 In Rwanda young Hutu were recruited into a youth militia and were taught that Tutsi had to be eliminated . More than 800,000 people, mostly Tutsis, were killed in the 1994 genocide .
 Other pull factors may include retribution, money, family ties, and power, according to reports .
 In Liberia some children join armed groups in an effort to avenge wrongs, such as the killing of one's parents by government forces . In Liberia, some children joined armed groups to help avenge their parents' deaths .
 Children are eager to earn money that they can send home to support impoverished families . Children may also be eager to work for a living wage to support their impoverished families.
 In northern Afghanistan children frequently joined the Northern Alliance to fight the Taliban . Their fathers, brothers, or uncles were members and because they regarded fighting as a matter of family honour and village protection . Children often joined the alliance because they were members of their families .
 A common myth is that all child soldiers are fighters . Many recruits serve as porters, cooks, bodyguards, and domestics, among other roles .
 Girls were recruited to serve as fighters and sex slaves in Liberia and Sierra Leone . Refusing to provide sex often led to severe punishment or death .
 Child soldiers may themselves become a means of perpetuating violence and armed conflict . Because they have been socialized into lives as soldiers, child soldiers may become a weapon of violence and conflict .
 A key priority has been to demobilize child soldiers and help them transition or reintegrate into civilian life . To break cycles of violence, a key priority is demobilizing child soldiers .
 Typically, this is done through a process of disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration . The U.S. has been involved in Iraq and Afghanistan in the past .
 Child soldiers are demobilized by being stood down from armed groups . Having turned in their weapons (disarmament), child soldiers are stood down . The demobilization process starts at the age of 12 .
 They are reintegrated through rehabilitation and work with families and communities . Families and communities work with them to help them find a place in civilian society .
 Rehabilitation requires attention to mental health issues that cause distress and impede reintegration . Mental health issues are among the issues that need attention to . Rehabilitation is a form of rehabilitation that requires attention .
 As part of her therapy, a female former child soldier in a rehabilitation camp in Bukavu, Dem. Uganda .
 Many former child soldiers developed problems of substance abuse after being plied with drugs by commanders .
 In other countries a minority of former child soldiers develop clinical problems, such as depression, anxiety, and trauma . Post-traumatic stress disorder can arise following extreme events, including exposure to deaths or active engagement .
 Effective treatment of these problems requires specialized supports, such as counseling by well-trained psychologists or psychiatrists, few of whom are available in war zones . Few of these therapists or psychiatrists are available to help the wounded .
 In Angola, former child soldiers were terrified because they believed they were haunted by the unavenged spirits of the people they had killed . Former child soldiers in Angola believed that the spirits of those they killed haunted them .
 The children benefit from the services of a traditional healer, who conducts a cleansing ritual to remove their spiritual pollution . In this case, rather than counseling, the children benefit .
 It is often everyday social issues that cause the greatest distress and the most formidable barriers to reintegration . Social issues are often the biggest barriers to integration, says author .
 To rectify family separation it is essential, when possible, to reunify former recruits with their families and manage family conflicts . It is essential to reunite former recruits .
 Nearly all former child soldiers struggle because they have lost years of education and lack the income needed to start a family . They lack social skills to assume the role of mother or father .
 Some people develop unruly behaviour, while others have difficulty meeting expectations associated with ordinary living . Some people are unruly and unruly, but others are able to cope with ordinary life .
 Many former child soldiers, particularly girls, are stigmatized and called “rebels” or are viewed as aggressive troublemakers . Many former soldiers, especially girls, have been stigmatized by their treatment .
 Effective reintegration is possible through holistic community-based supports . Reintegration can be achieved through holistic support from the community .
 It is important to mobilize communities to support the livelihood, acceptance, and education of former child soldiers . It's important to activate protection mechanisms that guard against rerecruitment or retaliation .
 Reintegration efforts are not sufficient by themselves . Equal efforts should be given to prevention, particularly to ending the impunity that allows recruitment to continue .
 Recognition of the serious nature of enlisting children in warfare was highlighted in 2009 . Thomas Lubanga Dyilo became the first person to be tried by the International Criminal Court .
 UN is at the forefront of strengthening international standards against child recruitment . UN urged governments to ratify the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict .
 The optional protocol was adopted in 2000 to augment the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child . It raises the minimum age of participation in hostilities from 15 to 18 years of age to 18 .
 These efforts will succeed, however, only if all countries agree to abide by the optional protocol and thus safeguard the world’s children .
 Born on the very same day, Feb., 1809, these two icons, one of emancipation and the other of evolution, continue to stir us in the 21st century and remain contemporary .
 "If anything, they are more alive for us now than they were at the moment of their centenary," says David Cameron . "They are still alive now," he says of the centenary .
 A hundred years ago, with civil rights unaccomplished and genetics not yet in place to explain the mechanisms of inheritance, Lincoln was perceived by many as a pious but impotent figure, and Darwinism was a speculative road, largely not taken .
 Barack Obama cites and echoes Lincoln in most of his speeches and many of his actions . Arguments over Lincoln's faith, acts, and attitudes continue to raise temperatures and feelings .
 There is even more dispute about Darwin and his legacy—attempts to use Darwinism to understand not only biology but also art and literature . Counterattacks from the religious-minded arraign Darwin for killing God and favouring eugenics .
 He still lends his name to the tradition that he engendered . Alone among the great scientists, he still lends name to his name .
 Different controversies surrounded both men throughout the bicentennial year . Both men were involved in controversies throughout the year .
 With Lincoln, the most vivid arguments turned on that ‘piety’ and the politics that it produced . Lincoln's "piety" and "politicism" were key to Lincoln's success, says historian John Sutter .
 The Biography of a Writer helps to make the case for Lincoln’s essential ‘literary’ qualities . Lincoln's essential "literary" qualities are evident in the book, which is published in New York .
 Harvard professor Henry Louis Gates, Jr., Jr. wrote a searching book, Lincoln on Race and Slavery . Gates hosted an equally searching public television documentary, Looking for Lincoln .
 Gates: Lincoln's antislavery views were courageous for their time . Gates says Lincoln's views were consistent with a clear vision of equality . He says Lincoln was courageous for his time .
 The Parallel Lives of Frederick Douglass and Abraham Lincoln emphasizes Lincoln’s moral education at the hands of the great African American abolitionist . The parallel lives of Lincoln and Douglass emphasize Lincoln's moral education .
 Others tried to argue, on the whole, that Lincoln was really just a politiciah . Others argued that eloquence and politics are alien to each other .
 To segregate Lincoln’s work as a word maker from his work as politician is historically absurd . In any case, it's historically absurd. Lincoln's word maker is a word-maker, not a politician .
 Lincoln became a plausible candidate for president because of his reputation as an orator . Lincoln's political life and his writing life were one. Lincoln's writing life and political life was one .
 evolutionary theory was part of his abolitionist heritage . The story of life, from first microbe to finished man, is one, he says .
 Darwin rejected those first stirrings of social Darwinism, emphasizing instead the role of culture in fostering humane progress . Darwin, courteous by nature, gave a respectful hearing to his cousin Francis Daltons eugenicist ideas .
 Darwin was certainly a ""Europeanist," who believed that the liberal culture of his time was better than tribal culture . Darwin thought that differences were the result of an increase in the spread of social sympathy rather than something inborn or natural only to one race .
 Darwin and Lincoln emerged from their bicentennial trials as men of their time with the marks of their own time . Darwin emerged as men who, on the whole, grew in moral understanding as they aged and came to embrace Abraham Lincoln's ideas .
 Although the polemics about them are important different, the two men are still worth taking together .
 It is not a simple parallel in life but a common liberal temperament, a modem turn of mind, that melds them together . It is (as I meditated at length in my own long essay Angels and Ages) Not a simple parallels in life in life .
 There was not some kind of secret magic connecting these two very disparate figures but rather a field of new feelings and voices that connected many of the liberal voices of the day, including John Stuart Mill, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and William James .
 One might propose three common elements that gave this temperament a shape . The temperament of this temperament is one of the key elements to the personality of this personality .
 First, they shared a taste for argument from below, rather than insistence from above . First, the pair had a taste of argument from within, not above .
 Darwin and Lincoln both began their great works not with grand principle and moral exhortation, but with simple evocations of homely evidence . Darwin began his great works with simple evidence, not grand principle . Lincoln's great works began with evocation of evidence, rather than principle .
 Darwin had begun his epoch-making Origin of Species not with the ""cosmic question” that he would solve but with an almost absurdly homely description of the breeding of dogs and pigeons . Darwin had written about the breeding and breeding of pigeons and dogs .
 Darwin's argument is more than an analogy—his point is similar to Newton’s contention that a boy throwing a ball and the motions of the planets follow the same rules, even if one is volitional and one is not . Darwin's arguments are similar to that of Newton�
 Lincoln and Darwin practiced the habit, at times exasperating to admirers, of sympathetic summary . Darwin and Lincoln were both famous for their sympathetic summary of their lives .
 The ability to enter into an opponent’s argument without contempt or sarcastic bitterness was common to them both . Both men were able to enter in to an argument without being sarcastic or contempt .
 Darwin did not merely articulate his opponents’ arguments against evolution . He anticipated them and refuted them in advance . Darwin anticipated his opponents' arguments, he refuted them .
 This is not merely instrumental, or a sign of softness, but it is part of the liberal inheritance . Lincoln went to war; Darwin annihilated a thousand years of biblical literalism . Darwin . The liberal inheritance is not just instrumental or soft; it's part of a liberal inheritance
 Charles Darwin and Charles Darwin shared a tragic sense of life that did not paralyze their capacity for moral action . Darwin and Darwin were both men who died in a tragic accident . Darwin died at the hands of a young boy in his native New Zealand .
 Both men rejected organized religion and searched for some other way to understand the presence of pain and suffering in the world . They sought some other model—for Lincoln, a kind of providentialism; for Darwin, a stoical resignation .
 Darwin and Lincoln helped to set the stage for the bicentennial, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: The real event was to see how Darwin, Lincoln helped set them .
 Darwin and Lincoln persist as central figures of liberal civilization . In the politics of the newly inaugurated President Obama and in the efflorescence of evolutionary arguments, evolutionary arguments persist . Science progress and democratic politics are deeply and permanently intertwined .
 A free concert to mark the 40th anniversary of the legendary rock festival known as Woodstock was canceled just days prior to the event . The concert was a free concert featuring Woodstock alumni including Richie Havens and Country Joe McDonald .
 Other performers included Big Brother and the Holding Company, Canned Heat, and Levon Helm . Other performers were Big Brother, Big Brother .
 Organizers secured land outside the actual town of Bethel to hold the festival . Organizers: Lang, Artie Kornfeld, John Roberts, Joel Rosenman .
 By late July members of hard-core American alternative society had begun arriving at the festival site . Despite the business plan of the organizers, by late July, the festival had begun .
 The Merry Pranksters, the alumni of author Ken Kesey, turned up in their famous psychedelic bus . They were the students of the author Ken . The Merry pranksters turned up on the bus in the 1970s .
 Woodstock organizers ignored what would become a major problem . The Pranksters' presence was proof of the festival’s credibility .
 The Hog Farm is the longest-running hippie commune in the U.S. It was founded by a self-styled "mobile, hallucination-extended family" The farm brought with them literally tons of muesli and bulgar wheat, as well as truck
 A week before the festival was set to begin, most of the venue seemed in readiness . Most of the festival seemed to be in readiness.
 Turnstiles and gates were not ready for operation, which created a considerable problem . Unaccountably, the turnstiles, gates and security systems weren't ready to operate, officials said .
 By the night of August 13, about 50,000 people had arrived, mostly without tickets, and entered for free . By the end of the next day, the crowd had doubled in size .
 On the morning of August 15, a young man was killed, accidentally driven over by a tractor . The accident happened in the early hours of that morning .
 By the afternoon of August 15, all roads within a 32-km radius of Woodstock were utterly blocked . Organizers summoned up to 16 helicopters to block up to 32 roads .
 By Friday evening the festival audience was 500,000 strong, eagerly awaiting the first act, unaware that electricity had yet to be fully piped to the stage .
 Richie Havens opened the event as a solo performer only because he had been able to fit into the four-seater helicopter that was all that was available at the time for taking acts to the site . The first artist to play was Richie Haven's first act .
 Armed with only an acoustic guitar, Country Joe McDonald was cajoled into following Havens onstage . McDonald was joined by Havens on stage for the first time .
 Hanging out backstage, not booked to perform, was Sebastian, formerly of the Lovin' Spoonful . Sebastian is currently on a solo tour with the band .
 Sebastian provided one of the key moments of the event . Asked to play, Sebastian went out in front of the crowd and provided a key moment of the tournament .
 Later that evening there was a fierce rainstorm—though nothing compared to what was yet to come . The storm was the first of its kind in New York City .
 The spirit of the event was inculcated in the 8:00 AM Saturday morning wakeup call over the sound system . The Spirit of the Event was in the form of the 8,00am Saturday morning .
 We have one of the biggest cities in the United States, and we ought to be proud of ourselves. We have a big city in the U.S. and should be proud, he says. "We have a great city," he says .
 With the site in danger of being overrun by garbage, the audience worked as one to eliminate this health hazard . With the help of the audience, the crowd cleared the area of garbage .
 By now, the music was in full flow, with performances from Creedence Clearwater Revival, the Who and the Grateful Dead . The Who were briefly interrupted by a stage protest from Hoffman .
 Sly and the Family Stone sealed the day’s glory with a mind-blowing show . Sly and The Family Stone closed the show with a performance of their own .
 At midday, fat clouds rolled in and the heavens opened, transforming Yasgur's land into an ocean of mud . Cocker and the Grease Band delivered a memorable set .
 As though adversity was being turned to advantage, mud became a feature of the festival, with festivalgoers playing mud-sliding games . Festivalgoers also took part in mud-slamming games .
 Nelson Rockefeller declared the festival a disaster area; it was his intention, he stated, to send in the National Guard and remove the entire audience . Rockefeller had declared the event a disaster . Rockefeller declared it a national disaster area and sent in National Guard .
 Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young delivered a set of almost transcendent bliss . The band was performing live for only the second time .
 His rendition of the United States national anthem was etched into the memories of the remaining 25,000 people in the audience . His rendition provided the conclusion of a remarkable experience .
 Chris Salewicz, a former writer for the New Musical Express magazine, is the author of more than a dozen books and chronicled popular culture .
 The U.S. military fields at least 7,000 robots, which are either remotely guided by a human using a radio link or self-guided by preprogrammed flight plans . The United States military has at least seven,000 of these machines .
 More than 60 manufacturers in at least 40 countries are now servicing a market that is expected to exceed tens of billions of dollars over the next decade . The market is set to grow in the coming decade .
 Quentin Davies predicted in July 2009 that the world is now witnessing the last generation of manned combat aircraft and that by 2030 UAVs will have displaced them . The U.K.’s minister for defense equipment and support, Quentin Davies, the U.S. defense minister for
 UAVs, also called remotely piloted vehicles or unmanned aircraft systems, are aircraft without a pilot onboard . They are also known as remote piloted aircraft systems .
 Fixedwing UAVs resemble “smart weapons"" such as cruise missiles, but they are superior because they return to their base after a mission and can be reused . Fixedwings are superior to cruise missiles because they can return to a base after missions and return to them .
 The current generation of UAVs varies in size from small propeller-driven handlaunched models to jet-powered intercontinental-range craft such as the UQ-4 Global Hawk .
 Prices range from a few hundred thousand dollars for small models to well over $100 million for a Global Hawk .
 UAVs first took to the skies during World War II with radio-controlled target drones . They continued to develop through the Vietnam era when film cameras were mounted onto jet-powered drones for photoreconnaissance missions .
 modem UAVs began to appear over battlefields in the 1980s . Technical advancements made them much more effective in the '80s .
 Advanced composite materials made for lighter, stronger airframes, and improved electronics permitted the development of high-resolution TV and infrared cameras . The composite materials also allowed for lighter airframes and more powerful cameras .
 Full implementation of the Global Positioning System in the 1990s made it possible to navigate UAVs with precision that was previously unattainable . Also, full implementation of global positioning system in the 90s made navigation precision impossible .
 UAVs began to garner media attention during NATO’s intervention in the Yugoslav civil war of the 1990s . NATO intervened in the conflict in Yugoslavia in the early 1980s .
 In 1995 the U.S. Air Force put the RQ-1 Predator into service for airborne surveillance and target acquisition . The Predator was put into service by the Air Force in 1995 .
 Predators flying over Yugoslavia tracked troop movements, monitored refugees, marked targets so that manned aircraft could attack them with laserguided bombs . Predators flew over Yugoslavia, tracking troop movements and monitored refugees .
 The Predator remains the most widely used battlefield UAV operated by the U.S. UAVs. The Predator is the most commonly used UAV to operate in the United States.
 The entire system consists of the vehicle itself (with built-in radar, TV and infrared cameras, and laser designator), a ground-control station, and a communication suite to link the two by satellite .
 Though pilotless, the Predator is operated by approximately 55 personnel, including a pilot operator and a sensor operator .
 The current version, designated the MQ-1, went into service in 2001 armed with two laser-guided AGM-114 Hellfire missiles . The UAV can attack targets as well as identify them .
 The first time a Predator made a confirmed kill was in Yemen in 2002, when one operated by the CIA destroyed a vehicle carrying six members of al Qaeda .
 A turboprop-powered version of the Predator, called the MQ-9 Reaper, is significantly larger and has a greater payload . The Reaper is a larger, more capable of carrying out a larger payload .
 Reaper has been operational since 2007 with U.S. forces and is also used by Britain’s Royal Air Force . Reaper is operational with United States forces and also with Britain's Royal air force .
 Since UAVs are not yet completely autonomous, their operators must display great skill in judging distance and speed when landing, a task made more difficult by a slight delay in signal transmission between the UAV and the ground-control station .
 A Reaper on a combat mission over Afghanistan could no longer be controlled and had to be shot down by U.S. warplanes . There are occasional technical glitches, such as the one that occurred in September 2009 .
 Successful attacks by UAVs depend upon accuracy and timeliness of intelligence . Successful UAV attacks depend upon the accuracy and timing of intelligence, say experts .
 An al-Qaeda military planner was believed to have been killed by an American UAV in September but suddenly appeared in a media interview in October . This principle was demonstrated in 2009 when an al Qaeda military planner appeared in an interview with a media outlet .
 High-tech weapons may win engagements on the battlefield, but they cannot solve political problems . Also, high-tech gadgets may win battles but they may aggravate political problems, CNN's John Sutter says .
 For every militant killed by a UAV in Afghanistan and Pakistan, approximately 10 civilians were also killed, Brookings Institution think tank says . Brookings Institution: For every UAV killed a militant in Afghanistan or Pakistan, about 10 civilians also died .
 Human Rights Watch: Israeli UAVs unlawfully killed at least 29 Palestinian civilians during Gaza incursion in late 2008 and early 2009 . UAV operators allegedly failed to verify that targets were combatants .
 Most UAVs remain dedicated to what the military calls ISTAR—intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance . Most of them are dedicated to intelligence, surveillance and target acquisition .
 American UAVs began patrolling off the coast of Somalia in October 2009 in order to provide early warning of pirate vessels approaching merchant ships and to guide naval forces .
 The U.S. Marine Corps awarded contracts to Boeing and a joint venture between Lockheed Martin and Kaman to develop cargo UAVs that would be capable of delivering supplies to troops on the battlefield .
 The goal is to demonstrate how such UAVs could reduce risk and expense in logistics . The goal of the project is to reduce risk in logistics by reducing the cost of logistics .
 Currently it is expensive to operate ground supply convoys on the poor roads and in the back country of Afghanistan . Also, convoys must be heavily guarded, and they continually run risks from roadside bombs and ambushes .
 UAV technology is attracting interest from police forces and other civilian agencies . Besides these military uses, the technology has also attracted interest from other agencies .
 U.S. Customs and Border Patrol has been using the Predator to patrol the MexicoUnited States border since 2005 . Two maritime-patrol variants are scheduled to be operational in 2010 . The Predator has been used in the United States border patrol since early 2009 .
 UAVs are also being developed for use in search-and-rescue operations to help locate survivors and deliver emergency supplies to them . The technology is being developed to help in search and rescue operations .
 UAVs are being evaluated for their potential in assessing damage suffered from disasters such as hurricanes, forest fires, and maritime oil spills .
 As robotic vehicles become more commonplace, UAVs can be expected to be used wherever possible to minimize threats to personnel and to do tasks that exceed human strength .
 If current trends continue, UAVs could one day evacuate casualties from the heat of battle and mount round-theclock surveillance missions for months and maybe even years at a time .
 The pilot and sensor operator of the MQ-1 Predator unmanned aerial vehicle perform function checks at Balad Air Base, Iraq, before handing control of the vehicle to personnel stationed in the United States .
 Senior Airman Olufemi A Owolbabi is a senior Air Force Air Force member . He is the son of a U.S. Air Force sergeant sergeant .
 2009 may come to be seen as a year in which the movement toward electric cars gained momentum . 2009 may be the year that electric vehicles gained momentum in the United States .
 "This sudden gathering of energy actually brought together a number of forces that had begun independently the previous year," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Oil prices reached $147 per barrel in July 2008 and hovered in the $60-$80 range through much of 2009 . Oil prices peaked in 2008 and 2009, but remained low for much of the time .
 Gasoline prices threaten to make sport-utility vehicles and pickup trucks less economically viable for U.S. consumers . Fuel prices have led to a drop in sales of pickup trucks and sport utilities .
 Second was the severe recession that gripped the U.S. and then the rest of the world in 2008 and 2009 . Sales of new automobiles were at their lowest levels in half a century in sales .
 Third was a growing international awareness of the challenges posed by climate change, which led policymakers to seek ways to reduce carbon emissions such as those produced in automobile exhaust .
 The electric car movement has been given a lift by improvements in technology and by government commitments to help develop the infrastructure needed to support electric vehicles .
 Electricity was the preferred method of powering automobiles in Western Europe and the U.S. In the late 19th century and the first two decades of the 20th century, electricity was preferred .
 Electric motors did not have to be started manually; they were quieter than gasoline engines; and they provided a smoother ride because there were no gears to shift . Electric motors were quiet, quiet and smoother because they did not need to be manually started manually . Electric motor was quieter and smoother than
 A variety of innovations and discoveries proved enough to tilt consumers toward gasoline-powered cars . But a variety of new technologies and innovations pushed consumers toward the gas-powered vehicles .
 Henry Ford’s assembly-line model was the model for producing cars cheap enough to be owned by the common man . Henry Ford's assembly line model was one of the key pieces of American manufacturing history . Ford's model was a model for cheap cars that could be bought by the
 The internal combustion engine dominated the rest of the 20th century, its success perpetuated by low fuel prices . The engine was dominated by low-cost fuel prices throughout the decades .
 Businesses helped entrench gasoline-powered vehicles by establishing the infrastructure, gasoline stations, to support them . In addition, businesses helped to entrench the infrastructure of gasoline powered vehicles .
 Teslik powered alternatives, they were unable to travel long distances without recharging . Generally more expensive than fuel, they are more expensive to fuel .
 Most significantly, the infrastructure needed to support a large fleet of electric cars did not exist . Batterycharging facilities, such as battery charging facilities, were not available in the United States .
 Given the dearth of electric vehicles on the road, there was little demand for infrastructure . This made it even less worthwhile to produce electric cars, making it less worthwhile .
 During the 1990s electric vehicles briefly reentered the public sphere in response to a mandate by the California Air Resources Board that ""zero emission vehicles” make up 10% of vehicle sales in California by 2003 .
 General Motors introduced the first modem mass-produced electric vehicle, the EV1 . Toyota followed suit with an electric version of its RAV4 SUV; and other automakers announced their own plans .
 By 2003, CARB had rescinded its stringent requirements . The vehicles had been withdrawn from production . CARB has rescinded CARB requirements .
 Automakers responded that the programs they had worked on simply were not commercially viable at the time . Automakers said they worked on the programs simply weren't commercially viable . They said they were working on the technology in the 1980s .
 Toyota and Honda introduced hybrid electric cars to the Japanese market in 1997 and to the U.S. market in 2000 . The Prius and the Insight were introduced to the United States market by 2000 . Toyota's hybrid electric vehicles were introduced by Honda and Toyota .
 Hybrid vehicles proved popular in part because they didn't have to be plugged into the electric power grid to be recharged . Hybrid vehicles powered by a small gasoline engine that supplemented an electric motor when necessary .
 Barack Obama promised that half of all vehicles purchased by the federal government by 2012 would be plug-in hybrids or fully electric . During his campaign for the U.S. presidency in 2008, Obama promised to make half of the vehicles bought by the government be electric .
 $2.2 billion of his economic stimulus package had been awarded to some 48 automakers or parts manufacturers in order to increase production of electric vehicles . In August 2009 Obama, now president, announced that $2 billion had been given to 48 automakers .
 China’s government announced that it would provide subsidies for research and would also subsidize the purchase of electric or hybrid vehicles for use in Chinese taxi fleets and government agencies .
 Britain’s Prime Minister Gordon Brown said in July 2009 that he wanted all new cars sold in his country by 2020 to be electric or hybrid . British automakers said earlier in the year to subsidize purchases of electric vehicles would have little effect on sales .
 General Motors announced plans to roll out its new electric car, the Chevrolet Volt, in late 2010 . General Motors was majority-owned by the United States government in July 2009 .
 The Volt was an “extended range"" model, one whose batteries would be recharged overnight by a plug-in connection or on the road by a small gasoline engine . The Volt is an "extended" model .
 Nissan Motor Co. Co. announced production of the Leaf, a fully electric automobile that would boast zero tailpipe carbon emissions . Also announced in August, the Leaf will boast zero emissions from its tailpipe .
 As many as 25,000 charging points will be installed in accessible areas by 2015 . Mayor of London vows to make that city the ‘electric car capital of Europe’
 U.S.-based company Better Place demonstrated prototype of battery-exchange station . It intended to install throughout Israel and Denmark as part of a program to encourage a mass market for electric cars .
 Several challenges will have to be overcome if a sizable portion of the world’s auto fleet is to be replaced with electric or hybrid vehicles . Despite the gathering momentum of 2009, several challenges must be overcome to be met .
 At current gasoline prices it is unclear whether fully electric vehicles can be an economically viable alternative on a broad scale . At current gas prices, it's unclear if fully electric cars can be economically viable .
 Electric vehicles at this time are best suited for stop-and-go, short-range city driving . Given the limitations of current battery capacities, given current technologies that partly recharge batteries by using energy produced while braking, electric vehicles are likely to be best suited to city driving, experts say
 Before fully electric vehicles can realistically be expected to replace fuel-powered cars or hybrids, charging and battery-exchange stations will have to be put in place everywhere cars are driven . Charging and battery exchange stations will need to be installed all over the world .
 Even assuming the establishment of networks of charging stations, technological problems would have to be addressed, such as technological problems .
 Many plug-in models take hours to recharge, while gasoline-powered cars take only minutes to refuel . For instance, many plug-ins can take hours or minutes to recharge .
 Stations that are capable of charging car batteries rapidly are possible in theory . But they would have to be designed and operated in such a manner that they would avoid straining municipal power grids .
 As long as electric power plants continue to run on fossil fuels such as coal, recharging fleets of plug-in electric cars will not eliminate the emission of carbon into the atmosphere . Also, as long as power plants run on coal, they will continue to do not eliminate carbon emissions .
 Lee Hudson Teslik is Senior Editor and Analyst at Roubini Global Economics . He is the author of the Roubinis Global Economics. Teslik writes about the global economy . Teslik: The world's economy is changing in the wake of the Great Recession .
 Nissan Motor Co. 's zero-emission electric car, the Leaf, is displayed in August in Yokohama, Japan . Nissan's Leaf is an electric car that can be driven by Nissan's electric cars .
 The electric vehicle, powered by a lithium-ion battery, was scheduled for release in late 2010 . It was scheduled to be powered by an electric battery . The vehicle is scheduled to go on sale in 2010 .
 Ardipithecus ramidus was the first species to be found in the world to be studied in the fossil form of Ardithecus . Ardithecidus is thought to have been the first to be discovered in the form of a fossil from the fossil of the same species
 The long-awaited results of a monumental effort to reconstruct the skeletal biology, paleoecology, and evolutionary position of Ardipithecus ramidus were published at last in the Oct., 2009, issue of the journal Science .
 The issue featured 11 research articles written by an international team of 47 authors and a number of related stories and online materials . The issue was published in the March issue of the International Economic Journal .
 Over the next year 16 additional specimens were found, including a number of teeth, a mandibular fragment, and parts of four cranial bones, and four arm bones .
 When information about these 4.4-million-year-old hominins was published in 1994, they were considered a new species of Australopithecus . They were more morphologically primitive than the other members of this genus .
 Remains of a spectacular partial skeleton were unearthed at Aramis in November 1994 . The novelty of this new material required a change in generic status from Australopithecus to Ardipithecus .
 It took three entire field seasons of surface crawling to locate and subsequently extract the pieces of Ardi’s skeleton . It took 14 pelvis and 10 cranial reconstructions before the authors were satisfied with the accuracy of their models .
 White, co-director of the Middle Awash Project, had been collecting fossils in this region since 1981 . The project included 70 scientists from 18 countries, including 70 scientists .
 Remains of eight different hominin species spanning almost six million years of evolution were uncovered at the site . Remains were found in the site of the remains of 8 different species of hominoids .
 The A ramidus fossils at Aramis were very securely dated because they occurred between two key layers of volcanic tuff . The fossils were found in the region of Aramis . They were discovered in a crater on the site of a volcano .
 A ramidus represents a lessspecialized grade of hominin organization than the fully bipedal australopithecines . The ramids are a less specialized grade of . hominine organization .
 Ardi walked bipedally when on the ground, although she retained an apelike opposable big toe and also climbed trees . For instance, Ardi’s mosaic-like foot skeleton suggests she walked bipedsally . Ardi also used to climb trees and had an
 In arboreal settings she operated as a monkeylike quadruped while moving on the top of branches and bridging between branches . She operated like a monkey like quadruped .
 Her pelvis structure combined typical features of both hominins and apes . She was found to be a hominin in the form of a chimpanzee .
 A comparison of dentitions from human, Ardipithecus ramidus and chimpanzee all males . Mattermes—Science/AAAS/Reuters/Landov .
 A large very flexible midcarpal joint permitted her to support nearly all of her 50-kg body weight on her palms when clambering along tree branches . She supported nearly all her body weight when she clambered on tree branches using her palms .
 An important evolutionary implication of Ardi’s postcranial material was that the hypothetical common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees was not morphologically or behaviorally similar to modern African apes, as was once envisioned .
 Experts now believe that it was more probably a palmigrade quadrupedal climber that may have resembled some Miocene apes and the earliest hominins in its locomotor adaptations .
 The comparative analysis of Ardipithecus necessitated a complete paradigm shift . The study was conducted by the author of the book, "Ardipithec"
 Ardipithecus lived in a humid, cool woodland with a grassy substrate and occasional patches of open forest . Ardiphithecus was found in a moist woodland with grassy substrates and open forests .
 The 150,000 fossil plant and animal specimens from Aramis documented the presence of browsers, fruit eaters, and leaf eaters . The fossil specimens were found in Aramis .
 The remains of spiralhorned kudus, two species of monkey, various kinds of small mammals, parrots, peafowl, catfish, palm tress, fig trees, shrubs, and grasses were plentiful . turtles/tortoises, crocodiles,
 Ardi was an omnivore, most likely consuming insects, small mammals, fruits, and nuts . Ardi is believed to have eaten insects and small mammals .
 Ardi was only 1. m tall, short for a female hominin . Her height proved to be typical for both males and females of her genus . Males in the rest of the assemblage did not have larger bones and were not taller than females, as among other hom
 Ardipithecus specimens had relatively small canines with diamond-shaped crowns . Ardipitithecus was a relatively small species of Ardipithcus that had diamond canines .
 No upper canine-lower premolar honing was present in any of the specimens . The species was not honed in any specimens .
 Ardipithecus' s physical inability to process a hard, abrasive diet . The postcanine megadontia that characterized the australopithecines was absent, underscoring the lack of postcanines in Ardipithithecus .
 Ardi’s face was relatively small with a projecting muzzle, especially in the midface, much like Sahelanthropus but unlike the extreme lower facial projection of modern apes . Ardi was a relatively small ape with a projection of the lower facial features of today's apes .
 Ardipithecus lacked the large flaring cheeks of the australopithecines associated with heavy chewing . It also shared a short cranial base with both the Australopheticcines and Sahelanthropus . Ardiphithecus was found to have shared a cran
 The short face (from top to bottom) also was reminiscent of Sahelanthropus’s face . It was also similar to the face of the short-living animal .
 Grades are levels of functional organization usually associated with a particular adaptive zone . Grades in adaptive zones are considered as a level of organization that can be adapted to adaptability .
 All of the above fossils may actually represent a single genus (Ardipithecus would have priority) that contained the evolutionary forerunners of the australopithecines and occupied a distinct adaptive zone .
 Ardipithecus’s dental and skeletal anatomy combined with principles and theories from evolutionary biology have led to a number of assertions . In terms of social behaviour and lifehistory strategies, lifehistory . strategies .
 Ardipithecus grade from the last common ancestor humans share with the chimpanzee . Regular food carrying, pair bonding, and female ovulation concealment .
 Increased male parental investment was seen as an important ‘breakthrough’ adaptation for early hominins . Increased parental investment seen as important “breakthrough"" adaptation for homininins.
 Ardipithecus and the lack of pronounced sexual dimorphism in this taxon both signify that male-to-male conflict and aggression had been reduced . In addition, the overall dental morphological pattern of Ardipitithecus suggests that male to male conflict has been reduced.
 A baby orangutan laughs in response to a researcher’s tickling, providing evidence that laughter emerged in animals millions of years before humans evolved .
 A number of investigations of nonhuman primates, however, connected these six topics in 2009 . In 2009, a number of probes of non-human primates were connected to the topics .
 Researchers worldwide surveyed the behaviours of nonhuman primates by analyzing the responses of great apes that were tickled . They also monitored the public tantrums of young rhesus macaques and the abilities of long-tailed macaques .
 The origins of human laughter could be traced 10 million to 16 million years ago to the last common ancestor of humans and apes . The researchers also concluded that laughter is a cross-species phenomenon .
 The great apes are not the only nonhuman primates with humanlike displays of expression . They are not only apes, but other non-human primates .
 Infant rhesus macaques were found to be expressive too, especially when they did not get what they wanted . Infants are expressive when they are not getting what they want, researchers found .
 Their mothers were found to be twice as likely to give in to their offspring when the tantrum occurred in the presence of potentially threatening animals .
 This study was considered the first to demonstrate how bystanders could affect the communication between the mother macaque and infant .
 Researchers found that orangutans use unique maneuvers to overcome the safety risks associated with accessing food and crossing gaps in tree crowns . Researchers say the largest habitually arboreal mammal in the world uses these maneuvers .
 The orangutans’ irregular movements include shifting from side to side and using all four limbs at once . The irregular movements cause a minimal disturbance to the trees and facilitate their motion .
 Because orangutans remain on the verge of extinction, it is critical that scientists understand their needs, their movement limitations, and their ability to overcome the environmental challenges posed by humans .
 Such knowledge could form the basis for animal and environmental conservation programs, experts say .
 He was observed stockpiling stones, which he later hurled at the zoo’s visitors . He was seen stockpiling the stones and throwing them at zoo visitors .
 This behaviour was proof that apes are capable of planning for the future . This behaviour is proof of the apes' ability to plan for their future .
 One zoo became well known for the behavioral study of a bad-tempered primate resident in 2009 . The study was conducted at a zoo in New York City .
 Santino repeatedly gathered stones and concrete chips from his home at the Furuvik Zoo . Santino, an adult male chimpanzee, stockpiled them in scattered areas throughout his habitat .
 Zoo's animal-care staff has removed hundreds of weapon caches . Santino has been accumulating his arsenal for more than 10 years .
 Santino collected objects while he was calm; however, he threw them at zoo visitors a number of hours later during his agitated dominance displays . Santino was observed to collect the objects while his calm state was calm .
 Santino's behaviour indicated that Santino was spontaneously planning for a future mental state . This suggests that chimpanzees have highly developed consciousness, a characteristic many scientists have been reluctant to attribute to nonhuman primates . Santino is a chimpanzee with a history of planning for future mental states .
 Tooth-flossing behaviour is not typically attributed to nonhuman primates . Tooth flossing is a common part of the behaviour of non-human primates.
 The study was designed to investigate the proliferation of tool use throughout a population in a small group of females who were rearing infants . The study found that tool use was proliferating in a population of small groups .
 A different primate study conducted at the Itozu-no-Mori Park, Fukuoka, Japan, tested the responses of an infant chimpanzee to music .
 Sakura preferred consonant, or harmonious, sounds to dissonant, sounds . She prefers consonant sounds to discordant sounds . Sakura could indeed appreciate music .
 Sakura consistently preferred to produce consonant music for a longer period of time than dissonant music . During six weekly sessions, Sakura consistently produced consonant songs .
 Study of primates published in 2009 revealed evidence that some monkeys and apes discerned right from wrong . Other studies of primates have found evidence that chimpanzees negotiated with troopmates and constructed mental maps based on geometric coordinates .
 Research with nonhuman primates would continue to provide a portal through which humans might better know and understand themselves . Humans might not be as unique as they once thought, researchers say .
 Young boy in small Gulf-coast town of La Gloria, Veracruz, fell ill with an influenza-like disease of unknown cause . Doctors at the Mexico City Navy Hospital wear protective gear .
 Within weeks nearly 30% of the town’s residents had been affected by a similar sickness . Within weeks people in nearby villages had fallen ill as well .
 The young boy was the only individual from the region to test positive for a new strain of influenza virus . The new strain was named swine influenza, or swine flu, because it contained genetic material from existing swine virus viruses .
 By mid-March a sickness resembling the one from La Gloria had emerged in Mexico City . Not long after, cases of the respiratory illness were reported throughout the country .
 Health officials send more than 50 patient samples to a lab in Canada for analysis . After several infected persons died, the country’s health officials decided to send over 50 samples to the lab .
 The World Health Organization convened an emergency meeting to assess the situation . 16 of the 16 people who tested positive for swine flu turned up positive for the virus .
 The newly identified virus, deemed to have significant pandemic potential (the ability to spread easily over a wide geographic area) owing to the lack of preexisting immunity in humans, appeared in the U.S. in mid-April . The virus is deemed to be a significant pand
 It subsequently spread to Canada and the United Kingdom, to Europe, and to New Zealand .
 Hong Kong flu claimed the lives of more than 750,000 people globally in 1968 . It was the first pandemic to occur since 1968, when more than 700,000 died worldwide .
 The rapid spread of the virus generated significant fear among the public . The majority of individuals who became infected with swine flu experienced only mild symptoms of fever, cough, and runny nose .
 The swine influenza virus at the root of the 2009 pandemic was a newly identified strain of influenza A subtype H1N1 .
 Influenza A viruses are the primary cause of seasonal influenza in humans . They are constantly evolving, and they are the main source of seasonal flu season .
 One mechanism of evolution is viral reassortment, when multiple strains of influenza viruses infect a single host and recombine to give rise to a new strain . Virus reassortment is a form of evolution that occurs when a single virus infects a host .
 Genetic material from humans, birds, and pigs mixed and recombined in a pig host, giving rise to a triple reassortant virus . In the case of the 2009 swine flu virus, genetic material from three organisms—humans, birds and pigs—mixed and . recombined
 Swine flu also was subject to constant evolution through antigenic drift as it circulated between the Northern and Southern hemispheres . Similar to all other influenza viruses, swine flu is subject to continuous evolution .
 As swine flu crossed the globe, strains carrying mutations for drug resistance emerged . The first strain appeared in Denmark in June and demonstrated resistance to Tamiflu .
 Scientists immediately began to search for ways to overcome resistant strains of strains . Scientists are now trying to find new ways to combat resistant strains .
 In laboratory studies, combinations of existing antiviral agents proved promising . Combination of existing anti-viral agents has been shown to be effective .
 The genetic constitution of the reassortant virus rendered it more contagious than typical seasonal influenza . It was transmitted in typical flu fashion—via infectious droplets expelled into the air from infected persons when sneezing or coughing .
 The virus could survive on hard surfaces for 24 hours, providing ample opportunity to spread to another person . It could also spread to other people within 24 hours of exposure .
 The thermal imaging system was used to screen passengers for swine flu under age 5 . Under age 5, persons suffering from chronic illness or with suppressed immunity were screened .
 The name initially given to the virus, “swine influenza,” was fitting in several respects . The virus not only contained genetic segments from two different swine influenza viruses but also appeared to have originated on a pig farm near La Gloria .
 The farm belonged to Granjas Carroll de Mexico, a joint venture operation working in partnership with U.S.-owned Smithfield Foods, Inc. It is a major international producer of pork .
 Countries such as China, Thailand, and Russia temporarily arrested the import of pigs from affected areas . Countries like Thailand, China, Russia and China temporarily suspended pigs imports .
 Egyptian Minister of Health Hatem al-Gabali ordered the slaughter of up to 400,000 of the country’s pigs . There was no evidence that they were infected with the virus .
 The mandate sparked riots and protests from Egyptian farmers who depended on raising and selling pigs as a source of income . The mandate instantly sparked protests and protests .
 WHO changed the name of the virus to influenza Ain late April in an effort to dispel confusion . The virus is now known as influenza .
 When the influenza A virus was discovered in Mexico, it was not considered of international concern . When the flu virus was found in Mexico it was considered not a problem .
 WHO acknowledged that global dispersion was imminent and issued a level 5 pandemic alert . As the disease spread across Mexico City, into the United States and Canada, and overseas to Spain, the United Kingdom, and the Middle East, WHO said it was a pandemic .
 The alert served as a signal to national health agencies to finalize plans for the implementation of control measures . Measures include limiting travel to and from affected regions and distributing face masks to limit disease spread .
 When the pandemic was declared in June, cases had climbed to nearly 30,000 worldwide . The virus had spread to many regions of the world, including Southeast Asia, Scandinavia, the West Indies, and Central America .
 By early September, with the exception of several places, including Greenland, Mongolia, and some areas of Africa, swine flu was established in all parts of the world . The exception was Greenland, Mongolian and some parts of Africa .
 In late December some 622,480 cases and 12,220 deaths were confirmed globally . In late December there were more than 12,000 confirmed cases of HIV-AIDS .
 Not all cases and fatalities could be tracked, however, the actual figures were believed to be far greater . Because not all cases were tracked, it is believed to have been far greater.
 Studies of past pandemics show outbreaks occur in waves, or alternating periods of high and low disease activity in the same region . Each ""wave” represents a period of increased activity, with each ""wave" representing a period .
 In the summer of 2009 in North America, swine flu cases dropped off significantly . In the post peak period of 2009 activity during the summer, 2009, cases of illness dropped significantly .
 WHO issued a warning in late August to prepare for a second pandemic wave . Evidence of that began to emerge in the first week of September in the U.S. Some isolated areas experienced sudden spikes in influenza A activity .
 When the pandemic potential of the virus was first realized in April, scientists set to work on vaccine development .
 In July, just four months after the isolation of the new virus, the first swine flu vaccine for humans entered clinical testing . The vaccine is the first to enter clinical testing for humans .
 The vaccine, however, required two shots, administered three weeks apart, which raised concerns that there was not enough time for full immunity to be established . Vaccine supplies would run out before a second wave hit .
 Just days later, single-dose vaccines emerged, and meeting global vaccine demand appeared feasible once again . Just days before, however, single dose vaccines emerged . Single dose vaccines appeared to be feasible again .
 A singledose vaccine developed by Sinovac Biotech Ltd., a Chinese company, was approved in China in early September . Similar vaccines developed by other pharmaceutical companies worldwide became available shortly thereafter .
 As summer turned to fall in North America, a second pandemic wave, equal to or greater in severity, seemed certain . As summer turns to fall, North America seemed like a second wave of disease was certain .
 U.S. health officials remain confident that the virus could be contained . Despite this, United States health officials remained optimistic .
 The generation of single-dose vaccines, WHO’s effective surveillance program, and existing global mitigation and control measures, were repeatedly strengthened and reevaluated throughout the pandemic .
 Kara Rogers is the Senior Editor of Biomedical Sciences for Encyclopaedia Britannica . She is also a Senior Editor at the Encyclopaedic Britannica.
 Autism is a spectrum condition with varying degrees of severity . Autism is manifested to varying levels of severity and is manifested in various ways .
 At one extreme, a person may have no social skills, no language skills, and major learning difficulties . At another extreme, people may have major social skills and major difficulties .
 Those living with either condition share a strong preference for routines and repetition . They are characterized by an obsessional interest in highly specific topics . Both subgroups are subgroups on the autistic spectrum .
 In the late 1990s the prevalence of autism spectrum conditions was found to have increased substantially relative to previous decades . Data published in 2009 revealed that number of children diagnosed with these conditions was continuing to follow this same trend .
 The study assessed the prevalence of these conditions in eight-year-olds . This represented the age by which most affected U.S. children had been placed under specialist’s care .
 The number of people diagnosed with autism spectrum conditions has increased in the UK in recent years . This figure is representative of an increase in the number of persons diagnosed with autistic conditions .
 It remained unclear whether such increases were due to the conditions’ becoming more widespread or to improved diagnostic procedures used to detect them .
 Information on the incidence of autism spectrum disorders in other countries remained controversial . Information on autism spectrum disorder remains controversial .
 Study published early in 2009 in the Israel Medical Association Journal addressed the incidence of autism spectrum disorders in that country .
 These figures were assessed in terms of the total number of children under age 18 who lived in the country during the time period investigated . The figures were further assessed in . terms of . children under . age 18 .
 Per capita prevalence of autism spectrum disorders in Israel in 2004 was estimated to have been 1.1 per 10,000 children .
 in Israel between 2001 and 2004, the prevalence of autism spectrum disorders was about 36 per 10,000 . This means the incidence of the conditions in the country is closer to estimates of worldwide incidence reported in a study published in 2006 in the journal Lancet .
 Atypical behaviour is a characteristic of people affected by autism spectrum conditions . Autism spectrum conditions are often associated with atypical behavioural patterns .
 Such behaviour has been associated with empathy and systemizing . Such behaviour is associated with two primary psychological aspects, empathy .
 Empathy involves imagining another persons thoughts and feelings and having an appropriate emotional reaction to those feelings . Empathy is a form of empathy that involves imagining a person's thoughts, feelings and responding to them .
 Children and adults with Asperger syndrome show their empathizing difficulties on tests of emotion recognition, theory of mind, and spontaneous empathy .
 Theory of mind is the ability to attribute mental states to oneself or others . It is regarded as the cognitive component of empathy . Theory of Mind is a form of empathy that can be attributed to others .
 Emotion recognition is sometimes regarded as part of theory of mind because emotions are mental states . Emotions are a mental state . Emotional recognition is a form of recognition of a state of mind . Emissions of emotion recognition can be attributed to emotion recognition .
 Often emotion-recognition deficits appear only if complex emotions are tested . In some individuals with autism, the deficit is evident even when basic emotions are examined .
 This deficit can explain the difficulties in social and communicative development and in imagining others’ minds . It can also explain difficulties in the social and social development of children .
 Systemizing is the drive to analyze a system in terms of underlying rules in order to understand and predict its behaviour . Systemizing aims to analyze and predict the behaviour of a system .
 The repetitive behaviour, the desire for routines, and the need for sameness can be interpreted as being the result of a strong drive to systemize . The repetitive behaviours can be seen as a strong desire for routine routines .
 Individuals with autism or Asperger syndrome are relatively fast on tests of attention to detail . Systemizing also requires excellent attention to . Attention to detail also requires .
 Adept systemizing can explain the exceptional mental abilities possessed by some persons affected by these conditions . Adept systemsizing can often explain some of the mental abilities of some people affected by such conditions .
 Anatomical abnormalities have been identified in different brain regions in individuals with autism . Anomalistic abnormalities were identified in the brain regions of autistic individuals .
 These abnormalities are not found in every case, and there are inconsistencies between studies . Sometimes overgrowth or underdevelopment is found in some cases .
 Brain regions that have been reported to be atypical include the cerebellum, corpus callosum, the hippocampus, and the amygdala .
 Epilepsy also occurs in a proportion of individuals with autism spectrum conditions, though the exact rate is not clear . Epileps is a form of epilepsy that occurs in people with autism .
 In classic autism one-third of cases develop epilepsy by adolescence . In Asperger subgroup these rates may be much lower and have not been systematically studied .
 The number of Purkinje cells (large neurons with many branching extensions) in the cerebellar cortex in people with autism is abnormally low . In terms of neuropathology, this is an abnormality low .
 Abnormalities have also been reported in the density of neurons in the hippocampus, the amygdala, and other parts of the limbic system .
 One report also suggested a reduction in the size of cortical minicolumns . The significance of this is unclear .
 Functional neuroimaging studies of autism spectrum conditions show abnormalities in the amygdala and in the orbitofrontal and medial prefrontal cortex, among other areas . Autism spectrum conditions .
 These atypical patterns of neural activity occur in relation to the empathizing deficits . These patterns of activity occur when people empathize with others .
 By age two to four, MRI-based brain volumes are larger than average, study finds . 90% of children diagnosed with autism have larger brain volumes than the average .
 The sibling risk rate for autism has been estimated to be about 5 to 10 times higher than general population rates . In recent years the sibling risk rates have been higher .
 60% of MZ pairs were found to be concordant for autism, meaning that both twins were affected . 60% were concordated for autism - meaning both twins affected .
 Genetic linkage studies have led to the implication of a number of chromosomal regions in autism . Autism has been linked to a range of genetic predispositional factors .
 X chromosome abnormalities have been identified in association with autism, which may explain the sex ratios being markedly biased toward males . In addition, abnormalities affecting the X chromosome have been linked to autism .
 Studies have indicated that levels of fetal testosterone are associated with the number of autistic traits present in an individual . For example, studies have shown that fetal testosterone is associated with autism .
 The hormone also is positively correlated with the emergence of narrow interests, systemizing, and autistic traits . Hormone is also linked to autism, narrow interests and systemizing .
 The higher the levels of the hormone during fetal development, the more likely these features are to appear in early childhood . Thus, the higher the . levels of . fetal development hormone during . fetal . development, more likely to occur in early . childhood .
 The earliest that classic autism has been reliably diagnosed is 18 months of age . Classic autism is a form of autism that can only be diagnosed at 18 months old .
 The Checklist for Autism in Toddlers tests for the absence of ‘joint attention behaviours’ such as pointing and gaze following . This was shown by a screening approach known as the Checklist .
 Children who failed on the CHAT test had an 83.3% chance of developing autism or a related developmental disorder . CHAT was developed by the U.K.-based Autism Research Centre . Children who fail on the test have an 83%.
 The approach, however, has a low level of sensitivity— it detected only two out of every five cases, mostly missing the Asperger subgroup . The approach has been used to detect only two or five cases of autism .
 Autistic children gather around a computer to watch a Lego movie made with Lego toys . Asperger syndrome was found to be a problem for autistic children .
 The most effective interventions for children on the autistic spectrum are special education, such as social skills teaching, and applied behaviour analysis . Special education teaches appropriate skills and behaviours through principles of reinforcement .
 The key ingredients for effective early intervention are that the methods are highly structured, intensive, and individualized . The methods must be highly structured and intensive, according to experts .
 There are ethical issues surrounding the notion of trying to cure autism . Indeed, there are ethical questions surrounding the idea of doing so .
 For many years ‘treatment’ in autism proceeded on the basis of an approach that was tried and tested but without any real rationale for why it should be effective . ‘Treatment’ should be based on an approach to autism that has been tried, tested and tested,
 The principles behind it enable target skills to be broken down into simpler units to be acquired through shaping and mass practice .
 While there is some evidence for the effectiveness of ABA, the methods require external reinforcers or rewards to maintain the child's attention and cooperation . The methods are not as autism-friendly as they could be .
 New interventions have been designed to harness individuals’ areas of strength and their natural interests as a means for building new skills .
 Mind Reading DVD educational software uses the natural interest in lawful, predictable computers and in information's being systematically organized . The domain of emotions is easier to learn about than the domain of emotion .
 A second example is The Transporters DVD animation, which relies on the child’s natural interest in the mechanical, predictable motion of vehicles to help the child attend to the film and to enable implicit learning of emotions .
 A final example is Lego therapy, which exploits the child’s strong interest in systems, to encourage turn taking and social communication . Lego therapy is also a form of therapy to encourage children to take part in systems systems .
 All treatments that are claimed to be useful for children or adults with autism spectrum conditions should be subjected to a scientific evaluation . All treatments should be subject to an evaluation by experts .
 This is to confirm that there are indeed benefits relative to no intervention and that there is no unwanted side effects . This is a confirmation of the benefits of no intervention . The study was carried out to confirm there were indeed benefits .
 Web sites have been developed to help parents and professionals make informed decisions about which treatment option to pursue, given that these are often expensive and that new methods are announced almost annually . Web sites help parents as well as professionals decide which treatment options to pursue .
 Teenagers and adults with Asperger syndrome often suffer from additional mental health problems . The most common is depression .
 The high levels of depression are not surprising if people with Asperger syndrome feel that they do not fit into society and feel rejected by the majority . The high rates of depression is not surprising, say experts .
 For teenagers this may be because the peer group becomes less tolerant of those who do not fit in . Failure to conform in the educational system can also mean underperforming academically . For teenagers, a failure to conform means they are less likely to perform well .
 Such depression may therefore be secondary to the condition and may be preventable with appropriate support . Such depression is secondary to a condition such as depression .
 Such support for teenagers may include special education, a buddy system, social skills training, and organized social groups .
 Support in adulthood may include sheltered employment, mentoring, advocacy, befriending, social groups for Asperger syndrome, and help with housing . Support may also include social groups, sheltered employment and advocacy .
 Autism spectrum conditions are not a disease or disorder but simply an atypical form of neurological development, akin to left-handedness . This is in part intended to convey that one view of autism spectrum conditions is that they are not disease or a disorder .
 Those whose brains develop and work differently need not be judged to be inferior to the majority . This view is less stigmatizing and makes an important political point, says David Frum .
 This view is called the neurodiversity movement . It resembles the civil rights movement that was necessary to gain equal opportunities for ethnic minorities and women . This view resembles the same movement that helped minorities gain equal opportunity .
 The diagnosis is given only if the individual is suffering to some extent, with their autistic traits leading to significant interference in their everyday life . It is important that the disability element is not overlooked in this shift of emphasis .
 This diagnostic criterion is important as a yardstick of severity, since if the features of the condition are very mild, they may not require a diagnosis . The criteria is important to determine the severity of a condition .
 This relates back to the notion of an autistic spectrum, a dimension of autistic traits that runs right through the population . This relates to the idea of an autism spectrum, the author says . Autistic traits that run right through people's lives, he says .
 The current view is that all humans lie somewhere on this spec. trum and that it is only those who are at the extreme end . Those who are experiencing difficulties as a result of their high number of autistic traits will require a diagnosis .
 Not all doctors share this view of autism spectrum conditions’ simply being a case of neurodiversity . Autism spectrum conditions are simply being seen as neurodiverse .
 The American Psychiatric Association retains the term autism spectrum disorder . This group of conditions includes pervasive developmental disorders, which involve varying degrees of impairment .
 Individuals on the autistic spectrum who also have below-average IQs are likely to need special support throughout their lives . Those individuals on the autism spectrum are at risk of broader developmental delays .
 The issues and challenges that low IQ raises are in some respects no different from those raised by low IQs in other individuals (who are not on the autistic spectrum) and are probably best served by learning disability agencies .
 Communities for autistic adults create a living environment that caters to the unique needs of these individuals . Cascina Rossago in Italy is one of the most popular communities in the world .
 Developments in the field of physical anthropology during 2009 included news about the reconstruction and analysis of an extraordinarily complete skeleton of a controversial primate .
 The 47-million-year-old adapiform primate, Darwinius masillae, was announced to the world on May 19 via the most extensive public relations multimedia campaign in the history of primate paleontology . Darwiniusmasillae is the oldest known adap
 The specimen was originally unearthed in 1983 near Messel, Ger. , and was cleaved into two parts that were subsequently sold separately . The specimen is believed to have been discovered in 1983 .
 Her well-preserved digestive tract contents indicated a diet of leaves and fruit . She was probably nocturnal, and her diet was likely to be a low-energy source .
 An agile arboreal quadruped, she inhabited a rainforest and died near a volcanic lake . She was an agile, quadruped who lived near a volcano .
 She possessed a mixture of primitive and advanced morphological traits that led to controversial claims about her taxonomic relationships and phylogenetic position within the order Primates . Her taxonomic position within Primates was controversial .
 Darwinius and other adapiforms placed within lemurlike strepsirhines, not among the haplorhines . Darwinius is thought to be among the lemur like strepsirsines . The consensus favoured by most experts not connected to the research team placed Darwin
 Darwinius was a linking form between lemurlike primates and anthropoids, hence an ancestor of humans . The conjecture was considered to be false by many of the worlds leading paleoanthropologists . Darwinius may have been a link form between anthropoids and primates .
 Cross Altar because he had been in charge of this altar when serving as an unordained canon at the cathedral . He had been serving as a canon in the cathedral when he served as an unordained canister .
 DNA was extracted from three upper molars and both femora of this skeleton . The mitochondrial DNA profiles of these different samples were identical, which implied that the cranium and postcranial samples represented a single individual .
 No relatives who could provide a DNA reference sample had been identified . Investigators found a clever substitute source for the DNA sample .
 Copernicus’s heavily annotated copy of Johann Stoeffler's calendrical treatise Calendarium Romanian magnum (published 1518) had resided at Uppsala since the mid-17th century .
 The strands of hair could be used as a reference sample for his skeletal DNA . The DNA was used to confirm the identification of the skeletal remains as his .
 portraits of Copernicus usually showed him with dark eyes . Genetic analysis revealed that he had the genotype predominant among blueor grayeyed humans and thus may have had a light iris colour .
 Statistical analysis indicated 14 ancestral clusters present in the African data set . Analysis indicated that 14 ancestral cluster clusters were present .
 Strong associations between geography, language, and genes reflected the concomitant spread of people, languages, and sometimes culture or ethnicity . Strong associations of geography and genes reflect the spread of languages and culture .
 Genetic diversity was generally highest in African populations and declined with increasing distance from Africa consistent with serial founder effects that resulted from global migrations .
 Modern human migration within Africa may have originated near the coastal border of Namibia and Angola, an area that constitutes the current San homeland . The San homeland is located in the area that is now considered the current homeland .
 The Khoisan speakers, the eastern African Khoisanspeaking Hadza and Sandawe, and the central African Pygmies are all remnants of a widespread proto-KhoisanPygmy population of hunter-gatherers .
 Pygmies were originally Khoisan speakers who, in a rare example of complete language replacement, subsequently adopted the nonclick Niger-Congo languages spoken by their neighbours . According to this intriguing scenario, this is an intriguing scenario of a rare case .
 African Americans had primarily West African roots, deriving 71% of their ancestry from both Bantoid and non-Bantoid Niger-Congospeaking populations . Only 8% from the rest of Africa, 13% from European admixture, and the remaining 8% is from
 The 4.4-million-year-old hominin Ardipithecus ramidus was found at Aramis, Eth. It is the first time the fossil has been found to be found in the region .
 In 2009 the largestknown trove of Anglo-Saxon treasure was unearthed in a farmers field in Staffordshire, Eng. The largest known treasure was discovered in 2009 .
 Staffordshire Hoard was dated to the 7th century CE and was composed of more than 1,500 pieces of gold and silver, weighing 5 kg and 2. kg (5. lb) It was made of over 1,000 pieces and weighs 5 kg (2. kg)
 Hohle Fels Cave in the Ach Valley, southwestern Germany, continues to yield extraordinary Ice Age finds . The cave is home to the world’s oldest Venus figurine .
 Dated to more than 35,000 years ago and carved out of mammoth ivory, the 6-cm -tall statuette was thought to be the earliest-known example of figurative art . The 6cm - tall statuettes predated previous finds by some 5,000
 Its patina and a loop on its back suggest it may have been worn as a pendent . It is believed to be the first time the pendent has been found in the world .
 These artifacts brought to eight the total number of known instruments from the Swabian Aurignacian, which suggested that music was an important element of human cultural expression at this early date .
 The hall, which measures some 16 m in diameter and was likely built of wood, rested upon a 4-m -wide pillar that had four spherical rotating mechanisms . The hall is located in Rome and is thought to have been built in the Roman capital .
 The ships had been transporting wine from Italy, garum (fermented fish sauce) from provinces in Spain and North Africa, and metal for making weapons and utensils . The ships were transporting wine and fish sauce from Italy .
 Archaeologist Timmy Gambin of the Aurora Trust says the ships were likely seeking safe harbour near the island during storms when they sank . The Aurora Trust has found the cargo ships in the area .
 The citizens of the city, which reached its apogee in the mid-2nd century BCE, had mastered their marshy environment . He also stated that the images made it clear that the citizens had mastered the marshy area .
 Remains of the oldest-known settlement in the Aegean came to light during excavations in June at Ouriakos on the Greek island of Limnos . Remains were found in the same place as the remains of the first known settlement .
 Also in Greece, ongoing research at the submerged city of Pavlopetri off the Laconian coast pushed back the date of the town's habitation to 2800 BCE, more than a millennium earlier than previously thought .
 The site is thought to be the oldest-known sunken city in the world . It covers more than 35,000 sq m and includes streets, houses, temples, and tombs .
 The ancient Egyptians added a host of herbs and resins to their wines to endow them with medicinal properties . An amphora recovered from the tomb of the early Egyptian pharaoh Scorpion I (c.50 BCE) at Abydos revealed that the ancient Egyptians used to add herbs and
 Horses from Bronze Age sites had had slenderer builds than their wild counterparts . Bronze Age horses from the Bronze Age showed signs of bridling . Horses' teeth showed wear patterns consistent with bridling, study found .
 Containers found within pit houses and in nearby middens bore traces of fat solids from the horse milk once stored in them .
 The earliest-known evidence for horse domestication came from a series of late 3rd-millennium-BCE chariot burials belonging to the Sintashta culture of Central Asia .
 Shards of pottery recovered from a cave in southern China’s Hunan province were dated to 18,000 years ago . They are the oldest-known examples of clay craft in the world .
 They were found in Yuchanyan Cave among sediments rich in animal bone and charcoal fragments, bone and shell tools, and other artifacts .
 The earliest-known evidence for pottery had come from a suite of Chinese sites in Hunan, Jiangxi, and Guangxi provinces, dating to 10,000-16,000 years ago .
 Himalaya expert Broughton Coburn and Everest mountaineer Pete Athans in 2007 and 2008 discovered a long-lost library of 15thcentury manuscripts . Mustang was once a centre of Tibetan culture and now part of northcentral Nepal .
 More than 8,000 folios belong to some 30 religious tracts . Found in Mardzong Cave, part of a rockhewn monastery complex carved into a cliff face overlooking the upper Kali Gandaki River . Most associated with Bon, an animist faith that flourished in the region
 Among the newly discovered volumes was a heretofore-unknown version of the Lubum, a sacred Bon text devoted to the propitiation of naga serpent deities . The Lubum is a sacred text dedicated to a sacred ritual by the ancient Bon people .
 The manuscripts were discovered during a cave-documentation project . They were transported to a local monastery for conservation and Study .
 Cahokia Mounds are the largest and most complex Native American civilization in North America . Cahokia was the largest of the most complex and largest of North America's ancient mounds . In 2009 archaeological research at the Fisher Mounds Site Complex in southern Wisconsin continued to expand knowledge .
 Cahokians apparently brought pots and chert (fine-grained quartz) tools with them, as there was little evidence from excavated features for the use of local lithic materials and clay sources .
 The Mississippian houses, potsherds, and stone tools recovered from these excavations dated to about 1050 CE . Cahokia’s punctuated regional political consolidation coincided with Cahokia's punctuated political consolidation .
 The absence of a palisade wall at the site indicated that the colony enjoyed a relatively peaceful existence . It indicated that it was a relatively quiet existence .
 Archaeologists uncovered large portions of one of the largest Mississippian mound centres in the eastern U.S. mound centres . The mound centre is one of largest in eastern United States .
 Cahokia excavations fundamentally revised archaeological understandings of Cahokia civilization . Archaeological excavations in Cahokia have fundamentally changed Cahokia history .
 St. Louis mound centre witnessed its peak residential occupation while the nearby site of Cahokia was being depopulated . The mound centre was occupied by Cahokia during the early Cahokia period .
 St. Louis sites experienced their highest population densities contemporaneously . This suggests a larger regional population than previously posited .
 Excavations continued at the Topper site near the Savannah River in South Carolina . Excavation continues at the site .
 Topper was once a Paleo-Indian quarry and habitation site where Clovis points were manufactured . Topper is located in Topper, a site where the points were made by Clovas .
 Work at the site in 2009 recovered more detailed information about the Clovis occupation of the site .
 The presence of blades, cores, and flake tools indicated that manufacturing activities beyond the production of bifacial stone tools occurred at Topper .
 Evidence for this claim consisted of various objects argued to be bend-break unifacial tools . Evidence included various objects arguing to be bent-break tools .
 If this claim was proved accurate, it would overturn most current theories for the peopling of the New World .
 Excavations at the Chimney Rock site near Pagosa Springs, Colo., provided important insight into Southwestern prehistory . Chimney rock site is located near the town of Pagosa, Colorado .
 Lekson believed the site to be directly affiliated with Chacoan society and used as a lunar observatory . Lekson believes the site was used as an observatory by Chacoans elites .
 The elites who lived at Chimney Rock enjoyed a diet of deer and elk, while lower-status residents of the site dined on smaller game, the researchers say .
 Among the significant Mesoamerican archaeological discoveries was that of two large stone sculptures in Mexico City by archaeologist Leonardo Lopez Lujan .
 These works provided additional depth to current understandings of Aztec sacrifice and funeral rituals . These works provide additional depth of the Aztec tradition .
 The first sculpture, a 13-ton monolith, was discovered in October 2006 . It was believed to represent Tlaltecuhtli, a female Aztec deity of the earth, known for her nurturing symbolism .
 Stone representations of this goddess often served as platforms for the cremation rituals of deceased kings . Stone representations were often found in stone representations of the goddess . The goddess is believed to be a Hindu goddess of Hinduism .
 Pigment residues identified on the surface of the sculpture indicated that it would have been decorated in black, red, and blue .
 The second sculpture depicted a large cactus believed to have been used as a platform for rituals involving Aztec sacrifice . This interpretation of the sculptures function was based on an Aztec legend that indicates that sacrificial rituals performed atop cacti confer the gods' favour upon the performers .
 Archaeologist Richard Hansen recently discovered two 8-m -long panels carved in stucco from the preClassic Mayan site of El Mirador, Guat. Guat., that depict aspects of the Popol Vuh, the Mayan origin story .
 Popol Vuh features the Hero Twins, Hunahpu and Xbalanque, who were transformed into, respectively, the Sun and the Moon . In explaining how the Mayan gods created the world, the Mayans explain how the world was created .
 One of the panels depicts the Hero Twins beneath a bird deity . The other panel features a Mayan maize god surrounded by a serpent .
 The panels thus authenticated the earliest written version of the Mayan origin story . It was transcribed in the 1700s by Spanish colonial priest Francisco Ximenez .
 Additional findings at the Classic Maya farming village of Ceren, El Sal., continued to provide major insight into ancient subsistence and food production .
 Ceren was discovered by archaeologist Payson Sheets in 1978 . Ceren, like Pompeii, was buried in volcanic ash, was pivotal in providing amazing detail about Mesoamerican lifeways .
 An eruption 1,400 years ago covered the site in 5 m of ash, preserving houses and adjacent agricultural plots . The eruption covered houses and agricultural plots, preserving the site .
 The use of ground-penetrating radar and limited test excavations during the 2007 field season revealed the presence of this agricultural field . The field is located in an agricultural field in southern California .
 Excavations at the site in 2009 revealed the extent of intensive cassava cultivation in the New World, as evidenced in 18 3 x 3-m excavation blocks .
 The cassava plants had long ago decomposed, their presence was revealed in the ash as hollow spaces that, as in Pompeii, were filled with dental plaster to determine shape and size of the object .
 Cassava, a starchy root crop, is rarely preserved archaeologically . Unlike the more common Mesoamerican triad of maize, beans, and squash, the seeds of which have durable structures that can survive charring . Cassava is a starchy root crop that is
 In tropical and temperate regions, macroscopic plants can remain in preserved form only if they have carbonized in fires . Cassava is composed mostly of sugars, which melt away when burned .
 Manioc often was overlooked in the reconstruction of ancient Mesoamerican foodways . As a result, manioc has been overlooked in many of the foodways of the ancient times .
 Analysis of chili pepper DNA by botanists Seung-Chul Kim, Araceli Aguilar-Melendez, and Mikeal Roose revised previous interpretations .
 Chilies, formerly believed to have been domesticated first in central Mexico, were domesticated independently and from several different wild ancestors in Mesoamerica .
 The top story in 2009 in architecture was the disastrous impact of the global economic recession . The world's top architecture story was the collapse of the Great Depression .
 Building projects around the world were suddenly stopped for lack of funding . Building projects across the world stopped for a lack of funds .
 Some of them left holes in the ground where foundations had been planned . Some of the holes were left in places where foundations were planned . The holes were also left in some of the planned foundations .
 In Germany and other countries, firms are cutting back to a four-day week for lack of work . In Germany, firms were cutting back on a four day week .
 There was concern that many talented younger architects, after being laid off, might not ever return to architecture . There was also concern that young architects might not return to work .
 Most economic predictions foresaw only a slow recovery for the building market in 2010 and 2011 . Most of those predictions were based on the fact that the market was expected to grow slowly in the coming years .
 Some journalists predicted that the era of so-called iconic architecture had come to an end . The era of iconic architecture was said to have begun in the 1990s with the construction of the Guggenheim Museum in Spain .
 Global warming is having an impact on architecture . Global warming has encouraged architects to design “green’s” buildings .
 Despite the shrinking economy, many notable buildings did reach completion in 2009 . Many notable buildings were completed during the recession .
 The Acropolis Museum in Athens was designed by Swiss-born Franco-American architect Bernard Tschumi . The new museum was built by the architect of the Acropolis in Greece .
 The building's exterior was sheathed in a gleaming mesh of stainless steel . The interior featured a vast freely shaped stairway that quickly also became a student social centre .
 Renzo Piano added a large new Modern Wing to the 1893 building of the Art Institute of Chicago . The Modern Wing was designed by the world's leading designer of art museums .
 Piano called a ""flying carpet," a translucent roof of glass that projected from the building's walls like a visor of a hat . The glass-faced exterior was topped by what he called a 'flying carpet' Piano called the building a "flying carpet"
 Several major buildings were completed in 2008 continued to garner much critical attention during 2009 .
 The first 77 stories were office space, and the hotel and observatory occupied the upper floors . The first three floors of the building were office spaces .
 Gehry transformed the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto by wrapping a new glass and steel addition around an older art museum dating from 1918 . Gehry wrapped the addition around the older Art Gallery in Toronto around an old art museum in 1918 .
 In Spain in the Museum of the Roman Theatre of Cartagena, Rafael Moneo wove his own work into the old city . In Spain, the museum is located in the Museums of the Theatre of the Old City .
 He created a path along which his new buildings merged harmoniously with historical ones . The public path that climbed upward through the hilltop city climbed upward .
 Stem, known for architecture in traditional styles, designed the Comcast Center . Stem designed a 58-story Modernist office tower . The Comcast Center is located in New York City .
 One entire side of the lobby was a media wall, with very realistic ever-changing video imagery . One of the most realistic media walls in the world was a wall of media images .
 Some thought the media wall might be an omen of the architecture of the future, in which whole facades might someday consist of digital signage, rather than solid stone, brick, concrete, or glass .
 The glass-covered public lobby of Philadelphia’s Comcast Center features life-size sculptures of people strolling on steel tubes . Comcast Center's Comcast Center is the world's largest entertainment center .
 The coveted Pritzker Prize was awarded in 2009 to Swiss architect Peter Zumthor .
 This abandoned freight-rail line sliced through the air across 22 blocks in Manhattan . It had been scheduled for demolition and was scheduled to be demolished .
 After pressure from a volunteer citizens’ group, the city converted much of the park into a linear park . The city converted the park to a park after pressure from the group .
 The park was immensely popular and spurred development; a number of new buildings quickly appeared near it . The park also spurred development .
 The park’s designers, who were careful to preserve some of its gritty industrial aesthetic, were landscape architect James Corner and architects Diller Scofidio + Renfro .
 The Promenade Plantee in Paris, another park along a former elevated rail line, was one of the inspirations for the High Line . The High Line is a park along an elevated rail track .
 Blamed for endless bickering and disagreement among the owners and others .
 The AT&T Performing Arts Center was dedicated in October and began performances in the same month . By way of contrast, the city of Dallas was well on the way to completion of the city's new arts center .
 Also well known was his complex of indoor and outdoor thermal baths in the mountains of Switzerland .
 The visitor moved from dark, cavelike interiors out to sun-drenched terraces . The visitor was moved out of the dark interiors to a sun-filled terrace .
 Zumthor also designed the Swiss Pavilion for Expo 2000 and the Kolumba art museum, both in Germany . He also designed Swiss pavilions for the 2000 Expo and 2000 Expo Expo 2000 .
 Pei, who turned 92 in 2009, is best known for his renovations to the Louvre Museum in Paris . Pei turned 92 years ago .
 Among other notable Pei buildings were the East Building of the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. and the Fragrant Hill Hotel in Beijing . The John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston was built by the Chinese artist .
 The Gold Medal of the American Institute of Architects was presented to Peter Bohlin . Bohlin received the award for his work at the University of Cambridge, Cambridge, in 2007 .
 Bohlin Cywinski Jackson was known for his beautiful rural houses . Bohlin was the founder of Bohlin's American firm, Bohlin .
 Hong Kong-Zhuhai Crossing Hong Kong to China link 50 km . Branson Regional south of Branson, Mo., near Arkansas state line 5,400 2009 Opened May 8; first privately funded commercial airport in United States . Zambezi bridge at Caia Caia
 The AIA's annual 25-Year Award went to the Faneuil Hall Marketplace in Boston, a renovation of a group of wholesale market buildings dating from 1826 . The award was given to the work of architecture that had proved its merit over at least a quarter of a century
 American architect Benjamin Thompson restored the markets in 1976, converting them into what he called a ""festival marketplace” of indoor and outdoor streets of shops and restaurants .
 The latter was a tall boat-shaped worship space filled with warm-toned light from above . The latter is a tall, tall boat shaped worship space .
 The hottest preservation issue of the year arose over a proposal by British Pritzker Prize winner Lord Rogers for a site in London . Lord Rogers has proposed a site for a London site in the future .
 Called the Chelsea Barracks, the project would have been built next to a historical 1692 landmark, the Chelsea Royal Hospital by legendary British architect Sir Christopher Wren . The project would be called the Chelsea barracks .
 Prince Charles was opposed by Britain’s Prince Charles, a frequent critic of modem architecture, who demanded a more traditional design .
 The prince won the battle in June when the project’s developers, investors from Qatar, dropped the Rogers scheme . The Rogers scheme was the brainchild of the prince .
 The Darwin D Martin House in Buffalo, N.Y., a 1904 masterpiece by American architect Frank Lloyd Wright, has been restored . The Darwin Martin House was a masterpiece by the architect of the same time as Wright's .
 The restoration of the exterior was completed in 2008, and in 2009 the house acquired a new visitors’ centre next door .
 It was designed by architect Toshiko Mori in a crisp glass style that acted as a foil to the heavier brick of the house .
 American architect Steven Holl won the coveted job of designing an addition to the Glasgow School of Art, a 1909 work by Scottish architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh . Holl designed the addition to Mackintosh's work, which was completed in 1909 .
 The exhibit was timed to mark its 50th anniversary . The Guggenheim itself was a Wright building, and the exhibit is timed to celebrate its anniversary .
 The German Bauhaus school was one of the major sources of the modern movement in art and architecture . The exhibit includes works by the Bausausausa school of modern architecture .
 Julius Shulman is a 20th-century architectural photographer best known for his images of modern houses in California .
 An exhibit at Los Angeles’s Central Library featured artwork by 20th-century architect Richard Neutra . Neutra's work was featured in the exhibit .
 At the Barbican Art Gallery in London was a massive exhibit of the work of the Swiss Modernist Le Corbusier . The exhibit was one of the three or four leading architects of the 20th century .
 A Life, by Nicholas Fox Weber, and of an enormous compilation of his work and life entitled Le Corbusier Le Grand. A Life . A Life is published in Paris, France, and London, England .
 These notable books and exhibitions seem to mark a resurgence of a taste for Modernism in contemporary culture . Taken as a group, these notable books seem to indicate a resurgence in Modernism .
 Sverre Fehn, 84, regarded as the leading Norwegian architect and a winner of the 1997 Pritzker Prize, died in February . Fehn was regarded as one of the world's leading architects and a leading architect .
 Also in February came the death of J Max Bond, Jr., 73, a noted American architect, educator, and advocate for African Americans in the architectural profession .
 Arthur Erickson, the most influential Canadian architect, died at age 84 in May . Erickson was the architect of Canada's most influential architect . He died at the age of 84 .
 Joan Goody, 73, a pioneer and leader among American women architects, died in Boston in September . Goody was a leader among women architects in Boston .
 China Central Television headquarters, a major building by OMA, burned while under construction in Beijing . OMA's OMA building burned while building was under construction .
 Fire believed to have been started by fireworks in celebration of the Lunar New Year . The 33-story tower was completely gutted by fire .
 Washington, D.C., was the site of competitions for two major civic landmarks . Washington was the birthplace of the World War II .
 Gehry won the competition for the design of a memorial to U.S. Pres. George W. Bush . Gehry designed the memorial to the former president of the United States. Gehry has won the design contest for the memorial .
 David Adjaye led a team whose design won the competition for the National Museum of African American History and Culture . The architect was born in Tanzania and led the design team .
 It was to be built on an edge of the Mall not far from the Washington Monument . It was planned for the edge of Washington's Mall .
 The economic downturn of autumn 2008 cast a pall on every sector of the 2009 art market . Art market was hit hard by the 2008 recession .
 Auction houses faced straitened circumstances with new strategies as well as shaken confidence and diminished expectations . Auction houses face new strategies and new expectations as they face new challenges .
 Lowered estimates and restricted reserves seen in all the major sales rooms . But bidders were equally cautious .
 At Phillips de Pury & Co., London, 12 out of the 43 contemporary lots remained unsold . 12 of the . 43 contemporary . lots remain unsold.
 Price records for individual artists were set by Claes Oldenburg's Typewriter Eraser at more than $2. million . David Hockney’s iconic painting Beverly Hills Housewife at nearly $8 million . It was a pale showing compared with those shattered in the previous
 Christie's sold Rembrandt’s Portrait of a Man, Half-Length, with His Arms Akimbo for a record price of $33 million in December .
 Chinese contemporary art brought strong returns at Sotheby’s spring sale in Hong Kong . Zhang Xiaogang's austere black-and-white oil paintings of ordinary citizens were inspired by Cultural Revolution-era found photographs .
 The double portrait Comrade surpassed its estimate by nearly a third . Its closing price of about $1 million, including commission, was about $ 1 million . It illustrated the disparity between Eastern and Western contemporary art .
 Laurent and Pierre Berge’s collection of art and antiques will be sold at auction at Christie's in Paris at the end of February . The Berge Collection will be auctioned off at auction in February .
 The best returns were seen for Modem paintings; records were set for works by Constantin Brancusi, Piet Mondrian, and Marcel Duchamp .
 A scandal followed the sale when an anonymous bidder secured two 18th-century bronze animal heads from China . Anonymous bidder refused to pay for the heads .
 Cai Mingchao, a consultant for China’s National Treasures Fund, revealed that he bid only to bring attention to the works’ suspect provenance .
 The bronzes had been looted by British and French troops during the Second Opium War . Originally part of a fountain with a zodiac motif at the Old Summer Palace in Beijing, the bronzes were looted during the war .
 Some clients turned to galleries for private sales, accepting lower returns to avoid the public embarrassment of selling off their collections . Some clients turn to galleries to avoid public embarrassment .
 Few buyers were willing to make daring purchases, preferring the established work of Modernists such as Alexander Calder over that of reigning art superstars such as Damien Hirst and Takashi Murakami .
 Enrico David was short-listed for the Turner Prize for the surrealist work Absuction Cardigan . The Italian-born artist is famous for his work at the Tate Britain in London .
 Major museums in the United States cut staff numbers and salaries, instituted hiring freezes, and imposed staff furloughs without pay . Major museums across the U.S. have cut their staff numbers, salaries and hiring freezes .
 Curators encouraged curators to create in-house exhibitions based on permanent collections . Curators wanted to avoid the insurance and transportation expenses incurred by traveling exhibitions .
 The success of the new Modern Wing at the Art Institute of Chicago offered a bright spot in a dire year .
 After a decade in planning and construction, the addition opened in May to record crowds . It boosted attendance rates by 80% during a weeklong celebration and averaged out to 20% rise over the previous year .
 Renzo Piano's Modern Wing features permanent collection galleries for Modem and contemporary art, as well as designated space for architecture, design, and photography exhibitions, a large education facility, and outdoor spaces for changing displays of contemporary sculpture .
 With an addition of 24,526 sq m —a 35% increase of total display space— the Art Institute became the second largest art museum in the country .
 Antony Gormley’s One and Other was staged on the empty Fourth Plinth in London's Trafalgar Square from July 6 to October 14 . The show attracted worldwide attention through streaming coverage on the Internet .
 Out of a pool of 35,000 applicants from every region in the UK, 2,400 “plinthers"" were chosen by a random computer selection to occupy the plinth for the space of an hour .
 Rachel Wardell of the East Midlands described herself as a 'stay at home mum' Gormley sought to present the ""sample of now" that he sought in his project . Wardell used her time to promote children's charities .
 One plinther launched a paper airplane; another sat naked naked on a beach towel and read Treasure Island . Another displayed a paper cutout of a British woman on death row in a Texas prison to protest capital punishment .
 Bmce Nauman launched the skywriting project that he conceived in 1969 called Untitled (LEAVE THE LAND ALONE) over Pasadena, Calif., on September 12, in conjunction with the 20th anniversary celebration of the city's Armory Center for the Arts .
 The letters spelling out his ecological dictum dispersed within the hour’s performance . The show also lived on as a YouTube video, with the letters .
 Pruitt presided over an invitation-only dinner at which he presented awards to art world luminaries in the form of light bulbs . The light bulbs were inserted into champagne bottles .
 Enrico David, a self-described surrealist who used a hardedged style and disturbing commedia dell’arte characters, and Richard Wright, used hardedged styles . Richard Wright's intricate patterns on existing architecture were often painted over at the close of an exhibition .
 Roger Hiorns transformed derelict rooms in South London into glittering blue crystal caves with liquid copper sulfate . Lucy Skaer, whose drawings and sculptural installations hovered between abstraction and figuration, also listed .
 Visual artists named as John D and Catherine T MacArthur Foundation fellows included mixed-media installation artist Mark Bradford, landscape painter Rackstraw Downes, and digital artist Camille Utterback .
 Notable deaths in the art world included painters Andrew Wyeth and Nancy Spero; sculptor Ruth Duckworth, sculptor Jeanne-Claude; and artist Coosje van Bruggen .
 Other losses include painters Tyeb Mehta, Ray Yoshida, and Robert Colescott . Mixed-media artist Dash Snow; sculptors Tony Rosenthal and Ingeborg Hunzinger .
 Spring art season opened in March 2009 on a positive note that countered dire predictions . Most observers attributed the optimism to the recent spectacular sale of the Yves Saint Laurent private art collection in Paris .
 Sales were steady at the fairs, but, in fact, the market had not taken an upswing . Many dealers were selling works from established collections to raise cash for clients .
 Sales were slow but better than expected, and a new feature called ""Special Projects" presented large-scale site-specific works in public venues .
 The 10th Havana Biennial was held at the Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes . The first comprehensive representation of American contemporary art in Cuba in more than 50 years .
 Third Art Dubai fair enjoyed good attendance, but business was slower than at previous year’s edition . With 68 dealers, the fair was held at the Madinat Jumeirah resort in Dubai .
 Art Vilnius '09 opened in early July in Lithuanian capital as the first international art fair to be held in the Baltic states . The fair is the first of its kind in the region and is currently being held in Lithuania .
 Critics noted energy was high and that European attendees outnumbered Americans . Critics noted that energy costs were high . Critics said that energy was too high .
 Artist duo Michael Elmgreen and Ingar Dragset curated two pavilions in a single installation called The Collectors . The collectors are a deadpan critique of owning art in the current market .
 Califomiastyle Nordic Pavilion hosted the home of a fictional playboy collector . Works of Wolfgang Tillmans and Tom of Finland on the walls and scantily clad house boys wandering through the rooms .
 The adjacent Danish Pavilion was ""for sale” with a real-estate agent on hand to point out the amenities . The adjacent Australian pavilions were "for sale"
 In a pool in front of the pavilions, a figure—one of the ""collectors”—floated face-down, dead in the water . The figure was one of the "collectors"
 Elmgreen and Dragset won the Curating Worlds Special Mention for their installation . The Curating World Curator's Art of the Year Awards was awarded for their work .
 British artist Liam Gillick filled the German Pavilion with simple pine kitchen furnishings in the installation Kitchen . Kitchen was inspired by the 1926 modernist designs of Viennese architect Margarete Schiitte-Lihotzky .
 The spare cabinetry lacked fixtures and appliances, subverting the intended efficiency of the original design . Spare cabinetry was designed to be efficient and efficient .
 The Golden Lion for best national participation went to the United States Pavilion for Bruce Nauman’s Topological Gardens . It was the first such award granted to an American exhibition since 1991 .
 The exhibition, organized by the Philadelphia Museum of Art, filled three venues . Two local universities supplied the additional space to the United States Pavilion in the Biennale's Giardini .
 Nauman defined his concepts as ""Heads and Hands,"" “Sound and Space,"" and “Fountains and Neon,"” with all three themes blended in each venue . Nauman: “Head and Hands’s and hands’"
 The Silver Lion, citing the promise of a young artist, honoured Swedish artist Nathalie Djuberg . The Experiment was a multimedia installation of nature gone awry .
 John Baldessari and Yoko Ono received Golden Lions for lifetime achievement . Yoko ono received lifetime achievement award for her work in art .
 The exhibition revealed the full assimilation of digital media and the displacement of irony with sentiment . Intended to track shifting trends as the largest generation since the baby boomers came of age, the exhibition .
 Turkish artist Emre Huner combined painting and animation with animation . Texan Ryan Trecartin's use of paint as cosmetics in performance .
 Cyprien Gaillard’s threepart filmed performance, shot in Ukraine, Russia, and France, features a disjunctive narrative of staged and real violence and destruction, with sound track of anthems composed for the production .
 Tobias Rehberger was awarded the Golden Lion for best artist at the 53rd Venice Biennale . His installation Cafeteria is the work of German artist Tobias Rehrberger .
 Protect Protect —spanned 15 years and included new redaction paintings based on content from declassified U.S. government documents associated with the Afghanistan and Iraq wars .
 Meet Me at the Center of the Earth at the Yerba Buena Center for the Arts, San Francisco . Nick Cave's Soundsuits provided a pansensory experience in the new exhibition .
 Polish artist Miroslaw Balka’s How It Is, a massive steel chamber lined with felt, plunged visitors into silence and darkness . In contrast, the Tate Modern's Turbine Hall, a steel chamber was filled with felt and filled with silence .
 Londonbased Yinka Shonibare used colourful Dutch-wax fabrics to craft the elaborate costumes worn by the headless mannequins that populate tableaux interrogating African identity and colonial power in the exhibition .
 Rivals in Renaissance Venice was co-organized by the Boston Museum of Fine Arts and the Louvre Museum, Paris . It exposed how the three artists pushed one another toward innovation .
 A Dutch Master Rediscovered, curated by Arthur K Wheelock, Jr., at the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., shed new light on the painter whose own fame had been obscured by Rembrandt's gigantic shadow .
 Influence, Anxiety, and Myth, curated by Jay A Clarke, was seen only at the Art Institute of Chicago . Munch’s ambitious career strategies and his keen awareness of prevalent trends in the art world across Europe .
 It provided new insights and a broader international context for the Norwegian painters emotionally charged work .
 Budget cutbacks discouraged plans for large loan exhibitions, prompting curators to rethink their permanent collections .
 Temkin explained that the wooden frames, added to the works for exhibition purposes, diminish viewers’ perception of the original radical impact of the works . Temkin said that the frames, which were added for the exhibition, diminish the original impact of works .
 In 2009 the inauguration of Barack Obama as the 44th president of the United States (and the first African American to hold this office) rekindled interest in American photography .
 Los Angeles is a vast exhibition documenting the history and popular culture of the City of Los Angeles . The exhibit is called “L.A. Los Angeles”
 More than 50 photographs of Obama embraced by Ethel Kennedy, widow of Sen. Kennedy, are displayed at the White House . White House photographer Pete Souza took many of the photos .
 Over the years Wegman had gained a worldwide following for using his Weimaraner dogs as models . Weimarans have been used as models for over 30 years .
 His latest offering featured new colour prints taken on the Maine coast in the previous 10 years . The colour prints were taken in colour on the coast of Maine .
 Other Americans given solo exhibitions in Europe included Bill Owens, Helen Levitt, William Eggleston, Ralph Gibson, and Ralph Gibson .
 Miroslaw Balka’s installation How It Is, a massive steel structure encasing a cavernous area in which visitors were invited to walk, was displayed in Turbine Hall at the Tate Modem .
 Sarfati's 26 colour prints in the exhibition were originally published in Magnum Photo's Fashion Magazine in 2008 . The exhibition is being held in New York until April 28 .
 Les Rencontres Photographie festival at Arles, France, celebrated its 40th anniversary (July 7-September 13) by hosting dozens of exhibitions, workshops, tours, and seminars within the backdrop of ancient Roman architecture .
 The international lineup included exhibitions featuring Nan Goldin, Duane Michals, Martin Parr, and Brian Griffin . There was a special retrospective by Willy Ronis, who died at age 99, one day before the festival .
 Irving Penn turned 92 on June 16 . The great fashion and still life photographer turned 92 this year .
 A total of 41 young, mostly European, photographers were invited to submit photographs inspired by the work of the master .
 The 2009 event had a special focus on Arab and Iranian photography, with work from Arab Image Foundation .
 The artist’s work, already known in Europe, confronted from a female perspective the conflict between tradition and modernity .
 One of her series of works, Like Every Day, featured portraits of veiled women, their faces hidden by domestic items . Another, Wldte Square, consisted of pictures of individual objects for military use .
 Nick Brandt published the second volume of his planned trilogy of books and exhibitions depicting the wildlife of East Africa in sumptuous black and white .
 Atlas Gallery, London, featured 58 recent images from famous game reserves, including Amboseli, Nakuru, Maasai Mara, and Serengeti .
 Zurich-born Michel Comte was one of the most sought-after artists of this genre of photography in 2009 . The year would not be complete without a dose of celebrity photography .
 Comte’s work was also exhibited at Guy Hepner Contemporary, Los Angeles, in the show ‘Women’ , where vivid colour portraits of Carla Bruni were also exhibited .
 Christensen was the subject of artful black-and-white studies of a nude Christensen . Nicolas Sarkozy and Pamela Anderson were also featured .
 The American auto industry experienced the BANKRUPTCIES of GM and Chrysler, as well as an increased interest in ELECTRIC CARS and gas-electric hybrids . The U.S. auto industry is experiencing an increase in interest in electric cars .
 In other sectors companies SLASHED inventories, costs, and personnel in the hopes of KEEPING AFLOAT until the economy revived .
 The CEOs of the Big Three automakers appeared before Congress in November 2008 to ask for $25 billion . The CEOs hoped that the cash infusion would help them weather the developing economic downturn . But in the first few months of 2009, car sales collapsed .
 In January automakers sold 656,976 cars and light trucks in the U.S., the lowest total since December 1981 . For the first time in history, auto sales in the United States were lower than in China, where 790,000 cars were sold .
 Obama announced $2.2 billion of his economic stimulus package had been awarded to some 48 automakers or parts manufacturers . The effort is an effort to increase production of electric vehicles . Obama: $2 billion will be spent on electric vehicles and parts production .
 Obama administration imposed strict measures on GM in exchange for continued federal aid . The measures included the resignation of GM CEO Rick Wagoner and a comprehensive restructuring plan .
 GM entered Chapter 11 protection on June 1; it emerged about a month later with a new board and the United States government holding a roughly 60% stake in the company . The U.S. government holds roughly 60 per cent of GM's stake .
 The reorganized GM announced plans to shed more than $79 billion in debt, reduce dealer network by 40%, shutter 14 factories, and cut at least 21,000 jobs . GM also said it will reduce dealer networks by 40% and reduce 14 factories .
 GM pulled out of a deal to sell a majority stake in its European operations Opel and Vauxhall in November . In November GM pulled back on a plan to sell the majority stake of Opel in Europe . GM has been criticized for pulling out of the deal .
 The auto task force nearly voted to let Chrysler collapse by not providing additional financing . The task force voted to not provide additional financing for the company . Chrysler is the largest U.S. auto manufacturer in the world .
 Chrysler entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on April 30 . President Obama reportedly decided that the loss of as many as 300,000 jobs would be too much for the already-ailing U.S economy .
 Fiat would hold a 20% stake in the new Chrysler Group LLC, with an option to increase its stake to 35% . After taxpayers were fully repaid, Fiat would have a majority of 51% stake . Fiat would then have a stake of 35% and 51% if taxpayers repaid .
 A Ford dealership in Culpeper, Va, creatively advertises the cash-for-clunkers program . The U.S. government offered money to consumers who traded in their older cars for new, fuel-efficient models . Fiat CEO Sergio Marchionne took over as the
 Chrysler's U.S. sales were down 42% year-on-year in September . Chrysler's former 11.1% market share had been reduced to 8.4% by year's end .
 Fiat posted 62% drop in quarterly trading profit in the third quarter of 2009 . Officials spoke of possible write-downs due to its partnership with Chrysler . Fiat posted a 62% fall in quarterly profit .
 Ford Motor Co. avoided bankruptcy and government bailouts . Only a few years earlier, GM had been considered to be in weaker shape than Ford . GM avoided bankruptcy, but Ford avoided a government bailout .
 Ford increased its overall market share, mainly at its Big Three rivals’ expense, in Europe . By September Ford’s market share in Europe exceeded 10.1%—the company's best performance since September 2001 . Ford's market share increased by more than a quarter to 10
 Ford added 10,000 vehicles to its third-quarter production schedule . The government gave consumers up to $4,500 toward trade-ins of older cars for new, fuel-efficient models . Ford says it will continue to expand production in the fall .
 Ford had boosted its U.S. market share to 16.1% for the year . By year's end new vehicle sales had improved slightly, and Ford boosted its United States market share . Ford's market share in the United States was 16.2% .
 Ford surprised analysts with a profit of $834 million in the first half of the year and a $1.1 billion profit for the first nine months . Ford had been targeting a return to profitability by 2011 .
 Toyota Motor Corp. was the world's largest automaker in late 2008 . The global recession wreaked havoc on Toyota’s sales as well .
 The company in May 2009 posted its first annual loss in 59 years . The company said that it was also likely to post a loss in its fiscal year ending March 31, 2010 .
 Other Asian automakers, while struggling for sales in the collapsed North America market, found some balance in the burgeoning Indian, Chinese, and Pacific Rim markets .
 Honda expected to post first-half 2009 operating profit driven mainly by sales in China and Japan . Governments had introduced tax cuts and subsidies to increase domestic sales in Japan .
 Hyundai Motor Co. and Kia Motors Corp. reported that profits rose to record highs during the third quarter . South Korean automakers also prospered during the same period . Both Hyundai Motor Company Co.
 Many European carmakers faced the same formula—declines in Europe and North America countered by gains in Asia . Declines in North America and Europe and Asia offset each other's gains .
 Sweden’s AB Volvo announced a third-quarter net loss of $423 million . The company reported that demand was stabilizing, particularly in Asia . Heavy-duty-truck sales were expected to fall 40% in the United States from 2008 levels .
 Volkswagen AG's third-quarter earnings were driven by strong sales in China and improved demand in Germany . The company was boosted by an equivalent to the U.S. cash-for-clunkers program .
 Porsche had spent a year battling to purchase a majority stake in Volkswagen . Porsche had a 35% share in Volkswagen in 2008 . It could not raise enough funds, owing to the decline in car sales and tightening of the credit markets .
 In October China announced its annual production had exceeded 10 million cars for the first time in history . China is expected to top 12 million cars by year's end .
 Chinese domestic car sales were up 48% year-on-year in the summer . Many analysts said that China was on pace to become the world’s largest car market .
 Ford especially made a push in late 2009 to boost its presence in India by introducing the Figo, a low-cost car to be built in India and sold to other Asian-Pacific markets . Ford also introduced a low cost car in India in 2009 .
 The American airline industry appeared to stabilize in the second half of 2009 . While much of the automobile sector was in tatters, the airline industry seemed to stabilize .
 International Air Transport Association predicted that its members would lose $9 billion in 2009 . The five largest U.S. airlines all posted losses in the second quarter . None of the airlines went under or required federal bailouts .
 The airline industry has seen a decline in jet fuel costs for much of the year . Jet fuel costs have been a boon for the airline industry .
 Southwest Airlines Co. and United Airlines’ parent UAL Corp. report narrower losses in the third quarter than in late 2008 . Southwest Airlines reported narrower losses than in previous quarter . Southwest and UAL reported narrow losses in third quarter .
 Southwest lost $16 million in third-quarter 2009, compared with $120 million in 2008 . Southwest increased its ridership by lowering its fares, which reduced passenger revenue yield by 12% .
 Delta Air Lines Inc. and United States Airways Group Inc. also posted losses in the third quarter . Delta and U.S. Airways Group both posted losses .
 AMR Corp. registered a third-quarter loss of $359 million, compared with a profit of $31 million in 2008 . AMR showed a record-high load factor (the percentage of available seats filled) as of September 30 .
 The low-cost, smallervolume JetBlue Airways Corp. returned to profitability in late 2009 . JetBlue is a small-scale carrier that operates in the U.S.
 International airlines also faced declining ridership and the subsequent need to reduce flights, costs, and staff . International airlines faced falling ridership in the past .
 Ryanair has aggressively pursued a strategy of reducing fares while increasing customer charges . Ryanair charges to customers of roughly $64 to check in at the airport rather than using Ryanair's Web site .
 Ryanair was rebuffed in its attempt to purchase Aer Lingus, which it owned a 29% stake . Ryanair owns 29% of the Irish airline's network . The budget airline was forced to abandon its bid to buy Irish rival Aer Lingum .
 Aer Lingus expected to lay off up to 17% of its staff and impose salary cuts and caps on much of the remainder of its workforce . Meanwhile, the airline is expected to impose salary caps and salary cuts .
 Deutsche Lufthansa AG slumped by 19% in the quarter ended June 30 . Its purchase of the ailing Austrian Airlines was approved by the EU in August .
 Japan Airlines Corp. lost more than $1 billion in its fiscal quarter ended June 30 . It also continued in joint-venture talks with both Delta and American .
 India's low-cost Jet Airways, which in 2003 had controlled nearly half of India’s domestic market, saw its market share fall to 25%, and by mid-2009 it was posting losses and cutting staff .
 The two largest global aircraft manufacturers had a difficult year, plagued with what seemed to be endless delays in their next-generation aircraft and a great decline in orders . The two biggest global aircraft makers had a tough year .
 As of Sept., 2009, total orders booked by Airbus and Boeing Co. were only 203, compared with the 1,360 orders that the two had booked in the first nine months of 2008 .
 Company analysts said that Boeings decision to outsource much of the Dreamliner's manufacturing to save costs had contributed to bottlenecks in production .
 Boeing posted a $1. billion loss in third-quarter 2009, compared with a $695 million profit in the same quarter in 2008 . Boeing posts a loss of $1 billion in the third quarter of 2009 compared with $695m profit in 2009 .
 Airbus A400M military transport made long-delayed maiden test flight on December 11 . Despite escalating costs and canceled sales, the plane made its first test flight in December .
 Energy producers endured a year marked by extreme price volatility not seen since the energy crisis of the late 1970s . Energy producers had years of record profits due to high oil and natural gas prices .
 Oil prices fell from $145 a barrel in summer 2008 to $33 in December 2008 . Oil prices then soared again to above $80 in late October 2009, before slipping below $80 at year's end .
 The price spikes occurred even though energy demand was low and inventories high, which suggested that they were driven more by market fears of inflation and the reduced prospect of new oil discoveries . The price spike was driven by fears that inflation was more likely to drive the price of oil .
 ExxonMobil was expected to report a 63% drop in profit to $4.94 billion in the third quarter . Britain's BP PLC posted a 53% decline in profit in second-quarter 2009 alone .
 Royal Dutch Shell PLC’s angry shareholders shot down the company's executive-compensation plan in May . Shell's executive compensation plan was shot down by angry shareholders .
 In August 2009 Brazil’s government announced that its national oil company, Petrobras, would control all future development of the deep-sea oil fields found in 2007 . The discovery is considered one of the biggest new oil discoveries in recent years .
 Venezuela bypassed American and Western European firms for its new development . The country signed a $ 16 billion investment deal with China for oil exploration in the Orinoco River region .
 Cnooc Ltd. and China National Petroleum Corp. proposed a $17 billion acquisition of Repsol YPF’s stake in the Argentine YPF unit . China's biggest oil and gas producer and China's largest state-owned oil firm proposed the deal . Repsol's stake
 China has bought Addax Petroleum by Sinopec, CNPC and KazMunaiGas . This followed the $7.7 billion acquisition in June of Switzerland’s Addax .
 In early December it topped $1,200 per ounce, though it had dropped to about $1.095 by year’s end .
 Commodity Futures Trading Commission: Speculators in mid-October betting on longterm gold price increases outnumbered short-term speculators by 10 to 1 . The ratio is 10-to-1, compared with a 4-1 ratio in late 2008, according to the commission
 Silver was up 44% to $ 17 per troy ounce as of mid-October 2009 . Front-month copper had more than doubled, to $2.5290 a pound, in July from December 2008 .
 Aluminum prices, by contrast, slumped in 2009, with prices down 45% year-on-year as of July 2009 . Aluminum prices fell 45% in 2009 .
 Alcoa Inc. posted a $454 million loss in the second quarter and idled 20% of its production by April 2009 . Most of its major markets, including automobile makers, were showing signs of stabilizing . The company reported a third-quarter profit of $77 million .
 Alcoa finished a $750 million construction project on a products factory in Russia . The company also procured Switzerland-based Noble Corp.’s intellectual property rights on welded-aluminum products .
 Steelmakers across the globe contended with bloated inventories, slackened demand, and some heavy losses . Steelmakers in some cases have struggled to cope with high demand and high losses .
 ArcelorMittal, the world’s largest steelmaker, posted a $792 million loss in the second quarter . The steelmaker said it anticipated that the worst of the economic turmoil was over in the first quarter .
 As in other sectors, demand was recovering faster in India, Russia, China, Brazil, and Eastern Europe than in the United States and Western Europe .
 ArcelorMittal’s mills in India were operating at full capacity by mid-year 2009 . Only three of its nine U.S. blast furnaces were operating as of July 30 .
 Nippon Steel Corp., ArcelorMittal’s biggest rival, also posted net losses in first-half 2009 . Nippo Steel Corp. cited increased raw material costs and flattening demand . ArcelaMittal's biggest rival also posted losses .
 At the start of the year, the world economy faced the worst recession in modern history, with an increasing number of bankruptcies and rising unemployment . The world economy is facing the worst ever recession in history .
 Firms and individuals are having difficulty accessing operating funds and loans, says the IMF . There was a dramatic slowdown in global production and trade, says IMF .
 In September 2009 the IMF estimated worldwide toxic debt, or subprime assets, at $3.4 trillion . The IMF had previously estimated that toxic debt was $4 trillion, down from its April estimate of $3 trillion .
 Many banks were close to collapse and were rescued by their respective governments . Many banks have been bailed out by their governments .
 In the U.S., 99 banks had been closed down by the end of October . The government's $700 billion Troubled Asset Relief Program fund was used to extend loans to many banks .
 In Ireland the Anglo Irish Bank was Ireland's third largest bank and Europe's most successful during the housing-price ""bubble"" years . In January the bank was nationalized .
 In the U.K., Lloyds Banking Group and the Royal Bank of Scotland were partly and almost completely nationalized, respectively . The banks were nationalized in the 1980s and 1990s .
 In continental Europe casualties included ING, Fortis in Belgium, and Flypo Bank in Germany . ING also suffered in Belgium and Germany .
 In Eastern Europe more than $1.1 trillion had been borrowed, and many banks were in trouble . In 2009 some $400 billion had to be renewed or repaid, mainly to Western banks that were unable to roll over the debt .
 Throughout 2008 central banks around the world had cut interest rates to increase liquidity . Central banks in the world have cut rates to boost liquidity .
 U.K. and U.S. adopted quantitative easing in 2009 to increase lending . Quantitative easing is a form of economic stimulus in the United States and Britain .
 For the first time in 39 years, the 25 leading banks, which accounted for nearly 40% of bank capital and 45% of total assets, suffered losses . The top 5 banks alone lost a combined $95. billion in losses .
 Western banks endured hefty losses, led by the United States with $91 billion . Three American banks—JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, and Citigroup—raised enough funds to head The Banker's list .
 The 27-member European Union sustained a total loss of $16. billion, while the U.K.'s banks lost $51. billion . The U.S. banks also suffered a total of $51 billion .
 10 U.S. banks in June repaid $68 billion to the TARP fund . Bank profits after the first quarter were much better than expected .
 There was growing concern and public anger that the deeply embedded bonus culture persisted in the U.S. and U.K. Bank employees were poised to receive huge bonuses .
 The $9 trillion cost of the bank rescues had fallen on the taxpayers . This was in spite of the fact that the bank rescue costs had been passed on to taxpayers .
 Central banks formulating measures to prevent another banking crisis . Central banks and regulatory bodies formulating new measures to avoid another crisis .
 Capitalization requirements were increased, and there was to be greater transparency .
 In October the U.S. Treasury announced a draft bill that would enable a financial institution to be ordered by the Federal Reserve to sell a risky part of the business or have it seized . The draft bill would allow a bank to sell risky parts of its business .
 In Europe the EU was imposing penalties on all European banks that had been bailed out in the financial crisis, and even more stringent measures were likely . In Europe, the EU is imposing penalties .
 There was ongoing debate on the wisdom and feasibility of dividing banks into a two-tier system of commercial and investment banks . The more risky investment bank activities, such as hedge funds and derivatives, never again had so serious an impact on the retail banking sector .
 BHP Billiton settled iron-ore price negotiations with more than half of its steel industry customers . Many customers agreed to rates 33% below 2008 prices, and others agreed on quarterly price negotiations .
 The more flexible contracts would enable BHP and other miners to respond quickly to spikes in demand . It would also allow steelmakers to cut costs during low-demand periods .
 BHP failed to break through with Chinese steelmaker clients, who were seeking a 50% discount . BHP has failed to find a way to sell the company to Chinese steelmakers .
 China Minmetals Non-Ferrous Metals Co. bought many of Oz Minerals Ltd.’s assets . Sinosteel Corp. purchased iron-ore miner Midwest Corp. in a hostile bid . China also bought many Australian mining companies .
 Aluminum Corp. of China's proposed purchase of an 18% stake in Rio Tinto fell apart in June . The Anglo-Australian company walked away from the $19. billion proposal .
 Rio Tinto, still burdened by debt from its 2007 purchase of Alcan, suffered a 65% decline in first-half profit . Rio Tinta's first half profit fell 65% in the first half of the year .
 In April the American steel industry filed an antidumping suit against China . The suit alleges that Chinese steelmak219 had unfairly dumped tubular and pipe steel imports into the domestic market .
 Steelmakers, including U.S. Steel Corp., Nucor Corp., and AK Steel Holding Corp., call on Obama administration to push for tougher enforcement of trade laws . The Obama administration is considering imposing more tariffs on primarily Chinese imports .
 China's steel industry was fragmented into hundreds of small companies . At the same time, the Chinese government attempted to consolidate its steel industry . It accounted for about 38% of global production but was fragmented .
 When China attempted to privatize Linzhou Iron and Steel Co., 3,000 steelworkers protested . The government eventually scrapped its plan after the protests .
 Dow Chemical Co. was forced to complete its purchase of rival Rohm & Haas Co. for $16. billion . For which it borrowed $9. billion in short-term loans, the company nearly saw its credit status downgraded to ""junk" because of the increased debt
 Rohm sued Dow to close the deal with Rohm . Dow had tried to cancel or at least delay the deal, but Rohm won't let it go . Dow sued Rohm after Rohm tried to delay or cancel the deal . Rohm had sued Dow after Dow tried to
 Dow undertook layoffs, sold off Rohm & Haas's Morton Salt unit to Germany’s K&S AG for $1.1 billion . Dow also sold its interest in a Malaysian chemical joint venture for $660 million .
 Drug manufacturers also offered a string of megamergers during the year . Drug companies also offered big deals during that year .
 Pfizer Inc. in January paid $68 billion to acquire its rival Wyeth, the largest pharmaceutical merger since Glaxo Wellcome PLC bought SmithKline Beecham PLC in 2000 . Pfizer's acquisition of Wyeth is the biggest pharmaceutical merger in history .
 Merck & Co. announced that it would buy Schering-Plough Corp. for $41. billion . Six weeks after Pfizer announced the Pfizer deal, Merck announced it would purchase Schering Plough . Merck has also announced it will buy the company for $
 Merck, with Schering’s patents and new-drug pipeline, could soften the blow from the loss of its patent for the bone drug Fosamax . The drug had recently become available as a generic .
 Merck’s patent for the asthma drug Singulair was set to expire in 2012 . In August Merck won a patent-infringement suit against Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. Teva was prohibited from marketing a generic version of the drug .
 Abbott Laboratories in September acquired the pharmaceutical unit of Belgium’s Solvay SA for $7 billion . The industry considered a growth area of flu vaccines, which is considered a major growth area .
 Pfizer agreed to pay $2.2 billion to settle allegations that it had illegally marketed its withdrawn painkiller drug Bextra and three other drugs . The largest health care fraud settlement and the largest criminal fine in corporate history was reached in September . Pfizer has been accused of illegally
 A federal case involving Merck involving Fosamax ended in a mistrial in September because of a deadlocked jury . The case against Merck was a federal case against a federal drug manufacturer .
 In June 2009 President Obama signed the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act . The act gave the FDA regulatory authority over the manufacturing and marketing of cigarettes and other tobacco products .
 The FDA’s first major action in September was to ban flavoured cigarettes, including candy and clove varieties . The FDA also announced a ban on flavoured cigarette flavours .
 Reynolds Tobacco Co. and Lorillard Inc., had filed a federal lawsuit in August to protest the FDA's new power to impose marketing restrictions . The tobacco companies claimed that it violated the companies’ First Amendment rights . A federal judge denied a motion for a preliminary injunction sought by the tobacco
 In 2009 the global economy showed signs that it was emerging from the ‘Great Recession,’ which officially began in December 2007 . The global economy began to grow in 2009 .
 Although unemployment remained high, even the tarnished banking and finance systems showed improvement . Unemployment remained high in the United States, however .
 After hitting their lows in the first quarter of 2009, world stock markets rose steadily . Many bourses recorded their highest levels at year's end at year’s end .
 Dow Jones Industrial Average closed at 10,428.05, up 18.8% for the year and 59.3% from the March low . Dow Jones is still 26.4% below its all-time high set on Oct. 7, 2007 . Dow is now 18.
 Apple CEO STEVE JOBS returned to the company after surgery . Microsoft introduced WINDOWS 7 to replace the much-criticized Vista Vista .
 2009 was a difficult year for technology workers and companies . The global economic recession made 2009 a tough year for tech workers . The recession hit technology workers in 2009 .
 In the first quarter alone, American high-tech firms laid off more than 84,200 workers, according to jobtracking firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas . Challenger: High-tech companies laid off 84,000 workers in first quarter of 2014 .
 Toshiba announced plans to lay off 3,900 contract workers over the next year . Computer-chip manufacturer Toshiba also plans to cut 4,500 temporary workers it had already cut .
 As the year ended, computer companies hoped that they were seeing the signs of an economic upturn . Microsoft's new Windows 7 operating system was envisioned to generate a new round of computer-upgrade purchases .
 Optimism was based on better-than-expected quarterly earnings reports from several companies . Google, IBM, and Intel were among the companies to report better results .
 It's too early to tell whether an uptick in technology purchasing in the U.S. would spread to the corporate market . Consumer electronics is driven largely by consumer electronics, the report says .
 Electronic gadgets of all sorts continue to become part of the everyday lives of ordinary citizens . Electronic gadgets continue to be part of everyday lives .
 In the U.S., 44% of households owned a laptop personal computer . The average family owned two PCs . In the United States, 44% owned laptops .
 High-definition television and home computer networks are among the gadgets most rapidly gaining favour with consumers . High-defined television and computer networks were among the devices most popular .
 Wireless phone companies continued to invest heavily in smartphones and netbooks as new ways to sell more data services . Phone companies invested heavily to offset declining prices for cellular voice service service .
 One cellular company tried to borrow an audio technique from consumer electronics to make voice calls more appealing . The technique was borrowed from the audio technology of consumer electronics .
 France Telecom offered HD cellular audio, which brought to cell phones the digital sound reproduction used with digital TV, music compact discs, and FM radio stations . France Telecom also offered digital cellular audio .
 Electronic books caught the eye of publishers as never before in 2009 . Amazon's Kindle and Sony’s Reader were stand-alone devices designed to read e-books that were sold online .
 Google also said that it would begin offering e-book downloads, although it was unclear which equipment it would use . Google said it would also offer e-books, but it's not clear which equipment will use .
 Other e-book providers included iRex, a division of Royal Philips Electronics, and cell phone company China Mobile . iRex and China Mobile also provide e-books for customers .
 Some printed book publishers were compelled to take e-books seriously because e-book sales were growing, while sales of printed books were not . E-books are more popular than printed books in the U.S. than in other countries .
 Publishers could do away with physical book expenses such as printing, storage, and transportation . That was because publishers could do so away with printing and storage costs .
 E-books also offered multimedia options that printed editions could not . Text could be combined with occasional video snippets and links to Web sites .
 It was unclear how many consumers would shift from printed books to ebooks . In 2009, ebooks accounted for only a few percent of unit book sales .
 Some in the book industry worried about piracy of electronic books via downloads of illegal book copies . Still, some worried about what had already happened to the music industry . The book industry is worried about the possibility of illegal downloads .
 Book publishers worried that letting libraries offer e-books would make consumers less inclined to buy print versions . Publishers also worried that e-book downloads would make library use easier to download .
 Some book publishers refused to allow their e-books to be offered through libraries . As a result, some book publishers have refused to offer e-book titles to libraries . E-books are banned from being offered in libraries .
 Amazon was slammed with a barrage of criticism, made more intense because 1984 details how powerful rulers can dominate peoples’ lives . 1984 details the power of the powerful ruler to dominate peoples' lives . Amazon has been accused of being too powerful to control people's lives .
 A Michigan highschool student whose copy of 1984 was deleted sued Amazon . In September, the case was settled out of court .
 As part of the settlement, the company pledged not to delete e-books from U.S. customers’ Kindle units in the future unless the user agreed, the user wanted a refund or failed to make the electronic payment, a court ordered a book deleted, or removing a book
 The iPhone 3GS added voice controls, a digital compass, and the ability to record video to the third-generation wireless-network platform . The company also dropped the price of the previous model, the iPhone 3G, to $99 .
 Apple’s iPod remained the top-selling digital music player . Microsoft continued to compete with its Zune music player, to which it added the capabilities of playing HD video and receiving HD radio signals .
 AT&T and TMobile offer free Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity) connections when they can't get a cellular network connection . The two companies sought to differentiate their data-using smartphone services by offering customers free connections .
 AT&T had faced the bigger problem because its iPhone customers used more data than owners of other smartphones . iPhone customers tended to take up more network capacity per user . AT&Ts faced the problem because iPhone customers use more data .
 Apple reported that it had sold its two billionth unit of iPhone and iPod Touch application software software . The software software is available from iTunes' iTunes online store . Apple has sold two billion units of the software software from its iTunes store .
 Users could choose from among 100,000 apps in 20 categories, including games, business, and social networking . Users could also choose between games and business apps, including business and games .
 Hundreds of independent firms wrote apps for the iPhone and iTouch . Apple had to approve the programs before they could be sold online through iTunes .
 Apple allowed Rhapsody and Spotify to provide an app that connected iPhone and iPod Touch customers to their services . For the first time, Apple allowed two of its music competitors, on-demand streaming music services, to provide the app .
 App overlays a street scene with local tidbits of information, such as the identity of stores, points of interest, or real-estate listings . App used the GPS (global positioning system satellite navigation) location chip in the phone .
 Research firm iSuppli concluded that GPS capabilities of smartphones were opening up a new area of growth for the devices, particularly the iPhone . The reliability of augmented reality was limited by the accuracy of the GPS units that the phones contained, the research found .
 GPS was used to enable the iPhone to compete with stand-alone GPS navigation systems . There were still technical hurdles in placing complex navigation software on cell phones .
 Apple won in another controversy over whether Palm Pre should be allowed to connect to Apple’s iTunes software . Palm Pre smartphone is in competition with the iPhone and the iPod . Palm's Palm Pre phone is not compatible with Apple's iTunes software, Apple says .
 Palm complained to an industry oversight group for USB-port connection standards that Apple’s action was improper restraint of trade . Palm complained that Apple blocked the connection to Palm . Palm says Apple's action is improper restraint on trade .
 The USB Implemented Forum dismissed Palm’s claim that its device was an Apple device . The forum said Palm was in the wrong for making its device appear to be an Apple product .
 Sales of video games and game consoles that played them suffered from poor economic conditions . The sector had been expected to be recession-proof, on the theory that games represented stay-at-home escapist entertainment .
 Experts attributed the sales decline to both tight consumer budgets and a lack of new must-have games . New console games cost about $60 each .
 ODST and The Beatles: Rock Band are paired with a playalong game . The Beatles' music and images of the legendary 1960s band were paired with playalong games .
 The gaming industry also began to embrace a new trend, playing casual games on cell phones . The games industry is embracing the trend .
 The iPhone’s App Store had made hundreds of low-cost or free games available to consumers for downloading . There were concerns that cell-phone games could take attention away from moreexpensive games for other portable gaming devices .
 A study by Forrester Research showed that half of American adults who spent time online used social networks such as Facebook or Linkedln, a 46% rise from previous year .
 Survey: Most parents don't understand extent of teens' social networks . Common Sense Media: Teens are big users of social networks, but parents are too unaware .
 Rock Band, was released during the year . It featured the music and images of the legendary 1960s band . Rock Band was released in 2011 .
 Twitter incorporated features of traditional social networking Web sites, such as MySpace and Facebook . The service worked in some ways like an Internet or mobile telephone instant messaging client . Twitter is now available to buy for free .
 Twitter users (alternatively called Twitterers, Tweeters, or simply Twits) could elect to receive the tweets of other posters or track specific topics, creating a dialogue of sorts . The number of "followers" in a given Twitter feed could reach the millions .
 Ashton Kutcher made the news when he became the first Twitterer to collect more than a million followers in 2009 .
 Twitter users made headlines throughout the year, transforming the service into a news outlet that transcended political borders . The service's users made their own, transforming Twitter from something that was regarded as an idle hobby for an increasingly wired world into an outlet .
 Passenger Janis Krums tweeted that his ferry was going to rescue people from the downed plane . Krums broke the story of the successful water landing of United States Airways Flight 1549 on the Fludson River .
 Twitpic.com crashed as thousands of Twitterers attempted to view the image . Krums's photo was uploaded to the photo-hosting service for Twitter users . The site promptly crashed .
 Shaquille O'Neal learned of his trade from the Phoenix Suns to the Cleveland Cavaliers via tweet in June . NBA star Shaqille O’Neal also tweeted his trade news from the Suns .
 A massive denialof-service attack in August targeted an economics professor in Georgia, knocking out the entire site for hours . The attack is the latest in a string of attacks targeting celebrities .
 Twitter's iconic 'fail whale' is a cartoon whale being hoisted into the air by a flock of birds, signaling a site outage . Millions of users attempted to log into Twitter only to be greeted by the site's iconic image .
 On hand was astronaut Michael Massimino, who posted the first tweet from space during a shuttle mission in May . The first tweet was posted during a space shuttle mission .
 Twitter's role as an emerging outlet for the dissemination of information more apparent than during the events surrounding the Iranian election in June 2009 . Nowhere was Twitter more visible than in 2009 when the Iranian elections were held .
 Supporters of opposition candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi took to the streets in a series of increasingly violent demonstrations . Mahmoud Ahmadinejad secured an easy victory in the election .
 The topic known as #lranElection became one of the most followed on Twitter . Mousavi supporters coordinated protests and posted live updates of events throughout Tehran .
 On June 15, three days after the election, Twitter delayed a 90-minute maintenance period at the request of the U.S. State Department . Twitter rescheduled it for 1:30 am Tehran time in order to avoid interfering with the flow of information within and from Iran .
 The following day foreign journalists were banned from covering opposition rallies, and Twitter . Twitter, along with other social networking sites, filled the void left by the traditional media .
 Government security officers tried to stanch the flow of information by blocking the Web site . Opposition supporters urged #lranElection followers to change their profile settings to the Tehran time zone .
 Events reached a fever pitch following the shooting of Neda Agha-Soltan as she was leaving a protest on June 20 . Neda was shot by police officers in the face as she left a protest .
 A mobile phone video of the young woman's graphic death was posted on the YouTube video-sharing Web site, and by the following day ""Neda"" was both the rallying cry of the opposition and one of the top trending topics on Twitter .
 The creators of Twitter did not envision such a paradigm shift when they first designed and launched the service in 2006 . Jack Dorsey, Evan Williams, Christopher Isaac Stone, and Jack Drexler created the social networking site .
 Twitter was primarily a free short messaging service with a social networking element . From its inception, Twitter was mainly a free messaging service . Twitter was founded in 2008 .
 The site lacked a clear revenue stream that one could find on sites that derived income from advertising or membership fees . As such, it lacked the clear revenue streams that one can find on other sites .
 Much of the attention in 2009 was focused on Twitter, a social-networking service that allowed people to exchange short messages, or “tweets,"" on any topic via computer or cell phone .
 Twitter was able to raise $100 million in new funding, even though it was a start-up with little or no revenue . Twitter raised the money on the basis of its popularity . Twitter is now a $1 billion-a-year-old company .
 Twitter’s founders sought to expand the reach of the service that they had launched in 2006 without a formal business plan . Twitter was founded by Evan Williams, social-networking expert ""Biz"" Stone, and software engineer Jack Dorsey .
 Text messaging is sending short written messages via bursts of data from one cell phone to another . The activity became controversial when more people began driving and texting at the same time .
 Research into so-called distracted driving found that drivers using cell phones were four times as likely to have a crash as other drivers . Drivers using phones are four times more likely to crash than other drivers, research found .
 U.S. government employees were banned from text messaging while driving government vehicles . Government employees were also banned from texting while driving .
 Another problem of cell-phone texting was the transmission of sexual images or messages, which became known as “sexting,” between teenagers .
 In the United States, the problem posed new issues for schools and courts . In the U.S., the problem poses new issues .
 The Iowa state Supreme Court upheld a misdemeanor conviction of an 18-year-old boy who sent a nude photo of himself to a 14-year old classmate via text messaging . The boy was convicted of a misdemeanor charge of sending the photo to the teen .
 A survey by the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy showed that 20% of young Americans between the ages of 13 and 19 had either texted or posted online partially or completely nude pictures or video of themselves .
 Microsoft admitted that users had been disappointed with the Windows Vista OS (introduced in early 2007) Windows 7 was launched in October 2009 .
 Windows 7 was said to address complaints about Vista, software crashes, and software incompatibility issues . Windows 7 is said to keep the underlying Vista architecture of Windows 7 .
 Windows 7 improvements included more efficient use of memory, which caused a PC to start up faster and run more smoothly . Windows 7 also added more efficient memory management .
 Vista's high computing demands meant that it would not run well on many existing computers . Vista was announced in 2007 but has not been widely available on existing computers since then .
 Windows 7 said to work on nearly all new computers as well as those that were up to three years old . That was expected to be less of a problem with Windows 7 than Windows 7 . Windows 7 is said to be easier to use on new computers .
 Microsoft's official system requirements are set fairly low . Satisfactory performance on older PCs is said to vary .
 Microsoft reached an agreement on Windows long-running antitrust issues with the European Union in December . In December Microsoft reached a deal with the EU over long-standing antitrust issues .
 The EU reacted favourably to Microsoft’s offer to alter the way that it combined its Internet Explorer Web browser with Windows . The EU responded positively to the offer .
 Microsoft also won a patent victory when a federal judge overturned a $388 million penalty against the company . The penalty was one of the largest amounts ever awarded in a civil patentinfringement lawsuit .
 Software firm Uniloc USA, Inc., Inc., won damages from Microsoft in an earlier jury trial . Software firm won damages on the basis of claims that Microsoft had infringed on Unilloc's security software patents . Microsoft won damages in the earlier trial .
 A federal court in Texas in May ruled in favour of Canadian firm i4i, Inc., which claimed in a lawsuit filed in 2007 that Microsoft’s Word software infringed on an i4I patent . The lawsuit was settled in May .
 In August the court ruled that Microsoft should pay more than $290 million in damages . The court issued an injuction that would prohibit the company from selling versions of the Word program that contained the patented technology .
 i4i told the appeals court that Microsoft had known about Mi’s patent before using the technology and had simply disregarded it . Microsoft obtained a temporary stay of the court's order and told the court that the lower court had erred .
 Microsoft agrees to replace the infringing code in Word 2003 and Word 2007 . Microsoft lost its appeal and agreed to replace it in Word 3 and 2007 .
 The court ruling might force the software company to make technical changes to Word . The next version of Word is planned for release in 2010 . The software company is expected to release the next version in 2011 .
 Under the agreement, Microsoft was to provide Bing’s search technology on Yahoofs Web sites . Under the deal, Bing's search technology was allowed to be used on the sites .
 There were more delays in Google’s settlement with authors and publishers in a 2005 copyright-infringement case over scanned library books that were to appear online . Google settled with authors, publishers in 2005 case over library books .
 Google's original settlement called for Google to pay $125 million to compensate authors and publishers of books that were still protected by copyright . The original settlement was called for the company to compensate copyright holders for out-of-print books .
 The United States Department of Justice raised legal and antitrust objections to the agreement . The U.S. government says the agreement gave Google too much power over copyrighted works .
 A replacement agreement was awaiting court approval at year’s end . The two sides in the copyright case had been negotiating a replacement agreement .
 Google acquired reCAPTCHA, a company that created visual puzzles to ensure that people and not automated hots (short for robots) were signing up for Internet services . In a related matter, Google also acquired re CAPTCHA company, which was created by Google .
 Google sought to adapt the technology to improve optical character recognition for out-of-copyright books that it scanned and offered for downloading . The technology is being used to scan books and offer for download .
 The PC industry waited for signals that the recession was over, but the outlook was not good in the first part of the year . PC industry was waiting for signals of the recession to be over .
 Worldwide PC shipments were down 2.4% in the second quarter from a year earlier, IDC says . The value of PC shipments dropped about 19%, in part because of price discounting .
 It was hoped that the year-end holiday season would signal the return of better economic times . Early indications that could be true, however .
 In the third calendar quarter of the year, all PC companies reported rising sales . PC sales are up in the third quarter of 2014 .
 PC maker Acer replaced Dell as the second-ranked PC market-share holder, with 14% of the worldwide market . Late in the year, according to IDC, Dell replaced Dell with Acer .
 Hewlett-Packard remains number one, with just over 20% of the world PC market . Hewlett Packard remained number one with 20% PC market.
 Apple boosted its U.S. market share with record nonholiday sales in the third quarter . The Macintosh remained a minor player internationally .
 Netbooks were the fastest-growing PC category . Netbooks are seen as bridging the gap between smartphones and laptop computers . Netbook is the fastest growing PC category in the world .
 Netbooks were small notebook computers with slower processors, smaller screens, shrunken keyboards, and smaller screens . They nonetheless could handle Internet browsing and routine computing tasks . Netbooks are small notebooks with smaller screens and smaller keyboards .
 They were aimed at users who were comfortable with using online applications for common productivity tasks, such as document or spreadsheet creation .
 There was concern in the computer industry that netbooks simply represented a new, lessexpensive product category . Netbooks sales would cut into sales of traditional laptop PCs, analysts say .
 Designed to fit in a pocket or purse, it was intended for e-mail or Web browsing via cellular network or Wi-Fi Internet connection . The device is designed to fit into a pocket, purse or pocket . It's intended to be used to send e-mails or browse the
 Google declares it will compete with Microsoft and Apple in the market for PC operating systems . Google already makes the Android OS used on some cell phones .
 Google planned to challenge the Windows and Mac OS X operating systems . It planned to use an extension of its Chrome Web browser technology in a product that it expected to introduce in late 2010 .
 Google CEO Eric Schmidt resigned in August from Apple’s board of directors . As a result, Schmidt resigned from the Apple board, Schmidt was forced to resign from the company .
 Steve Jobs has returned to his job after having taken a medical leave of absence for much of the year . Jobs had been given credit for Apple’s dominant position with the iPhone and iPod .
 During that time he had a liver transplant that was needed because he had suffered complications from pancreatic cancer . He also had complications from complications from cancer . During his time in hospital, he had to undergo liver transplant surgery .
 Jobs' return was considered likely to reassure Apple shareholders who were concerned that Jobs was an irreplaceable part of Apple’s financial success . His return was expected to reassure investors who were worried that Jobs would be irrereplaceable .
 Apple introduced an undramatic upgrade to its Mac OS X Snow Leopard in August . The upgrade incorporated many small improvements rather than high-profile changes .
 Oracle continued its ambitious growth plans in the software industry, which had resulted in the purchase of more than 40 companies in four years . Oracle continued to purchase 40 companies, including 40 software companies .
 Oracle's plan to acquire Sun Microsystems, a computer hardware and software firm, for $7. billion was announced early in the year . Oracle's purchase of Sun MicroSystems was announced in March .
 Analysts say the deal would make Oracle more competitive against IBM in the corporate computing market . Analysts said that it would make the deal more competitive .
 Oracle’s plan was delayed when the European Commission decided to extend its investigation of the acquisition's ramifications . The European Commission has extended its investigation into the acquisition of Oracle . Oracle's plan for the acquisition was delayed due to the EU investigation .
 EU officials expressed concern that the acquisition of Sun by Oracle could reduce competition in the market for database software . Oracle is one of the world’s largest software firms .
 The delay is unexpected because the United States DOJ had already approved the transaction . The delay was unexpected because of the U.S. DOJ approval of the deal .
 Oracle CEO Larry Ellison said Sun was losing $100 million a month . Ellison said he was eager to complete the acquisition because of Sun's losses . Oracle CEO Ellison said the Sun company was losing more than $1 billion a month a year .
 Intel appealed a $1.45 billion antitrust fine levied against it by European Union regulators . Intel appealed the fine, asking that the fine be overturned or reduced .
 Intel was accused of providing rebates to some PC makers who were heavy users of Intel chips . Intel accused of rewarding them for delaying the production and release of PCs using chips from Intel competitor Advanced Micro Devices .
 It was unclear how the settlement would affect ongoing government antitrust actions against Intel . The settlement would end private antitrust cases pending in the United States and Japan . It would also end private cases pending against Intel in the U.S. and Asia .
 EMC Corp. paid $2.2 billion to acquire Data Domain, which had “data deduplication” software that helped corporations to sharply reduce the amount of computer storage they required . EMC bought Data Domain for $2 billion .
 Adobe Systems bought Omniture, a Web-traffic-analysis firm, for about $1.1 billion . Adobe Systems is known for its Photoshop and document-reading software . Omniture was bought for $1 billion by Adobe Systems .
 Omniture’s software was designed to facilitate online marketing . Adobe's focus was on software to create online and offline content . Omniture's software was developed for online marketing, while Adobe's software focused on content .
 Cisco Systems was in the process of acquiring Tandberg, a Norwegian videoconferencing company, for $3. billion after initially having bid $3 billion . Cisco Systems initially bid $2 billion, but initially had bid $4 billion .
 Tandberg sold videoconferencing equipment and software that could make connections between different types of video equipment . The company also sold software that made connections between video equipment and other types of equipment .
 Hewlett-Packard said that it would acquire network equipment company 3Com for $2.2 billion . The deal would allow the company to compete more effectively with Cisco, the networking market leader .
 Texas-based Perot Systems was founded in 1988 by H Ross Perot, a former U.S. presidential candidate . It provides services ranging from data centre management to consulting .
 Legal opposition resolved to allow eBay’s $2 billion sale of the majority interest in Internet phone service Skype to a consortium of investors . eBay will sell the majority of Skype's majority interest to investors in a consortium .
 Skype founders accuse eBay of violating copyright by changing and sharing key software code associated with the service . Skype service consisted of free Internet-based voice and video messages between users of Skype software on computers and smartphones .
 EBay settled the lawsuits filed by the Skype founders by giving the founders a 14% ownership position in Skype . The founders also received two seats on Skype's board of directors . EBay paid for the settlement by giving them a 14%.
 Skype founders were to transfer to Skype the intellectual property that was the basis for the lawsuits . In return, the founders had to transfer the intellectual rights that were the basis of the lawsuits, Skype . Skype was sued by the founders of Skype in 2010 .
 Skype was acquired to help eBay connect buyers and sellers via Internet phone service . Analysts said that Skype never fit in with eBay’s business .
 An appeals court overturned the 2007 conviction of Gregory Reyes, the former CEO of computer data centre supplier Brocade Communications Systems . The court cited improper actions by prosecutors by prosecutors . Reyes was convicted of fraudulently defrauding the company .
 He had been sentenced to 21 months in prison and a $15 million fine for illegal backdating of stock options to increase employee pay . In 2009 he faced a new trial, but he was convicted of backdating options .
 Reyes resigned from Brocade in 2005 after accounting problems connected to stock-option grants . Reyes had resigned from the company in 2005 .
 It had been common practice in some corporations to backdate the grant date of stock options to a day when the stock price was low, which would increase the value of the options when they were eventually exercised at a higher price .
 While not illegal in itself, the practice required a special accounting treatment to avoid artificially increasing company profits . The rule was not always followed, with the practice not always being followed .
 AOL said it would eliminate 2,500 jobs, or one-third of its workforce, as part of its spin-off from media company Time Warner Inc. AOL said in a statement that it would be a spin off from Time Warner . AOL said that it will eliminate one third of
 The spin-off reversed the highly publicized but largely unsuccessful merger of ""old"" and ""new” media firms nine years earlier . Nine years earlier, the merger was unsuccessful .
 Video-game maker Electronic Arts announced that it would eliminate 1,500 jobs, or about 17% of its workforce . The company announced the job cuts in June . The job cuts will be about 17%, according to a CNN report .
 Computer security experts said that the risks from hackers were changing . Experts said that computer security experts were changing in the past .
 There was a decline in attacks on security flaws in the ubiquitous Microsoft Windows OS . The OS had been made more impervious to attacks .
 Hackers were shifting to attacks on security holes in programs found on many PCs . Microsoft Office software package, Adobe’s Flash Player (used to display video animations), and QuickTime video player software . Apple's QuickTime is also used to display animations .
 Hackers increased the number of attacks on corporate Web sites to steal information or to convert legitimate Web sites into distribution points for malicious software that could take over PCs .
 Theft of data and intellectual property via Web site break-ins reached a value of more than $1 trillion in 2008, security firm McAfee said . The theft of data, intellectual property reached a total of $1 billion in 2008 .
 A hacker in one of the largest identitytheft cases in U.S. history pleaded guilty in late August . He faced up to 25 years in prison and could get 25 years behind bars .
 Albert Gonzalez had been arrested in 2003 but was not charged because he had become a government informant in the case . Gonzalez was arrested but not charged in 2003 because he became an informant . Gonzalez had become an informant for the government . He was arrested in 2004 but was never charged .
 The Pirate Bay was to be converted to a legitimate business after being acquired by the Swedish firm Global Gaming Factory for $7.75 million . The file-sharing service the Pirate Bay will be converted into a gaming business .
 The Pirate Bay had an estimated 20 million users worldwide . It ran aground in 2009 when a Swedish court convicted its founders and one of their investors of copyright violations .
 Each was sentenced to a year in prison, and they were collectively fined $3.3 million in damages . The men were sentenced to one year prison .
 The Pirate Bay founders were threatened by a Dutch court with $9 million in additional fines . They were threatened with additional fines if they removed links on the Pirate Bay service to copyrighted material from the site .
 The founders claimed that they had no power to do so because they were no longer affiliated with the company, which was now owned by Riversella Ltd. of the Seychelles . The founders claim that they have no power because they are not affiliated .
 Questions remain about how the Pirate Bay could be turned into a legal business without either losing its file-sharing audience or violating copyrights .
 Data security was a big issue in negotiations between the United States and the EU over sharing banking data across country lines to help fight terrorism . The U.S. and EU agreed to share banking data between countries to fight terrorism in exchange for data security .
 The database that enabled financial tracking was being moved from the United States to The Netherlands . The move brought into play European data-privacy rules that more tightly controlled the sharing of information about trans-Atlantic financial transactions .
 An interim one-year data-sharing agreement was in the works, but critics questioned its legality . Critics questioned the legality of the agreement .
 Barack Obama’s administration announced that it would devote more attention to cybersecurity to protect an American computer infrastructure . The U.S. computer infrastructure is vulnerable to foreign attack, the administration said .
 Theft, alteration, or destruction of data could reduce public trust in information systems . Theft or alteration could reduce trust in public information systems, experts say .
 Microsoft joined a small number of companies that provided antivirus software free instead of selling it . Microsoft joins a small group of companies offering antivirus free to download .
 Adobe and security firm McAfee said they would adapt digital-rights-management software to protect corporate documents from unauthorized viewing . The software is long used to protect digital music from unauthorized use . Adobe and McAfee will adapt the software for corporate documents .
 Access to documents would be controlled by the level of security classification they carried . Access would be limited to documents with the highest security classification .
 A university study sponsored by Cisco Systems found that the best-performing broadband connections were in South Korea, Japan, and Sweden . The study was based on download and upload speeds .
 South Korea, Japan, and Hong Kong are the leading broadband providers in the world . Hong Kong and South Korea ranked the highest in broadband performance and market penetration .
 As part of the U.S. government’s economic stimulus plan, the Departments of Commerce and Agriculture were to award $7.7 billion in broadband stimulus grants beginning in 2009 .
 The Obama administration’s new FCC chairman, Julius Genachowski, claimed that “net neutrality” would be the federal government’�s policy toward the Internet .
 Net neutrality, as advocated by Web companies and consumer groups, would require that all data flowing over the Internet be treated equally . Net neutrality is the idea of treating all data over the internet equally .
 Some cable-television and telephone companies wanted to provide different priorities for broadband Internet traffic depending on how much was paid to transport data . That ran counter to the wishes of some cable TV and phone companies that wanted different priorities .
 Net neutrality also affected the free flow of information, because it was designed to prevent unpopular views from being blocked by datatransmission companies . Net neutrality was designed by the internet to prevent the blocking of unpopular views .
 Genachowski affirmed that wireless data carriers should be held to the same networkneutrality standards as wired carriers . He said that a situation that did not exist currently currently did not .
 Another federal agency, the Federal Trade Commission, imposed new regulations on bloggers . Those who voiced their opinions online on Web logs are subject to new regulations .
 Under updated federal rules, bloggers and others who posted product reviews online would be required to disclose whether they were paid for the reviews in money or free merchandise . The rules cover endorsements and testimonials in advertising .
 The rules were updated because advertisers were believed to be using paid endorsements on blogs and social networks to promote their products under the guise of noncompensated personal recommendations . Advertisers believed to have used paid endorsements to promote products .
 The blurring of the distinction between television and Internet services continued . The blurred of the difference between television services and the Internet services continues .
 German public broadcasters planned to let viewers catch up on previous episodes of TV shows via computer Internet connections . Viewers will be able to catch up episodes of their favorite TV shows using computer computers .
 The British system would go farther by combining digital TV broadcasts with a companion Internet service that included special TV content . Digital TV broadcasts would be combined with the Internet service .
 Netflix, Amazon, and Apple all offered online movie rentals . Google’s YouTube offered some older movies free .
 Google had experimented with video rentals but stopped offering the service after it bought YouTube . Google stopped offering video rentals after it purchased YouTube .
 Cloud computing continues to gain traction in corporate world, despite embarrassing setbacks . Cloud computing provides computing power to customers over the Internet .
 Some corporations considered cloud computing to be less expensive and easier to scale up than self-run computing operations . Cloud computing is a cheaper option than other cloud computing operations, experts say .
 Users of TMobile Sidekick phones were cut off from Internet services such as e-mail and Web browsing . A Microsoft-run remote server for T-Mobile failed when a remote server failed .
 When Microsoft restored the server, part of the data was inadvertently corrupted . Phone numbers, photos, calendars, and other information were accidentally corrupted .
 One million Sidekick phones were affected . It was unclear how many of the one million users were affected by the problem . Sidekick users were also affected .
 Google also had cloud problems when a computer error redirected some of its Web traffic through Asia . Data congestion slowed or stopped Google online services such as e-mail, calendars, and office-productivity software .
 Google accounted for 5% of all Internet traffic . The significance of the interrupted Google service was that it was Google's 5% Internet traffic interruption .
 China demanded that all new PCs sold in the country be outfitted with Internet-filtering software preinstalled by computer manufacturers . The move was prompted by China's demand that all PCs be preinstalled with Internet filters .
 Chinese officials softened the requirement to apply only to PCs in schools and public places such as Internet cafes . In the face of computer industry opposition and Chinese citizen protests, the requirement has been softened .
 The software, Green Dam-Youth Escort, was developed to block pornography and violence on the Internet in an effort to protect children . It had the capability to block content that Chinese officials deemed undesirable .
 PCs would receive automatic downloads of updated lists of prohibited content . Chinese hackers reported that the lists included political topics .
 The Epstein Medal for innovation in geochemistry was awarded to John Eiler at the 2009 Goldschmidt Conference in Davos, Switz . The first Epstein Medal was awarded in 2009 .
 This medal celebrates the pioneering research of the late Samuel Epstein, a geochemist . Epstein was perhaps most famous for his calibration of oxygen isotope distributions between carbonates and water .
 These paleotemperature determinations required the estimation of vanished reservoir information such as oxygen isotopes of the ocean from which marine organisms grew .
 Eiler, a geologist from the California Institute of Technology, developed an expanded technique that involved the measurement of ""carbonate clumped isotopes" in carbonate minerals .
 This distribution is temperature-sensitive and independent of the composition of the host medium, such as seawater . The distribution of the distribution of this distribution is also independent .
 Eiler's acceptance lecture presented new data extending his previous findings that many carbonates and carbonate-bearing minerals follow a single temperature-dependent calibration of the clumped isotope thermometer . The acceptance lecture was presented by Eiler .
 He outlined the techniques applications to a variety of problems involving crustal rocks down to depths of 10 km . These include geotherms (mapped lines of equal temperature within Earth) Fault friction, fault friction, fossil extremophiles, and the genesis of oil, gas, and coal
 For about 30 years, scientists had recognized that this ice sheet was vulnerable to abrupt collapse . An abrupt collapse could increase global sea level by up to 7 m and possibly devastate the economies of many megacities .
 A team of 56 scientists led by sedimentologist Tim Naish of the Antarctic Research Centre in Wellington, N.Z., identified 38 sedimentary cycles, each of about 40,000 years' duration, in good accordance with the same cyclicity recorded .
 Japan’s National Institute for Materials Science continued to explore the geochemical hypothesis put forth by NIMS emeritus fellow Hiromoto Nakazawa . Life on Earth evolved from biomolecules formed by meteorite impacts in early oceans, he says .
 Recent research about the composition and temperature of Earth’s early atmosphere had refuted the relevance of previous experiments . Previous experiments devoted to the generation of organic compounds in gas mixtures that simulate the planet's early atmosphere .
 NIMS materials scientist Toshimori Sekine and his colleagues published results of a new approach in 2009 . The new approach was published in 2009 by the NIMs materials materials scientist .
 Sekine conducted innovative shock-wave experiments by using a propellant gun that accelerated . A “smart spider” sensor package sits on a deposit of volcanic rock .
 This unit was part of a network designed to detect earthquakes, ground deformation, explosions, and large emissions of ash associated with volcanic activity . Delivered by helicopter, this unit was sent by helicopter to the site .
 High-speed impacts generated extremely high pressures and temperatures within the sample for a fraction of a second . The impact was generated by high speed impacts on a sample sample .
 Analysis of the shocked samples by chromatography-mass spectrometry established the presence of an amino acid, four types of amines, and six types of carboxylic acid .
 The experiment confirmed that organic molecules could be generated as proposed by Nakazawa’s ""big bang” hypothesis for the birth of life . The experiment confirms that organic . molecules could have been generated in the 'big bang'
 Meteorites may have been influential in generating life on Earth more than four billion years ago . Life on Earth may have come from meteorites that created Earth's first known meteorites .
 65 million years ago, dinosaurs were believed to have been wiped out of existence . Since then, impacts such as the one many scientists contend caused the extinction of dinosaurs have destroyed life .
 The boundary of North America was marked in North America by a widespread layer of black sedimentary rocks covering the bones of many large fauna . Such remains were not found above the layer . The boundary was marked by a layer of sedimentary rock .
 In addition, the layer contained billions of nanometre-sized diamonds, most of which were encapsulated within carbon spherules . In addition to the layer of diamonds, the material was encapsulated in carbon sphelets .
 Some independent experts remained unconvinced that these particles really were diamonds . But new evidence indicates that they were shock-induced diamonds .
 The presence of particulate carbon and grapefruit-sized clusters of soot was consistent with the occurrence of intense wildfires, which were also associated with the asteroid-induced mass extinction of 65 million years ago .
 The Younger Dryas Period began as Earth crossed paths with a swarm of comets, scientists say . These facts supported the conclusion that Earth crossed the paths with comets . Earth crossed comets at the time of the period, according to scientists .
 Ancient sedimentary rocks contain what little evidence there is for the life forms that followed the early synthesis of organic chemicals . The rocks contain little evidence for life in ancient life forms .
 The bacteria formed an organic meshwork of microbial mat that bound together fine sand grains . Their formation was established by comparison with the activities of cyanobacteria in modern tidal flats . They occurred during periods of calm hydraulic conditions .
 MISS were produced by interaction of microbiota with wave and current dynamics, and they suggest the presence of strongly seasonal paleoclimates . MISS was produced by interactions of the microbiota with waves and currents .
 microbial mats grew over large areas of ancient shallow seafloors from at least 3. billion years ago until the present . Extensive microbial mats were found over vast areas of the ancient seaflors . The fossil remnants promised to supplement the geobiological interpretations from the betterknown strom
 The need to monitor active volcanoes in order to provide reliable estimates of renewed activity to ensure safe evacuation procedures is emphasized by the eruption of Mt. Mt. Merea .
 The project (also supported by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the United States Geological Survey) was expected to provide a blueprint for the installation of sensors at other unmonitored active volcanoes .
 Such a plan could help determine reliable estimates for the evacuations of endangered populations, experts say . Such an estimate could help provide reliable estimates of evacuations .
 The battery-operated robots looked like microwave ovens on tripods . Each contained an earthquake-detecting seismometer, GPS receiver to pinpoint location and ground deformation . An infrared sounder to sense volcanic explosions, and lightning detector .
 The robots communicated wirelessly with one another and with NASA’s Earth Observing Satellites, thus providing a low-cost sensor network that could operate in harsh conditions . The robots communicate wirelessly .
 Similar sensor webs were also planned for the exploration of other planets with hostile environments . Similar sensors were planned to be used on other planets .
 A damaging earthquake occurred near the Italian village of L’Aquila on April 6, 2009 . The quake occurred near L'Aquila, Italy .
 The main shock was followed by thousands of aftershocks that were detected and located by a portable network of seismometers . The Instituto Nazionale di Geofisca e Vulcanologia located the quake using a portable seismometer .
 The L’Aquila earthquake resulted from normal faulting on the northwest-southeast-trending Paganica Fault . The earthquake was caused by a normal fault on northwest-southwest-southward fault .
 It and several neighbouring faults are related to extensional tectonic forces associated with the opening of the Tyrrhenian Basin to west .
 Earthquakes that occur deeper than about 50 km have long been enigmatic to seismologists . Seismologists say they are baffled by the depth depth of the deepest quakes .
 At these depths the lithostatic pressure is large enough to inhibit brittle failure, or rock fracturing . At the depths, the pressure is enough to stop brittle failure or fracturing .
 In January a team of geologists from Norway and Germany presented new evidence in favour of a proposed mechanism for generating intermediate-depth earthquakes .
 They analyzed veins of rock that had been formed by flash heating in a Precambrian terrane in Norway . The study was published in the journal Nature Sciencedenceda .
 The pseudotachylytes had initially formed at depths greater than 70 km before being exhumed to the Earth’s surface . In this case, geochemically analysis showed that the pseudotsachylytees had formed in depth at 70 km .
 Using computer modeling, the authors explained their observations by means of a self-localized thermal runaway failure mechanism . The authors used computer modeling to explain their observations .
 This mechanism does not depend on the existence of free fluid in the pore spaces of rocks and therefore provided a distinct alternative to the dehydration embrittlement hypothesis that was favoured as a mechanism for generating intermediatedepth earthquakes .
 Using the laser-flash analysis technique, her research provided insight into how heat behaves as it is conducted through rock enriched with dissolved minerals .
 Discovered in the late 1970s, these features had been extensively studied because they led to distinct biospheres that did not depend on photosynthesis . Discovered by scientists in 1970s .
 Scientists began monitoring the Endeavour segment of the Juan de Fuca Ridge in the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Oregon and Washington with a network of eight seismometers buried beneath the seafloor .
 Using high-fidelity seismic data, scientists located several thousand small earthquakes that were associated with an axial magma chamber that drives the hydrothermal, or deep-sea, venting in the region . The scientists located the small earthquakes .
 The scientists concluded that cracking associated with the recharge of the axial magma chamber was the key mechanism for localizing and maintaining black-smoker vent fields .
 The scientists used a new technique known as laser-flash analysis to determine the time that it took for heat to diffuse from one end of a rock sample to the other .
 This technique accounts for biases caused by radiative heat loss and allowed for accurate measurement of the drop in conductivity as the sample was heated . This technique properly accounts for bias caused by heat loss .
 Thermal conductivity was reduced by as much as 50% at the base of the crust compared with previous estimates . The results of these experiments showed that thermal conductivity had been reduced .
 Granitic magmas observed in hot mountain belts such as the Himalayas could be generated without the radioactive heat production in the lower crust increasing . This in turn implied the base of the crust was much hotter than previously thought .
 Heat generated by the localized deformation of the crust may form magmas . Instead, heat generated by local deformation may form the magmas.
 The positive feedback created by temperature-dependent conductivities may have been integral to the differentiation of the Earth into core, mantle, and crust from its original chrondritic (meteorite-derived) composition .
 Scientists studying Earth’s magnetic field reported new constraints on the structure and dynamics of Earth's core . Scientists studying the structure of the core of the Earth's magnetic field .
 Magnetic field fluctuations reflected processes of fluid dynamics that took place in Earth's liquid-iron outer core .
 The fluctuations were created by torsional oscillations that occurred with a cylindrical geometry . The fluctuations are created by the fluctuations of torsion oscillations .
 In contrast to the elastic restoring force responsible for seismic waves from earthquakes, the magnetic restoring force creates these hydromagnetic waves . The waves were created by a magnetic restore force .
 Using methods that seismologists developed to study seismic waves, the scientists modeled the hydromagnetic waves to constrain the structure of the magnetic field in the outer core and the rigidity of the solid inner core .
 The ""core-quakes” that generate the hydromagnetic waves appeared to originate near the equator of the inner core, but their precise source mechanism remained a mystery . The precise source of the waves is unknown .
 First stage of the largest and most ambitious tornado field experiment in history ran from May 10 to June 13, 2009, across the United States Great Plains . The first stage of this experiment ran across the U.S. Great Plains in May 2009 . The experiment was part of a larger and
 VORTEX2 (Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment 2) involved a roving armada of more than 50 scientists and 40 research vehicles, which included 10 mobile radars . The experiment was part of a larger effort to verify the origins of rotation in
 The collaborative project was designed to explore the origins, structure, and evolution of tornadoes by collecting data from portable instruments placed near or inside the violent storms .
 Understanding how tornadoes form is expected to aid the ongoing improvement of severe weather warnings . Understanding how tornado form is important to improve severe weather warning systems .
 The original VORTEX program operated in 1994-95 in the Great Plains and documented the entire life cycle of a tornado for the first time in history . It documented the tornado's life cycle in a unique way .
 Applications of the findings from this project contributed to improvements in National Weather Service severe weather warning statistics . Applications of this project have contributed to improved National Weather Services severe weather warnings statistics .
 VORTEX2 was a $11. million program funded by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Science Foundation . 10 universities, 10 nonprofit organizations, and three nonprofit organizations supported the program .
 NOAA’s National Severe Storms Laboratory provided leadership and equipment for the program . The program was scheduled to operate its second and final field phase from May 1 to June 15, 2010 .
 Scientists hoped to use the VORTEX2 program to study five tornadic storms in 2009 . The year was a historically quiet one, especially during May .
 Researchers believed that this tornado became the best-documented tornado in history . Data collection began before the tornado developed and continuing through its lifetime .
 Scientists investigated several supercell thunderstorms that did not spawn tornadoes . The Wyoming tornado was the first tornado to hit the state .
 National Aeronautics and Space Administration launched NOAA’s latest geostationary satellite . The satellite is the latest in a series of satellites launched by the agency . NOAA's latest satellite was launched in March .
 GOES-14 carried enhanced instrumentation to capture high-definition images of severe weather patterns and atmospheric conditions . Hovering about 36,000 km above Earth, GOes-14 captured weather patterns, atmospheric conditions and weather patterns .
 Such images could help meteorologists develop more accurate forecasts and warnings for hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, and disruptive solar disturbances .
 GOes-14 joined GOES-13 to serve as a backup satellite until one of the operational satellites experiences trouble . GOES14 joined the GOES13 to provide backup to the backup satellite .
 NOAA-19, a polar-orbiting satellite, was part of the Polar Operational Environmental Satellites project . The satellite was launched in February .
 POES project was designed to detect more subtle changes in atmospheric and oceanic conditions . Its satellites could be used for longer-range forecasts as well as research on climate change .
 The White House released a landmark study on the effects of climate change on the U.S. on June 16 . The study was released by the White House .
 The report was commissioned in 2007 and was written by a team of 31 climate scientists . It outlined climate-related trends and projections for the country, as well as for specific regions .
 The report stated that climatic changes already under way in the U.S. were forecast to increase . The report also stated that climate change in the United States was forecast to rise .
 Some of the predicted effects of global warming included rising temperature and sea level, retreating glaciers, longer growing seasons, and earlier snowmelt . The predicted effects include rising sea level and retreating glaciers .
 The report affirmed that the effects of climate change would differ by region . The report also affirmed that . effects of . climate change differed by region, according to the report .
 Water stress from reduced mountain snowpack would continue to intensify, especially in the West and Alaska . For example, water stress from reducing mountain snowpacks would intensify .
 Agriculture was one of the sectors most adaptable to climate change, report says . Report maintained that growing crops and raising livestock would become more difficult . Report: Growing crops, raising livestock will become harder for farmers .
 The report also anticipated that land along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts, Pacific Islands, and parts of Alaska would be at greater risk of sea-level rise and storm surge . Parts of Alaska and the Pacific Islands were also at risk .
 The pace of climate change would ultimately depend on levels of current and future greenhouse gases and particulates released into Earth’s atmosphere, study says .
 To solve this problem, many scientists called for a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions . To solve it, scientists have proposed a reduction of emissions from the atmosphere .
 The WCC-3 conference was convened by the World Meteorological Organization and its partners . The goal of the conference was to ensure that every country was equipped to access and apply the array of climate prediction and information services .
 Conference concluded that such capabilities fell far short of meeting present and future needs, particularly in less-developed countries . Conference concluded such capabilities would not meet the needs of the world's most developed countries .
 Researchers countered stating that the e-mails were taken out of context . Researchers countered saying that the messages were taken from context . The e-mail was taken from the context of a series of emails sent to researchers .
 Copenhagen United Nations Climate Change Conference ended with a nonbinding agreement to cap an increase in average global temperatures to below 2 °C (3.5°F) The agreement was reached in Copenhagen, Denmark, December 19 .
 To achieve this goal, industrialized countries would commit to implement economy-wide emissions targets . The goal would be to achieve an end to global warming by 2020 .
 Developed countries agreed to support a goal of mobilizing $100 billion annually by 2020 to address the needs of less-developed countries . The goal is to mobilize $100billion annually to help less-advantaged countries .
 A National Severe Storms Laboratory Field Command Vehicle helps track a nearby tornado . The vehicle is part of the Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment 2 in Goshen county, Wyo.
 The project was designed to examine the evolution of tornadoes in an effort to improve the ability of the National Weather Service to predict severity of these phenomena . The project is designed to look at how tornadoes evolve .
 India began offering FREE elementary EDUCATION, China focused on rebuilding EARTHQUAKE-RAVAGED schools, and H1N1 FLU closed numerous schools worldwide . American students lag behind their Asian counterparts ACADEMICALLY .
 2007 Trends in Math and Science Study found Asian students at the top of the world in math and science achievement . Asian students in 59 countries and 8 other jurisdictions took part in study .
 Students in Hong Kong and Singapore were the top-performing fourth-grade math students in the world . Students in Singapore and Hong Kong were the best in fourth grade math students .
 Students in Taiwan, South Korea, and Singapore were the top eighth-grade math students . Students in Hong Kong and Japan were also the top students in Taiwan and Singapore .
 Singapore students were the top fourth-grade students in Singapore . Taiwan and Hong Kong students were also the top students in science . Singapore students scored the highest in fourth grade science .
 Students in Singapore and Taiwan had the highest average science achievement among eighth graders . Singapore students had highest average achievement among 8th graders in the country .
 This assessment, the largest gauge of student achievement in the world, was a project of the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement . It was administered by the TIMSS & the PIRLS (Progress in International Reading Literacy Study) at Boston College .
 The results were considered somewhat disheartening in the United States . The U.S. once again found itself trailing much smaller and poorer countries, such as Latvia and Kazakhstan .
 Massachusetts was one of only two states that participated in TIMSS as a separate jurisdiction . Students performed at levels comparable to students in Japan, Taiwan and Hong Kong .
 Minnesota also performed above the United States average . The other state, Minnesota, also performed well above the average .
 TIMSS results helped to spur a new round of American policy makers, including the newly elected U.S. president, Barack Obama, to call for American schools to adopt world-class standards .
 Obama established the $4.35 billion “Race to the Top” initiative as a onetime fund to spur reform . Arne Duncan, the former chief executive officer of Chicago Public Schools, made the establishment of world-class standards and assessments .
 States encouraged to apply for Race to the Top grants if they aggressively pursued reform in accordance with the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 . States were encouraged to . apply for . Race to . Top grants . States are encouraged to. apply for grants if . they aggressively pursue reform
 The ARRA pumped money into the economy to stimulate recovery after the near collapse in 2008 of the financial system, which caused a deep recession that threatened to cut funds to schools across the country and severely cut education budgets in some states .
 States must affirm they are working to develop worldclass standards and assessments, introduce data systems that would be able to track the progress of individual students and link those students to their teachers .
 Five students share a single textbook at a pritnary school in Harare, Zimb., one of many state schools suffering from severe shortages of educational materials . NCLB required that five students share one textbook .
 The long-term National Assessment of Educational Progress (also known as the Nation’s Report Card), released in April 2009, showed that there had been considerable progress in reading and math for younger students . The relative stagnation of state-by-state math scores on what is known as
 There had been some discussion of reworking the federal ESEA legislation in 2009 . However, the illness and death of Sen. Sen. John McCain led to the legislation's demise . The bill was passed in 2009, but there had been no discussion of it .
 Edward Kennedy, one of the coauthors of the 2001 authorization, was one of many factors that pushed back the legislation to the 2010 legislative schedule . Edward Kennedy (see Obituaries)
 Many countries still struggle to provide students with any education at all . The United States struggled to provide its students with a world-class education .
 Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia were the regions with the most children out of school . Sub-Sahar Africa was the region with the highest number of children out-of-schooled children .
 UNICEF announced in September one of the biggest donor programs in five years . Australia, New Zealand, and European countries donated $70 million to fund a program to get Zimbabwean students back in school and to provide them with textbooks .
 As schools opened in 2009, it was estimated that there was only one textbook for every 10 students .
 By far the country with the most children chronically out of school was India . India has the most chronically out-of-school children in the world .
 UNESCO report estimated 9. million boys and 11 million girls in India did not attend school in 2007 . UNESCO 2009 report estimated that 9 million boys did not go to school in India . UNESCO report: 9.m. boys, 11m girls were not at school when they were in 2007
 India’s parliament passed and the president signed into law the previously controversial Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 . It guaranteed all children between the ages of 6 and 14 the right to an elementary-school education with no fees .
 This specifically included children with disabilities and older children who should have received such an education at a younger age . This includes those with disabilities, older children .
 Indian policy makers agreed to a national-curriculum framework and appropriate training and education for teachers . Policy makers continued to wrestle with the practicalities of how to make free education available to all children .
 They established a commission to tackle issues of access and quality at the higher-education level . They also established a higher education commission .
 Extremists claim Islamic law prohibits girls from being educated in schools . Schools, particularly those serving girls, are under siege from extremists .
 In July, a truck bomb killed 25 people, including 13 children on their way to school . In one particularly vicious attack in July in Afghanistan, 25 people were killed, including children .
 The story prompted readers to send donations, which Filkins used to buy a school bus to help protect the girls from further attacks . The donations were used to help Filkins buy the school bus .
 The niqab is a face veil with only a narrow opening for the eyes that was often worn by women . The sheikh of al-Azhar, Muhammad Sayyed Tantawi, the nation’s top cleric, declared it had nothing to do with Islam and was
 There were reports that he planned to bar female students who wore face veils from entering the schools of al-Azhar, Sunni Islam's premier institute .
 Many schools had been shoddily built in the 1990s following the extension of compulsory education . In the aftermath it became clear that many schools were built in a shoddy way .
 The central government set aside about $1.1. billion for the attack . The attack occurred in Kandahar, Afghanistan .
 Many countries, particularly Mexico and the United States, struggled with the effects of the pandemic H1N1 flu . Many schools were closed in the end of the 2008-09 school year and threatened many schools in 2009 .
 Trials for an H1N1 vaccine were quickly put into place in order to make vaccines available in October . Schools in the United States were instructed to prepare materials for students to continue their lessons in the event that schools had to close owing to illnesses .
 11 million doses were available in October, most of the year . Most doses were not available until later in the year. Most of the doses were released later in October .
 The World Health Organization identified schools as a key link in the spread of pandemics . The WHO has issued guidelines urging schools to stock soap and other hand-washing supplies .
 WHO found the decision to close schools under these circumstances difficult . WHO said many doctors and nurses with school-age children were affected by this .
 At the beginning of the 2009 school year, colleges and universities in the U.S. reported that hundreds of students had fallen ill with H1N1 flu .
 By December 26, nearly 1,700 deaths had occurred in the United States . By that time, the U.S. had more than 1,800 people had died .
 The H1N1 flu victims were more likely to be young and healthy . Public health officials said that figure was comparable to the usual number of deaths from the common seasonal flu .
 Higher-education enrollment grew sharply from 2000-07 . Total undergraduate enrollment in degree-granting institutions increased from 13 million in 2000 to 15 million in 2007 . The 2009 Condition of Education was produced by the United States Department of Education .
 As schools opened in the fall of 2009, there was widespread concern that the cost of college might cause a decline in enrollment . The near collapse of the financial system the previous year had caused many private college and university endowments to drop .
 In addition to cuts in state budgets, public colleges and universities have cut programs and increased tuitions . Public colleges are also cutting programs and increasing tuitions in response to cuts .
 At the same time, many public-university systems began addressing the disparity in graduation rates among students . The disparity is being addressed in part to address it .
 African American students were found to attain a baccalaureate degree at about half the rate of white students . Latino students were only at about one-third the rate .
 United States higher-education institutions continued to be a draw for international students, report says . Institute of International Educations report: U.S. higher-educational institutions continue to draw international students .
 Almost 624,000 international students enrolled in the 2007-08 school year . 7% increase over the previous year . Difficulties of obtaining student visas after terrorist attacks eased .
 The majority of international students hailed from India, China, South Korea, Japan, and Canada .
 United Kingdom, Italy, Spain, France, and China are the most popular destinations for American students .
 Saudi Arabia charged with developing research that would solve problems related to energy production . Women on campus were permitted to drive cars and mingle freely with men and were not required to wear veils .
 Qatar continued with its own ambitions to reestablish the Arab world as a seat of knowledge development . Qatar continued to be keen on reestablishing itself as a center of knowledge .
 By 2009 some 1,200 students were enrolled in these institutions . The foundation was in discussion with Imperial College London to establish a branch campus at Education City within a few years .
 Qatar Foundation also launched the Qatar Science & Technology Park for technological research and development . Qatar Foundation launched the park in March . The park is part of the Qatar Foundation .
 International efforts toward standardization in postsecondary education continued in 2009 . The Bologna Process began as an attempt to create a way for European countries to recognize credits and degrees among European universities . It has since grown to become an attempt for worldwide cooperation in higher education .
 In April a Bologna Policy Forum included not only the 46 participating countries . China, Egypt, Israel, Japan, Tunisia, and the United States .
 Forum addressed issues such as universal recognition of teacher qualifications and teacher, researcher, and student exchanges .
 Surveys of EUROPEAN WADING BIRDS showed that 50% are in decline . AFGHANISTAN established its first NATIONAL PARK; and the first FIJI PETRELS were rediscovered after 25 years . First FIJi PETREls were red
 Decision by EU governments to phase out all incandescent lightbulbs and low-efficiency types of halogen bulbs by 2012 was confirmed on March 18, 2009 . Decision was confirmed in 2009 by European governments .
 On February 2 a directive came into force under which carbon emissions from all flights arriving at and departing from EU airports would be capped in 2012 at 97% of their 2004-06 levels and 95% of those levels after .
 The EC had exceeded its powers by reducing caps for Estonia and Poland to levels lower than those requested in their National Allocation Plans . The court also ruled that the two countries had asked for the caps to be reduced .
 European Parliament approved a new regime for granting market approval to pesticides . The European Parliament has consented to a draft directive guiding their sustainable use .
 Pesticide application near schools, parks, or hospitals would be forbidden or severely restricted . Aerial crop-spraying would be banned . Buffer zones would have to be established to protect aquatic environments .
 22 pesticides would be removed altogether from the EU market—approximately 25% of all pesticides in use . The move would remove about 22 pesticides from the market .
 Prime Minister Kevin Rudd announced a plan to reduce emissions by between 5% and 15% below 2000 levels by 2020 and introduce a carbon-trading scheme in 2010 . Rudd announced the plan in December 2008 under which his country would reduce emissions .
 Rudd announced in May that the introduction of the scheme would be postponed for one year owing to the poor climate . The delayed scheme would aim to reduce emissions by up to 25% of 2000 levels . Rudd announced that the delay would be due to poor economic climate .
 In June it was reported that the Environment Ministry had halted construction on two dams in Yunnan province on the Jinsha River, a tributary of the Yangtze River . In June, it was also reported that two dams were halted by the government .
 The projects had commenced without environmental assessments or ministry approval . The ministry says the projects had started without environmental assessment .
 In early August 33 persons were admitted to hospitals in Hunan province . Hundreds of others were found to have high levels of cadmium in their bodies following a series of leaks from the Changsha Xianghe chemical plant .
 Medical tests carried out on nearly 3,000 Zhentou residents during the following weekend . In the nearby town, approximately 1,000 people staged protests against the polluting plant .
 The authorities promised to pay compensation for tainted farm produce and livestock that needed to be destroyed . Authorities promised to also pay compensation to those who lost their livestock .
 It was also reported in August that two environment officials in Wugang were also reported to have been arrested .
 Incident took place in August near the city of Xi’an in south central Shaanxi province, China .
 1,354 children suffered lead poisoning from a metal smelter in Hunan province, China . Smelter was apparently responsible for the poisoning of children from Hunan .
 Two executives of the Wugang Manganese Smelting Plant had earlier been arrested and the smelter shut down . Two executives had been arrested earlier this week .
 The Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress announced its approval of a resolution calling for new laws to target energy savings and emissions reductions . The resolution was approved by the Standing Committee on August 27 .
 On July 15 the government published a white paper outlining its plan to reduce U.K. greenhouse gas emissions by generating 40% of electricity from low-carbon sources by 2020 . The government published the plan on July 15 .
 Barack Obama's science adviser and director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy . Barack Obama was President Obama's chief science adviser .
 In April the Environmental Protection Agency said it planned to declare that carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbon . emissions contributed to air pollution that endangered public health and welfare .
 The United States Chamber of Commerce filed a petition for a formal hearing on the decision . On June 23 the United States chamber of commerce filed the petition . The petition was filed on June 23 .
 The petition asks for the EPA and environmental and business groups to undertake a credible weighing of the scientific evidence that global warming endangered human health . It filed a 21page petition on August 25 .
 Pacific Gas and Electric Co., Exelon, and Public Service Co. of New Mexico resigned from the chamber in protest . Pacific Gas & Electric Co. Co. resigned from chamber .
 On June 26 the House of Representatives passed the American Clean Energy and Security Act by a margin of seven votes . The bill passed the U.S. House on June 26 .
 The law commits the U.S. to adopting clean energy sources and reducing emissions of greenhouse gases by 2020 . The law was sponsored by Henry Waxman, a Democratic representative from California, and Edward Markey .
 The law would also require utilities to generate 20% of electricity from renewables by 2020 . Utilities could meet one-quarter of the target through improved energy efficiency .
 Democratic Senators John Kerry and Barbara Boxer drafted a Senate bill that was published at the end of September . The bill was published in September .
 It set a target of reducing carbon emissions by 20% below the 2005 level by 2020 . The UK has set a carbon emissions target of 20% lower than 2005 levels by 2015 .
 The act allowed the U.S. to impose penalties on imports from countries that did not take steps to reduce emissions . The act also allowed the United States to impose restrictions on emissions imports .
 LDCs called on industrialized countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions . industrialized countries must commit 0.5-2% of their GDP to fund mitigation and adaptation measures . LDC calls on industrialized nations to reduce emissions .
 Su Wei, leader of the Chinese delegation, said that success at the December Copenhagen meeting depended on whether developed countries were prepared to provide substantial funds and transfer climate-friendly technologies to LDCs . Su Wei: Success at Copenhagen meeting depends on if developed countries are prepared to give substantial funds
 India, supported by about half of the Group of 77 LDCs, proposed an amendment to the Kyoto Protocol . The amendment would require developed countries to reduce their emissions to 40% below 1990 levels by 2020 . India is the only country supported by the group of 77 countries .
 China and India defeated an attempt by industrialized countries to offer curbed reductions while seeking solid commitments from LDCs . The Group of 77, supported by the G-77, defeated the attempt by the industrialized countries .
 Little progress has been made toward reconciling differences between industrialized countries and LDCs . Subsequent rounds of talks were held in Bonn in August, Bangkok in September and October and October .
 Hu Jintao said China would try to limit its emissions by a notable margin by 2020 by improving energy efficiency . But he set no target for the country's emissions by 2020 .
 Delegates agreed that the meeting had been constructive but made no specific recommendations . Delegates made no recommendations for the meeting .
 The second meeting took place in July at L'Aquila, Italy, alongside a Group of Eight summit . The meeting was held at the end of July .
 The shrinkage was caused by irrigation projects along the valleys of two of the lake’s tributaries . The lake was once the world's largest lake .
 Over the course of 50 years, these projects caused the loss of more than 90% of the lake’s volume . The lake was once the largest lake in the world and is now the world's largest reservoir .
 G8 leaders pledged to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by 80% by 2050 . Delegates agreed that the global average temperature should not be permitted to rise by more than 2 °C .
 Russia would not threaten its economic growth by agreeing to emissions cuts, he said . Russia also stressed that it would not agree to cut emissions in order to boost economic growth .
 The United States and the EU also urged LDCs to commit to a 50% cut in emissions by 2050 . The LDCS rejected this proposal . The U.S. and EU also wanted LDC's 50% emissions cut in 2050 .
 At the third meeting, held in Washington, D.C., in September, the United States and other industrialized countries said that they wished to abandon the Kyoto Protocol in favour of an Australian proposal .
 The proposal was strongly opposed by India . It demanded that all countries commit themselves to timetables for reducing emissions by stated amounts and that reductions begin by 2020 .
 By 2020 Japan will cut emissions to 15% below 2005 levels, amounting to 8% below 1990 levels . Prime Minister Taro Aso announced by June 10 that by 2020 Japan would cut emissions by 15% .
 During the year several cost estimates for adapting to climate change were published . Several cost estimates were published for adaptation to the climate .
 The UNFCCC had calculated an annual cost of $49 billion to $171 billion in 2007 . In 2007 the UNFCC had calculated the cost of the U.N.C. should be between $49 and $171 .
 A study published on Aug., 2009, by the International Institute for Environment and Development and the Grantham Institute for Climate Change at Imperial College London estimated that when the effects on various key economic sectors were taken into account, the total might be two to three times higher .
 Preliminary findings from a World Bank study suggested that the cost to the LDCs might amount to $75 billion-$100 billion annually from 2010 from 2010 . In contrast, the World Bank said the cost of developing nations in the region could amount to up to $100 billion .
 The report also said that developed countries would have to bear much of the cost . Developed countries would also have to pay much of that cost, report says .
 The Committee of Geological Sciences of the Polish Academy of Sciences issued a statement in 2009 . The statement said recent global climate change was part of an entirely natural climate cycle .
 They agreed that the increase in the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations was partly due to human activity . But they agreed that emissions should be reduced while sustainable economic progress was maintained .
 Keynote speakers included Vaclav Klaus, president of the Czech Republic and of the EU, American astronaut Jack Schmitt, and Arthur Robinson, curator of a petition rejecting global warming .
 The petition was signed by more than 34,000 American scientists, more than 10,000 of whom had doctorate degrees . The petition has been signed by over 10,500 scientists .
 Many skeptics of human-induced climate change maintained that some messages provided evidence that climate data were deliberately manipulated and exaggerated and dissenting research suppressed to serve an alarmist agenda .
 Climate scientists have been accused of taking climate scientists' messages out of context . Many scientists have said that the messages were taken from context . Climate scientists say that they are not concerned about the impact of climate change .
 The goal of the conference was to develop a binding global agreement on greenhouse gas emissions that would replace the Kyoto Protocol . The Kyoto Protocol was set to replace it as a replacement .
 In October 2008 a meeting of the International Maritime Organization in London formally approved amendments to the UN MARPOL convention on ship-source pollution . The convention confirmed new global limits on the sulfur content of marine fuels .
 Sulfur in fuels would be reduced from 4.5% to 3.5%, subject to a review in 2018 . The reduction of sulfur in fuels will be reduced in 2012 and 2020 .
 Meeting also produced tougher emission standards for nitrogen oxides for new marine engines . IMO convention on ship recycling also produced final draft text of a new IMO Convention on ships recycling .
 Under the convention, ships would have to hold inventories of all hazardous materials on board . Certain substances would be banned outright .
 The improvement is attributed to increased surveillance and tighter rules . The improvement was attributed to tighter rules and increased surveillance .
 Brazilian police are investigating the discovery of 99 containers of hazardous waste in the port of Santos, near Sad Paulo, and at two other ports .
 The containers held approximately 1,400 tons of dangerous material from the U.K., but they were labeled as recyclable plastic . The containers were labeled recyclables plastic .
 Environment Agency officials arrested three men, who were later released on bail . Environment Agency: Three men were later arrested on suspicion of breaching the law .
 Brazil formally accuses the U.K. of breaching the international law forbidding the export of toxic materials . Brazil formally accused the UK of having breached the law . Brazil has accused the British government of breaching international law .
 Environment Agency working with Brazilians to arrange return of material . U.K. authorities are working to arrange the return of the material from Brazil .
 In September a report unveiled that Italian authorities were investigating a claim made by a member of the Calabrian mafia that the mafia had deliberately sunk ships carrying toxic wastes to evade laws .
 One wreck was located 30 km southwest of Italy . Images from a robot camera revealed yellow barrels with toxic warning labels .
 Salomon Ugborugbo, head of Tommy, a local company contracted to handle the waste, was sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment . The trial ended at the end of the trial over the 2006 dumping of toxic wastes in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire
 Essoin Kouao, the shipping agent from Abidjan who recommended Tommy to Trafigura, the Dutch-Swiss commodities company that chartered Probo Koala, the ship carrying the waste, was sentenced to five years in prison .
 Trafigura and the captain of the Probo Koala were also facing criminal charges in The Netherlands for having illegally exported the waste . Trafigurura and ProboKoala captain are also accused of illegally exporting the waste to the Netherlands .
 In September Trafigura agreed to pay more than $46 million in compensation to people made ill by the waste . Each of the 30,000 victims would receive $1,546. In September each victim would get $1.546.
 Trafigura paid $200 million in 2007 to the Ivorian government . This payment was in addition to the $200million Trafigurra had paid in 2007 .
 Uzawa was honoured for his advocacy of the concept of social common capital as a theoretical framework for confronting environmental issues . Uzawa has been honoured for advocating the concept for the environment .
 Lord Stem was recognized for his report “The Economics of Climate Change,"" which he prepared for the U.K. government . He prepared the report for the government .
 The seven Goldman Environmental Prizes were presented in April at a ceremony in San Francisco . The seven were presented at the ceremony in April .
 The relationships between biodiversity conservation, ecosystem services, human livelihoods, and sustainable—or unsustainable exploitation of wild resources were highlighted in the news in 2009 .
 A series of bushfires began on February 7 in the Australian state of Victoria . The fires began in the early hours of February 7 . The bushfires were the largest in Australia's history .
 The fires, thought to be deliberate acts of arson, were amplified by dry conditions of a seven-year drought to become the worst in Australia’s history . The fires are thought to have been deliberately set deliberately .
 A warning was issued in February through an assessment of the vulnerability of the vulnerable areas .
 The burning of more than 1,500 sq mi of drought-affected land was thought to be the result of arson . The burning is thought to have taken place in drought-stricken areas of the country .
 Fourteen of the 20 most-at-risk countries were in Africa, along with Peru, Colombia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Pakistan, and Yemen . Peru is one of the most at-risk nations in the world .
 The vulnerability indicator for each country was influenced by the results of predicted warming models, the importance of fisheries to economies and diets, and the country's limited capacity to adapt to potential impacts . Each country's vulnerability indicator was based on results of climate models and the ability to adapt .
 Nearly all shortfin mako sharks caught east of 120° W by commercial fishing boats were female . Most caught west of this line were male, according to fishing reports .
 The western part of the western part was fished more heavily, and thus a disproportionate number of males may have been caught . This may have led to the deaths of many males .
 Many individuals fell victim to accidental capture in drifting gill nets . Despite being classified as Vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, many individuals were captured .
 Afghanistan's first national park was created at Band-e-Amir in April . The region is a region of blue lakes separated by dams of travertine mineral deposits . The park is the first of its kind in Afghanistan .
 Afghan snow finch ( Montifringilla theresae) is the country’s only endemic bird species . The urial, ibex, the ibex and the wolf are among the wildlife species that survived .
 April report revealed the reappearance of the blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus ) in the North Pacific Ocean . Another April report said the blue whales reappeared in April .
 It was thought that whaling activities up to 1965 had eliminated this population . The population was thought to have been eliminated by whaling activity .
 An analysis of sightings that had occurred since 1997 near the coast of British Columbia and in the Gulf of Alaska revealed that blue whales in these areas were part of an extant Californian population . This suggests that migration patterns of an eastern North Pacific population may have resumed .
 The California population and the population historically inhabiting the area around the Gulf of Alaska could be one and the same .
 A June report showed that the global whale watching industry had burgeoned over the past 10 years . In addition, a June report also showed that a global whale-watching industry is booming .
 It was estimated that 3,300 boat operators and other tourism officials offered whale watching and employed an estimated 13,200 people around the globe . The whale watching industry employed 13,000 people worldwide .
 The report affirmed that protecting whales had generated significant economic benefits to communities worldwide . The report said protecting whales was a significant economic benefit to communities .
 Two communities in Tanzania obtained the first Forest Stewardship Council certification for African forests in April . The first African forest certification was issued in April by the Forest Steward Council .
 African blackwood is used to manufacture clarinets, oboes, and bagpipes . It is used in the manufacture of musical instruments and instruments .
 The wood could fetch £13 per log, a considerable increase over the 5 pence previously received . The wood is expected to sell for around £13 a log .
 These communities should profit from timber sales, says author . Provided that the forests were managed sustainably, these communities will profit from sales .
 An expedition to Fiji in May rediscovered one of the world's most elusive birds . The elusive bird was rediscovered by a team of scientists in Fiji .
 The Fiji petrel ( Pseudobulweria macgillivrayi) is classified by the IUCN as Critically Endangered . It was formerly known from one specimen collected in 1855 on Gau Island .
 In 1984 a single adult was caught on Gau Island, photographed, and released . The adult was photographed and released by the authorities .
 Expedition baited sea 25 nautical miles south of Gau with food made from finely cut fish offal and fish oil . The expedition baited the sea with a special food .
 When cast into the sea, the mixture created a pungent oil slick that attracted the petrels . The mixture was cast in the sea and created an oil slick which attracted petrel .
 50% of the populations of wading birds in Europe, western Asia, and Africa have declined . The pace of falloff had accelerated, according to a study published in May . The decline in wading bird populations has accelerated .
 Their decline was linked to inadequate protection of key sites on their migratory routes . Their decline has been blamed on inadequate protection from key sites .
 While wading birds used a network of protected areas in Europe, key sites elsewhere were not adequately protected . Wading birds were not protected in Europe's protected areas, experts say .
 Wetlands along Africa’s west coast, for example, had been affected by the construction of dams that drain wetlands and irrigation schemes that affect water flow .
 The IUCN classified the species, endemic to China’s Yangtze River system, as Critically Endangered . The last confirmed sighting of the species occurred in 2003 .
 Individuals bom in the late 1980s and early 1990s may survive in the wild because the Yangtze River system has complicated habitats where paddlefish could hide . Individuals may survive because of the complicated habitats of the river system .
 The upper Yangtze is probably one of the last places that the fish may survive in the region . It is the last place the fish could survive .
 Asian vulture species have been decimated by consuming the remains of livestock laden with diclofenac, an antiinflammatory used to treat cattle . The antiinflammatory ingredient is found in the stomachs of Asian vultures .
 Lammergeiers had previously been seen on India’s border with China but not in such a large group or at so high an altitude . Lammersgeiers were previously seen on the border with India but not so high a high altitude .
 Lammergeiers were known for dropping the bones of the animals they consumed onto rocks in order to smash them open and access the marrow of the marrow . They were known to drop the bones onto rocks to smash open and eat the marrow from them .
 Lammergeiers were not badly affected by diclofenac . Their numbers had significantly dwindled in India . Lammergesiers were also affected .
 A ll sectors of the fashion industry were affected in the year 2009 by the recession . The prolonged global economic downturn curbed consumer spending on fashion and luxury products .
 Conspicuous consumption, once perceived as “retail therapy’s” or an entertaining distraction from daily life, has become superfluous in the straitened economic times . Consicuous consumption has become more conspicuous in recent years, but it has become less conspicuous .
 Boris Johnson, mayor of the city, joined forces with the London Development Agency in the allocation of £40,000 to fund the cost of airline tickets and hotel accommodations for 30 Middle Eastern buyers . London Fashion Week will be held in London for 30 days .
 The gesture was made in recognition of their “significant” and “growing” purchasing power . The gesture is made in . recognition of . their ‘significant’ and ‘growing’ purchasing power.
 During the first nine months of the year, 18% of women's and children’s shops closed across the country . In Great Britain a Local Data survey revealed that during the first 9 months of 2013 18% closed .
 Style Rookie blogger Tavi Gevinson secured a front-row spot at Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week in September . Her blog Style Rookie became a popular destination for fashion tips .
 Richemont SA reported that fiscal first-half sales were down by 15% from the same period in 2008 . Burberry reported that during that same March-September period, it experienced a 19% drop in profit .
 In October, LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton released news that revenues over a nine-month period in 2009 had suffered a 6% fall year-on-year . The parent company owns Christian Dior, Louis Vuitton, and Fendi .
 Italy's IT Holding SpA went into receivership, as did Christian Lacroix’s Paris couture house after 22 years of operation . Gianfranco Ferre and Malo knitwear also went under receivership in Italy .
 Belgian designer Veronique Branquinho will close her company . She had already accepted a new role as creative director of Delvaux, the venerable Brussels leathergoods label .
 In 2008 she staged a celebratory 10year retrospective at the ModeMuseum for fashion in Antwerp, Belgium . She experienced a ""sharp drop" in orders for her autumn-winter collection .
 Yohji Yamamoto, the ‘elder statesman’ of Japanese fashion, filed for bankruptcy protection on October 9 . Yamamoto founded his label in 1972 .
 Luella Bartley announced that her eponymous label would cease trading on November 9 . Her financial backer, Club 21, withdrew its investment .
 In 2008 she had reported a £9 million turnover and received the British Fashion Council’s coveted Designer of the Year award .
 Models’ fees plummeted as designers cut back their budgets for once-lavish fashion advertising campaigns, and editorial opportunities lessened . Advertising budgets for fashion magazines dramatically diminished because of “staggering’s” advertising cutbacks .
 Conde Nast titles laid off staff, and quarterly magazines InStyle Weddings and Time Style and Design halted publication . Conde-Nast titles including InStyle and Design, devoted to chronicling the luxury market, halted publication.
 Ultimately, fashion was about change, and financial hardship ushered in a new era of pragmatism . Fashion was about fashion, and it's about change .
 The Sartorialist is a chic street-fashion blog maintained by photographer Scott Schuman .
 Its images provided visitors with “inspiration and ways to reinterpret’s clothing they already have” or prompted them to “shop in their own closet,” a phrase that became popular as the fashionable turned to their own wardrobes for style inspiration .
 Tavi Gevinson, a 13-year-old girl from Illinois, flaunted her favourite clothes on her Style Rookie blog . She also chronicled her favourite outfits on her blog .
 She had just appeared in a four-page profile in Love, a new Conde Nast biannual fashion magazine .
 Pop publisher Bauer Media appointed Dasha Zhukova as editor-in-chief in February . Dasha is the editor in chief of Pop magazine's Pop .
 The attractive 27-year-old girlfriend of Russian oligarch Roman Designer Beth Ditto favoured hold designs .
 Abramovich also owned a Moscow contemporary art gallery and Kova & T fashion label . Abramovich was also a Russian art dealer and designer .
 Fast fashion —inexpensive briskly produced merchandise that copies or interprets runway trends—became even more popular because of its accessible price and celebrity endorsements . Fast fashion became more popular in the 1990s because it was more accessible to the public .
 Sir Philip Green, the owner of Topshop’s parent company, flew in Kate Moss to open the store . The four-story, 2,323-sq-m retail space is located in the topshop's parent company .
 The celebrities in attendance included actress Jennifer Lopez, designer Marc Jacobs, designer Georgina Chapman, designer of the Marchesa fashion line .
 Beth Ditto, the lead singer of electro-pop group the Gossip, launched an eponymous line of designs for the plus-size British highstreet brand Evans .
 Fashions Ditto created items that curvaceous women usually avoided . The 22-piece collection includes dresses with thigh-grazing hemlines and polka dots .
 Ditto prompted a debate about why more stylish clothes were not readily available for the generously sized figure .
 Leading designers continued to cause retail sensations by producing lowpriced limited-edition collections for high-street retailers .
 Jimmy Choo’s collaboration with H&M has sold out . Several styles of high heels were sold out and were later bought on eBay for double their original price .
 The Choo multifaceted line was conceived by Tamara Mellon, the company’s president . It marked the shoe and accessories brand's first foray into clothing . It is the first time the brand has made its clothing foray into fashion .
 The line included 1980s-inspired women's wear and slick menswear staples, including jeans and T-shirts .
 United States Vogue’s June issue debuted Steal of the Month . The new section features fashion that retailed for under $500 .
 This reflected the plethora of quality fast fashion along with the demand for affordable clothes and also high-low dressing . Mixing upscale clothes with chain-store merchandise to create an ensemble .
 Obama made the knitwear staple a “must-have” for spring . Flaunting an array of cardigans with great flair during the G-20 summit .
 The first lady’s appearance at a Washington, D.C., food bank in a J Crew cardigan and capris paired with sneakers produced by Lanvin prompted objections when it was revealed that the footwear retailed for $540 . Several weeks later, however, the first lady
 Fashion boutiques opened spontaneously in every major fashion capital as designers negotiated short-term leases . The boutiques temporarily occupy storefronts vacated by bankrupt retailers .
 Affordable straw panama hats first appeared on the Gucci men's and women's ready-towear runways . The hats are now a ubiquitous street fashion trend .
 Feisty prints and bright “feel-good hues” dominated the designer ready-towear collections .
 Balmain's Christophe Decamin debuted Swarovski-crystal-embellished peak-sleeved minidresses, a zipped miniskirt and a bow-bedecked blouse .
 Jade is a limited-edition Le Vernis nail polish . It also appeared in Sublime Deco, an Art Deco-inspired Chanel costume-jewelry .
 The latter chronicled the relationship of Valentino Garavani and his business partner, Giancarlo Giammetti .
 Project Runway had a yearlong absence from the airwaves due to legal wrangling as it moved cable channels from Bravo to Lifetime . Show experienced a peak in its popularity, drawing a record-setting 4. million viewers .
 The hit hour-long weekly reality TV show was hosted by Fleidi Klum (see BIOGRAPHIES), who set challenges .
 Selma Weiser, the owner of Manhattan’s Charivari fashion boutiques, passed away in June . Weiser died in June at age 85 .
 She was also known for having taken pioneering steps to sell the designs of important Japanese and Belgian designers . At one time she employed a teenage Marc Jacobs as a stock boy .
 HIV GENOME structure reveals information about the virus’s infectious nature . Elucidation of HIV GENome structure revealed information about virus's infectious nature. Health and Disease .
 In 2009 American scientists made significant progress in their understanding of how HIV infects humans .
 Their analysis of the architecture of the virus’s genome found that its RNA structure plays a key role in its infection cycle . Their analysis found that the structure of the genome is key to the development of HIV .
 The lead researcher said that the findings could help reveal how RNA genomes influence the behaviour of not only HIV and other viruses .
 Scientists had charted only small areas of the HIV RNA genome . Prior to this, scientists had only charted very small areas .
 At issue was a group of study participants that had been inappropriately counted in the results . Study participants had been wrongly counted in study results .
 Others who saw the research believed that further analysis would show that the results were not statistically significant for the group that had received all six doses of the vaccine .
 Access to HIV treatment continues to improve around the globe, particularly in parts of Africa . Access to access to treatment continued to improve, particularly around the world .
 The number of people receiving antiretroviral treatment in lowand middle-income countries in 2008 was 36% higher compared with the previous year . A report released in 2009 by the World Health Organization , the United Nations Children’s Fund and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV
 More than four million people are receiving therapy, 10 times the number of people who were using the medications just five years earlier .
 The discovery of a species of African chimpanzee susceptible to AIDS-like illness could help scientists better understand how HIV attacks humans . Scientists hope to better understand the effects of HIV on humans .
 In July scientists reported that the species developed the illness after being infected with a version of HIV unique to simians . The illness is believed to be a form of HIV that is unique to humans .
 In August scientists in Europe reported the discovery of a new strain of HIV-1, which was closely related to a strain of virus occurring in gorillas . Scientists in Europe also reported a discovery of the new strain .
 The transmission of a simian immunodeficiency virus from gorillas to humans had not before been documented . The transmission was not before documented .
 The three strains of HIV-1 had previously been linked to chimpanzees, but their association with gorillas represented a groundbreaking discovery in HIV/AIDS research .
 The Sudan called for emergency measures in 2009 to stop a polio outbreak that was spreading across the Horn of Africa . The Sudanese government called for measures to stop the spread of polio .
 The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies also sought emergency funding to battle the outbreak . Red Cross, Red Crescent and Red Cross Societies are also seeking emergency funding .
 Officials say eradication efforts fell short in stopping the spread of two strains of polio from northern regions of India and Nigeria . Officials said that eradicating efforts failed to stop spread of the two strains .
 Polio also reached Port Sudan, which was a cause for concern because many people had to pass through the area in their travels to Mecca . Polio was also a cause of concern because of the area's proximity to Mecca, which is a major pilgrimage destination .
 Persons going to Mecca suspected of having caused spread of disease from Port Sudan to Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Yemen, and Indonesia between 2004 and 2006 .
 The disease still had not been eradicated in Nigeria, India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan . Despite continued efforts, the disease still has not been wiped out .
 Officials also reported that polio appeared to be reemerging in Angola, Chad, Niger, The Sudan, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo . Officials also said that polio also appeared to have reemerged in Angola and Chad .
 Rotary International and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation committed $355 million to strengthening eradication efforts . Rotary and the Gates Foundation are committed to eradicating eradicating malaria .
 Globally, the number of new polio cases in 2009 that had been reported by late December was 1,517, compared with 1,651 the previous year . The number of polio cases worldwide had increased by more than 1,500 in 2009 .
 In January, the government of the Philippines reported what may have been the first known case of the Ebola virus’s being transmitted from a pig to a human .
 Farmer thought to have come in contact with infected pigs tested positive for antibodies to EbolaReston virus . A farmer thought to be infected pigs has been confirmed to have been infected with Ebola .
 Four other people, including farmers and a slaughterhouse worker, tested positive for Ebola-Reston antibodies . The government reported that four other people tested positive .
 The Philippine Department of Health said that the people who tested positive appeared healthy . The department said they appeared to be in good health .
 Officials believed that direct contact with infected pigs was the underlying cause for the presence of Reston antibodies .
 Studies of Reston strain had shown that the virus can be passed to healthy humans without resulting in illness . Studies of the Reston strains have shown that it is safe to pass to healthy people .
 Its effects in other populations, including the elderly and women who are pregnant, were not known . The elderly and pregnant women were not affected .
 The government ordered the slaughter of 6,000 pigs at a farm north of Manila . To prevent the potential spread of the virus, the government ordered it to be slaughtered . The slaughter will take place in order to prevent the spread of it .
 Health ministers from countries where drug-resistant tuberculosis was most prevalent agreed in April to increase efforts to fight the disease . Health ministers in countries where the disease is most prevalent have agreed to increase their efforts .
 At the centre of these agreements was their promise to invest $15 billion to support TB-elimination efforts over the course of the following six years . At the end of the agreements, they pledged to invest more than $20 billion in the fight against the disease .
 WHO: At least 4,000 new cases of drug-resistant disease arose annually or in which one-tenth of the total number of new cases were drug resistant, reached 27 in 2009 . WHO: The number of high-burden countries with high-risk countries in which at
 She explained that a united, global effort in fighting the epidemic was of utmost importance and required consideration on a political level . She said a united global effort needed to be made to combat the epidemic .
 Parasites resistant to the antimalarial drug artemisinin found in Thailand and Cambodia . Global malaria control efforts could face a major setback, experts say .
 Artemisininin-resistant parasites were found along the Thai-Cambodia border, WHO said in February . The parasites are found in Thailand along the border .
 Combination therapies using artemisinin were considered extremely effective, with more than 90% of infected persons being treated successfully . More than 90 per cent of infected people were treated successfully, according to experts .
 The malaria drug resistance seen along the border was likely to have been fueled largely by the continued use of artemisinin alone rather than in combination therapy, experts say .
 Malariacontrol efforts implemented in Zambia included the widespread distribution of insecticide-treated nets and combination treatments based on artemisinin .
 Two studies released in September found using a double dose of a cancer drug increased the chance of disease remission for patients with a common form of leukemia .
 The studies examined the treatment of patients with acute myeloid leukemia . The cancer is one of the most common acute forms of the cancer that occurs in adults .
 The studies appeared in The New England Journal of Medicine . The studies examined a man with tuberculosis awaiting free treatment outside a medical facility in Siliguri, a city in northeastern India .
 The dandelion is a plant which propagates by airborne means . In the same way, social action can spread and take root, carried on the winds .
 Of those who took the higher dose, some 71% experienced remission of their disease . Of those patients receiving the normal amount of drug, about 57% entered remission .
 The results also showed that more chemotherapy was associated with improved survival length . Those receiving the larger dose survived 24 months and those receiving the smaller dose survived just 16 months .
 The second study examined patients aged 60 to 83 and found that more than two-thirds had remission of their cancers when given a dose of chemotherapy that was twice the standard amount .
 This was in contrast to remission in about 54% of patients treated with the regular dose of daunorubicin . This was compared to 54% who were treated with regular dose .
 Researchers said that their work could produce a shift in the treatment of adults under 65 .
 The elderly, however, who were at an increased risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia, were not predicted to see any change in the current approach .
 In an effort to better address cancer in Hispanic populations, the U.S. National Cancer Institute created partnerships with the governments of Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Mexico and Uruguay .
 The network’s mission was to develop a comprehensive understanding of cancer among Hispanics in Latin America and the U.S. It also wanted to improve cancer research and care in those regions .
 In 2009, for the first time, a person's own heart stem cells were used to help repair tissue damage after a heart attack . The stem cells are now being used to treat tissue damage in the heart .
 In June a team of doctors performed the procedure on a 39-year-old male patient at Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute .
 The tissue was then taken to a lab, where it was cultured, giving rise to heart stem cells . Heart stem cells were then cultured to give rise to stem cells in a lab .
 Millions of cells were grown in order to ensure that there was an adequate supply for the treatment . Millions were grown to ensure there was a sufficient supply of cells for treatment .
 Using a catheter, doctors were able to deliver the stem cells to the patient's heart via the coronary arteries . Using a coronary artery, doctors delivered the stem cell to the person's heart .
 The procedure is part of a Phase 1 clinical trial in which 15 other patients were scheduled to undergo the same treatment . The procedure was part of the Phase 1 trial .
 A study published in March in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology concluded that if doctors broadened statin-prescribing criteria to include C-reactive protein levels, an indicator of inflammation, might enable them to prevent thousands of heart attacks, strokes, and deaths each
 The report indicated that 6 million older adults with low cholesterol but high CRP levels might benefit from statins . The report said that 6. million older people with low levels of CRP may benefit from the drugs .
 Statins prevent additional heart attacks and strokes in patients who had already suffered from one or the other . Previous studies had shown that statins can prevent additional strokes and heart attacks in patients .
 Statins were also known to help those who were at increased risk for cardiovascular disease but may not have had a heart attack or stroke . Statins may also help those at risk of heart attack but not having had a stroke .
 About 50% of adverse cardiovascular events occurred in persons who had normal cholesterol levels . About half of those who suffered a heart attack or stroke were people with normal cholesterol .
 Some 20% of these events occurred in persons who had no evidence of cardiovascular disease risk factors . 20% were in persons with no risk factors, including those with no cardiovascular disease .
 The incidence of heart attacks had decreased significantly in places in North America and Europe where smoking bans had been passed .
 Ban on smoking in public and work areas reduces incidence of heart attacks by 17% . Communities that had not taken steps to reduce smoking reported a reduction of 17% in heart attacks .
 Researchers were hopeful that a new drug tested in 2009 could stamp out river blindness, or onchocerciasis . River blindness was primarily in Central and South America and Africa .
 The drug, known as moxidectin, was investigated as part of a clinical trial involving three African countries . The drug was investigated by a group of African countries involved in the trial .
 Africa was the region of the world most affected by river blindness . More than 37 million people worldwide were infected with the causative parasite, Onchocerca volvulus .
 The study was focused mainly on determining moxidectin’s activity against the adult worms of O volvulus .
 The drug was developed as part of a collaboration administered by WHO and Wyeth Pharmaceuticals known as the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases . The drug is available in the UK and Australia .
 Study suggests eliminating onchocerciasis through ivermectin treatment may be possible . Treatment may also be possible in the future, study suggests .
 ivermectin treatment has stopped infections and further transmissions in three African regions . The study was published in July in the journal PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases .
 ivermectin kills larvae but not adult worms of O volvulus . Annual or biannual treatments would be necessary to prevent resurgence of the worms .
 Promising results were reported in a study examining a new vaccine for advanced melanoma, a deadly form of skin cancer . The vaccine is a form of form of melanoma that can be deadly and aggressive skin cancer.
 A peptide vaccine combined with interleukin-2 stimulates the body's immune cells to attack cancer cells . A study at Anderson Cancer Center in Houston found better response and survival outcomes .
 Among those given the vaccine, 22.1% of patients responded, and for nearly three months, the treated patients' cancers did not progress .
 Those who were not treated with the vaccine experienced an average of about 1.6 months of progression-free survival . Those who didn't receive the vaccine, however, experienced average of 1.5 months of survival .
 The average overall survival time for patients treated with the vaccine was 17. months . The vaccine is a form of formative step-up to a formative form of life .
 In contrast, patients not treated with the vaccine survived only an average of 12. months . Patients not treated for the vaccine survive only 12.6 months .
 The vaccine was also the first to have demonstrated, in a Phase 3 clinical trial, beneficial effects in patients with melanoma . Vaccine was first to demonstrate, in the Phase 3 trial, that beneficial effects were beneficial to patients .
 New hope for cocaine addicts may be on the horizon after an experimental vaccine showed positive results in helping treat their addiction . An experimental vaccine has been shown to help treat cocaine addicts .
 Vaccination with the anticocaine agent reduced cocaine use in 38% of treated patients . Vaccination also reduced the use of cocaine by 38% .
 Clinical trial included patients who were being treated for methadone addiction . The clinical trial received backing from the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse .
 The results were published in October in the journal Archives of General Psychiatry .
 The vaccine works by triggering antibody production by the immune system . It is similar to the way in which other vaccines work against infectious diseases .
 In the presence of the anticocaine vaccine, antibodies are produced that bind specifically to cocaine in the blood . Antibodies are produced in the absence of the anti-cocaine vaccines .
 This stops the drug from moving through the blood-brain barrier and thereby prevents the ‘high’ that it normally causes . The drug is then stopped from entering the brain barrier, preventing it from entering into the bloodstream .
 The vaccine Gardasil is widely used to help prevent cervical cancer in women . It is now widely used in men to help fight cervical cancer .
 In September drug advisers recommended Gardasil be used for the prevention of genital warts in men . In September the U.S. drug advisers said it could be used to prevent genital warts in men .
 Genital warts are caused by the human papillomavirus, the same virus that can cause cervical cancer in women . Human papillumavirus can cause genital warts .
 A committee associated with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration voted to support the extension of Gardasil uses to include the vaccination of males aged 9 to 26 . A committee of the FDA voted to extend the vaccination to include those aged 9-26 .
 The vaccine binds to the papillomavirus, rendering it incapable of infecting the cells of the genital tract . Vaccine is available in the UK for around $1.5 billion .
 Gardasil was approved in 2006 for use in females aged 9 to 26 to aid in the prevention of cervical cancer in 2006 . It was approved to be used in females under the age of 26 to help prevent cervical cancer .
 In September Pfizer Inc. settled an agreement to pay $2.2 billion for having illegally encouraged the medical use of several drugs that were known, by company officials, to have potential health risks . Pfizer is one of the world's largest pharmaceutical companies .
 The United States Department of Justice described the case as being a landmark health care settlement . The settlement is one of the largest of its kind in the country's history .
 The drugs at the centre of the case included the painkiller Bextra . The painkiller had been withdrawn from the market several years earlier .
 Bextra was known as a COX-2 inhibitor, the name given to a class of pain-relieving drugs that inhibit the cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme . The enzyme is involved in inflammation .
 Pfizer pulled Bextra from the market when it was revealed that the drug posed potential risks to heart health in some patients . Pfizer also pulled Bexra from market after it was found to pose a risk of heart health .
 Pfizer officials engaged in schemes to illegally market Bextra and other drugs, including Zyvox and Lyrica . The government charged the company with illegally marketing the drugs .
 FDA panel urges a ban on the popular prescription painkillers Vicodin and Percocet . Panel says they have potential for liver damage if they are given the drugs .
 Acetaminophen is an aspirin alternative used in over-the-counter pain relievers, such as Tylenol and Excedrin . It is a pain-killing alternative to aspirin used in some pain relief products .
 Patients who need to take Percocet or Vicodin for long periods of time often require periodic increases in dosage for the drugs to remain effective . Patients need to increase their dosage for long-term use of drugs .
 This means that more acetaminophen enters their bodies, creating a higher risk for liver damage . This means more acetamophen enters the body, causing liver damage, according to experts .
 Panel also recommended lowering the maximum dose of over-the-counter painkillers with acetaminophen . Panel also recommends lowering the amount of over the counter painkillers used to treat pain .
 The recommendations follow an FDA report showing that severe liver damage, and even death, can result from a lack of consumer awareness that acetaminophen carries such risks .
 Many patients take acetaminophen because it is easier on the stomach than aspirin and ibuprofen . Acinaminophen is easier to treat than aspirin or ibupofen .
 Some 35 million people worldwide are living with some form of dementia, such as Alzheimer disease . In September information published in the 2009 World Alzheimer Report indicated that some 35 million .
 The newly published data were the result of an extraordinarily comprehensive investigation aimed at assessing the prevalence of the illness .
 The number surprised scientists because it was about 10% higher than what they had anticipated according to assessments that had been completed several years earlier . Scientists say the number surprised them because of the size of the number of people affected .
 Previous studies had not fully estimated the extent of the impact that Alzheimer disease would have in less-developed countries . Alzheimer disease is a major problem in developing countries .
 By 2050 Alzheimer disease could affect more than 115 million people, report says . Number of persons with dementia would continue to increase every year . Alzheimer disease will affect 115 million by 2050 .
 The rise in life expectancy in developed countries is attributed to increased life expectancy . This rise is attributed in part to increased longevity in developed nations .
 The United Kingdom and several other countries had a place long-term pro-Alzheimer patients . Whereas the United Kingdom . had a . place of pro-alzheimer instruments, the U.S. had a long-time pro .
 Music therapy was shown to positively affect behaviour and mood in persons with dementia . Music therapy has been shown to have positive effects on people with dementia in some cases .
 Alzheimer disease had received less attention and federal support in the United States . Alzheimer disease, compared with other diseases, had received much less attention in the U.S.
 A government advisory group in the U.S. sparked a heated debate in November after recommending that women begin screening for breast cancer at age 50 rather than 40 .
 Panel also said that women should have mammograms only every other year rather than annually . Panel said mammograms should be given to women only once a year or twice a year .
 Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius says women should continue to have regular mammograms starting at age 40 . She reminded the public that the task force did not set federal policy and was only an advisory group .
 The guidelines were described as ""a step backward” by officials at the American College of Radiology . The guidelines have been described as a 'step backward'
 The same group also said that the new recommendations could potentially harm the health of women . The group said the recommendations could also harm women's health .
 The American Cancer Society also strongly objected to the new recommendations . The new recommendations will be reviewed by the FDA next year .
 The task force’s decision to recommend later and less-frequent screening was based on research into the benefits and risks of mammography . The decision was made by the task force .
 It assessed the number of false-positive instances and unnecessary treatments that occurred as a result of the procedure . It took into account whether screening actually led to reductions in deaths from breast cancer .
 Potential harms, such as unnecessary biopsies and treatment of slow-growing cancers, need to be taken into consideration . It also said, however, that the potential harms must be taken to consideration .
 The new screening guidelines did not include women who may be at greater risk for breast cancer . Women 40 and older should still consult with their doctors about when to undergo testing .
 Greg Walden is chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee . Walden says peanut products should be banned from being sold in the U.S. Congress .
 The president of Peanut Corp. of America, Stewart Parnell, refused to answer questions concerning the salmonella outbreak that was linked to the company’s Georgia plant . U.S. health officials announced a countrywide recall for all peanut products made during the previous two
 Peanut Corp. of America, which initiated the recall, produced various peanut products, including peanut butter and peanut paste . The recall includes peanut butter, peanut paste and peanut butter . Peanut Corporation of America recalls peanut products .
 The warnings did not include peanut butter sold in jars at retail stores . The warnings do not apply to peanut butter in jars or in jars .
 Barack Obama lifted the ban on human embryonic stem cell research in the United States . The move opens the door to new avenues of scientific study that had been closed .
 The ban had been imposed in 2001 by former president George W Bush, who objected to the research because studying embryonic stem cells required the destruction of a human embryo .
 Obama’s order removed the restrictions on federal funding for such research . Obama also removed restrictions on funding for research .
 A separate ban on federal funds to pay for the development of stem cell lines was not part of the president’s order . A separate legislative ban on funding for stem cell line development was also not included .
 Deaths from unsafe abortions, particularly in poor countries of Africa, remained a serious problem worldwide in 2009 . In 2009, the number of unsafe abortions in the world remained at a high level .
 Of the 41. million abortions reported in 2003, nearly 20 million were unsafe and many were carried out by women themselves . Many of the 41 million abortions were unsafe, according to data .
 Sub-Saharan Africa is particularly affected, with more than half of the deaths from unsafe abortions occurring in this region . The report noted that sub-Saharan African was particularly affected .
 The region also had an exceptionally high occurrence of unintended pregnancies . The region was reported to have had an extremely high occurrence .
 This was likely associated with the fact that very few people used contraceptives . This was probably associated with a lack of use of contraceptives .
 More people were taking advantage of contraceptives, which contributed to a decline in the number of abortions performed globally in recent years . Worldwide, however, more people took advantage of contraceptive contraceptives .
 The year 2009 marked the sesquicentennial of the publication of Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species and the bicentenary of his birth . ZOOLOGY he year 2009 marks the birth of the first person born in Darwin .
 Among Darwins many other outstanding accomplishments were his book The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication . His lesswell-known discourses on coral reefs are his lesswell known discourses .
 One of three lines of evidence based on analysis of Bronze Age horses from the Bronze Age and those of wild specimens from older Paleolithic sites .
 Skeletal material revealed Botai horses to be slenderer and more similar to Bronze Age domestic horses than to wild horses from the older sites . The findings provide evidence of domestication of domestic horses .
 A third of the mandibles of horses that were examined showed signs that they had held bits in their mouths and possibly carried riders . In addition, a third of those mandibles showed signs of holding bits in the mouth and possibly carrying riders .
 Botai pottery fragments revealed that the pots had once held horse milk . Is isotopic analyses of fat residues in Botai pots revealed that they once held milk .
 Scientists used DNA sequence polymorphisms (genetic variations) to determine coat colour . Arne Ludwig of the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research in Berlin and Michael Hofreiter of the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig .
 Wild horses from the Iberian Peninsula dating to the Early Holocene carried both black and bay genes thousands of years before horses were domesticated anywhere . Wild horses dating back to the early Holocene, however, still carry both bay and black genes .
 Black colour expressions in wild horses are presumed to have been a consequence of natural selection associated with dense forests following glaciation . The black colour expressions are thought to be a result of natural . selection .
 The investigators concluded that selective breeding of domestic stock is the most parsimonious explanation for the observed changes in horse coat coloration in the Eurasian Steppe .
 The deep ocean is one of the least-explored parts of the planet . The myriad interactions and associations between species in the deep ocean are not well understood .
 Among the population traits that can be critical to the persistence of some communities is the longevity of a keystone species . Keystone species on which other species depend are key to the survival of communities .
 Fishing and other harvesting activities that destroy such deep-ocean corals were thought to disrupt the fragile ecological balance of deepsea communities . Fishing and harvesting activities have been thought to be disrupting ecological balance .
 Some individual colonies were found to be several thousand years old . They found that some individual colonies had been found to date back thousands of years ago .
 The oldest Gerardia species specimens specimens were more than 2,700 years old . Leiopathes species had longevities of more than 4,200 years . Gerardia specimens were 2,800 years old, and those of Leiopats species had 4,000 years old
 Many scientists maintain that the destruction of deep-sea coral eliminates critical living space and other ecosystem services for many members of the biological community . Many scientists say the destruction .
 Bottom trawling, other fishing activities, and harvesting for the coral jewelry trade have been identified as the cause of long-lasting damage to deep-sea coral beds in many regions .
 Such activities are not compatible with maintaining ecosystem integrity in fragile deep-sea communities dependent on long-lived coral, scientists say . Such activities do not work well with coral communities .
 Researchers studying animal behaviour continued to discover patterns that shed light on the ecology and evolution of species . Researchers continued to find patterns of animal behaviour .
 Using a statistical technique called principal components analysis, the investigators determined that choice of foraging microhabitats by juvenile cottonmouths was not random . The cottonmouthmouths are known to be the largest in the world, according to scientists .
 Adults were randomly scattered throughout a diversity of microhabitats . In contrast, adults were randomly dispersed throughout a variety of microhomes . Adults are randomly scattered in microhabits .
 Young cottonmouths were found on land alongside the wetland, typically in a tight coil, in a sit-and-wait foraging posture for ambushing prey .
 Juveniles also occurred in locations hidden from predators, while adults were generally discovered outstretched and actively foraging throughout the wetland . Adults were generally found outstretched .
 Juvenile snakes were able to use caudal luring to attract salamanders and small frogs . The snakes have yellow tails and are able to lure salamander and frogs .
 Developmental changes in coloration and behaviours that affect an animal’s risk of becoming prey can influence foraging strategy and the choice of microhabitat within a predatory species .
 Many social animals gain ecological benefits from living in groups, says behavioral ecologists . The benefits are more effective predator avoidance and an increase in foraging success, or prey capture .
 A third recently identified advantage to larger groups is the development of more effective problem-solving skills in novel situations . A third advantage is the ability to solve problems in new situations .
 Groups of six were found to be 4 times more successful than groups of two at solving the problem of removing the lid and 11 times faster at gaining access to the food .
 A clear conclusion was that larger group size resulted in more rapid problem solving . The study found that larger groups of people solve problems faster than small groups .
 One explanation for the higher success rate was that certain individuals may have had experience in solving similar problems or simply have an aptitude for doing so .
 Research in 2009 also focused on questions related to how animals may respond to shifts in climate . Research also looked at how animals respond to climate shifts in 2009 .
 Two generally accepted responses to global warming are latitudinal or elevational shifts in geographic distribution and changes in the seasonal timing of critical biological events, such as reproduction, migration, or emergence from hibernation .
 Two independent research projects identified components of higher environmental temperatures that affect the body size of animals . The research was conducted by independent research groups .
 Researchers tested the hypothesis that decreased body size among ectothermic, or cold-blooded, aquatic animals will generally become more prevalent with global warming .
 They provided evidence from fish sampled in the Baltic Sea and rivers in France and published data about the North Sea .
 In rivers with more than two decades of gradual increases in water temperature, average fish size decreased . Fish species with smaller body sizes became significantly more prevalent, investigators found .
 North Sea fish communities where warming trends had occurred . The latter observation was also true for North Sea communities .
 This specimen of smooth black coral , which lives in deep water near Hawaii, lived for approximately 4,000 years . In some fish the fish is thought to have lived for more than four millennia .
 Increased water temperature resulted in changes in species composition, individual growth rates, and reproductive patterns of fish and other aquatic ectotherms .
 Similar patterns were found in lab experiments in which a warming environment decreased the size of zooplankton, phytoplankon, and bacteria .
 Arpat Ozgul and Tim Coulson of the Imperial College London examined the causes of decreasing body size among a free-living population of Soay sheep on Hirta, an island in the Saint Kilda archipelago of Scotland .
 The researchers concluded that the shift in size was primarily a consequence of ecological responses to climate change that produced milder winters over the previous two decades .
 More sheep survived milder winters, resulting in greater population densities . This led to greater grazing competition and slower growth rates overall .
 Body size of both fish and sheep changed in under three decades . The results suggest rapid changes in a trait as biologically important as body size can be induced by climate change .
 Important breakthroughs in 2009 were made in 2009 by using genetic engineering to raise the productivity of crop plants .
 Most rice plants die if they are completely submerged in floodwaters for more than a few days . This problem afflicts up to 40% of rice crops in Asia and Africa during their rainy seasons .
 Some rice varieties, however, can survive flooding by rapidly growing their stems upward, some reaching 4 m in height . Some varieties of rice varieties can survive floods by growing stems upward .
 Such plants are typically far less productive than high-yield varieties . High-yielding varieties are typically less productive and less productive .
 As the stems grow, they form hollow structures inside that allow gas exchange with the atmosphere and thus prevent waterlogging . This prevents the plant from getting waterlogged .
 When these genes were introduced into common rice plants, their stems rapidly elongated in deep water and withstood flooding . The stems of these rice plants can also withstand flooding in deep waters .
 A gene helps some types of wild rice fend off rice blast disease, a fungal infection caused by Magnaporthe grisea . The fungus destroys up to 30% of world rice production .
 Previous attempts to breed cultivated rice with resistance to the fungus produced poor-tasting, low-quality rice . Previous attempts have failed to breed resistant rice resistant to fungus .
 The fungus also quickly evolved to overcome the resistance in as little as two years . The fungus quickly evolved in a matter of hours .
 The new work successfully used genetic sequencing to isolate the blast-resistant gene, P121, from a linked stretch of DNA responsible for the bad flavour of the wild varieties of rice .
 The gene increased the plant’s defenses against infection in general, making it harder for the blast fungus to take hold . The gene also increased plant's defense against infection .
 Scientists from Germany, Switzerland, and the United States used another form of plant defense to genetically engineer com plants to fight off a root pest .
 Larvae from a beetle known as the western corn rootworm burrow into the plants’ roots . It had become the most destructive corn pest in the U.S. in the past .
 Some varieties of com, however, fight off D virgifera by releasing a chemical messenger called -beta-caryophyllene . Insecticides are largely controlled with insecticides, but some varieties are resistant .
 Chemical attracts soil-living nematode worms, which attack and kill the beetle larvae . The chemical attracts protective soil living nematodes, killing larvae .
 After decades of breeding, most North American com varieties no longer emitted -beta-caryophyllene and thus had lost the ability to recruit protective nematodes . Most of the com varieties had lost their ability to attract nematode .
 When the gene for the chemical was introduced into the genomes of ordinary corn plants, the plants became far less vulnerable to beetle attacks .
 Plant scientists took a major step forward in their plans to “barcode’s every plant species in the world by using DNA analysis . Plant scientists say they hope to use DNA analysis to identify species of plants .
 The selection of the most appropriate gene for barcoding animals had been achieved several years earlier, but a botanical equivalent proved troublesome . The selection was made after the selection of a gene for animals had already been achieved .
 52 scientists working in 10 countries spent four years discussing which DNA barcode to use . A team of 52 scientists from around the world spent the last four years working on the barcode .
 DNA variations in the DNA give a characteristic signature for plant species . They eventually selected portions of two chloroplast genes, rbcL and matK .
 In 72% of the cases, they immediately determined the correct species of plant . The plant was found in the wild .
 For the remaining specimens, they were able to place each plant within a group of related species . For the rest of the specimens, the researchers placed each plant in a group .
 Researchers in the United States and Belgium identified two species of microbes growing on the inside of roots of poplar trees . The microbes boost the trees’ productivity on barren or contaminated soils .
 Genetic analysis of the two bacterial species revealed that they produce growth-promoting plant hormones . This could stimulate the trees’ growth, according to scientists .
 With fertile farmland in short supply, the notion of adding bacteria to poplar trees to help them grow on marginal land was particularly attractive .
 Trees could be used as feedstock for the production of biofuels and help sequester carbon from the atmosphere . Such trees could also be used to help to feedstock biofuel production .
 Another study revealed a fascinating symbiosis between bacteria and the giant cardon cactus . Pachycereus pringlei allowed the plant to grow on barren rocks in Mexico .
 When the cactus seeds germinated, bacteria contained within the seeds dissolved the rock and released minerals that the seedling roots could absorb . The cactus seedlings can also absorb minerals from the rock .
 Once the cactus was established, its roots grew into the rock and, with the help of the bacteria, eventually produced soil . Once the roots grew in the rock, the bacteria produced soil for soil .
 The bacteria were fed carbon and nitrogen compounds by the cactus . In return for supplying the minerals, the bacteria were given carbon by it .
 Many orchids lure insects to pollinate their flowers by imitating the insects’ sex pheromones . Orchids attract insects to their flowers with imitating their pherms .
 A unique type of mimicry was discovered in Dendrobium sinense, an orchid that grows in China . The orchid is found to mimic mimicry in a Chinese orchid .
 A team of Chinese and German scientists discovered that the orchid produces a chemical that exactly imitates the honeybees’ alarm pheromone Z-l 1-eicosen-l-ol . The chemical is previously unknown in plants and rarely identified even in the insect world
 Hornets typically home in on this pheromone to catch honeybees for food . Hornets typically use the pheramone to attract honeybees to food .
 The hornets are so fooled by the orchid’s scent that they pounce on it and thus pollinate the flower . The orchid is so attracted to hornets that the hornets pounce upon it .
 Microorganisms outnumber the more than 75 trillion cells of the human body by at least 10 to 1 . Every human is host to a microorganism community -- a veritable ecosystem of a diverse array of microbes .
 The majority of microbial populations that inhabit the skin, nose, mouth, gut, gut and other tissues are not simply opportunistic parasites . They are true symbionts vital to human health, and exert previously unappreciated influence on the ability to resist disease .
 Many microbes do not grow well outside of their normal habitat, meaning they cannot be cultured in the lab . One reason that many of these microbes have remained unknown until recently is that they cannot grow well in the wild .
 Available samples of human secretions or tissues contain such a complex array of different species as to be refractory to analysis by traditional means . Human secretions are refractories to analysis using traditional means, scientists say .
 In 2009 scientists made great strides in improving their understanding of the identities and roles of these microbes .
 These research efforts were spearheaded in part by the Human Microbiome Project . The project is sponsored by the National Institutes of Health in the United States .
 Launched in December 2007, the HMP pursued stated goals that included identifying and sequencing the genomes of those microbial species that inhabit the healthy human body .
 One of the first members of the human microbiome to be recognized as beneficial to human health was E coli, which inhabits the large intestine . E coli is one of the most common bacteria in the human body to be beneficial to health .
 The community of microbes inhabiting the gut is startlingly diverse . It became clear, however, that the community was startlingly varied .
 DNA sequence analysis of gene 16S rRNA (ribosomal small subunit RNA), which is unique to each species of microorganism, enabled scientists to identify various microbes in the human gut .
 Studies of the microbial communities in healthy humans and laboratory animals implicate microbial variation as a factor influencing everything from nutrient extraction during digestion, to defense against invading pathogens .
 One of the most compelling connections between gut microbes and health deals with obesity . Gut microbes are linked to obesity .
 Enterococcus faecalis, found in the human gut, is a member of the diverse community of microbial species that constitute the human microbiome . Researchers exploring the distal gut microbes of obese and lean laboratory mice and also of obese human volunteers .
 germ-free mice intentionally colonized with “lean” gut microbes accumulated significantly less total body fat through the course of the experiment . The trait was transferable, according to the study .
 The “obese’s gut microbes also demonstrated an increased ability to extract energy from the diet . Of note, the ‘obese gut microbes’ also demonstrated that they were better at extracting energy .
 While circumstantial, these data clearly implicate the ‘obese’ gut microbes as a contributing factor in human obesity . This may also suggest novel routes of intervention in the battle against obesity .
 One of the least-well-understood aspects of the human microbiome deals with the question of initial colonization of an infant .
 A newborn emerges sterile from the womb, and over the course of the next days to months, he or she must acquire a full complement of “good" microbes .
 One can only wonder whether the most ingrained and natural of all behaviours—that of human parents to nuzzle and kiss their baby, or of a mother mouse to lick her pups—are linked to the need to share not only love but microbes .
 Classic autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder that is evident by age three and that affects four times as many males as females . Classic autism, the most common autism spectrum disorder, affects 4.5% of males and 4% of females . Autism is the most severe form of autism,
 Whether this apparent ""epidemic” of autism reflects a true rise in incidence or is due to changes in diagnostic criteria and ascertainment is a point of some contention . Most experts attribute at least a majority of the apparent increase to ascertainment .
 Even monozygotic twins do not show 100% concordance, sometimes one twin is affected and the other twin is not . The heritability of twins is estimated at greater than 90% . Sometimes twins are affected by the same heritability .
 Even when both twins are affected, the level of severity can differ . Further, the severity of the twins' condition can differ depending on severity .
 The sibling risk is 5-10%, which is 10 times higher than the population risk . The risk of sibling deaths is 5 to 10% .
 ASDs result from a combination of both genetic and environmental factors, say experts . Together these data confirm that ASDs are caused by both genetic or environmental factors .
 Neuroanatomical and neuroimaging studies suggest that affected individuals may experience abnormal neurodevelopment in utero, beginning as early as the first or second trimester of gestation .
 The key environmental influences, therefore, may be prenatal as well as post-natal . Environmental influences, such as prenatal as postnatal influences, may also be prenatal .
 The article, published by British physician Andrew Wakefield and colleagues in the journal The Lancet, was retracted by a majority of the coauthors . The article caused a wave of fear among parents and health care providers . immunization rates in the U.K. fell by more than 10%
 In February 2009 the Omnibus Autism Proceeding in the United States Court of Federal Claims ruled against the plaintiffs in three test cases, thereby closing this sad chapter in medical legal history .
 The mouse demonstrated a variety of social and behavioral characteristics reminiscent of the disorder . This is further evidence of a causal relationship between the chromosomal abnormality in patients and their clinical symptoms .
 ASD may result from impaired regulation of neurons in a region of the brain stem called the locus coeruleus . Other data suggested that some of the features of ASD may respond to fever and may result in impaired .
 These advances offered hope that the cause of autism would soon be understood, which may enable future generations to prevent or reverse its course .
 In October 2009 a number of reports documenting the discovery of a new early hominid were published in the journal Science . The discovery was made in October 2009 by a group of scientists .
 Ardipithecus ramidus was dated to 4. million years ago and appeared to be far more primitive than Australopithecus . This species was dated 4.million years ago, and appeared more primitive . Ardipithcus ramidsus was a species that was far more
 The hadrosaur sequences were determined to have more in common with those of birds than those of other reptiles . This confirms the close relationship between birds and dinosaurs .
 The family Heterodontosauridae represents a very basal group of omithiscian, or ""bird-hipped,” dinosaurs .
 They were small bipedal animals known mainly from the Early Jurassic Period of Africa . The animals were known mainly as small bipedsal animals .
 A report published in March 2009 described the first known Early Cretaceous heterdontosaur from the Chinese province of Liaoning .
 Tianyulong confuciusi extended their geographic range into Asia . The heterodontosaurs were found in China . The new species is a new species of the heterododontosaurus .
 A new Jurassic ceratosaur from China shed light on the origin of the reduced number of digits in birds .
 Previous studies suggested that the reduction to three digits in theropod dinosaurs occurred by the loss of digits four and five . Previous studies suggest the reduction occurred by losing digits four, five .
 Birds appeared to have lost digits five and one, leaving the three expanded central digits to support the wing . Birds, however, appeared to lose digits five, one and one .
 In the new Chinese ceratosaur, the metacarpal region (an area made up of the bones of the hand proper) shows similarities to digits two, three, and four . While the phalangeal region shows more affinity to digits one, two, and three .
 The authors indicated that this phalangeal anatomy in other theropods may be the reason for the idea that they retain digits 1-3 .
 The authors suggested that it made more sense to assume that the reduced number of fingers in theropods actually represents digits 2-4 . Theropods combined with the hand anatomy of the new ceratosaur, they said .
 A study published in 2008, comparing the clutch volumes of the dinosaurs Troodon, Oviraptor, and Citipati, supported a bird-patemal-care model for the dinosaurs, indicating that the male parent cared for the young .
 Living archosaurs, such as crocodilians, follow the maternal behaviour model, in which the young are cared for by the female . In contrast, living archosaurs such as the crocinos follow the motherly model .
 Epidexipteryx hui, a new avian from the Jurassic of Inner Mongolia, showed a surprising mixture of characteristics from several different theropod groups . Other early bird species seem more aligned with a particular type of coelurosaurian .
 An analysis of pterosaur limb strength indicated that, unlike birds, pterosaurs may have launched into flight by using all four limbs . Unlike birds, birds may have used all four legs to launch into flight .
 The research compared bone strength of three pterosaur species with that of 20 bird species . The research was carried out by a group of 20 birds .
 In heavier birds the leg becomes much thicker than the humerus of the wing, which creates more leg strength for takeoff . The leg of a bird is thicker than that of its wing, making it stronger for takeoff.
 In pterosaurs, forelimbs are much stronger, which suggests that pteros may have used them to aid in takeoff . Forelimbs may have been strong enough to help in flight .
 Features suggest that the animal lived in trees, making it the oldest known tree-dwelling vertebrate in the fossil record .
 A biometric study compared the bending force of the jaw of this animal with that of the American alligator . Deinosuchus had a bite 13 times as powerful as the alligator, according to a study .
 It was likely one of the top predators of coastal environments . It was capable of easily taking down a sizable dinosaur . The dinosaur was a top predator .
 An online report of three new Australian dinosaurs was published in August . The report was published by an online report in August.
 Two of the new genera, Diamantinasaurus and Wintonotitan, represented the first new sauropods from Australia in 75 years . The three were the first to be named from Queensland in 28 years, and two of the . first new . genera were
 The third dinosaur, a large carnivorous theropod, was assigned to the newly created genus Australovenator . The new genus was created for the first time in 2013 .
 Three dinosaurs lived during the Cretaceous Period approximately 98 million years ago . All three dinosaurs lived in the same time as dinosaurs in the early 2000s .
 Titanoboa cerrejonensis, a newly described 60-million-year-old boid from northeastern Colombia, represents the largest-known snake of any age . With a body length of 13 m (about 43 ft) and an estimated weight of 1,135 kg , Titan
 The maximum size of poikilothermic animals is restricted by metabolic rate . Average temperatures must have been relatively high to support the snake's growth .
 This interpretation supports the hypothesis of very hot Paleocene climates in the neotropics based on high concentrations of carbon dioxide predicted by climate models . This interpretation is supported by the hypothesis that high carbon dioxide levels predicted by models are predicted by scientists .
 Fossil evidence has indicated that it took 14 million years for whales to sequence from a terrestrial animal to a fully aquatic one . The whales are believed to have evolved from terrestrial animals to aquatic ones .
 A 47-million-year-old specimen of Maiacetus inuus, a semiaquatic ancestor of the whales, was reported with a fossilized fetus in the skeleton . The fossil was found in the fossilized skeleton of a marine mammal .
 The size and position of the fetus indicates that the young were delivered headfirst, similar to terrestrial mammals . The fetus was delivered head first, according to the size of the baby .
 The new specimen suggests that this ancestral whale still gave birth on land . Since marine mammals deliver the fetus tail first, this suggests that the whale gave birth to land . The whale's tail was delivered tail first .
 Trilete spores in the fossil record indicate the presence of vascular plant lineages . The spores were found in fossil records dating back to 2000 .
 During the Ordovician, Saudi Arabia was part of a large southern landmass known as Gondwana . Saudi Arabia is now part of the world's largest landmass .
 The paper hypothesized that vascular plants originated and diversified in Gondwana and then migrated elsewhere . The paper also hypothesised that vascular plant species originated in the region .
 The group known as the ‘great appendage’ arthropods has been known only from Cambrian deposits such as the Burgess Shale . It occurs near the base of the arthropod family tree .
 The rarity of great appendage arthropods in the fossil record was probably due to a scarcity of the types of sites needed for their preservation . The rare fossil record is thought to be due to the type of site needed for the preservation .
 This image provides a side-by-side comparison of vertebrae belonging to the present-day anaconda and that of an extinct boid . Titanoboa cerrejonensis is considered the world’s largest-known snake and considered the largest snake .
 Online publishing figured prominently, especially in China, where the growth of INTERNET LITERATURE overshadowed the production of print products . Online publishing figures prominently in China .
 Russia announced a record number of literary deaths, including major novelists such as Frank MCCOURT and Augusto BOAL . Americans John UPDIKE and Frank Mccourt also died, including Augusto BAL .
 2009 was a vintage year for books that examined the death of unbridled capitalism . In the nonfiction realm, 2009 was the year of nonfiction books examining capitalism's demise .
 In these books one could see the authors analyzing, defining, and coming to terms with the end of an era . The authors analyze, define and come to terms .
 Financial journalist Gillian Tett’s Fool's Gold similarly attributed the recession to unfettered greed .
 Many of these books looked forward optimistically toward a kinder, greener business climate . Many of the books looked optimistic toward the future of business .
 The Storm by Vince Cable, treasury spokesman for the Liberal Democrats, argued for a return to safe, regulated banking . Zac Goldsmith’s The Constant Economy sketched out a new society, in tune with the limits of the Earth .
 The study identified inequality as the cause of isolation, depression, and the drive to consume . More equal societies almost always do better, says the study .
 Fear and Happiness in the Twenty-first Century City assessed the privatization of the British city and the cost of championing investors’ needs over those of residents in terms of human happiness . The study was published by the University of Manchester .
 In Sarah Waters’s The Little Stranger, readers entered a post-World War II landscape of decay, austerity, and class envy . Waters' book is published by Sarah Waters, a British-born American novelist .
 Simon Mawer’s The Glass Room was a historical novel set in 1930s Czechoslovakia . Mawer's novel was set in the 1930s Prague .
 Adam Foulds based his novel The Quickening Maze on a moment in the late 1830s when John Clare and Alfred Lord Tennyson lived in a home in High Beach Asylum .
 Mantel's novel was described as a “Tudor spellbinder”; it was historical revisionism at its best . Full of verbal jousting, rich historical detail from tapestries to heretic burnings, and human insight .
 Coetzee and Mantel all occupied the highest echelons of the literary hierarchy . Foulds was already a seasoned award winner, and was already an award winner .
 For an award often maligned for championing ‘unreadable” novels, the short list was full of commercially viable ""cracking good” reads . Furthermore, for the award, there were also some commercially viable reads .
 Samantha Harvey surprised critics when she was nominated over Nobel Prize-winning American writer Toni Morrison . The winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature will be announced on Sunday .
 Harvey’s first novel, Th.e Wilderness, traced the descent of an aging architect into dementia as he loses grasp of his own memories and consequently his identity . Harvey's first novel was published in 2007 .
 The winner of the Orange Prize was American writer Marilynne Robinson for Home . Robinson won the award for her work in which characters attempt to come to terms with their personal and family histories .
 Home was appreciated for both its technique and its humanity . The novel was published in the U.K. in 2009 .
 If the narrator of The Wilderness could be described as unreliable, so too could the main characters of a number of other well-received novels . The Wilderness' main character is unreliable, as is the main character of many other novels .
 Charlie calls into question his own attempts to order the chaos of his life, “This falsification of memory—the adjustment, abbreviation, invention, even omission of experience—is common to us all, it is the business of psychic life”
 Central to all the books nominated for the CILIP Carnegie Medal for children’s books was the transition from childhood to adulthood . Whether they be historical novels with a political edge, cosmic adventures, or dystopian fantasies, they were nominated .
 Bog Child by Siobhan Dowd combined the stories of Fergus, an Ulster teenager with a brother half dead in the Maze prison on a hunger strike, and Mel, the Iron Age girl whose body Fergus finds preserved in a bog .
 Dowd showed an empathetic understanding of the confusing terrain of adolescence . Dealing with teenage sexuality and the difficulties of disentangling politics from immediate human relations, Dowd said .
 Set in postwar Britain, it promoted the timeless values of tolerance and friendship . Story of Henry, a boy forced to work on a photography project with two classmates stigmatized by the prejudices of the age .
 Poet poetry captured front-page headlines twice within three weeks in May . Poet's poetry captured headlines twice in three weeks .
 Carol Ann Duffy became the first woman to be appointed poet laureate since the post was created in 1668 . Duffy is the first female poet laureate to have been appointed in the post since 1668. Duffy is also the first African-American poet laureate in the UK .
 Duffy’s hard-hitting first poem in her new role was a departure from the topics expected of a poet laureate . Duffy's poem was her first poem since taking over the role of the poet laureate in 2012 .
 The poem was seen to have topical resonance in a year brimming with politicians' expense scandals . As one commentator described it was an ""almost speechless with rage” attack against the effect of politics on the politician .
 The scandal continued apace when Ruth Padel admitted to her part in disseminating sexual-harassment allegations against Walcott to the press . Padel, who won the election, admitted to disseminating allegations to the media .
 Padel, who would have been Oxford's first woman professor of poetry, resigned . Padel resigned from the position after the incident .
 Judges' chair spoke of a ‘renaissance in poetry’ as the prize boasted its strongest short list in years . Josephine Hart, the judges’ chair, also spoke of the prize's strongest shortlist . The judges' chair said there was a “ren
 Scottish poet Don Paterson wins best collection for his fourth collection . The winner in the best collection category was Scottish poet Paterson .
 Other contenders included the 80-year-old establishment poet Peter Porter .
 Reid’s collection A Scattering was a “moving, unsentimental record of loss,"" dedicated to his wife, who died in 2005 . Reid's collection was “a “magnificent record of lost,"’�
 The Cry of the Flesh blended philosophy with phenomenology to reflect on the social effects of illness on the sufferer . Based on the author’s own experience of living with a rare and fatal lung disease .
 Nine Hypochondriac Lives, also short-listed, drew links between hypochondria and creativity . Charlotte Bronte, Marcel Proust, Charles Darwin, and Glenn Gould examined historical figures such as Charles Darwin .
 How the Romantic Generation Discovered the Beauty and Terror of Science, by Richard Holmes, by literary biographer Richard Holmes . Holmes looked at radical science before Darwin and its impact on great writers such as Shelley, Coleridge, Byron, and Keats .
 The prizewinners are selected in October by the Swedish Academy and receive the award on December 10 in Stockholm . The prize will be presented in Stockholm in December .
 Herta Muller International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award was awarded in 1996 . The award is the largest international literary prize and is open to books written in any language . It was awarded to the winner of the award in 1996.
 Organizations that contribute to the literary welfare of children and young people are also eligible . Organizations who contribute to literary welfare in the UK are eligible .
 Tamer Institute for Community Education (Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip) Commonwealth Writers’ Prize . Established in 1987 by the Commonwealth Foundation .
 In 2009 there was one award of £10,000 for the best book submitted, as well as a £5,000 award for best first book .
 Awarded to the best full-length novel written by a citizen of the Commonwealth or the Republic of Ireland and published in the UK during the 12 months ended September 30 .
 Awarded to a work of published fiction written by a woman in English and published in the U.K. during the 12 months ended March 31 . Awarded for work by a female writer in English .
 Frank O’Connor International Short Story Award was first awarded in 2005 . Prize recognizes a collection of short stories in English by a living author and published in the previous year .
 The award is organized by the Munster Literature Centre in Ireland and Cork . It is underwritten by the Cork City Council in association with the Irish Times . The award will be presented in Cork and Ireland .
 Love Begins in Winter by Simon Van Booy Bollingen Prize in Poetry . Bollingen prize was established in 1949 by Paul Mellon .
 PEN American Center recognizes a living author for his or her body of work in a variety of genres written in, or translated into, English . Allen Grossman received the award in even-numbered years for his work .
 The award, named for Vladimir Nabokov, was first presented in 2000 . The award is named for the Russian-born Russian author .
 PEN/Faulkner Foundation each year recognizes the best published works of fiction by contemporary American writers . Cynthia Ozick received the award for her work in New York City .
 The award, named for William Faulkner, was founded by writers in 1980 to honour their peers . The award is named for Faulkners and was named for his work in 1980 .
 Pulitzer Prizes in Letters and Drama Begun in 1917. Netherland by Joseph O'Neill . Netherland is one of the world's most famous dramas .
 Categories have varied, beginning with 3—Fiction, Nonfiction, and Poetry—swelled to 22 awards in 1983 . Categories have since returned to the following 4 in 2001 .
 Awarded annually since 1930 by the Poetry Society of America for distinguished lifetime service to American poetry . Twice Toward Justice by Phillip Hoose .
 The Newbery Medal is the oldest award in the world for childrens literature . It honours the author of the most distinguished contribution in English to American literature for children .
 Established in 1951 by Planeta Publishing House for the best unpublished original novel in Spanish . Established by the Planeta publishing House .
 Established in 1988 by the governments of Portugal and Brazil to honour a ""representative"" author writing in the Portuguese language . Established to honour the author of a book .
 First given out in 2006; it is sponsored by the government of Russia and underwritten by a number of prominent businessmen . The jury also serve as the jury .
 Leonid Yuzefovich for his novel Zhuravli i karliki Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature . Leonid was awarded the award for his work in the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Fiction, Poetry, Drama, Translation, Nonfiction, and Children’s Literature . Each in English and French .
 The award honours first-edition books of poetry published during the preceding year . The award is given to first-time-published books published during that year .
 Wright Buchner Prize Established in 1996 and awarded for the best contemporary novel published in Arabic . Awarded for best contemporary fiction in Arabic published in 1996 .
 The Caine Prize for African Writing is awarded annually for a short story Georg-Biichner-Preis . Warrak Al-Hub by Khalil Sweileh was awarded the Caine prize for the best short story in Africa .
 First awarded in 1923; now administered by the German Academy for Language and Literature . Awarded in 1923 .
 Walter Kappacher Hooft Prize is written by an African writer and published in English . The prize is awarded to African writers who have won the Walter Kappacher Prize .
 Selections are made by a 10-member jury from among original works first published in Danish, Norwegian, or Swedish during the previous two years or in other Nordic languages (Finnish, Faroese, Sami, etc. etc. during the last four years . Selections
 Per Petterson Prix Goncourt Prix de VAcademie Goncourt is a French Academie de Goncourt .
 First awarded in 1903 from the estate of French literary figure Edmond Huot de Goncourt, to memorialize him and his brother, Jules . First awarded from 1903 .
 Trois femmes puissantes by Marie NDiaye Prix Femina . Established in 1904 . Troi Femina was created in 1903 .
 The awards for works ""of imagination"" are announced by an all-women jury in the categories of French fiction, fiction in translation, and nonfiction . The awards were announced by a jury in French fiction .
 The Man Asian Literary Prize is awarded annually for an Asian novel unpublished in English . French Fiction Personne by Gwenaelle Aubry Strega is awarded a French fiction prize .
 The prize is underwritten by the Man Group PLC and the Hong Kong International Literary Festival Ltd .
 The Boat to Redemption by Su Tong . Jun’ichiro Tanizaki Prize . Jun'ichiro Sho. The Boat To Redemption . Su Tong. Tanzaki Prize
 Established in 1965 to honour the memory of novelist Jun'ichiro Tanizaki . Established to honour novelist's memory in 1965 .
 The prize is awarded for the best serious work of fiction by a promising new Japanese writer published in a magazine or journal . Established in 1935 and now sponsored by the Association for the Promotion of Japanese Literature .
 Awarded annually since 1947 for the best work of prose (fiction or nonfiction) by an Italian author in the previous year . Awarded since 1947 .
 The prize has been supported by the beverage company Liquore Strega and Telecom Italia .
 Tiziano Scarpa Cervantes Prize for Hispanic Literature Premio Cervante . Prize was awarded for Hispanic literature . Stabat mater was awarded by Tizio Scarpasa Cevantes .
 Established in 1976 and awarded by the Spanish Ministry of Culture for a body of work in the Spanish language . Awarded in 1976 .
 Jose Emilio Pacheco Mao Dun Literary Award was awarded to honour contemporary Chinese novels . Named after novelist Shen Yanbing whose nom de plume was Mao Dun . Award is awarded every three years .
 The bicentenary of Darwin's birth and the 150th anniversary of his On the Origin of Species was a topic raised in the armfuls of histories, primers, and collections published to mark the birth of Darwin . Science’s impact on culture is a topic of discussion
 Darwin’s Sacred Cause, by Darwin biographers Adrian Desmond and James Moore, controversially located Darwins motivation for his theory of evolution in his repugnance for the slave trade .
 American publishers were assaulted on a number of fronts in 2009, including by the down-tending economy, flat or sagging book sales, and the distractions of the Internet, the Internet .
 Many readers looked to escapist literature, especially those who flocked to the works of such best-selling authors as James Patterson, Dan Brown and Nicholas Sparks .
 It was a silver year, if not a golden one, for readers who enjoyed good fiction, poetry, and nonfiction narrative . Nevertheless, it was a year for readers to enjoy good fiction .
 Doctorow built on, changed a bit, and transformed the lives of the Collyer brothers into a stately, beautiful performance with great resonance within their housebound lives .
 Her first novel in nearly a decade was a dense, sharply rhythmic work of fractured narrative about a nearly broken West Virginia family . The novel was published in 2007 .
 The book shifts back and forth over a nine-year period, between South Korea’s North Chungchong province in late July 1950 and a West Virginia hamlet in 1959 . The book is set in the 1950s and 1959s .
 She’s already walking off across the grass, but Termite is outside so he doesn’t mind her going . Termite doesn't mind Termite going .
 She’s a little shape in the shine of glare on the window, then the gravel crunches and they're moving off fast, like they’re going somewhere important . She's a little figure in the glare of the window .
 Murder was also at the centre of John Irving’s latest opus, Last Night in Twisted River, a novel that carries the reader from a remote New Hampshire logging camp in the mid1950s to a freezing lake house near Toronto early in the new century .
 Philip Roth's latest short novel, The Humbling, is about an aging actor who tries to cure his stage fright with sexual addiction . The book-length work by gifted storyteller Lorrie Moore, A Gate at the Stairs, was widely praised . Though widely praised, the
 Well-regarded and enterprising work by writers with smaller followings also gained considerable attention .
 French tightrope walker Philippe Petit strung cables between the twin towers of the World Trade Center in 1974 . Petit was inspired by the real August 1974 illicit high-wire walker who strung cable between the Twin Towers of New York .
 McCann wrote, ""He entered the noise of the city, the concrete and glass made a racket, the thrup of the traffic. McCann wrote . McCann wrote that he entered the noise of the city of the concrete and glass .
 The action follows the stories of a priest, prostitutes, a judge, and an heiress . The action also follows the story of a judge and a priest .
 Luis Alberto Urrea’s novel Into the Beautiful North drew a lot of praise for its lyrical narrative . The novel is wedded to a plot similar to Akira Kurosawa's film Seven Samurai . Urrea is Mexican American .
 Their ribs showed—the farther north the bus drove, the more pronounced the cages . The farther north they drove the cages became more pronounced . Their ribs were clearly visible .
 Bonnie Jo Campbell’s short-story collection American Salvage offered a look at cold, lonely, methamphetaminedrenched modern working-class life in small-town Michigan . Campbell's short story collection was published in 1998 .
 Because of their despairing feel and their shape and form, they felt all too real . Few of the stories ended with a resolution, but because of their . despairing . feel and the shape of the . form, the stories felt too real to be resolved .
 Daniyal Mueenuddin is the author of another fiction finalist, In Other Rooms, Other Wonders . He attended Dartmouth College, Hanover, N.H., and Yale Law School .
 As do a number of his characters in these sharp and insightful stories, he lived in the Punjab, which he offered as the centre of the world . He lived in Punjab, where he offered to be the world's centre .
 A large cast of characters, ranging from wealthy landowners to servants, pass through his pages . A wonderful sense of the strata of contemporary Pakistan . A great corrective to the cartoonlike representation in current-day newspapers .
 Marcel Theroux was born in Uganda and lived in the United Kingdom . He is the son of novelist Paul Theroux . Theroux is the author of several novels, including The Life of the Museums .
 His novel Far North offered a dystopic look at the future, with Americans living in encampments along the Russian tundra . Far North was published in 2007 .
 The Way Through Doors and Lowboy, by two young male writers, Jesse Ball and John Wray, respectively, both featured major characters who were rather odd young men . Two new novels of note, by Jesse Ball, both feature odd characters .
 Boyle attempted an affecting portrait of American architect Frank Lloyd Wright in The Women . Boyle nobly attempted to portray the architect in the film .
 South African expatriate Lynn Freed focused once again on her native ground in The Servants’ Quarters . Freed is back in South Africa for the first time in her native country .
 Michael Malone took readers onto his North Carolina turf and into the air above it in The Four Comers of the Sky . Malone also took readers on his own turf in North Carolina . Malone's book was published in October 2013 .
 Achy Obejas, author of Memory Mambo and Days of Awe, chose Havana for the setting of her third novel, the appealing Ruins . The Ruins is the work of the author of the novel, which is published in Havana .
 Jean Thompson’s latest collection of short fiction, Do Not Deny Me, won some praise . Joanna Scott's novel Follow Me and Robert Cohen's Amateur Barbarians were also praised .
 The Library of America published the Collected Stories of Raymond Carver . 1,000 pages of Carver’s work, including variant versions of some of his most famous short fiction .
 William Styron's Marine Corps sketches titled Suicide Run . Another compelling collection of posthumous work was published by Styron . Styron was a Marine Corps artist .
 Michael Crichton's last fully completed novel, Pirate Latitudes, lit up the fall title list . In addition to the fall titles, the author's last full-completed novel was Pirate Latitude .
 While fiction of 2009 shot off sparks and sometimes fireworks, the nonfiction books smoldered rather than exploded . Nonfiction books, whether memoir, criticism, history, or a blend of the above, were bestsellers of the year .
 The Death and Life of an American Small Town offered a worrisome piece of book-length reportage of a methamphetamine-saturated American heartland . The book was published by Pulitzer Prize-winning Tom Charity .
 Eula Biss published a collection of eccentric and well-composed personal essays on race in American life in Notes from No Man’s Land .
 Jane Vandenburgh's memoir, A Pocket History of Sex in the Twentieth Century, was built on a wonderful fusion of insight and eccentricity of vision .
 Posthumous The Essays of Leonard Michaels (edited by Katherine Ogden Michaels) Showed off the brilliance of the late story writer in nonfiction prose .
 Alan Cheuse published A Trance After Breakfast, a collection of travel essays that ranged in subject from his native New Jersey to the islands of Bali, Indonesia, and New Zealand .
 Former poet laureate Rita Dove signed in with Sonata Mulattica, a collection of poems about a young African European composer who first won Beethoven's approval and then earned his anger .
 Campbell McGrath turned his attention to the figure of young George Shannon, the youngest member of the Lewis and Clark expedition . Shannon was the Pennsylvaniaborn teenage boy who was the youngest .
 In Shannon he dramatized George’s 16 days of wandering alone across the Great American Desert after becoming separated from the main group of explorers .
 Novelist Richard Bausch went mostly in the direction of lyric in his book These Extremes . The book featured prose to his relatives as well as verse based on historical and literary figures .
 Marilyn Kallet, longtime resident of Tennessee, brought out Packing Light . Marilyn Kallett brought out the light for the first time in her Tennessee home .
 Miguel Algarin is founder of the Nuyorican Poets Cafe . He produced essays and poems in Survival Supervivencia . He has published numerous pieces of poetry, essays and poetry .
 Snodgrass, James Purdy, Harold Norse, Frank McCourt, and William Safire are among the writers behind the scenes .
 Humour and disaster were often uneasy companions in Canadian novels in 2009 . The best Canadian novels of the year were published in 2009 and 2010 .
 Margaret Atwood’s The Year of the Flood was an inventively witty but bleak account of life on Earth after a long-predicted worldwide disaster has occurred . Douglas Coupland's darkly comic Generation A was set in a future in which bees were nearly extinct and only
 Tall tales also informed Michael Crummey’s Galore, set in a remote Newfoundland outport . Galore is set in the province's largest town .
 The true and tragic capsizing of the oil rig Ocean Ranger in 1982 formed the backdrop for Lisa Moores novel February . February is the story of a family surviving the loss of husband, father, and breadwinner .
 Other settings include ancient Macedonia, a World War II-era factory and a post-Khmer Rouge Cambodia .
 Anne Michaels’s compelling love story The Winter Vault took both Egypt and Canada as its setting . Anne Michaels also interweaved flashbacks of historical events in post-World War II Poland and England .
 Barry Callaghan also played with time, present and past in Beside Still Waters . Beside still Waters is a peripatetic search for a lost love .
 Bonnie Burnard’s Suddenly was placed squarely in the centre of a cancer patient's family and friends . In contrast, she was put in the heart of her cancer patients' friends .
 Kate Pullinger reworked the story of a rebellious housemaid and her famous employer, Lucie Duff Gordon . Claire Holden Rothman was not too closely bound by the facts in The Heart Specialist, an account of Maude Abbott, one of Canada’s first female doctors .
 The pitfalls of expediency and morality were examined in Linden MacIntyre's The Bishop’s Man . Colin McAdam's Fall is a portrait of privileged male adolescents at an Ottawa boarding school . Martha Baillie's The Incident Report is a fantastic romp of literary references
 Alice Munro’s latest collection, Too Much Happiness, was published in October 2013 . Munro's short stories include the rewriting of real lives, as well as the final journey of a famous 19th-century Russian mathematician .
 Ali Smith demonstrated the versatility of the short-story form in The First Person, and Other Stories . Deborah Willis and Mavis Gallant once more utilized her talents for observation in Going Ashore .
 Alexandra Leggat’s Animal plumbed the often unrecognized affinities of animals and humans . The stories in the Animal series explore the ways of life in animals and people .
 Curry Is Thicker than Water by Jasmine D’Costa is a deftly witty excursion into tales set in the heart of India . George Bowering’s The Box is a playful riff on Vancouver in the 1960s .
 A common theme in many books of poetry was the differences that both separate and unite individuals . Poems are about the differences and differences that separate individuals .
 Adeena Karasick’s Amuse Bouche served up a word salad of phrases, concepts, metaphor, and wit in wild and tasty juxtapositions . The Amused Bouche is the latest in a series of words from the author's work .
 Marguerite Pigeon’s Inventory examined the interface between subject and object, where the observer and the observed begin and end . Fred Wah considered the relations between word and thing in Is a Door, and Jeanette Lynes contrasted Canadian places and pastimes .
 Douglas Lochhead stayed put and studied his own backyard in Looking into Trees . Lochhead's book was inspired by his backyard experiences .
 Barry Dempster revels in the contrasting vagaries of the human heart in Love Outlandish . The book is based on the same themes of love and marriage .
 David Zieroth meditated on escaping from oneself in The Fly in Autumn . Carmine Starnino in This Way Out looked for exits from modernity . Sina Queyras’s Expressway was a direct route into the heart of other times and places .
 When Canadian author Margaret Atwood attends a photocall in London for a theatrical performance of her novel The Year of the Flood .
 Important works written in English by authors from sub-Saharan Africa, Australia, and New Zealand made a strong showing in 2009 .
 New releases by several of South Africa’s preeminent writers hit bookstores . Much to the delight of readers and critics alike, new releases by South African writers have been released .
 Coetzee, the 2003 Nobel Prize-winning laureate in literature, brought out Summertime, the final volume in his trilogy of fictionalized memoirs . Andre Brink also released an autobiographical volume, A Fork in the Road, a memoir of his life .
 Breytenbach's Notes from the Middle World is one of the year’s most memorable books . The book includes a vast array of aesthetic, social, and cultural commentary .
 Antjie Krog, Nosisi Mpolweni, and Kopano Ratele released their investigative collaboration There Was This Goat . The book is based on the 1996 testimony of a mother who lost her son in a massacre .
 Nigerian fiction writer Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie continued her remarkable success with the publication of her debut collection of short stories, The Thing Around Your Neck .
 Australians heralded the publication of David Malouf’s novel Ransom, his first to appear in more than a decade . Malouf's first novel to be published in over a decade has been published in Australia .
 The work revisited Homer’s Iliad and gained widespread praise for its spare prose and imaginative rendering of ancient Greece . The work is set to be released in 2015 .
 Too Many Murders is the second novel in the Carmine Delmonico series . Colleen McCullough is known for her prodigious Masters of Rome historical novels .
 Tim Winton and Christos Tsiolkas received international attention in receiving the Miles Franklin Literary Award and the Commonwealth Writers’ Award . Two other Australians garnered international attention for their work .
 Award-winning Aboriginal author Alexis Wright is best known for her breakthrough best seller Carpentaria . Wright's novel was published in the U.S. in 2009 .
 Liberian political leader, short-story writer, novelist, essayist, and translator, died in February . Sankawulo, Sr., was Liberian politician, short story writer, author, translator .
 The authors of a number of the major German-language works of 2009 were born in the communist part of Europe during the Cold War .
 Herta Muller was the winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature . Muller won the prize for her work in Germany . Muller's work was published in Germany in 2007 .
 Muller, who came from a German-speaking village in Banat, Rom., had moved to West Germany in 1987 in order to escape repression and censorship under the dictatorship of Nicolae Ceausescu . Muller was born in a village in the historic region of Banat in Romania .
 Muller’s novel Atemschaukel, published in August, told the story of a young German-speaking Romanian at the end of World War II and his experiences in Soviet labour camp .
 The novel was about a woman who, like the author herself, loses the ability to speak after a stroke and has to relearn language . The novel is about the woman who loses the language of a stroke .
 Schmidt had published several well-received books in the decade before 2002, when a cerebral hemorrhage forced her to go through that very experience . Schmidt suffered from a stroke that left her with a brain injury .
 Du stirbst nicht dealt with the way that language and identity are interwoven . The novel’s protagonist was, like its author, born in East Germany . It also addressed the final years of the dictatorship and German reunification .
 Hungarian-born Terezia Mora published Der einzige Mann auf dem Kontinent . Mora had moved to Berlin at the beginning of the 1990s .
 The novel’s protagonist, Darius Kopp, lives in a synthetic world of computers and office buildings that is no longer connected to the natural world and its rhythms . The novel's protagonist lives in an artificial world that is not connected to nature .
 The novel explored the fragility of contemporary capitalism and the personality structures associated with it . Written by an author who grew up in the brittle world of socialism in Hungary .
 Rainer Merkel’s novel Lichtjahre entfemt dealt with contemporary sexual relationships . The novel was published in 1998 .
 Norbert Scheuer's novel Uberm Rauschen was also an introspective exploration of personal relationships . This time it was between two brothers and their father, who is dead . Scheuer was also exploring personal relationships with his dead father .
 This novel, unlike the novels of Mora and Merkel, showed the interrelationship between humans and nature . The primary activity of its protagonist, Leo Arimond, as well as of his brother and father, is fishing in a country river near his hometown .
 Stephan Thome’s novel Grenzgang also told a provincial story about life in a small village with its rituals, problems, and interactions with city people . The novel also told the story of a provincial village .
 Swiss novelist Urs Widmer published Herr Adamson, a novel about death and its relationship to life . Widmer's novel is about the relationship between death and life .
 When the novel’s protagonist is eight years old, he meets a man named Adamson . Adamson emerged from the world of the dead, having died at the precise moment when the novel's protagonist was born . The novel's main character is eight when he meets Adamson,
 Adamson can be seen only by the novel’s protagonist, and he can be released completely into the land of the dead only when the protagonist himself dies . Adamson is released from Adamson's body only after the protagonist dies in the novel's final chapter .
 The living and the dead are united by bonds that are only separable only by death . All of life is a preparation for dying, and all of the life is preparing for dying .
 The novel is narrated on the day of the protagonist’s death . Logically, the novel is narrating the death of the main character . The novel was published in 2007 .
 Jens Petersen awarded the Ingeborg Bachmann prize in June for his unfinished novel Bis dass der Tod . Petersen was awarded the prize for the unfinished novel in June .
 Like Herr Adamson, this work explored issues of life and death . The novel’s protagonist, Alex, who cares for his terminally ill and comatose girlfriend, considers the possibility of suicide .
 Judith Hermann’s short-story collection Alice addressed the prominence of death in life . Similarly, the short story collection Alice addresses the prominence in life in life.
 The five stories in the book revolve around one main figure, various men in her life, and her attempts to deal with their deaths . The book is published by Simon Cowell, a British publisher .
 Brigitte Kronauer’s novel Zwei schwarze Jdger was a playful self-referential exploration of literature and the way it reflects and enriches life . On a lighter note, Brigitte's novel was a self-reflective exploration of the way literature
 Rita Palka encounters a number of people with unusual histories in her novel . The novel was written by the writer and is set in New York City, New York .
 Lutz Seiler's sombre short-story collection Die Zeitwaage returned to the problem of life in socialist East Germany and its negative impact on human life .
 The year 2009 showed a marked decrease in the number of works of autobiographical fiction, or ""autofiction,"” a genre in which authors novelize their lives and which had reigned over the past decade of French literature .
 The title of one of 2009’s best-selling works, D’autres vies que la mienne, could be viewed as a literary rallying cry . The title is the title of a 2009 best-seller, one of the best-sellers of the year
 Alain Fleischer subverted autofiction in Moi, Sdndor F by treating biography as autobiography . The prizewinning author subverted the idea of autobiography in the novel .
 Fleischer channeled his uncle, who had been killed by the Nazis during deportation . Fleischer opened a new literary frontier where novel, biography, and autobiography meet and one man's past elucidates another's present .
 Agnes Desarthe’s Le Remplagant was a homage to a dead relative . The author believed herself to have inherited her understanding of storytelling as a weapon against resignation and forgetting .
 The decline of autofiction was matched by a resurgence of traditional fiction, particularly in works exploring the close setting of the family .
 In ParisBrest, Tanguy Viel offered the spectacle of a dysfunctional family in which the narrator, Louis, is trapped between his disgraced, bankrupt father, his domineering mother, and his oppressive grandmother . Louis hopes to gain a fortune that Louis wants to gain for
 Louis attempts a rebellion that is doomed from the outset, in a novel that intertwines humour and despair . Wielding two weapons, he has written to expose his family’s foibles and his friendship for a young hoodlum whom his family despises .
 Philippe Djian published Impardonnables, in which a has-been writer lost his wife and one daughter in a car accident . Djian sees his world crumble again when his other daughter disappears . In a similar vein, the celebrated novelist lost his family in a tragic car crash .
 As his quest to find her estranges him from his new family, he begins to worry whether destiny has chosen him as its special victim and whether forgiveness of oneself can ever be anything but an illusion .
 One subgenre of fiction, historical fiction, also saw a revival in the vacuum left by autofiction . Historical fiction saw a particular revival in its place as a subgenre .
 In Des hommes, Laurent Mauvignier described the ramifications of the Algerian War on a group of French men who witnessed unspeakable horrors . The war was the result of a French draft in Algeria .
 The novel begins 40 years after the war, with the men suffering from psychological problems . The novel culminates in a moving flashback describing their experiences in the Algeria of 1960 .
 Pierre Lartigue completed a historical novel just days before his death . He completed the historical novel days before he died . The novel was published by the French author .
 In Des fous de qualite, he portrayed the loss of idealism of soldiers who believed in the military virtues of honour, courage, and meritocracy under Napoleon . The restoration of the embittered monarchy, eager to bury Napoleon’s memory, has replaced honour with the
 French author Marie NDiaye was awarded the 2009 Prix Goncourt for her novel Trois femmes puissantes .
 Three of the four main literary prizes were awarded to autofictions in 2013 . Ironically, in a year marked by pure fiction's triumph over autofiction, three of the main prizes were given to autfiction .
 The Prix Medicis went to Haitian Canadian Dany Laferriere’s L’Enigme du retour, in which the author described his homecoming, after decades of political exile, to Haiti .
 Frederic Beigbeder took the opportunity afforded by his infamous 2008 drug bust to reminisce upon his troubled childhood . Frederic was awarded the Prix Renaudot, Un Roman frangais, for his role in the film .
 Gwenaelle Aubry won the Prix Femina for Personne, her portrait in 26 chapters, one for each letter of the alphabet . Aubry's father was a lifelong manic-depressive who in the end died homeless .
 The Prix Goncourt was awarded to Marie NDiaye’s Trois femmes puissantes . The novel is set in three vividly dysfunctional families, set in a dysfunctional family .
 The second, Fanta, is living in France with her failure of a husband, who envies her and suspects her of having an affair with his boss . Fanta's husband is also in France, but he is not happy with her .
 The third, Khady, is a young widow at the mercy of her in-laws, who hate her for not having given her husband a child before his premature death . Khady is the widow of Khady's husband, who died prematurely .
 Khady remains true to herself in a triumph of the human spirit over adversity . Though subjected to the worst humiliations as she attempts to reach France, she remains poignantly true to her .
 Two fiction titles dominated the literary scene in French Canada in 2009 . French Canada's literary scene was dominated by fiction titles .
 Haitian-born writer and filmmaker Dany Laferriere matched literary quality with popular success . L’Enigme du retour is a story of a man who, after his father’s funeral, returns to Haiti .
 The book won not only the Grand Prix du Livre de Montreal but also France's Prix Medicis . The book is published in Canada and France .
 The other dominant title was Le Ciel de Bay City by Catherine Mavrikakis, which in 2009 picked up the booksellers' prize .
 This was Mavrikakis’s breakout book, though, like her earlier works, it featured a dark and brooding atmosphere . This was her breakout work .
 In competition for the Grand Prix du Livre de Montreal was a graphic novel, Paul a Quebec by Michel Rabagliati . The graphic novel was published in Quebec in 2007 .
 This was the first time that such a work had been considered for a major prize . The work was considered for the prestigious prize for the work .
 The year saw the continued flowering of the Aurelie Laflamme phenomenon . The character was the creation of writer India Desjardins, who understood the need for a local series of novels for teens .
 Julie Mazzieri's Le Discours sur la tombe de I’idiot won the Governor General’s Literary Award for French-language fiction . The novel depicted a society falling apart after the village idiot is killed .
 Nelly Arcan's suicide at age 36 shocked Quebec society . The suicide of novelist Arcan shocked society . Arcan committed suicide at 36 .
 Sadly, she did not live to see the publication later in the year of her book Paradis, clef en main, ironically a novel that ultimately argued against suicide . Sadly, there was not the publication of her novel Paradis .
 Tiziano Scarpa's novel Stabat mater, recipient of the 2009 Strega Prize, focuses on the impact of Antonio Vivaldi’s innovative music on his contemporaries . The novel was awarded the award for the best novel in Italy .
 16-year-old Cecilia spends nights writing letters to her unknown mother and conversing with a personification of her own death . Cecilia was abandoned at birth and spends her nights writing her letters to unknown mother .
 Cecilia is Vivaldi's most talented pupil at the Ospedale della Pieta in Venice . Cecilia plays the Red Priest's unconventional scores for the Italian opera company .
 She gradually perceives the revolutionary power of music . Shocked at first, she gradually becomes aware of the power of it .
 In her journey of discovery, writing and music eventually coincide and lead her to pursue her freedom . Her music and writing eventually coincide .
 Edith Bruck’s Quanta Stella c’e nel cielo was recipient of the Viareggio-Repaci Prize for fiction . The protagonist, Anita, is also 16 years old, summons the strength to escape from an oppressive reality .
 After surviving the Auschwitz concentration camp, she finds herself in Czechoslovakia, treated as an object by members of her own family, who, like her, are Jewish, living in a precarious condition, in perpetual wait to leave for Palestine .
 Maternity makes her regain control of herself and her body and gives her the courage to rebel . She begins a journey to reach the Promised Land .
 Elena Lowenthal’s Conta le stelle, se puoi is a family saga told in a “counterhistorical” perspective .
 The author imagines that Mussolini died in 1924 of a stroke and that 1938, instead of being the annus horribilis of racial laws in Italy, was the birth of the state of Israel .
 Their hopes to find their own ""promised land"" seem to burn along with Smyrna (now Izmir, Tur) during the terrible fire that devastated that city in 1922 . Their hopes of finding their own "promise land" seem to have been destroyed by the fire .
 Almeno il cappello by Andrea Vitali brings to life the small intrigues, lies, mysteries, quarrels, and quarrels that animate Bellano, a small town on Lake Como .
 The creation of a brass band in the town exposes the protagonists of this endeavour to petty power games between the podesta and the parish .
 Cesarina Vighy’s L’ultima estate, winner of the Campiello Prize for a first novel, is a caustic coming-of-age narrative told by an internal narrator, who coincides with the author, and partially by an omnis
 Shadows from the internal narrators past populate the limited physical and sensorial space in which she has been confined by illness, and these shadows urge her to make them live through her .
 Antonio Scurati's II bambino che sognava la fine del mondo tells a story inspired by the case of alleged pedophilia at a school in Rignano Flaminio, which received enormous media attention in 2007 .
 Through a complex interplay of fiction and nonfiction, autobiographical fiction and autobiography, the author—a media and communications specialist—reflected on the manner in which the media often amplify collective fears, thereby making the distinction between illusion and reality very thin .
 Roberto Saviano continued to write as an act of resistance, in the obstinate belief that truth ""exists in spite of everything” and is to be found in the proliferation of accounts of “microstories” that are often neglected by the media .
 La bellezza e I’infemo, a collection of essays that he had written and in part published between 2004 and 2009, was his second book . The book was published in 2009 .
 Space and time cross and overlap in two significant works published during the year . The works include two works published in the same year .
 Italian writer Roberto Saviano followed up his 2006 novel Gomorra with La bellezza e l’infemo, a collection of essays . In Daniele Del Giudice’s Orizzonte mobile, accounts of his expedition to the Antarctic in 1990 and
 By switching continuously between different times and perspectives, the author re-creates the ""moving horizon” referenced in the title . The author switches constantly between different time and perspectives to create the "moving horizon"
 Eraldo Affinati’s Berlin is an homage to that city 20 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall . The film is set in Berlin and is set to be released in Berlin next month .
 Seven chapters, each with a different narrator, render the multifaceted image of a city that still carries the marks and wounds of 20th-century history, along with the signs of a multiethnic, productive future .
 Fernanda Pivano was pivotal in the diffusion of 20th-century American literature in Italy . She was a translator and essayist whose work was pivotal to Italian literature .
 Alda Merini was one of the country's most important contemporary poets . Merini's death was a major loss to Italian letters . Italian letters were lost in the last century .
 Many novels published in Spain in 2009 had a generational content . Many of the novels had a tendency to refer to past times in order to explain the present . The novels were published in 2009 .
 Cronica del desamor by Rosa Montero explored the worries of the post-Franco generation of women and gay men . Set in the political transition of the 1970s and reissued 30 years after its original publication .
 Perez-Reverte presented a violent story about ambition and miscegenation . His novel depicted the most dramatic night in Mexico’s conquest . The novel was published in 1939 .
 Eduardo Mendoza presents pseudosaintly characters who are willing to give up everything in the pursuit of an idea . In his first short-story collection, Tres vidas de santos, he presented pseudosaintsly characters .
 Angeles Caso won the Planeta Prize with Contra el viento . The story is the story of a young Cape Verdean woman who seeks a better life on the Iberian Peninsula . Caso's book is about a young woman who discovers that life is still harsh and
 La sombra de lo que fuimos, by Chilean Luis Sepulveda, was awarded the Primavera Prize .
 Spanish journalist and novelist Rosa Montero observed the 30th anniversary of the publication of her first work of fiction, Cronica del desamor . Kirmen Uribe won the National Prize .
 Luis Leante’s La luna roja was a novel of secrecy and passion, about the love for books and storytelling . The novel was about a love of books and stories .
 It narrated the parallel lives of a writer and his translator and the ruthless woman between them . The film is set to be released in cinemas in New York and Los Angeles .
 After dying, the protagonist is reunited with two of her friends in heaven, where they look back at their lives in Barcelona during the 1960s and their childhood in postwar Spain .
 The Alfaguara Prize was awarded to Argentine-born Andres Neuman for El viajero del siglo . Neuman looked back at the 19th century from a 21st-century perspective, analyzing issues such as immigration .
 The highest distinction in Spanish letters, the Cervantes Prize, went to Mexican poet, short-story writer, and novelist Jose Emilio Pacheco .
 Among the writers who died in 2009 was the winner of the 1991 prize, Spanish novelist Francisco Ayala . Ayala won the prize in 1991 .
 The novel El viajero del siglo was awarded the Alfaguara Prize . It was one of the best surprises of 2009, winning Alfaguar Prize for best novel .
 Set in an imaginary German town at the beginning of the 19th century, this beautifully written novel was a love story as well as a novel about ideas, literary criticism, philosophy, and politics, with multiple levels of meaning . Set in a fictional German town, it was set in an
 Africa de las Heras was one of the wives of the Uruguayan writer Felisberto Hernandez . She never suspected that she was a Russian spy .
 Another Argentine author, Claudia Pineiro, published Las grietas de Jara, a thriller with elements of the psychological and the existentialist novel .
 The protagonist, a weak man who is submissive to his boss and his wife, finally breaks free of the humiliation and submission he suffers . The protagonist is finally freed from the humiliation he suffers from .
 Todos los hombres son mentirosos by the Argentine Alberto Manguel, a resident of France, was a novel that could be read, in part, as a continuation of the authors essays on the art of writing .
 Manguel was a nostalgic, sometimes funny, sometimes desperate, return to Latin America, its language, and its realities . It was a meditation on the art of narration and a tale about Argentina’s recent past .
 The Guatemalan Rodrigo Rey Rosa published El material humano, about the Guatemalan civil wars . The book was published by the author of El Material Humano .
 Rey Rosa created a journal-like narrative in which historical reality, fiction, and autobiographical elements alternate . Rey Rosa used documents recently discovered in the police archives in Guatemala to create the novel .
 The result was an exploration of the capacity of fiction to depict the ugly reality of repression . The result of the film was a look at the capacity for fiction to reveal the truth .
 The Chilean Luis Sepulveda used the techniques of the grotesque in La sombra de lo que fuimos (winner of the 2009 Primavera Prize) in order to convey the disenchantment of a generation of old political activists .
 Both El material humano and La sombra de lo que fuimos were in part autobiographical novels . The same was true of Demasiados heroes, by the Colombian author Laura Restrepo, who fictionalized her revolutionary activities in Argentina .
 The book questioned memory, authenticity, the limits of heroism, and the search for personal identity . It questioned memory and authenticity, authenticity .
 Memorias de una dama, by Santiago Roncagliolo, was a tragicomic novel about the Mafia, Caribbean dictators and the relationship between the upper classes and political power in Latin America .
 Volpi’s further exploration of the genre of the poetic narrative, which began with El jardm desvastado , a novel about the Iraq War . It also represented Volpi's further exploration .
 Santiago Roncagliolo earned praise for his tragicomic novel Memorias de una dama ters of diverse races and nationalities . Isabel Allende's La isla bajo el mar was the story of Haitian slaves told through a wellbuilt narrative populated with charac
 It focused on one of the slaves, Zarite, and her masters, large landowners who had escaped to New Orleans after their slaves rebelled and their plantation was burned . Zarite and Zarite were slaves who escaped from the burning of their plantation .
 Zarite was humiliated repeatedly and after having children by her master, Zarite achieves her freedom . Zarite had children with her master and was forced to have children with him .
 Santiago Gamboa, a Colombian author residing in New Delhi, chose an international setting for Necropolis . Gamboa chose, as in his previous novels, to be set in the international setting of the novel .
 In it, a series of persons of different origins and professions attend a conference in Jerusalem, where a homicide occurs, and the narrator contrasts various versions of the same story . The novel is set in Jerusalem .
 Israel was the setting in another novel, Aquarium, by the Argentine Marcelo Figueras . The novel was set in Israel .
 This lack of communication was intended as a metaphor for the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict . The lack of communications was intended to be a metaphor . The film was meant as a way of dealing with the ongoing conflict .
 Argentine Carlos Maria Dominguez, a resident of Uruguay, published La costa ciega, a short experimental novel in which different voices were superimposed and confused .
 William Ospina, from Colombia, received the Romulo Gallegos Prize for El pais de la canela, the second novel of a trilogy based on the cronicas, or chronicles, written during the exploration and colonization of Latin America . The novel is the second
 Papeles inesperados is a collection of previously unpublished works and texts discarded by the author but retained in his archives . The collection includes previously unpublished texts and texts .
 Among those who died in 2009 was the Uruguayan Mario Benedetti . Benedetti was one of the best known writers in the world .
 The most important trophy of Portuguese-language literatures, the Camoes Prize, was awarded in June 2009 to Cape Verdean poet, fiction writer, and journalist Armenio Vieira .
 Vieira’s poetry was rooted in the tradition of the foundational Cape Verdean literary movement Claridade . He wrote in opposition to the colonial and postcolonial political authorities and established literary canons .
 The second-ever Leya Prize went to the novel O olho de Hertzog by Portuguese-born Mozambican historian and fiction writer Joao Paulo Borges Coelho . The prize was sponsored by Portuguese publisher Leya .
 The story centred on European colonial rivalries in Africa and depicted Mozambique and its neighbours as proto-independent countries in the period around World War I . Among Coelho's previous fictional works were Ax duas sombras do rio , As visitas do Dr.
 Antonio Lobo Antunes' 24th novel, Que cavalos sao aqueles que fazem sombra no mar? chronicled the lives of members of a dysfunctional family . The Portuguese literary scene was agitated in 2009 by the publication of NoMiguel Tov
 The polemic against Cairn by Roman Catholic leaders recalled the one provoked years earlier by Saramago’s O evangelho segundo Jesus Cristo (1991; The Gospel According to Jesus Christ, 1991) when Catholic authorities responded impetuously to his deconstruction of
 In Caim he revisited the Bible, this time the Old Testament story of Cain and Abel . This time he subverted the traditional relationship between an envious and resentful God and the suffering Man .
 The book narrated the lives of members of a dysfunctional family in seven chapters named after the formal moves of traditional bullfighting in the family’s native province of Ribatejo .
 Among new works of Brazilian fiction in 2009 was a family saga, Chico Buarque’s novel Leite derramado . The novel narrated in parallel fashion the evolution of a Brazilian family and the transformation of Brazilian society over two centuries .
 Tatiana Salem Levy's first novel, A chave de casa, was awarded the 2008 Sao Paulo Prize for first works of literature . The protagonist travels to Turkey, her family’s homeland, as she discovers what it means to be a Jewish-Brazilian descendant of immigrants
 Mario Sabino’s collection A boca da verdade highlighted unhappiness as a key element of life . Sabino's short stories highlight unhappiness in life as an element of happiness .
 The poet Rosa Lia Dinelle published Enquanto os sinos plangent, a collection of poems with a wide variety of forms and styles, from classical stanzas to popular Brazilian national forms with contemporary ecological themes .
 Carlos Newton Junior’s essay on Lampiao, a legendary cangaceiro (backlands bandit) introduced his anthology O cangago na poesia brasileira . The anthology offered an original viewpoint on the importance of popular poetry within Brazilian literature .
 Among new works of literary criticism were the outstanding English-language biography of Clarice Lispector, Why This World, by Benjamin Moser . Rita Olivieri-Godet's study of the works of Joao Ubaldo Ribeiro . A collected volume of essays, Nas tr
 Throughout 2009 there were celebrations of the centenary of the death of Euclides da Cunha, author of Os sertoes (1902), a classic narrative of life in the backlands .
 Salim Miguel was awarded the Machado de Assis Prize by the Brazilian Academy of Letters for his body of literary works . Miguel was born in 1961 .
 During the harshest years of the dictatorship, Boal founded and led the Teatro do Oprimido (""Theatre of the Oppressed") and was sent into exile by the regime .
 His decades-long influence on Brazilian and international theatre was profound . He was Brazilian and Brazilian theatre legend .
 In her latest work she used provincial life in a Sovietera city as the setting for a voyage to the land of the dead . Her latest work, The Death of the Dead, is set in a Russian-era Soviet-era city .
 Leonid Yuzefovich was a writer on the border between the real and the fantastic . Leonid wrote about his experiences in a book called "The Great War" Leonid's book was published in 1998 .
 The protagonists of his novel, Zhuravli i karliki, were the real-life 17th-century adventurer Timofey Ankudinov and a fictional contemporary researcher working on a biography of him .
 A second trend in contemporary Russian prose could be distinguished in Roman Senchin’s novel Yeltyshevy, a dark, naturalistic saga of contemporary peasant life . The novel was stylistically reminiscent of the “country prose” of the late Soviet period .
 Andrey Gelasimov’s novel Stepnyye bogi (2008; ""Gods of the Steppe”) occupied an intermediate zone in that landscape . Aleksandr Terekhov's Kamenny most (""The Stone Bridge"") occupied that zone in
 Stepnyye bogi combined a heartfelt realistic description of life in the Baikal countryside in 1945 with elements of a mystical thriller . Kamenny most, a taut psychological thriller, was based on the true story of a double murder .
 Yelena Chizhova, Yelena Katishonok and Boris Khazanov won the prize in 2006 . Also on the list were the novels Vremya zhenshchin and Zhili-byli starik so starukhoy .
 The novel Okolonolya (""Almost Zero"") provoked something of a sensation as much because of its author as because of the content . The novel was written by the author as much as the content of it .
 The work, a satiric look at circles close to government power, was signed by the pseudonymous author Natan Dubovitsky . The work was satiric take on circles of power in Russia .
 Most suspected the real author to be none other than Vladislav Surkov, one of the most influential figures in the current Russian government . Most suspected Surkov was the author of the book .
 In September a heated discussion about the state of Russian publishing broke out when the poet Olga Martynova published a brief article—in German—in a German newspaper . The poet published the article in September .
 The article was anonymously translated into Russian and posted on the influential Russian Web site Openspace . Soon after, the article was anonymous translated into Russia .
 The article argued that Russia’s dominant publishers ignored aesthetically and intellectually complex works in favour of a kind of mishmash of mass market and “serious” literature that was reminiscent of Soviet literary norms . The article was agreed to expand and write in Russian .
 Martynova criticized a number of Russia’s best-known and most popular writers, including Lyudmila Ulitskaya, Dmitry Bykov, Zakhar Prilepin and Vladimir Sorokin .
 The year saw the publication of new books by Igor Bulatovsky, Ilya Kucherov, Dmitry Grigoryev, Natalya Chernykh, Aleksey Porvin, Aleksandr Mironov, and Vadim Mesyats .
 Although most of the authors in this list were representatives of the Petersburg School, their publishers were Moscow-based, which signaled a healthy openness . The Petersburg School is known for its openness, especially its openness .
 Several young poets whose reputation was based exclusively on Internet publication and who had not yet attempted printed publication. Another highlight of the year was the entry into literature of several young poets .
 This group included 20-year-old poets Vera Polozozkova and Alya Kudryashova . This group of poets included the 20,000-year old poets . The group was formed by a group of young women .
 Although neither had yet produced a masterpiece, their work showed promise . The level of professionalism was considerably higher than that of the ‘Web poets of previous years .
 Many writers died during the year, including acclaimed popular prose writer Vasily Aksyonov and 96-year-old Sergey Mikhalkov . The author of both the Soviet national anthem and the new Russian national anthem was also dead .
 Not since end of World War II and Joseph Stalin’s terror had Russian literature lost so many writers in a single year . Not since the end of WWII and Stalin's terror had such many writers have died .
 Literary production in Iran continued to suffer from restrictive government measures . Political turmoil that followed the disputed June presidential election eclipsed it in 2009 .
 Herfeh-ye man khavab dldan ast ("My Profession Is Dreaming") was among the year’s most innovative works of short fiction . Fatimah Zari'i's collection of short stories was one of the best short stories of the year .
 Censoring an Iranian Love Story is based on an unpublished original Persian manuscript by Shahriar Mandanipour . The book addresses censorship in a novel way and led an impressive array of literary translations .
 Her works include Afsanah-ye Baba Layla, a poetic novel published in a heavily censored version in Tehran in 2006 . Aks-e fowrl-ye ' eshq-bazl (“A Snapshot of Love-Making”),
 The Courrier International’s literary prize was awarded to Zoya Pirzad for her translation of Christophe Balay's French translation of her short story titled Le Gout apre des kakis ("The Bitter Taste of Persimmon")
 There was concern among Arab publishers in 2009 about the impact of the global financial crisis that had begun in 2009 .
 In turn lower book prices made books more affordable for the general public . That in turn translated into lower book price and lower book sales .
 New writers traditionally published their first work at their own expense . New writers could not afford to publish their work at the expense of publishers .
 Arab writers were generally dissatisfied with aspects of the cultural life in their countries . Arab writers generally complained about aspects of their countries' culture .
 Complaints abounded about censorship, weak distribution of their works, biased award systems, and what many felt was the undue recognition of writers with strong connections to government publishing houses . Complaints of censorship and censorship abounded .
 Arab writers also showed a growing interest in translation, with some questioning both the quality of the books selected by national translation organizations and the intentions of Western publishers .
 Iraqi writer In'am Kajahjl's work echoed the most pressing problems of the region . His work echoed many of the issues in Iraq and Syria .
 In Al-Hafldah al-amrlkiyyah (2008; “The American Granddaughter”), Zaynah, the protagonist, is an American Iraqi who faces multiple identities while working as an interpreter .
 The novel explores the contempt Iraqis feel for their Americanized compatriots, whom they consider traitors . The novel revealed the harsh reality in Iraq, where sectarian and religious divisions destroyed a society that prided itself on religious tolerance .
 Mourid Barghouti’s second memoir celebrated his Egyptian-born son Tamim's first visit to the West Bank . Wulidtu hunak, wuliddu buna (“I Was Bom There, I Was Born Here”) celebrated his
 The book provided an account of the hardships of the Palestinians . It praised those who battle Israeli restrictions and find creative strategies .
 He denounced religious intolerance, divisions between various political factions, and abuses of power . He denounced divisions between political factions and religious intolerance .
 Narrating the story of the Qahtan family from the Ottoman era to the period of the British mandate . The book denounced Britain's role in Palestine, revealed the weaknesses of the early Palestinian liberation movement .
 The novel paints an atmosphere of fear and secrecy in which the characters are pawns, secretly maneuvered and manipulated . Depicting various Islamic groups as being manipulated by the state .
 Libyan writer Ahmad Ibrahim al-Faqlh explored human interactions with animals and insects . He found compassion on the part of animals toward humans and an absence of compassion in humans' relationships among themselves .
 Muhammad al-Bisatl remained close to his society’s problems with his novel Aswar . Aswar is about life in Egypt being akin to life in a prison .
 The story revolves around a chat room that becomes accessible to new members every Friday . The chat room gives young people the opportunity to discuss their problems freely and anonymously .
 Despite awards for poetry, poetry continued to lose readers to fiction, especially the novel . The Foundation of Abdul Aziz al-Babtain presented the most prestigious poetry awards in Arab world .
 Egyptian poet and literary critic ‘Abd al-Mu'tl HijazI’s continued to defend the genre tirelessly . The staunchest critic of weakening interest in verse was the Egyptian poet .
 He attributed its loss of popularity to a poor educational system that failed to provide students with a solid knowledge of classical Arabic, he said .
 The death in 2008 of Palestinian Mahmud Darwlsh, one of the most prominent and popular Arab poets, perhaps contributed to poetry’s waning popularity .
 His last collection of poems, La uridu li-hadht alqasidah an tantahi, was published posthumously .
 The novel did not attract much attention when it first appeared, in 2008, in Egypt . It later became the subject of strong criticism from the Coptic Orthodox Church .
 Of some 3,000 new Chinese novels published in print in 2009, few found favour with the critics . Few new novels found favour in print with critics .
 Yi ju ding yiwan ju by Liu Zhenyun was one of the few exceptions to the book . Liu's book was written by a well-known writer, though it had a few detractors .
 Composed of 400,000 Chinese characters, the novel told the story of a peasant, Yang Baishun, who leaves his home in Yanjin (also Liu’s home village) after the death of his adopted daughter .
 Niu Jianguo, who had left the village, returns to it with the same strong desire for personal connection . Decades later the daughter’s son returns to the village in search of personal connection with the village .
 The author probingly examined the concept of friendlessness, which differs from what in English is called loneliness . The author attempted to redefine the meaning of friend . Using a fine, delicate narrative style, the book was written in a fine style .
 China's first literary Web site in mainland China (www.rongshuxia.com) was established in 1997 . Digital publishing has developed rapidly in China .
 Organizers reported that during that period more than 70,000 new works, including fiction, essays, and plays, were submitted online . Organizers: More than 80,000 works were submitted in that period .
 Work of the winners would be published on Qidian Zhongwen wang (Starting Point Chinese Web ), www.qidian.com, the official Web site of the project .
 This project was organized by Shengda Literature Ltd. , the leading Web-based interactive entertainment media company in China .
 SDL owned the three biggest Chinese literary Web sites, including Jinjiang yuanchuang wang (Jinjiang Web of Original Creation), www.jjwxc.net, and www.hongxiu.com .
 Hou Xiaoqiang, the chief executive officer of SDL, declared that his company would use copyright as a core tool to seek a new shape for the literary industry . He declared that copyright would be used to help shape the literary world .
 Two Chinese-born nonagenarians died in 2009 . Nien Cheng and Yang Xianyi were notable translators of the 20th century . Their memoirs recount their experiences during the Cultural Revolution .
 The most notable event in 2009 for Japanese literature was the publication of Haruki Murakami’s 1Q84 . The most significant event in the literary world was the release of the novel 1Q85 .
 So many people preordered the two-volume novel that it appeared on best-selling lists as soon as it was released in late May . The novel was released on May 1 .
 Murakami and his publisher kept quiet about the content of the book prior to its publication . Public interest in 1Q84 was only increased by the silence of the publisher and the Japanese media .
 Aomame is a 30-year-old woman who works for a secret agent whose aim is to kill those who hurt others . She is driven by a strong memory of Tengo, a childhood friend, and seeks him out .
 Tengo, who teaches school but aspires to be a novelist, in turn seeks her . She is in a relationship with the author of the novel .
 One day he receives a ghostwriting job from a publisher that had rejected his work, and it is that job that brings him close to Aomame . The job brings him to a close relationship with the publisher .
 Murakami's novel's title is intended as a play on Orwell's dystopian 1984 . The English letter Q and the Japanese word for the number 9 are pronounced identically .
 Murakami also stirred controversy by accepting the Jerusalem Prize for the Freedom of the Individual in Society in early 2009, just after the cessation of hostilities between Hamas and Israel in the Gaza Strip in Gaza .
 Murakami insisted that it would be better to attend the ceremony and deliver his speech than to keep silent . Pro-Palestinian groups had asked him to stay silent, but he refused .
 One of the best-selling books of 2009 was Ken’ichiro Isozaki’s Tsui no sumika . The short novel won the first Akutagawa Prize, normally awarded twice a year .
 The selection committee declined to award the year’s second Akutagawa Prize . The committee has declined to give the second prize .
 Shirin Nezammafi won the Bungakukai New Writer's Prize with Shiroi kami . She became only the second non-Japanese winner of the prize .
 So Kurokawa’s Kamome no hi (2008; “The Day of the Seagull”) received the Yomiuri Prize for Literature . Kurokawawa's work received the award in 2008 .
 The Yasunari Kawabata Prize went to Nanae Aoyama’s “Kakera” (“A Fragment”), first published in the November 2008 issue of Shincho .
 The Kenzaburo Oe Prize was awarded to Hikari no mandara, an essay on Japanese literature, by the literary critic Reiji Ando . Hikari was awarded the prize for the essay .
 Deaths in 2009 included Kaoru Kurimoto, who wrote science fiction (most notably the Guin Saga) She also wrote literary criticism under the name Azusa Nakajima .
 U.S. and NATO prepare to send more troops to Afghanistan and Pakistan . Pakistan launches new offensives in response to Taliban insurgency . U.N. President Barack Obama declares victory in Afghanistan .
 26-year rebellion waged by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam to establish an independent homeland in Sri Lanka was crushed in 2009 . Government forces overran the last area of rebel-held territory in May .
 During the final battle Tiger leader Velupillai Prabhakaran was killed . During the battle he was killed by the Tiger leader .
 UN Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 1874, tightening an existing arms embargo against North Korea . Resolution tightened arms embargo on North Korea in response to North Korean nuclear tests .
 Pyongyang conducted its second-ever underground nuclear explosion in May . The action occurred after North Korea conducted a second underground nuclear blast . Pyongyang conducted the explosion after a series of underground nuclear tests .
 A treaty establishing Africa as a nuclear-weapon-free zone came into force in July . Burundi became the 28th African country to ratify the treaty . The treaty establishing the zone was ratified in July by Burundu .
 Treaty of Pelindaba prohibited possession, development, manufacture, testing, or deployment of nuclear weapons on the African continent . Treaty also prohibited the possession of weapons in Africa .
 Barack Obama announced the launch of bilateral talks to succeed the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Talks treaty . The talks will follow the 1991 treaty that led to the creation of the treaty .
 START I expired in December 2009 without agreement on a successor to START I . Diplomats had been negotiating a new treaty since April . START I expires December 2009 but diplomats are still negotiating a successor .
 Six-year war between Sudan's pro-government forces and rebels in Darfur effectively ended, UN's military commander in the region says . Except for sporadic violence and banditry, the six-year conflict effectively ended last year .
 Since fighting began, an estimated 300,000 people had died in Darfur . A further 2. million had been displaced, according to reports .
 The Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to be plagued by insecurity and violence . The country has been plagued by violence and insecurity .
 More than 1,000 civilians were killed in the east of the country during joint DRC army-UN operations against the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda . The Rwandan rebel group is linked to the Hutu extremists responsible for the genocide of Rwandan Tutsis .
 Forces from the Ugandan Lord's Resistance Army continued to operate in the DRC’s northeast . A joint offensive by Congolese and Ugandan troops forced most of them into neighbouring Central African Republic .
 Islamist groups and warlords fought for control of much of southern Somalia . Islamist groups battled for control in Somalia's southern Somalia for decades .
 After Ethiopia pulled its troops out of the country in January 2009, al-Shabaab began to dominate the struggle . The extremist Islamic group is thought to have links with the terrorist group al-Qaeda . Ethiopia pulled out of Somalia in 2009 .
 There had been no effective government in Somalia since 1991 . The transitional government, backed by the UN and the African Union, controlled only small parts of the capital .
 Only about half of the 8,000 troops authorized for the African Union Mission to Somalia had been deployed by the end of 2009 .
 The president of Honduras was removed from office by the military and forced into exile in June . Manuel Zelaya was ousted by the Honduran military . Zelaya is now living in exile in Honduras .
 Zelaya managed to secure the support of the Organization of American States and to have himself smuggled into the Brazilian embassy in Tegucigalpa . Neither his supporters nor the OAS was able to prevent an interim government from holding elections to decide on Zelaya's successor .
 Mexico deployed thousands of troops along the country’s northern border to stem violence between gangs supplying illegal drugs to the United States . Thousands of troops are deployed along the border to stop the flow of illegal drugs .
 Such violence in Ciudad Juarez resulted in nearly 2,000 drug-related murders in the first 10 months of 2009 . Such violence has resulted in 2,500 drug murders in Juarez, a city of 1. million people .
 Violence in Iraq fell to its lowest level since the U.S.-led invasion in 2003 . Violence has fallen to lowest level in Iraq since the invasion of Iraq .
 Iraqi forces took control of security in Baghdad’s fortified Green Zone . They assumed more authority over foreign troops based in the country . Iraqi forces take control of the Green Zone in Baghdad .
 British combat operations officially ended in April . U.S. troops withdrew from many towns and cities across the country . British troops were withdrawn from many British cities and towns .
 Saudi Arabian forces and Shi'ite Yemeni rebels clashed along the border between the two countries in November and December . Saudi Arabia and Yemen have been at odds with each other for years .
 During 2009 sporadic fighting between Yemeni security forces and rebels resulted in hundreds of casualties . An estimated 150,000 internal refugees were internally displaced from Yemen .
 Russia declared its nearly decade-old ""counterterrorism operation" against separatist rebels in Chechnya to be over in April . In April Russia declared the operation against rebels in the region over .
 In November a Muslim group from the Caucasus set off a bomb that derailed an express passenger train between St. Petersburg and St. Charles . In November, a bomb was set off by a group of Muslim Muslims from Caucasus .
 The war in Afghanistan grew in intensity and spread to the country’s north . The north had been relatively peaceful since the Taliban were overthrown in 2001 . The war has spread to Afghanistan's north .
 At the end of 2009, there were 71,000 troops (about half from the U.S.) from 43 countries contributing to the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force supporting the Afghan government .
 An additional 36,000 U.S. troops not part of ISAF were also in the country . ISAF is based in Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 Barack Obama announced that more than 30,000 additional troops would be sent to the country . NATO Secretary-General Anders Rasmussen announced that European members would contribute another 7,000 troops .
 The government of Pakistan launched several offensives during 2009 to wrest control from the Taliban and other militants in northwestern tribal districts bordering Afghanistan . The government has been fighting to regain control of the region since 2009 .
 Affairs claimed that hundreds of militants were killed as well as dozens of security force personnel . Independent verification was impossible, but independent verification is impossible .
 The militants responded with attacks on government and civilian targets across Pakistan . Militants responded to the attacks with attacks against government targets .
 The Ion Tiger is a small unmanned aerial vehicle developed by the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory . It flew for more than 26 hours in November .
 The UAV set an unofficial endurance record for fuel-cell powered flight . It was the first time the UAV has set a record for a fuel-fueled flight .
 The U.S. Navy commissioned the amphibious assault ship Makin Island . Makin is the first ship to be commissioned by the United States Navy .
 It was the first navy ship to use a combination of gas-turbine engines and electric drive for propulsion to reduce fuel usage and maintenance costs .
 The United States Air Force Research Laboratory in 2009 test-fired two new laser weapons in flight for the first time . The U.S. Air Force tested the weapons in 2009 . The laser weapons were the first to be fired in flight .
 The Advanced Tactical Laser is designed to destroy ground targets up to 20 km (12 mi) away . It was fired from an NC-130H Hercules aircraft . The laser was fired at a target up to 12 miles away .
 The much larger Airborne Laser, designed to shoot down ballistic missiles, was fired from a converted Boeing 747 . Airborne laser was fired in a converted 747 .
 The U.K.’s Ministry of Defence announced that it was fielding a new generation of lightweight textile-based armour . The new armour is designed to protect vehicles against rocket-propelled grenades . It was announced in March that the new generation was being fielded by the MoD
 Named TARIAN, the new armour is deployed on heavy trucks serving with the British army in Afghanistan . Named TarIAN, it is the latest in a long line of armour deployed by the British military in the country .
 India became the sixth country capable of building its own nuclear-powered submarines . China, France, Russia, the U.K., and the United States are the other countries capable of doing so . France rejoined NATO in March after having left it in 1966 .
 Russia announced plans to set up an Arctic Group of Forces to protect its interests in the far north . Russia has announced plans for the group of forces in the Arctic region .
 Establishment of new command influenced by growing importance of oil and gas reserves in the region . Establishment of the new command was influenced by the growing importance in the area . The new command is based in Bahrain and Bahrain .
 The group would coordinate activities of the armed forces, border guard, and coast guard . The group is based in New Zealand .
 Collective Security Treaty Organization agreed to establish rapid reaction force . Force will defend member states against foreign military aggression, terrorism, and drug trafficking .
 The force would also offer assistance in recovery from natural disasters . Force would offer assistance to recovery from disasters .
 Turkey banned Israel from participating in a planned NATO military exercise in October . Turkey also banned Israel's participation in a military exercise last year . Israel and Turkey have a history of tension between the two countries .
 In the same month, Israel and the U.S. held their largest-ever joint exercise, simulating the defense of Israel against a ballistic-missile attack . The exercise simulates a ballistic missile attack .
 Approximately 30 ships plus aircraft from 17 countries began operating together in January as Combined Task Force 151 . To combat piracy around the Horn of Africa, approximately 30 ships and aircraft from around 17 countries are operating together .
 Turkey enacted new legislation to give civilian courts authority to try military personnel who threaten national security . Civilian courts will be able to try anyone who threatens national security, Turkey says . Turkey enacted legislation to allow courts to try any military personnel .
 The law also prohibited military courts from prosecuting civilians during peacetime . Military courts were also prohibited from prosecuting civilian civilians .
 UN Human Rights Council backed a report that accused both Israel’s armed forces and Palestinian militants of war crimes that occurred during the 2008-09 Israeli offensive in Gaza . The report was backed by a vote of 25-6 by the UN .
 Around 1,300 Palestinians and 10 Israeli soldiers were killed during the fighting . An estimated 1,000 Palestinians were killed in the fighting, including 10 soldiers .
 A Rwandan man convicted of war crimes committed in 1994 was jailed for life by a Canadian court in October . He was sentenced to life in prison in October after a Rwandan war crimes conviction in 1994 .
 Desire Munyaneza, 42, was found guilty in May in the first court case brought under Canada’s Crimes Against Humanity and War Crimes Act . The case is the first brought under the law under the Crimes Against Human Rights Act and War Crime Act .
 In August the United States Air Force established its first numbered air force dedicated to fighting in cyberspace . The U.S. Air Force is the first to establish a dedicated air force for cyberswarfare .
 The 24th Air Force, based in Texas, is comprised of the 688th Information Operations Wing and the 67th Network Warfare Wing .
 The Japanese government relaxed its long-standing self-imposed ban on arms exports to allow more joint development and production of weapons with other countries . The ban was lifted in order to allow joint development, production and development of weapons .
 Exports to countries that sponsor terrorism, violate human rights, or have inadequate controls over arms sales continued to be outlawed . Arms sales to those who sponsor terrorism or violate human human rights were also banned in the United States .
 The number of suicides in 2009 was set to make it the fifth straight year that such deaths had set a record within the U.S. armed forces .
 U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates ordered a high-level review of military policies . The review follows the death of army psychiatrist Maj. Maj. Gen. Michael Lister . Lister is the son of a psychiatrist who died in 2009 .
 Nidal Malik Hasan shot dead 13 people and wounded 29 more at Ft. Hasan's Fort Hood . 13 people were killed and 29 were wounded in the shooting .
 A separate review of the way in which intelligence agencies handled information about Hasan before the killings was ordered by Obama .
 Hasan, a devout Muslim, had expressed misgivings to colleagues about the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan . Hasan, Hasan, was shot dead in a hail of bullets . Hasan had expressed his anger at the wars before the shootings .
 British Royal Marines intercept a Somali pirate vessel in the Gulf of Aden on June 2 . The pirates were pirates operating in the area of the Somali region .
 A spate of musicals BOOSTED theatre attendance on Broadway, while 3-D FILMS thrilled moviegoers .
 Classical music, literally, took centre stage at inauguration of U.S. President Barack Obama in 2009 .
 Yo-Yo Ma, Itzhak Perlman, Anthony McGill, and Gabriela Montero performed the debut of Air and Simple Gifts, composed for the event by John Williams .
 The performance went off without a hitch, given that it had actually been prerecorded and was mimed at the event by the illustrious musicians . The performance was actually a prerecorded performance .
 When the deception was revealed days later, a controversy began to stir . The deception was not the first time it was revealed to be a hoax .
 Media made references to Milli Vanilli, the infamous lip-syncing pop duo . The media also made reference to the lip-sync duo .
 The furor subsided quickly, however, when it was reported that the cold had prevented a ""live” performance because of the effect low temperatures have on musical instruments .
 Ma and Perlman had put soap on their bows to dull the sound of their instruments so as not to intrude on the recording . The recording was made the previous Sunday at a Marine barracks in Washington .
 It was that sort of year in classical music, when controversies surrounding the music tended to obscure the music itself . It was a year of controversy surrounding classical music .
 Earlier in January, Israeli conductor Daniel Barenboim canceled performances in Doha, Qatar, and Cairo because of security concerns related to the ongoing fighting between Israeli forces and Hamas .
 The concerts were part of the 10th anniversary tour of Barenboim’s West-Eastern Divan Orchestra . The orchestra was composed of young musicians from Israel, Palestine, and Arab countries .
 In March a West Bank children’s orchestra, the Strings of Freedom, was shuttered by local residents after it performed a concert for Holocaust survivors in Israel .
 An official of the Jenin refugee camp accused the orchestras leader of having exploited the children for political purposes . The event was billed as a Good Deeds Day event organized by an Israeli billionaire . An Israeli billionaire also organized the event .
 Polish pianist Krystian Zimerman created a stir of his own when he announced during a performance at the Walt Disney Concert Hall, Los Angeles, that he would no longer perform in the U.S. because of his objection to foreign policy .
 Cuban government blames U.S. restrictions on travel to Cuba for canceling concerts . Cuban government says it is outraged by the cancellation of the concerts .
 Two opera stars who had previously announced their retirement changed their minds . Meanwhile, two opera stars had previously said they were retiring .
 In August, Dame Kiri Te Kanawa, 65, said that her opera career was coming to an end . Dame Kanawa said in August that she was retiring from opera . In August she said that she would retire from singing .
 Neither singer had ruled out future recital appearances . Both subsequently withdrew any plans to quit the world of opera .
 Placido Domingo, 68, made his debut in a baritone role in a production of Giuseppe Verdi's Simon Boccanegra at the Staatsoper in Berlin in October .
 Bayreuth Festival opened with a children's version of Richard Wagner’s The Flying Dutchman . The opera is a perennial source of familial opera .
 Children were even encouraged to participate in the truncated version of the opera, which was the brainchild of new festival co-directors, Eva Wagner-Pasquier and Katharina Wagner .
 The half-sisters took over the reins of the annual Wagner festival from their father, Wolfgang, who had ruled the festival roost for more than half a century . The half sisters, both great-granddaughters of the composer, took over from Wolfgang .
 The new directors also announced a deal with the Royal Opera House’s Opus Arte production company to release the festival's productions on DVD . On August 9 they offered the performance of Tristan und Isolde live live on the Internet .
 As it had often in recent years, classical music continued to embrace the Internet as a way of extending its outreach and influence .
 The service offered online users the ability to search its database by composer, artist, and individual concert programs . The service was launched in 2009 .
 The Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra pursued a more commercial course with its online concert hall . Performances were made available either live or via reruns on the Internet .
 Classical TV, an online streaming video service, was launched in July . Classical TV offers free and pay-per-view opera, ballet and theatre performances .
 Classical TV also presented broadcasts by the English National Opera, the Royal Shakespeare Company, the Zurich Opera, and others . Metropolitan Opera .
 The price of an online viewing was set at $4.99 or $9.99 per performance . Online viewing of the live performances will cost up to $10.99 .
 Twitter was the star of the show in September at London’s Royal Opera House . The online social network phenomenon was the subject of the opera . Twitter is the latest in a long-running series of musicals from the world .
 The company presented The Twitter Opera, with music by composer Helen Porter and a libretto made up of the site’s signature short messages submitted by the public via the @youropera Twitter feed .
 Twitter was also the focus of a concert by the National Symphony Orchestra in July . Twitter also featured in a concert with the orchestra in July by the orchestra .
 The orchestra was made up of 93 musicians who had been selected from some 3,000 audition videos that had been submitted to the Web site from more than 70 countries . The orchestra is based in Los Angeles, California .
 Fifteen million online visitors voted on the winners, who were led in the debut performance by conductor Michael Tilson Thomas .
 Even as the classical world embraced the future, it was confronted by the disturbing economic realities of the present . The classical world was confronted with the disturbing reality of the future .
 Classical orchestras and opera and ballet companies try to weather the economic storm . Americans for the Arts estimated that 10,000 arts organizations would be out of business in 2009 .
 Both the Met and the Los Angeles Opera cut productions from their seasons and cut salaries . The Met and L.A. Opera laid off 17 people in the process . The Los. Angeles Opera also cut production and salaries .
 The Connecticut Opera closed after 67 seasons, as did the Opera Pacific, Santa Ana, Calif., and the Baltimore Opera . The Baltimore Opera declared bankruptcy last year .
 Budgetary problems forced the San Francisco Opera to cancel a production of Peter Grimes and a revival of Puccini's La Boheme . The opera was also forced to cancel an opera revival and a play of La Bohemme .
 The Bolshoi Theatre was forced to cancel a tour of Mexico and the premiere of its new production of Verdi’s Otello . Russia's Bolshoo Theatre cancelled a tour and premiere of the Verdi production .
 Italy's Maggio Musicale Fiorentino called off productions of Verdi’s Macbeth and Britten's Billy Budd that were to have been featured at the Florence festival . Verdi and Billy Budd were to be featured in the festival .
 South Korea particularly felt the impact when tours to that country by the Radio France Philharmonic Orchestra, the Vienna Symphony, and the Cincinnati Symphony were called off .
 The Guarneri String Quartet called it quits in 2009 after 45 years of playing . The legendary Italian quartet has been a soloist for 45 years .
 Three of the group's members had founded the ensemble at Vermont’s Marlboro Music Festival in 1963 and were in their 70s . The ensemble was founded by three members of the ensemble in 1963 .
 Gustavo Dudamel made his debut as music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic in October . Dudamel is 28-year-old Venezuelan conductor .
 In October Rattle reaffirmed his commitment to the Berlin Philharmonic . In October he signed a contract to continue as the artistic director through 2018 .
 The 200th anniversary of the birth of composer Felix Mendelssohn was celebrated in the U.S. and Europe this year .
 Two previously unknown works by Mozart were heard for the first time in August . The International Mozarteum Foundation, based in Salzburg, Austria, unveiled them in a performance by pianist Florian Birsak .
 An opera by popular singer-songwriter Rufus Wainwright debuted in July at the Manchester International Festival .
 The work, Prima Donna, was originally commissioned by the Met, but the company withdrew when Wainwright decided to write the libretto in French . The work was originally intended for the Met but was withdrawn by the company .
 The Cunning Little Vixen received its premiere at the Banff Centre in August . Canadian playwright director John Murrell's English libretto for composer Leos Janacek’s opera received its debut in August at the centre .
 13-year-old George Frankie of Scarsdale, N.Y., performs Laboratory at a School Day Concert .
 The Met presented its 125th Anniversary Gala in March . The Met was one of the most glittering events of the year .
 The fourhour performance included appearances by Roberto Alagna, Angela Gheorghiu, Domingo, Renee Fleming, Dmitry Hvorostovsky, Natalie Dessay, and a host of others .
 Drucker, 80, was not scheduled to play that night and had not performed the piece since the 1950s . Drucker reportedly did not drop a note .
 It was a delightful and unexpected coda to a career that ended with his retirement in 2009 after 60 years with the orchestra .
 The classical world was saddened during the year by the passing of several of its most beloved performers . Among them were sopranos Hildegarde Behrens of Germany and Elisabeth Soderstrom of Sweden . Erich Kunzel, Jr., who helmed the Cincinnati
 The median age of jazz listeners rose to 46, and the number of young jazz musicians declined . The number of jazz musicians in the United States declined .
 Jazz community was especially sensitive to public perceptions of the art form . Classical audiences were older than jazz audiences and had experienced a comparable decline in their numbers .
 Jazz, a fundamentally African American music, was a comparatively young art without the weight of centuries of tradition . It had been generally accepted as a legitimate art form only since the mid-20th century . Jazz is a fundamentally young art .
 There were few significant jazz institutions with resources equal to those of major-city art museums, symphony orchestras, and opera companies .
 The NEA survey reinforced fear that jazz was a gradually disappearing art . Two of the major living jazz artists turned 79 in 2013 .
 The JVC Jazz Festival, to have been held in June, was canceled by its producer, Festival Network . Festival Network had bought the festival in 2007 from founder George Wein .
 Wein, who founded the Newport Jazz Festival in 1954, rescued that and the Newport Folk Festival for 2009 after Rhode Island had canceled Festival Network’s license to operate those two events . Festival Network's license was canceled in 2009 .
 The 39-year-old monthly did suspend activity in June, but a new owner resumed publication with the old editorial staff in July .
 Wynton Marsalis had fostered appreciation of jazz as a fine art since the mid-1980s . Wynton's activity was in contrast to the bad news was the dynamic activity of the dynamic Marsalis .
 On Martin Luther King, Jr., Day, January 19, one day before the inauguration of U.S. Pres. Barack Obama, Obama will be inaugurated .
 On his album released in March, the trumpeter-composer alternated music by his quintet with the recitation of his original poem “He and She,” which was also the title of the album .
 The Living Theatre had ignited controversy in 1959 with its jazzand drug-themed Off-Broadway production of Jack Gelber’s The Connection . The Connection was revived for its 50th anniversary .
 This time Rene McLean led the onstage band; his father, Jackie McLean, was the saxophonist during the play’s original run . This time the play's original run was the original run of the play .
 A highlight of the Chicago Jazz Festival was the lyric duets by Buddy DeFranco and Johnny O'Neal . The duo duets were a triumph for the clarinetist and pianist .
 Madeleine Peyroux’s Bare Bones, for which she composed or cocomposed all the songs . The Bad Plus's For All I Care, with interpretations of music by Wilco, Nirvana, the Bee Gees, Gyorgy Ligeti,
 Younger brass improvisers, including cornetist Josh Berman and trumpeter Darren Johnston, have also released impressive albums .
 Among other releases were Creative Orchestra 2007 with the Italian Instabile Orchestra . Braxton was also a prolific composer .
 Coleman Mellett, of the Chuck Mangione band, as they were flying to a concert in Buffalo . Mellett was flying to Buffalo to perform at a concert .
 The year’s other deaths included those of Rashied Ali, singers Chris Connor and Blossom Dearie . George Russell, Hank Crawford and David Newman also died .
 Unknown Scottish vocalist Susan Boyle exploded onto the global stage with breathtaking performances on the television show Britain’s Got Talent .
 A video clip of her rendition of “I Dreamed a Dream” from Les Miserables made her a YouTube sensation . The video clip led to one of the year’s top-selling albums .
 Geoffrey Gurrumul Yunupingu, a blind Aboriginal singer-songwriter from Australia's Arnhem Land, is a blind Australian . The blind Aboriginal artist is known for his songs and Aboriginal dance .
 It was recorded for an independent label in Darwin, Australia, but became a surprise success across the country . It topped the World Music album charts in Britain .
 Gurrumul’s songs attracted an international audience, thanks to his thoughtful and soulful vocals and melodies . His songs echoed Western gospel and folk themes, and his soulful voice was soulful .
 Australian music was buoyed by the Black Arm Band, a collective of Aboriginal and white performers . The multimedia revue highlighted the ""two worlds of Australia” with stories of Aboriginal suffering and survival .
 From Africa there are also unexpected newcomers who moved from poverty and obscurity to playing in major concert halls .
 Staff Benda Bilili are a group of paraplegic polio victims and abandoned children who lived on the grounds surrounding the zoo in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo . They survived by performing on the streets .
 Tres tres fort won praise for their debut album . They matched rumba Congolese influences and funk with some extraordinary solos by Roger Landu . Landu constructed an instrument that he called the satonge .
 Mali’s Bassekou Kouyate, the virtuoso exponent of the ancient West African lute, the ngoni, released I Speak Fula . It features veteran singer Kasse Mady Diabate and kora star Toumani Diabates
 Maal was joined onstage by U2 for a memorable set of songs . The set included “One Love” written by reggae legend and Blackwell discovery Bob Marley . U2 was joined by Maal for the performance .
 From Latin America there were further reminders that world music artists are becoming increasingly keen to collaborate and experiment . World music artists from Latin America are keen to experiment .
 On the album Nuevos sonidos afro peruanos, their aim was to transform AfroPeruvian styles, making use of rhythm instruments invented by African slaves whose drums had been banned .
 The growing success of global fusion styles was also demonstrated by American producer Mark Johnson with his Playing for Change album .
 Johnson traveled around the world, recording both street musicians and celebrities playing soul standards . He then mixed the results together to create the album .
 She earned her a Grammy Award nomination for record of the year . She also featured prominently on the sound track of Danny Boyle's hit film Shtmdog Millionaire .
 Blind Aboriginal singer-songwriter Geoffrey Gurrumul Yunupingu performs during the Indigenous Music Awards in Darwin, Australia, in August .
 Kanye West brazenly interrupts singer-songwriter Taylor Swift’s acceptance speech for Best Female Video at the MTV Video Music Awards on September 13 .
 Tlahoun Gessesse, 68, died at age 68 at the age of 68 . He was one of the country's most famous musicians .
 Ethiopia's best-loved singer first came to fame in the era of Emperor Haile Selassie singing with the Imperial Bodyguard Band . Gessesse is Ethiopia’s most famous singer .
 The death of Michael Jackson and the success of Taylor Swift were the top stories of the American popular music year in 2009 . Taylor Swift's success was the top story of the year in the United States .
 Jackson died of drug-induced cardiac arrest on June 25 . American television networks devoted hundreds of hours to remembering and celebrating his legacy .
 In the two and a half weeks following his death, consumers purchased 2. million Jackson albums, guaranteeing that the late “King of Pop"" would be one of the year’s biggestselling artists .
 Swift's album Fearless overtook Jackson’s compilation Number Ones as the year's best-selling album . Jackson further pushed into third place by the debut album of Scottish singer Susan Boyle .
 Swift sold out Madison Square Garden in one minute . Swift saw her song “Love Story’s top charts internationally . Swift has sold out more than 100,000 fans .
 She also became the object of much public sympathy in September when rapper Kanye West grabbed the microphone from her at the MTV Video Music Awards as she was attempting to accept an award for Best Female Video .
 She capped the year with an impressive showing at the Country Music Association awards in November . She swept all four categories in which she was nominated .
 Sales of physical CDs, digital CDs, and what Nielsen SoundScan termed “track-equivalent albums” declined 8.9% from the first half of 2009 . Digital sales slowed from a 30% increase in growth in 2008 to a 13% rise in 2009 .
 The pop-music market was in free fall for much of the year . Despite some aberrations, sales spike in the wake of Jackson’s death and better-than-expected sales of Beatles albums .
 In January Bruce Springsteen performed on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., singing through the winter chill at the inauguration of United States Pres. Obama .
 In August rock historians marked the 40th anniversary of the Woodstock Music and Art Fair . Rock historians mark Woodstock 40 years ago .
 Robert Plant and Alison Krauss' Raising Sand won album of the year honours at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards on February 8 . The duo’s album of of the Year honours was made by all-star producer T Bone Burnett .
 Plant and Krauss were the night's biggest winners, also notching four other Grammy trophies . Plant, Krauss also won four other Grammys .
 Lil Wayne won four awards, including best rap album . Lil Wayne planned a late-2009 release for his Rebirth album . He planned to release it late 2009 .
 Plant talked about his pleasure in being associated with the Americana genre after so many years of being labeled a rock and roller . Plant said he was proud to be associated with Americana after years of playing in the genre .
 The Decemberists are the Decemberists and hyperliterate multi-instrumentalist Andrew Bird . They are the Pacific Northwest-based rockers . They have a history of success in independent music .
 Animal Collective, Neko Case, Bon Iver, and Animal Collective were also lauded . Neko
 Rockabilly singer Wanda Jackson was inducted in the Early Influence category . Jackson inducted into the category in 1964 .
 In country music Darius Rucker ended 2008 as the first African American solo artist to have scored a number one country single since Charley Pride in 1983 .
 In November Rucker was named best new artist at the CMA awards . Rucker is the first African American performer to win in a major individual category since 1972 .
 Other losses include Duane Jarvis and Amy Farris, songwriter Stephen Bruton, Nashville producer Aubrey Mayhew, former Grand Ole Opry manager Hal Durham .
 The centenary of Russian-born arts patron and impresario Serge Diaghilev’s founding of the Ballets Russes dance company gave the year 2009 a cause for focus and reflection .
 Twenty Years that Changed the World of Art was held in April at the Harvard Theatre Collection . The show was held at Harvard Theater Collection .
 Various companies around the United States as well as around the world have acknowledged Diaghilev’s legacy by presenting works from his era and commissioning works to reflect the innovative thrust of the Ballets Russes .
 Boston Ballet commissioned from resident choreographer Jorma Elo to create a new work inspired by Igor Stravinsky’s The Rite of Spring . Elo's new work is inspired by the notorious 1913 premiere of The Rite Of Spring . The ballet caused a riotous stir
 These included a performance by Ballet West (Salt Lake City, Utah) of Bronislava Nijinska’s Les Biches and a production of Belgian choreographer Stijn Celis's recent ""contemporary response to Nijinka”s Les N
 On the Dnieper, a world premiere using a Prokofiev score that was dedicated to Diaghilev, premiered in Moscow . The score is dedicated to the composer, who died in 2011 .
 A ""Live from Lincoln Center” national telecast was given of Romeo + Juliet, in the 2007 staging by NYCB’s ballet master in chief, Peter Martins . NYCB's "Romeo + Juliet" was given in 2007 .
 At year’s end NYCB played the Kennedy Center with seven performances of mixed repertory . NYCB also performed seven performances at the center .
 Moscow’s Bolshoi Ballet visited KC with its production of Le Corsaire, a landmark work of 19th-century ballet theatre . The work was historically researched by Ratmansky and his team when he was director .
 ABT gave a much-shortened NYC fall season, spanning only four days . Ratmansky presented Seven Sonatas at LC’s Avery Fisher Hall, his latest ABT premiere .
 Cory Stearns won the eighth international competition for the Erik Bruhn Prize from the National Ballet of Canada in March . He won the prize in March for his work at ABT .
 Julie Kent returned for the fall season from maternity leave . Much-admired Julie Kent returns for the first time since leaving maternity leave in 2010 . Kent has been a big name in the fashion industry for years .
 ABT guest artist Nina Ananiashvili gave a series of farewell performances as Odette/Odile in Swan Lake in June . She gave the last performance with ABT in June, marking her last appearance with the company .
 Longtime San Francisco Ballet ballerina Tina LeBlanc was celebrated at her farewell from the company in May . Longtime dancer Tina Leblanc was also celebrated at the farewell ceremony .
 The new staging substituted for the 1988 production on SFB’s three-city, 12-day fall tour to China . Because it was less difficult to ship, the new staging was easier to ship .
 ABT played a 4-day season in Beijing in November . ABT is also touring circuit to China .
 Merce Cunningham's new work, Nearly Ninety, was presented at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in April . Cunningham died in July at age 90 .
 Merce Cunningham Dance Company was founded by Cunningham after his death . Cunningham's death led to a two-year world tour of Cunningham's work . The company is now on a worldwide tour .
 Pacific Northwest Ballet showed the dances of former Cunningham dancer Ulysses Dove . The company took the all-Dove bill to the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival .
 Among the festival’s other offerings was a program of hip-hop works by Rennie Harris Puremovement and a program by Canadian choreographer Crystal Pite .
 BAM presented the United States premiere of Itutu as part of BAM’s Next Wave Festival .
 Martha Graham Dance Company played a brief NYC season following a successful run in Paris . The Martha Graham dance company was based in Paris and NYC .
 Grahams nowadays little-seen multiact Clytemnestra was the seasons most prominent offering, in a staging by MGDC artistic director Janet Eilber .
 Houston Ballet’s premiere of Marie, a Marie-Antoinette-inspired ballet by HB artistic director Stanton Welch to the music of Shostakovitch . Other prominent multiact dances included the Houston Ballet ‘Marie’
 The Joffrey Ballet of Chicago presented its first performance of Lar Lubovitch's Othello . The Ballet also performed its first performances of the play in Chicago . The performance was part of the first performance in Chicago of Othelo .
 Mark Morris Dance Group played LC with Romeo and Juliet, on Motifs of Shakespeare . Morris' 2008 moderndance rendering of Prokofiev’s score was commissioned by Morris in 2008 .
 The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater rounded out its 50th anniversary at BAM in June . The Alvin and Ailey celebrated 50 years together at the BAM .
 Judith Jamison will be leaving the troupe's directorship in 2011 . The company’s December season at CC offered a retrospective look at the legacy of Jamison . Jamison's departure will be celebrated at the end of the season .
 Lucinda Childs, an experimentalist from the 1960s, gained prominence after a number of years of low-key presence in the dance world . Childs' 1979 collaborative work with composer Philip Glass and visual artist Sol LeWitt .
 It was presented at Bard Summerscape and then went on a national tour of select cities . The show went on tour in select cities before going on national tour .
 Experimental choreographer Stephen Petronio marked the 25th anniversary of his own troupe and repertory, with a special season at NYC’s Joyce Theater . The Joyce Theater celebrates the anniversary of the troupe .
 British-born choreographer Christopher Wheeldon had his work shown at the Vail International Dance Festival . Morphoses company had launched three years earlier .
 At CC he offered two programs of his own works alongside those of choreographers Tim Harbour, Lightfoot Leon, and Ratmansky . He offered two shows at CC, one at the end of his career .
 Chan Hon Goh retired from her career with NBC in May in the title role of the troupe’s production of Giselle .
 Ballet British Columbia saw the departure of its longtime artistic director John Alleyne and the appointment of Emily Molnar as interim artistic director .
 Eduardo Vilaro was named artistic director of Ballet Hispanico in NYC . He replaces founding director Tina Ramirez, who left the ballet in June .
 Deaths, besides that of Cunningham, included those of Eva Evdokimova, Pearl Lang, Frankie Manning, and Georgina Parkinson . Patrick Swayze also died in the dance world .
 Haynes Owens, Marjorie Mussman, George Zoritch, Nora Kovach, Carolyn George d’Amboise, Bruce Bain, Dick Beard, and Lola MacLaughlin were also notable losses . Dance teachers Gage Englund Bush, Gerald E Myers, and
 The centenary of the first performances of Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes provided the central theme of the European ballet world in 2009 . Several new works as well as commemorative galas, exhibitions, and film shows were launched .
 In Paris the Theatre du Chatelet hosted a season by the Kremlin Ballet from Moscow, with guest appearances by leading dancers from the Bolshoi and Mariinsky companies . In Paris, the Theatre des Champs-Elysees hosted two evenings of documentary films .
 The program followed a pattern also seen in other cities, combining revivals of original ballets by Diaghilev’s great choreographers . The program included a contemporary reworking of Fokine's Thamar choreographed by Jurius Smoriginas .
 The Paris Opera Ballet waited until December to show a program of works by Leonide Massine and Vaslav Nijinsky . The program included two works by Fokine and Massine .
 John Neumeier’s Hamburg Ballet presented a ballet about Nijinsky, Vaslav, and his own version of Le Pavilion d’Armide . The Hamburg ballet was part of an international gala in October .
 Le Pavilion d’Armide had formed part of the historic debut of Ballets Russes on May 18, 1909 . With its original choreography by Fokine, it had been choreographed by the original choreographer .
 The Hamburg company had already shown a tribute program in its home theatre . The Bavarian State Ballet in Munich, the Rome Opera Ballet, and many others had also shown tribute programs .
 In London the Royal Ballet introduced Sensorium, a new piece by house choreographer Alastair Marriott, into a program otherwise by Fokine . Sensorium is the work of the Ballet's choreographer and choreographer .
 English National Ballet with Faun and Scottish Ballet showed reworkings of Nijinsky’s L'Apres-midi d'un faune .
 ENB’s two Ballets Russes programs brought them some very respectful reviews . Karl Lagerfeld's new costume design for Fokine's The Dying Swan received some publicity .
 Celebrating the present rather than the past, there was new work to be seen in many European theatres . New work was shown in many theatres across Europe .
 The Royal Ballet used its smaller theatre for a new work based on Bach’s Goldberg Variations . The work was choreographed by Kim Brandstrup in close collaboration with principal dancer, Tamara Rojo .
 The major revival of the Royal Ballet’s season was a cut-down version of Kenneth MacMillan's 1981 two-act ballet, Isadora, based on the life of dancer Isadora Duncan . The major revival of the season was the cut-
 Ballets Russes used film to establish the historical background to Duncan's life and work . Theatre Luke MacGregor—Reuters/Landov .
 The result, however, was no more popular with the critics than the original had been .
 In July the company made its first-ever visit to Cuba, fulfilling the dream of guest artist Carlos Acosta . Acosta's enthusiasm and hard work were well rewarded by the responsive .
 Elsewhere in the UK, two companies celebrated their 40th anniversaries . Elsewhere, two of the UK's biggest companies celebrated 40 years .
 The ballets return to the repertory was especially welcome for the memories it evoked of the former company director Christopher Gable, who had created the leading role .
 Scottish Ballet continued its rise in public and critical estimation in its 40th year of existence . Ballet introduced Frederick Ashton's Scenes de Ballet and William Forsythes Workwithinwork to its repertory .
 In France the Paris Opera Ballet gave its first performances of John Cranko’s Onegin . The piece is widely performed elsewhere in Europe .
 The Royal Danish Ballet's year included a visit to Japan, a Jerome Robbins evening featuring the company premieres of Dances at a Gathering and West Side Story Suite, and a Balanchine triple bill including another first for the RDB .
 Ballet master Sorella Englund and artistic director Nikolaj Hiibbe collaborated on a controversial new production of one of the company's treasures, August Bournonville’s Napoli . Set it in the rough environment of Naples in the 1950s and replacing the lost
 The National Ballet of Finland showed a program of works by Jin Kylian and David Dawson . Kylian's former company, Nederlands Dans Theater, celebrated its 50th anniversary and showed a number of retrospective programs .
 At the beginning of the year, Yury Burlaka succeeded Aleksey Ratmansky as director of the Bolshoi Ballet . Yury Burlaka  succeeded Ratmansky in January .
 In March, Maria Aleksandrova and Ruslan Skvortsov danced the leading roles on the first night of Sergey Vikharev's reconstruction of Coppelia . In December, Burlaka programed his own new production of La Esmeralda .
 The Bolshoi Theatre's rebuilding project continues to be disrupted by delays . In between, the company toured the U.S. and Spain, while at home the rebuilding project was disrupted .
 The theatre had closed in 2005 and was due to reopen in 2009 . The expected date of reopening was pushed back to 2013 amid reports that the original budget had been overspent .
 The Mariinsky Ballet also toured the U.S. in August . In August the company was in London for two weeks, selling well at the Royal Opera House .
 Opening night devoted to Leonid Lavrovsky’s 1940 version of Romeo and Juliet . Alina Somova making her debut in the leading role . Vladimir Shklyarov had a big success .
 Leonid Yakobson’s Tatar-inspired Shurale was revived in a revival of the original . The White Nights Festival was held in St. Petersburg .
 Leading the cast were Yevgeniya Obraztsova, Aleksandr Sergeyev, and Denis Matvienko . Leading the play was Aleksander Sergeyev and Aleksandra Matvin .
 Legris was chosen to take over as artistic director of the Vienna State Opera Ballet in 2010 . Schandorff moved into a backstage role in Copenhagen . Oaks and Oaks returned to Estonia, where Edur took over as the National Ballet's artistic director .
 The year was marked by the sudden death of choreographer Pina Bausch . She was one of the giants of the dancetheatre movement .
 Her company, Tanztheater Wuppertal, continued with the touring schedule that it had already planned, but there was no announcement about the company’s long-term future .
 Other losses during the year included those of Danish dancer, director, and choreographer Flemming Flindt, ballerinas Ekaterina Maximova and Eva Evdokimova . Two leading male dancers, Andre Prokovsky and David Ashmole, also lost .
 Money itself and the collapse of the world markets became the hot topic of the year in plays by 10 new writers at the small Soho Theatre under the group title Everything Must Go . The group of 10 new plays were created by 10 writers .
 Enron, an epic satiric drama of that company's demise, is produced by Rupert Goold’s touring company, Headlong . It will be staged at the Chichester Festival Theatre and the Royal Court Theatre .
 Samuel West’s outstanding portrayal of Enron's disgraced president, Jeffrey Skilling, assumes the tragic heft of a Shakespearean hero . The play seemed even more timely in its skillful anatomization of the financial shenanigans in the fantasy world of projected profits .
 David Hare’s The Power of Yes is at the National Theatre in an attempt to break through the protective attitude of the bankers . The financial crisis was explored more broadly in the playwright's play .
 Hare spent an intense period of research on his play, and it attracted enormous interest . Hare said in rescuing the banks the British government was replacing capitalism with socialism that bailed out the rich alone .
 The theatre seemed to be catching the mood of the country all year . Big, important plays appeared in rapid succession across the London stages .
 Jez Butterworth returned to the theatre after a long absence with two new plays . Parlour Song and Jerusalem are both new works . Butterworth returns to theatre after long absence from theatre .
 The two were both directed by Ian Rickson and suggested that nature would take revenge on suburban town dwellers .
 Johnny Byron is the Pied Piper of the drunk, disaffected, and disaffected . He is the son-of-the-people who wanted to wipe out his mobile home .
 Byron, played by Mark Rylance in a performance of Falstaffian swagger and humanity, was a modem Lord of Misrule summoning the mysteries of Stonehenge and the legends of old Albion . Byron, as played by . Mark Ryleance, was played by Ryl
 The other big play of the year was Simon Stephens's Punk Rock at the Lyric Hammersmith . It was a scintillating comedy of high-school classroom anxieties and friendship culminating in a terrible tragedy .
 The echoes of the Columbine High School massacre were the least of the play's strengths . Spring Awakening covered ground similar to many British plays such as Another Country and Alan Bennett's The History Boys .
 Stephens was a unique and increasingly powerful voice on the British stage . The vigour and perceptiveness of his dialogue as well as the brilliance of the acting in the . cast of mostly unknowns ensured against cliche and banality .
 Punk Rock marked a new era at the Lyric, one of London’s leading outerring theatres, under the artistic directorship of Sean Holmes . Holmes was making a point of building his policy around a youth theatre scheme, much as Dominic Cooke had channeled the Royal Court
 Polly Stenham's new play, Tusk Tusk, follows her remarkable 2007 debut play, That Face, with a similar almostanthropological account of young teenagers left to fend for themselves in a middle-class limbo without adults . Their mother had gone missing on a drink-and
 The productions included two revivals, The Fever and Aunt Dan and Lemon, and the world premiere of Grasses of a Thousand Colours . Shawn, directed by Andre Gregory, played a self-satisfied scientist who rhapsodizes on his sexual obsessions in a fantastical
 Grasses was a genuinely controversial play, but it struck a firm chord in a year that also saw several fine West End revivals . Grasses is one of the most controversial plays of the year .
 Enjoy, in performances by Alison Steadman and David Troughton, as a bitter comedy of old age with more than a touch of both Joe Orton and Beckett . Enjoy was restored, as well as a tribute to the one-time flop Enjoy .
 Alan Ayckbourn’s remarkable Woman in Mind, with Janie Dee fantasizing an alternative life in her own back garden . Tom Stoppard's Arcadia, an almost indecently enjoyable comedy of conflicting time periods, biography, mathematics, and gardening . Richard Greenberg's
 Dame Judi Dench’s West End show wrapped with an extravagantly-costumed cast in the West End . Not even Michael Granderson could save from the stilted performance .
 Law's performance flattered to deceive in its monotonous anger and conspicuous lack of wit . It was not apparent that Hamlet was actually a very funny character. Law’s performance, however, flattered .
 Theatre house style (black brick wall, flagstones, dry ice and dry ice) was wearing thin . Theatre house style is wearing thin, with great sound tracks and quick acting .
 Rachel Weisz scored a personal success as Blanche DuBois in an overrated A Streetcar Named Desire . Dominic West returned from television to lead a new look at Pedro Calderon de la Barca's classic Life Is a Dream .
 West End smash hits, apart from Law’s Hamlet, were Sir Ian McKellen and soon-to-be-Sir Patrick Stewart in Waiting for Godot . Sian Phillips and Patricia Hodge in the stage version of Calendar Girls .
 Peter Flannery's skillful stage version of the Russian movie Burnt by the Sun featured knockout performances by Ciaran Hinds, Michelle Dockery, and Rory Kinnear . Helen Mirren as the tragically smitten queen in Jean Racine's Phedre .
 The latter, which used the old Ted Hughes translation, was directed by Nicholas Hytner and set the action on a sunbaked Mediterranean design by Bob Crowley .
 At year's end, Hytner was awarded a Knighthood in the New Year’s honours list . He was awarded the knighthood at the end of 2013 .
 Phedre was the first NT production to be screened live, as performed onstage, in Britain and abroad . It was the latest move by Hytner to sustain as wide a wide a public interest in the work .
 His own production of Richard Bean’s England People Very Nice was a cartoon resume of immigration to Britain, flaring in a public row over the Muslim section . Antiracism campaigners led the first onstage demonstration of NT's history .
 The theatre stood firm in its commitment to the play, and the furor soon abated . The theatre was forced to stage a play at the end of the play .
 Auden and the composer Benjamin Britten played entertainingly with more high-brow, less controversial concerns . Richard Griffiths and Alex Jennings play the Britten .
 All’s Well That Ends Well at the National and As You Like It at Shakespeare's Globe at the Globe . Naomi Frederick was a truly delightful Rosalind .
 In temporary Courtyard Theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon, the RSC offered tepid revivals of As You Like It and The Winter’s Tale . But a more interesting Julius Caesar, with a 'Virtual'' crowd on film that railed against the conspir
 The Chichester Festival Theatre offered Joseph Fiennes in Cyrano de Bergerac and Diana Rigg as Judith Bliss in a poor revival of Noel Coward's Hay Fever . The show was directed by Trevor Nunn, and featured a poor performance .
 Nunn directed Kevin Spacey and David Troughton in a revival of Inherit the Wind at the Old Vic . Nunn has directed the show for the first time since his directing debut .
 Spacey’s Old Vic also celebrated the 80th birthday of Brian Friel with a gorgeous in-the-round production of Dancing at Lughnasa . Friel was further represented at the Edinburgh International Festival in a trilogy of plays from the Gate Theatre in Dublin .
 Other Irish playwrights with new work at the Dublin Theatre Festival included Sebastian Barry, Enda Walsh, and Conor McPherson, who continued the screen-to-stage craze .
 McPherson returned to Daphne du Maurier’s short story . The publicity material included a reference to the 1963 Alfred Hitchcock movie, a ploy to boost ticket sales .
 Another highlight of the Edinburgh Festival was an orgiastic version of Goethe’s Faust by Romanian director Silviu Purcarete in a huge out-of-town warehouse arena . Traverse Theatre participated with Rona Munro's The Last Witch, based on accounts of
 The Traverse also ran a full program of new work on the fringe at their home base next to the Usher Hall . Midsummer by David Greig and Gordon McIntyre and Orphans by Dennis Kelly . Dennis Kelly's Orphans is yet another look at the dysfunctional-family
 Bette Bourne and Mark Ravenhill wrote and performed the songs . The latter, which perhaps owed something to Harvey Fierstein’s Torch Song Trilogy, was written and performed by Bette . The show is set in New York City .
 Other losses were the actors Dilys Laye, Edward Judd, Harry Towb, and Iain Cuthbertson . The playwrights Tom McGrath and Mike Stott also lost their roles .
 Broadway racked up record profits in 2009 while nonprofit regional theatres coped with shrinking resources, cutbacks, and even closures .
 Some arts pundits speculated that hard times fueled the impulse for escapist entertainment . The bottom-line success of these musicals gave some credence to their thesis .
 Broadway’s sheen was enhanced as well by an eye-catching sales installation . The $19 million TKTS Discount Booth opened in late 2008 on the triangular patch of Times Square in 2008 .
 The booth's ruby-red, 27-stair glass-step design won awards and approbation from the ticket-buying public . The booth won't be available again until 2015 .
 Theatre organizations both large and small watched donations from foundations and corporations shrink or run dry . All-important individual contributions dwindled as well as individual contributions .
 Some major companies have cut staffs and shortened seasons to make ends meet . Some major sports teams have been forced to cut jobs to save money .
 Despite hard times, a spate of newly created and innovatively improved theatre spaces sprang up in the United States during the year .
 Dallas Theater Center moved out of its longtime home designed by Frank Lloyd Wright into a new $354 million performing-arts complex . Ford's Theatre and Museum in Washington, D.C., sported a glistening renovation .
 Lynn Nottage’s Ruined, a humanist expose about the brutalization of women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, was coproduced by the Manhattan Theatre Club and Chicago's Goodman Theatre . Nottage's play is about a decade of conflict in the Congo .
 Coming Home and Have You Seen Us? a pair of new works by 77-year-old playwright and activist Athol Fugard were both mounted during 2009 by director Gordon Edelstein at New Haven, Conn.’s .
 Sarah Ruhl’s In the Next Room is a sly meditation on Victorian-era relationships and gadgets for women's health . The show moved to Broadway from California's Berkeley Repertory Theatre from California .
 Berkeley company was also the source of a muchtalked-about musical, American Idiot, adapted from a 2004 multiplatinum album by the pop-punk trio Green Day .
 The unusual project, despite mixed critical response, was likely to have a rich future life on American stages .
 Peter Sinn Nachtrieb’s self-described ""explosive comedy about the end of the world" followed by Irish playwright Conor McPherson's The Seafarer and Stephen Karam's Speech & Debate . The year's most widely performed plays (as tab
 Philadelphia’s Pig Iron Theatre Company also made its mark with such shows as Chekhov Lizardhrain, a heady deconstruction of the Russian master's mind-set, and Welcome to Yuba City .
 Among the major theatre figures moving into new jobs in 2009 were high profile director Mark Lamos and manager Michael Ross . Angels in America director George C Wolfe was hired to help design a museum in Atlanta, slated to open in 2012 as the Center for Civil & Human Rights .
 Bartlett Sher announced that Kate Whoriskey would succeed him as artistic director of Seattle’s Intiman Theatre in 2011 . Sher is at the top of his game thanks to such successes as Lincoln Center Theater's South Pacific revival . Sher: Kate will succeed him in 2011 as artistic
 Kate Warner (formerly of Dad's Garage Theatre Company) and Raelle Myrick-Hodges (the founder of Philadelphia’s Azuka Theatre) took over Massachusetts's New Repertory Theatre and San Francisco's Brava Theater Center .
 Playwright Marsha Norman took up the torch of gender equality in an essay in the November issue of American Theatre magazine .
 Canada’s legitimate theatre scene attempted to hold itself together in the face of canceled shows, soft sales, and slashed prices . The impact of a bleak economy was felt north of the border .
 Buddies in Bad Times, a 30-year-old nonprofit devoted to gay themes and artists, scotched its final mainstage show of the 2008-09 season . The nonprofit was founded in Toronto, Canada, in 1987 .
 Reports leaked out that total sales amounted to only about a third of the seating capacity . Avatar is a science fiction comedy by Morris Panych .
 Even highly publicized commercial musicals were belt-tightening . David Mirvish's Dirty Dancing and the Queen songfest We Will Rock You were hawking reduced-price seats .
 Stratford Shakespeare and Shaw festivals suffered from stalled tourism . Strong reviews and a government marketing initiative helped avert big losses .
 Horton Foote, Tharon Musser, Augusto Boal and Karl Malden among theatre figures who died in 2009 . Horton's Orphan Home Cycle premiered posthumously . Tharon's lighting designer and Brazilian dramatist Boal also died .
 Other losses include playwright Lynne Alvarez, designer Ursula Belden, historian and poet Stefan Brecht, and iconoclastic director Tom O’Horgan .
 3-D films, a brief fashion of the 1950s, roared back as a significant theatrical attraction in 2009 . In 2009, 3D films were a major theatrical attraction .
 This ecologically minded science-fiction parable about earthlings and humanoids on the planet Pandora took cinema fantasy to new levels of realistic detail . 3-D photography, 2,500 special-effects shots, and an apocalyptic production cost of more than $230 million .
 Other films available in the format included Disney’s A Christmas Carol, Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs, and Coraline . Up is the best animated achievement of the year .
 The year’s family films also included the digitally enhanced Where the Wild Things Are . Spike Jonze's take on Maurice Sendak's classic children's picture book about a neglected boy .
 Disney returned to traditional hand-drawn animation for The Princess and the Frog . Tiana is a marketable lead character in the African American Tiana .
 Up in the Air is a lightly thoughtful diversion about a corporate hired gun addicted to business-class life . George Clooney’s subtle acting and physical charisma lit up the screen in the movie .
 He also appeared as a crazed ""psychic spy” in Grant Heslov’s brilliant satire The Men Who Stare at Goats . He also played a crazy 'psychic spy’ who appeared in The Men who Stare At Goats.
 Clooney was the voice of the title character in Fantastic Mr Fox . He starred in Wes Anderson's stop-motion puppet adaptation of Roald Dahl's children's book .
 Jeff Bridges starred as a broken-down country singer in Crazy Heart . Colin Firth was touching as a gay man dealing with personal loss in A Single Man . Tom Ford directed his first attempt at directing by fashion designer Tom Ford .
 Invictus is Clint Eastwood's even-handed drama about Nelson Mandela, South African unity, and rugby football . The film was released in March .
 A Serious Man is a wryly comic account of divine fate at work among a Jewish family in a Midwestern suburbia in the 1960s . Joel and Ethan Coen also showed their strengths in the film, which was released in October .
 Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince was made in England . The film was based on the Harry Potter books .
 Abrams’s Star Trek reinvigorated its veteran franchise with a fresh cast and a fast-paced, witty “prequel” narrative . Abrams' Star Trek is the latest installment in the series .
 Following The Da Vinci Code, Ron Howard and Tom Hanks teamed up again in the moderately improved Angels & Demons . The film was adapted from an earlier Dan Brown novel of ponderous religious intrigue .
 Roland Emmerich, specialist in science-fiction bonanzas, returned with the doomsday drama 2012 . The film is visually spectacular but dramatically laughable . Roland Emmmerich's film is a sci-fi doomsday film .
 Film charting the adventures of a flamboyantly gay fashionista, Bruno, from the Borat team of Sacha Baron Cohen and director Larry Charles .
 Battle of the Smithsonian continued the popular adventures of Ben Stiller’s former museum security guard . Stiller starred in the popular series .
 Films agonizing over U.S. fields of military conflict were less conspicuous . Films agonized over United States fields of conflict were not conspicuous .
 Kathryn Bigelow’s The Hurt Locker, concerning the activities of an elite U.S. bomb squad in Iraq, easily stood out for its physical intensity and claustrophobia .
 Julia Roberts returns to star prominence in Duplicity . The romantic thriller is a romantic thriller about the activities of two corporate spies .
 Cary Fukunaga’s Sin nombre [Without Name] is an exceptionally strong debut film about the efforts of Central American immigrants struggling to reach the U.S. border .
 Based on the novel “Push” by Sapphire also attracted much attention for its unsparing yet tender story of a pregnant Harlem teenager, an abject victim of parental abuse .
 The realist tradition in British cinema continued to bear fruit with Andrea Arnolds Fish Tank . The gripping drama about bleak lives on a housing estate is told observantly and tautly .
 Katie Jarvis was mesmerizing as the surly unloved teenager at the plot’s centre . She was mesmerized by the nonprofessional Katie Jarvis .
 Lone Scherfig's An Education painted a vibrant portrait of an English teenage girl’s dubious romance with an older man . An Education is an English teen's dubious romance .
 Realist stalwart Ken Loach drifted awkwardly into fantasy-tinged romantic comedy with Looking for Eric . Film is about a postal worker obsessed with association football .
 Soccer provided material for The Damned United, a film about Brian Clough . Soccer also provided material to the film about the 1970s Manchester United manager . The film is based on Clough's work as a manager of the English club .
 John Lennon received unusually conventional attention in Nowhere Boy . The film was directed by conceptual artist Sam Taylor-Wood . John Lennon is the subject of the film, directed by the artist .
 Jane Campion's Bright Star, produced with Australia and France, stood out for its tender depiction of the poet John Keats' last years of his life . The film shows the poet's last years viewed through the eyes of his lover and betrothed, Fanny Brawne
 The Iniaginarium of Doctor Parnassus was completed with some ingenuity following actor Heath Ledger’s 2008 death during filming . Gilliam's tale about a traveling-sideshow operator trying to wriggle free of his pact with the Devil appealed most to the director�
 Neil Jordan pitted fairy-tale myths against the grating modern world in the esoteric Ondine . Neil Jordan's novel is set in the Irish state of Ireland .
 Wider tastes catered to in Conor McPherson's emotional drama The Eclipse and John and Kieran Carney’s Zonad, a lunatic comedy about a drunk in a red vinyl suit .
 Xavier Dolan stirred much interest with his semiautobiographical J’ai tue ma mere (I Killed My Mother), a biting, at times funny account of a 16-year-old homosexual’s turbulent relationship with his mother .
 From Australia, Sarah Watt pondered on the travails of a Melbourne mother recovering from a serious illness in the funny and affecting My Year Without Sex . She ponders on a Melbourne woman's struggle to cope with her illness .
 The low-budget Samson & Delilah attracted much praise for its sensitive treatment of the messy lives of two Aboriginal teenagers in the outback and suburban Melbourne . Ana Kokkinos’s attention in the raw and compassionate Blessed.
 In The Boys Are Back, a sportswriter struggles with being a single parent following his wife’s tragic death . The situation explored without maudlin sentiment .
 New Zealand’s biggest filmmaker, Peter Jackson, lent his weight as producer to District 9 . The original, gritty science-fiction drama is about a slum ghetto of extraterrestrials in South Africa .
 The European film that stirred most controversy was the maverick Danish director Lars von Trier’s Antichrist . The film was the most controversial film in the world .
 In other Danish films, Martin Pieter Zandvliet’s Applaus ( Applause) packed some biting wit into its tale of a prickly alcoholic actress endeavouring to get her life in order . Nicolo Donato made an impressive directing debut with Brodersk
 Veterans of the French New Wave movement of the 1950s and '60s continued in business . Veterans of French New wave movement continued to do business .
 Claude Chabrol, 78, reached a wider audience with Bellamy, an enjoyably old-fashioned and witty policier . Gerard Depardieu as a police inspector cast in the friendly domestic mold of Georges Simenon’s .
 The films with most audience appeal and the hottest fire, however, came from the younger generations . The films that have the highest audience appeal came from young generations .
 Director Jacques Audiard cemented his stature with 11 n Prophete [A Prophet], a tough and absorbing drama about the thriving life of a young Arab French petty criminal .
 Tahar Rahim grabbed all eyes with the detail and intense physicality of his lead performance . The film won the Grand Prix at Cannes at Cannes .
 Anne Fontaine’s Coco avant Chanel pleased wide audiences with its prettily mounted portrait of the early years of the fashion designer Coco Chanel .
 Bruno Dumont continued his austere examinations of community life with Hadewijch . The film is about a devout young woman's extreme crisis of faith . Dumont's work was published in 1968 and 1989 .
 Micmacs a tire-larigot is a broad hyperactive tale about Paris misfits banding against arms dealers . Jean-Pierre Jeunet's novel features the comic Dany Boon, a Parisian comic .
 Jean-Paul Lilienfeld’s provocative La Joumee de la jupe was overloaded with social issues . Isabelle Adjani was a teacher in a suburban school driven to take her pupils hostage .
 La Fille du RER is a kaleidoscopic drama based on the true story of a woman train passenger who falsely declared herself the victim of a racist attack . Andre Techine took a more sophisticated view of social malaise in the film .
 Felix Van Groeningen’s visually boisterous De helaasheid der dingen and Un Ange a la mer are his feature debut . The film is about a family struggling to cope with a suicidal father . It is a striking feature debut by director Frederic Dumont
 With its cruel view of human behaviour, this was a film to admire rather than love . Haneke's craft, the detailed performances and beautiful black-and-white photography still made for a significant achievement .
 Fatih Akin's Soul Kitchen is a friendly portrait of multicultural Germany seen through the microcosm of a Hamburg restaurant . The Soul Kitchen was created by Akin's wife and daughter-in-law . The restaurant is based in the city of Hamburg, Germany .
 Heinrich Breloer's adaptation of Thomas Mann’s novel Buddenbrooks settled too easily for surface melodrama . Armin Muller-Stahl injected some dignity with the play .
 The Last Station, co-produced with Russia and the U.K., conjured solid middlebrow entertainment from the tempestuous last year of Tolstoy's life . Shot in English, the Last Station was shot in English .
 Lila, Lila is a neatly turned romantic comedy about a waiter who passes off an unpublished manuscript as his own work . Livelier commercial fare was offered by Alain Gsponer’s Lila in the film .
 Pedro Almodovar’s Los abrazos rotos ( Broken Embraces) is a labyrinthine tale about obsessive love, revenge, and cinema . The film is a tale of a former film director blinded in a car crash .
 The film remained a clever exercise rather than a drama from the heart . Almodovar’s medley of styles and genres ensured continual interest .
 La teta asustada (The Milk of Sorrow) is Claudia Llosa’s sober but vividly realized drama about a Peruvian housemaid so afraid of being raped that she blocks access to her vagina with a potato .
 The most spectacular Spanish film was Alejandro Amenabar’s Agora (Mists of Time), an emotionally cool but visually succulent epic about love and conflicting beliefs in 4th-century Alexandria .
 A brief, mannered story of misguided love. Singularidades de uma rapariga loura (Eccentricities of a Blonde-Haired Girl)
 Giuseppe Tornatore’s Baaria, sentimental and vacuous, opened the Venice Film Festival with a blast of hot air . The film is set in Venice .
 Marco Risi’s Fortapasc, about the last months of a Neapolitan journalist killed by the Mafia, painted a precise and grungy picture of the scene . The film is about the final months of the journalist's last months .
 Vincere was directed by Marco Bellocchio with operatic panache . It related the story of Mussolini’s cruelly discarded first wife and son . Vincere is directed by the Italian dictator .
 Luca Guadagnino's Io sono I’amore (I Am Love) explored the world of a wealthy Milanese family with vigour, detail, and psychological penetration . Tilda Swinton starred in the film .
 Kynodontas is a tale of three children trapped in an alternate universe created by their cruel parents on their isolated country estate . In Greece, Giorgos Lanthimos has written a book about the children's plight .
 Nord is Rune Denstad Langlo’s agreeably quirky comic drama about a dejected man who gradually warms up on a long Arctic journey . The film is set in Norway, Norway and Norway .
 Swedish director Lukas Moodysson made his first international production . Mammoth is a three-pronged drama about parents, children and global capitalism .
 Amintiri din epoca de aur is a patchy but watchable panorama of the absurdities of life under communist rule . The film was conceived, written, and partly directed by Cristian Mungiu . It is the latest in Romania's recent cinema renaissance .
 Episodes (directed by five separate filmmakers) ranged in tone from sharp light comedy to black irony . Episodes were directed by five different filmmakers . The series is set to be released in 2015 .
 Corneliu Porumboiu returned with Politist, adj. , a thoughtful drama about a policeman’s unwilling surveillance of a teenager suspected of selling marijuana .
 Mommo (The Bogeyman) is Atalay Tasdiken’s heart-tugging, limpidly filmed debut feature . The film is about two young siblings from an Anatolian village who are threatened with separation .
 Slovenia’s Slovenka (Slovenian Girl), directed by Damjan Kozole, told of an amoral student led into dreams of riches by dreams .
 Tatarak is at heart a mournful tale about a middle-aged woman lured by an attractive young man . The tale goes astray with the interweaving of personal monologues from Krystyna Janda, Wadja’s lead actress .
 Documentary maker Borys Lankosz traces effect of Polish secret police on three generations of women . Documentary tracing effect of communist Poland’s secret police force on women .
 In Mexico, Rigoberto Perezcano’s Norteado gave unhackneyed treatment to the familiar topic of immigrants struggling to enter the United States .
 Chile secured international attention with La nana . Sebastian Silva’s tensely wrought drama is about an obsessive, gloomy, territorial maid .
 Chilean director Miguel Littin stars in Dawson Isla 10, a harrowing drama about the treatment of political prisoners by the Pinochet regime . Alejandro Fernandez Almendras trod more gently in Huacho, a touching family saga following 24 hours in the life of a poor provincial family
 Productions from Uruguay, though small in number, continued to reveal talent .
 Adrian Biniez's Gigante tenderly pursued the comic fortunes of a shy supermarket security guard, nervously in love with one of the store's janitors .
 Argentina enjoyed a big local success with Juan Jose Campanella’s El secreto de sus ojos . The complex but gripping romantic thriller is a romantic thriller . The film was a big success in Argentina .
 In Brazil, Esmir Filho impressed with his Os famosos e os duendes da morte (The Famous and the Dead) in Brazil . Filho is a Bob Dylan fan whose main connection with the world is through the Internet .
 Israeli filmmakers proved the most prolific and successful in exploring the region’s conflicts . Israeli filmmakers have been particularly successful in the region .
 Samuel Maoz’s Lebanon, winner of the Golden Lion prize at Venice, placed the viewer inside an Israeli tank on the first day of the 1982 invasion of Lebanon .
 Visceral camera work gave the film a claustrophobic power . Characterizations stayed relatively drab, but characterizations stayed drab .
 Ajami, co-directed by Israeli Yaron Shani and Palestinian Scandar Copti, focused sharply on a revenge killing in Jaffa and its tragic repercussions . Ajami is co-commissioned by Israel and Palestine .
 Einaym Pkuhot is Haim Tabakman’s courageous film about a married male butcher in Jerusalem, a strict Orthodox Jew, in love with a seductive male student . The mood stayed intense in the film .
 Abdolreza Kahani managed a touching portrait of working-class life in Bist . The ensemble drama is about the staff of a Tehran reception hall faced with closure .
 Motion Pictures khabar nadareh (No One Knows About Persian Cats) is an uneven quasi-documentary blend of limp narrative and fiery music .
 A new director, Nour-Eddine Lakhmari, won popular success with Casanegra . The film is an energetic dark-hued tale about two smalltime hustlers in Casablanca .
 Bangladeshi director Mostofa Sarwar Farooki made a mark with Third Person Singular Number . The drama is about a single Muslim's woman’s struggle for an independent life . The film is stylistically polished and striking .
 Dev Benegal’s lightly likable Road, Movie, follows the cross-country trek of a disaffected young man . The film is based on the life experience of a young man in the United States . The movie was released in 2009 .
 China marked the 60th anniversary of communist rule with Jian guo da ye (The Founding of a Republic; Han Sanping, Huang Jianxin), a lavish depiction of the post-World War II battles between communists and nationalists .
 Within a month of its release, it had become China’s biggestgrossing film . The film was released in China and has become the country's biggest film .
 Ann Hui’s vividly acted drama about domestic violence . Subtler tastes satisfied with Tin shui wai dik ye yu mo . The drama is about domestic abuse .
 Haeundae is a disaster movie about a popular beach resort struck by a tsunami . South Korea sold plenty of popcorn with the movie . The movie is a rousing disaster movie . It was released in South Korea on Friday .
 Ounie Lecomte’s absorbing drama based on her own experiences as an orphan sheltered by nuns . Yeo-haeng-ja (A Brand New Life) is based on the experience of a nun sheltered in a convent .
 Kwasok scandle (Speed Scandal) spun popular comedy around the clever tale of a self-obsessed radio host whose life spins out of control .
 Park Chan-Wook's Bakjwi fuses vampire comedy with elements from Emile Zola’s novel Therese Raquin . The film is based on the novel, which was inspired by the novel .
 Kuki ningyo is a fragile modem fairy tale about a waiter and his favourite partner, an inflatable doll . Hirokazu Koreeda, one of the most idiosyncratic of Japanese directors, continues to explore lost souls .
 In Kinatay, Brillante Mendoza's directorial skills barely salvaged his coarse narrative about a police trainee losing his innocence in Manila's urban hell .
 The veteran Malian director Souleymane Cisse produced his first film in 14 years with Min Ye . Min Ye is a talkative tale of infidelity and polygamy among Mali's upper classes .
 Environmental issues continued to have a major presence in the documentary arena during 2009 .
 National Geographic still photographer Louie Psihoyos probed abuses suffered by commercially exploitable dolphins in Japan . In The Cove was an Audience Award winner at the Sundance, Hot Docs, and Silverdocs film festivals .
 His crew included Richard O'Barry, the former dolphin trainer of Flipper TV-series fame . The crew of the dolphin trainer included Richard .
 Robert Kenner's Food, Inc. scrutinized the history of the world food chain and the ramifications of its current control by multinational corporations . Kenner: The history of food chain is scrutinized by Kenner .
 Joe Berlinger’s Crude reported the effects of oil drilling on communities along the Amazon River in Ecuador . The effects of the oil drilling in Ecuador have not been seen .
 The film was critical of the U.S.’s handling of the recent economic crisis and its bailouts of corporations and banks .
 Other prominent documentaries explored issues in less-developed countries . Documentary documentaries have been aired in the U.S.
 A Grierson Award winner, Burma VJ by Anders Ostergaard, followed the efforts of reporters in Myanmar who risked their lives to expose political and social repression in their country .
 British director Havana Marking’s Afghan Star explores Afghanistan's open voting system . Documentary explores the implications of the program's democratic process in Afghanistan .
 Hamid Rahmanian’s The Glass House looked at the plight of four young Iranian women striving to break free from repression and exploitation with support from a rehabilitation centre in Tehran . Screened at numerous festivals internationally, the film was screened internationally .
 In the United States, Peter Esmonde’s Trimpin was a portrait of a truly original composer who used unorthodox instruments . In the U.S. he was an original composer using unorthodox instruments.
 Goldberg celebrated Gertrude Berg’s extraordinary contributions to radio and television, including the innovation of the character-driven situation comedy . Goldberg celebrated Berg's extraordinary contribution to television .
 Scientists DISCOVERED significant amounts of WATER on the MOON and evidence that stars had formed not very long after the big bang .
 In 2009 there was a surge in research on graphene, an atomthick layer of carbon atoms tightly arranged in a honeycomb structure . Graphene is an atom thick layer of graphene that is tightly arranged .
 The exceptional mechanical, structural, and electronic properties of graphene had propelled this form of carbon to the forefront of academic and commercial materials research . Graphene is a type of carbon material that has been used in commercial and industrial applications .
 Graphene conducted electrons faster than any other material at room temperature . Material had great strength and stiffness, stiffness, strength and strength . At room temperature it conducted electrons at faster than other material .
 Crystals of the form of graphite known as graphite had long been described as being composed of multiple layers of graphene . Carbon nanotubes and buckyballs were seen essentially as rolled-up forms and spherical enclosures of graphene, respectively .
 The team had succeeded in isolating graphene by turning to a rudimentary method . The team stuck small specks of graphite onto adhesive tape on adhesive tape .
 In 2009 scientists reported many advances in graphene synthesis, including methods of forming graphene strips by “unzipping” carbon nanotubes chemically and physically .
 Scientists also reported advances in the development of graphene applications, including electrically conductive coatings and polymer composites, ultracapacitors, nanoscale field-effect transistors and ultrafast photodetectors .
 In June 2009 the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry officially recognized a group of scientists led by Sigurd Hofmann of the Institute for Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt, Ger., as the first to have produced nuclei of element 112 . Hofmann led the group to the Institute
 The research group chose the name copemicium and symbol Cp in honour of Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus . The IUPAC was expected to approve the new name and symbol in early 2010 .
 The Lawrence Berkeley group used high-velocity ions of calcium to bombard a target containing plutonium . The bomb was used to target a target with plutonium .
 Such unfavourable statistics made it especially challenging, yet critically important, to independently confirm heavyelement synthesis results . Heavyelement synthesis synthesis results are especially important to confirm .
 Substances on aromatic rings such as benzene guides incoming substituents to specific ring positions . According to the classic textbook formulation of electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions, the presence of substitutionuents on the aromatic rings guides incoming substitutes to specific rings .
 Amines direct newly arriving reactants to the ortho and para positions (one and three carbon atoms away from the amine group, respectively) on the ring . Amines and other electrondonating groups, such as amine, are electrified by electrifying groups . Amined
 It appeared that these organic-chemistry rules might need to be qualified, however .
 Unusual reaction might lead to new syntheses for valuable products such as pharmaceuticals . The unconventional reaction might be used to synthesise valuable products .
 Study of proteins inside their native cellular environment could provide key insights into the biological mechanisms of diseases . The study of proteins in their native cells could provide insights into disease mechanisms .
 In-cell nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy held promise for carrying out detailed intracellular studies of proteins . Method's application had been limited mainly to probing in-cell protein conformations, dynamic motions, and binding interactions .
 Structure of metal-binding protein TTHA1718 found in bacterial cells differs from structure in vitro . Structure of the protein in vitro is subtle, scientists say .
 The method was previously limited to the study of prokaryotic cells that had been customized to express isotopelabeled proteins at elevated levels for NMR analysis .
 Researchers boosted the time resolution of electron energy loss spectroscopy by a factor of 10 billion . They also pushed the spatial resolution of the technique to the single-atom limit .
 EELS, often used in conjunction with transmission electron microscopy, could be used to reveal the chemical identity of a specimen by measuring element-specific decreases in beam energy caused by interactions between an electron beam and atoms .
 EELS signals were typically recorded on the millisecond scale, but can now be measured with femtosecond resolution . The new method was developed by Ahmed H Zewail and co-workers at the California Institute of Technology .
 Group mapped changes in real time in the chemical bonding and electron distribution of a graphite crystal as it was momentarily compressed by a laser pulse into a diamond crystal .
 In another study a team headed by Kazu Suenaga of Japan’s National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology showed that by finely focusing a TEM beam with devices known as aberration correctors, they were able to pinpoint the location and chemical identity of single impurity
 Converting the chemical building blocks of plant matter into fuels and other useful substances could help alleviate the problems of a dwindling supply of available petroleum resources .
 Major research efforts into green chemistry had largely focused on producing ethanol and other liquid transportation fuels .
 HMF could readily be transformed into various products typically made from petroleum, including solvents, fuels, and monomers for polymer production . Referred to as a platform chemical, HMF is often transformed into other products made of petroleum, such as solants and fuels .
 Research in biomass field was moving in that direction . Methods for converting raw lignocellulose to HMF or other finished chemical products had not yet been demonstrated .
 In the early part of the year, Z Conrad Zhang and co-workers at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Wash., reported devising a single-step method of making HMF directly from cellulose .
 The conversion was driven by a combination of copper chloride and chromium chloride dissolved in an imidazolium ionic liquid . The conversion is a mixture of copper, chromium and copper chloride .
 The catalytic mixture operated under mild conditions and rapidly depolymerized cellulose . The process is the main bottleneck in the development of a commercial process for the conversion of cellulosic biomass .
 The production of millions of tons of hydrogen peroxide (an oxidizer used as a disinfectant and bleach) each year depended on an indirect chemical process that was based on the sequential hydrogenation and oxidation of organic compounds .
 The direct synthesis of hydrogen peroxide from hydrogen and oxygen would be simpler and potentially less expensive . But it was not employed for the production of bulk quantities of the oxidizer because the catalysts known to drive such a reaction also catalyzed the decomposition of the hydrogen peroxoxox
 The group showed that a goldpalladium alloy catalyst supported on a carbon film pretreated with acid avoided decomposition .
 The team explained that their preparation method formed catalyst particles that were very small (less than 10 nanometres in diameter) and well dispersed .
 The particles guided hydrogen peroxide synthesis selectively and shut down the decomposition pathway . As a result of the particles, the particles guided the synthesis selectively .
 A new generation of logic circuits would be needed for the next generation of computer systems . Physicists focused much work in 2009 on “quantum dots,” tiny collections of atoms that function together as a single atom .
 Spin of a single electron trapped inside a quantum dot can act as a binary digit to store information . For example, the spin of an electron trapped in an electron can be used to store a single binary digit . A quantum dot has been used in quantum computing for decades .
 The information is unfortunately degraded by interactions with the nuclear spins of the atoms that make up the lattice . The information has to be degraded by interaction with the atoms in the surrounding lattices .
 These assemblies can work at room temperature and use very little energy . They can also be used to store energy-efficient devices .
 If electronic systems are going to be built that are nanometres in size, the pieces of those systems will be the size of molecules . The pieces of electronic systems will likely be the sizes of molecules, the researchers say .
 Previously, switching in single-molecule junctions was produced by changing the shape or the charge of the molecule . Now, switching is produced by making the shape of the molecules change or changing the charge .
 Su Ying Quek and co-workers at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, Calif., demonstrated switching in a single-molecule junction by merely stretching and compressing the molecule .
 The way in which electrons are transported in semiconductors is determined by the gap between the valence and the conduction energy bands . The gap in the gap means electrons can be transported by electrons travelling through a semiconductor .
 If this bandgap could be tuned, particularly with an external electric field, the design of devices with semiconductors would be much easier .
 Microchips that use light instead of electrons could outperform electronic counterparts . Microchip chips could outperach their electronic counterparts in the future .
 Photonic crystals are periodically arranged structures designed to confine light on subwavelength scales . They could also provide a way to guide light through an optical microchip without losing any of the light’s energy .
 J Hwang and co-workers at the Institute of Technology, Zurich used a single dye molecule as an optical transistor .
 Optical transistor could also be used to manipulate individual photons . An optical transistor of this size could be used in manipulating photons .
 In traditional photoconductors, impinging light causes conductivity to increase . Impinging light makes conductivity increase . In traditional photgraphics, the light impinging on light increases conductivity .
 The interaction between light and matter would be at the heart of any light-based device . Light-based devices could be used in the next generation of devices .
 This demonstrated that several unusual light-matter phenomena could now be tested experimentally . The study was carried out at the University of Cambridge, England .
 Devices that control light with frequencies between 0.0. and 5 THz could be useful in many areas, such as medical imaging, astronomy, and security .
 Y Chassagneux and colleagues at the Universite de Paris-Sud and Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Orsay, France, built electrically pumped lasers that operate between 2.55 and 2.88 THz .
 Devices that can effectively manipulate THz radiation require substantial development . Nevertheless, devices that can . effectively manipulate . radiation require significant development .
 A promising step was made when a two-dimensional device controlled the phase of THz radiation over a narrow frequency band . The device was developed at Los Alamos National Laboratory .
 The device could also modulate THz radiation over a broad frequency band . Alternatively, the device could be modulated over a wide frequency range .
 For the first time, the detailed chemical structure of a single molecule, pentacene, was imaged . The detailed structure of the single molecule was also imaged in a new study .
 An atomic force microscope acts like a tiny tuning fork, with one of the prongs passing incredibly close to the sample . This was accomplished by Leo Gross and colleagues at IBM Research, Zurich .
 When the fork is set vibrating, the prong nearest the sample experiences a minuscule shift in frequency that depends on the molecule’s structure . The prong closest to the sample is vibrating at a very low frequency .
 Understanding structure on the molecular scale could help in the design of drugs and electronics . Understanding structure could help the design and manufacture of electronics .
 Molecules in gases and liquids are always moving, thanks to their thermal energy . Molecules always move thanks to the thermal energy of heat .
 Albert Stolow of the Steacie Institute for Molecular Sciences, Ottawa, and his colleagues did this to a carbon disulphide molecule .
 A Ravasio and co-workers at the Centre d'Etudes de Saclay, France, reported a different method for obtaining images of objects nanometres in size .
 A 20-femtosecond pulse of X-rays generated a diffraction pattern when shone on such an object . The pattern was created by a beam of light that shone on the object .
 Entanglement could someday form the basis of quantum information networks . The concept of entanglement, where two spatially separated systems may have instantaneous correlations, could be the basis for quantum networks .
 These networks would require buffers to control how data moves through such a network . Such networks would need to be controlled by buffers, such as buffers .
 Such buffers would also need to store “quantum images”—that is, pairs of images that are entangled . Such buffers could be used to store single ""quantum bits” and ‘quantum image’
 To be able to control the flow of the quantum image through such a system would mean that one of the images would be slowed down with respect to the other .
 The interaction between the two qubits allowed highly entangled states between them to be created . Highly entangled states were created .
 Much work remained on increasing the power and performance of quantum processors . Despite this success, much work remained to increase the power of the processors .
 Jost’s group at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, Colo., took a different approach to entangled states . Jost says entangled states are a form of quantum computing that could be used in the future .
 They took two magnesium-beryllium ion pairs held in different locations and entangled their mechanical vibrational states . The study was published in the journal Astrophysics .
 The researchers entangle the internal states of the beryllium ion with the oscillations of the other ion pair . They also were able to entangle . The study was published in the journal Astrophysics journal Nature Resolutions .
 This work pointed the way for possible future experiments in which the effects of quantum mechanics might be observable in systems larger than the microscopic .
 Pascal Bohi and co-workers cooled rubidium atoms to near absolute zero to form a Bose-Einstein condensation . The state of matter coalesced into a single quantum mechanical entity .
 They were able to entangle the internal atomic states of the atoms, as well as the states relating to their motion . The study was published in The Astronomer's book, The Sun, on Thursday, at 8.30pm .
 This work could lead to future quantum computer systems in which many atoms are entangled . It could also lead to the creation of quantum computers with entangled atoms .
 The Casimir-Lifshitz force exists between two uncharged perfectly conducting plates because of quantum fluctuations, quantum fluctuations . Quantum fluctuations, random tiny amounts of energy, that exist even in a vacuum electromagnetic field .
 For all systems studied experimentally prior to 2009, the C-L force was attractive . The force was found to be attractive for all systems .
 Physicists placed fresh limits on the mass of the Higgs boson . The hypothetical carrier particle is thought to confer mass on other matter . It is the theoretical carrier particle of Higgs field that was thought to give mass to others .
 2009 was designated the International Year of Astronomy by the astronomical community’s professional societies, including the International Astronomical Union . 2009 marked the 400th anniversary of the use of the telescope for astronomical observations .
 The Hubble Space Telescope was repaired in May and then took some of the sharpest images to date of a wide variety of astronomical objects . The telescope's sharpest image was taken in May after it was repaired .
 The year also witnessed the launch of and the first observations with a variety of other space-based astronomical instruments . NASA’s Kepler satellite to search for habitable planets orbiting other stars was launched in 2013 .
 New searches for water on the Moon were conducted in 2009, in part because of proposals to have future astronauts spend long periods of time there . New searches have been conducted since 2009 .
 Astronomers are looking through older space-mission data for evidence of lunar water . This interest also spurred astronomers to look through older data for signs of water on the moon .
 In September it was announced that three different space probes had detected small amounts of water on widespread areas of the surface .
 India's Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft carried NASA’s Moon Mineralogy Mapper and operated in 2008-09 . India's space probe was launched in 2008 and 2009 .
 Scientists analyzing new data from NASA’s Deep Impact/EPOXI probe and 10-year-old data from Cassini spacecraft also found evidence of small amounts of water on the Moon . Scientists analyzing data from Deep Impact and Cassini probes also found signs of surface water .
 The most likely place on the Moon to find extensive quantities of water was thought to be in craters on the far side . Most likely place to find water on the moon is thought to have been craters .
 Water might exist there in the form of ice, since it would be protected from direct exposure to the intense solar radiation . Water could exist in ice, protected from the intense radiation, scientists say .
 In October NASA’s Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite sent the upper stage of its launch rocket to crash into a crater called Cabeus . The crater lies near the Moon's south pole .
 Nine instruments aboard LCROSS recorded a great deal of data about the impact itself and about the gas and dust kicked up by the collision . The impact produced a small crater some 28 m across and produced a large crater .
 Near the year's end, scientists reported that they had found strong evidence for the presence of significant amounts of water in the material Earth Perihelion .
 Equinoxes and Solstices, 2010 March 20 Vernal equinox, 17:32* June 21 Summer solstice, 11:28* Sept. 6 Aphelion, approx.:00, July 6 APhelion , approx.: 00*
 Sun, annular , visible along a path beginning in central Africa; extending across eastern Africa, the Indian Ocean, southernmost India, and Myanmar; and ending in eastern China . A partial phase visible in Africa (except the western and southern parts) .
 Sun, total , visible along a path beginning in the southern Pacific Ocean and extending to southernmost Chile and Argentina . Part of the path visible in the Pacific Ocean, with a partial phase visible in southern South America .
 Moon, total , the beginning visible in Europe, western Africa, most of the Atlantic Ocean, North and South America, and the eastern Pacific Ocean . The end visible in the northwestern Atlantic, North America, South America and the Pacific .
 The blue shows the presence of water and hydroxyl molecules excavated from the permanently shadowed lunar impact crater . This is the first time water has been excavated into a lunar crater .
 Another interesting impact within the solar system occurred at the giant gas planet Jupiter . The impact occurred at Jupiter .
 A temporary new atmospheric feature, a debris plume that was the result of an astronomical objects having collided with the planet, was found in Jupiter’s south polar region .
 Australian amateur astronomer Anthony Wesley reported first seeing it on July 19 . Wesley said it was the first time he had seen it .
 Hubble Space Telescope snapped the highest-resolution image yet taken of such an evolving Jovian debris plume . Four days later the revamped Hubble Space telescope snapped the image four days later . The image is the highest resolution ever taken by the Hubble Space Observatory .
 The event could have been caused by either an asteroid or a comet of perhaps several hundred metres across . It could be caused by a comet or asteroid of perhaps hundreds of metres .
 Jupiter sustained a series of hits by debris from the breakup of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, which produced many temporary features in the dense Jovian atmosphere . By way of comparison, 15 years earlier, Jupiter had sustained a more massive series of hit by debris .
 These two sightings suggest that solar system impacts are more common than had been previously thought . Together, these two sightings suggested that such solar system impact is more common .
 Since these planets are so dim compared with the stars they orbit, they were very difficult to detect directly . The planets were so dim that they were difficult to see directly .
 Astronomers had found nearly all the known exoplanets by using a variety of indirect means . The most effective was to look for changes in the motion of a star along its line of sight, indicating the presence of orbiting planets .
 The method was used by a group of European astronomers led by Michel Mayor of the Geneva Observatory to detect 32 new exoplanets . It was used to find 32 new planets .
 The discoveries were made with an instrument called the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher . The instrument is attached to the 3.6-m telescope of the European Southern Observatory .
 It was capable of detecting stellar motions as small as 3. km/hr , about the speed of a person walking . It was able to detect stellar motions small enough to reach speeds of 3.km/hr .
 This indicated astronomers were not far from being able to detect planets of about the same mass as Earth . This indicated that astronomers could detect planets that are similar mass to Earth . Astronomers are now close to detecting planets of such mass .
 The object designated CoRoT-7b was discovered in 2009 . It is the most intriguing exoplanet discovery in the history of planet Earth .
 It was the most likely of the known exoplanets to be a solid, rocky body like Earth . The planet is the closest to Earth and is most likely to have a rocky planet .
 Didier Queloz and colleagues from the Geneva Observatory reported that the planet probably has a silicate mantle and an iron core similar to Earth's . The planet is likely to have a silicated mantle and a similar iron core .
 The exoplanet’s orbit is tilted about 77° with respect to the spin axis of its host star, however, which is much different from Earth‘s orbit around the Sun . The planet's orbit around its star is tilted 77°, much different than Earth�
 This planet was found to orbit its star at a distance far less than that between Mercury and the Sun . Unfortunately for the search for life on exoplanets, this planet was not found to have life .
 This meant that liquid water could not exist on the surface of CoRoT-7b, so the possibility of its harbouring life as known on Earth was highly unlikely . Liquid water was found to be extremely low in the solar system .
 Throughout 2009, astronomers reported the detection of a wide range of astronomical objects with the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope . Astronomers have detected a range of objects using the telescope's Gamma-Ray telescope .
 16 previously unknown pulsars have been found on the basis of their gamma-ray emissions . The discovery of 16 new pulsars was the first to find pulsars in existence .
 Thirteen of the detected pulsars coincided with previously detected gamma-ray sources that had not been known to be pulsars . Thirteen such sources have been found in the past .
 Of the 1,800 pulsars discovered to date, the vast majority had been identified first by radio telescopes . The vast majority of pulsars often have gamma-ray luminosity that exceeds their radio power by orders of magnitude .
 Gamma-ray bursts are flashes of gamma rays that last from fractions of a second to minutes . For 40 years, gamma-ray burst bursts had been detected coming from directions all over the globe .
 They were thought to accompany the deaths of massive stars in giant supernova explosions . They are thought to have occurred in supernova supernovations .
 Gamma rays emitted in GRBs are beamed into small solid angles, so they can be detected at great distances . GRBs emit gamma rays that can detect gamma rays at great distance .
 On April 23 NASA’s Swift satellite identified such a burst of gamma rays, now called GRB 090423 for the date of the event . The event is now known as GRB090423 .
 It lasted for about 10 seconds and originated in the direction of the constellation Leo . It originated from the constellation of Leo .
 Ground-based telescopes in Hawaii and Chile determined that this GRB had come from a supernova in a galaxy with a redshift of 8.2, which indicated that it was very distant . GRB was found to be from a galaxy in which it was supernova .
 GRB provided direct evidence that stars had already formed not very long after the big bang . Detection of this GRB provides direct evidence of the formation of stars .
 Gamma-ray observations of 21 very distant galaxies were made with the Hubble Space Telescope's new Wide Field Camera 3 . Infrared observations were made using the telescope's new wide field camera 3 .
 GRB 090423 suggested that galaxies probably did not form at very much earlier times than suggested by GRB090423 . The discovery suggests galaxies probably formed very early in the history of galaxies .
 The colours of the 21 galaxies indicated that they lie between 12. billion and 13.01 billion light-years from Earth . The 21 galaxies lie in between 12 and 13 billion light years from Earth, according to Nasa .
 Galaxy formation was just beginning, but was happening quite rapidly, early in the history of the universe . Taken together, all these observations suggested that galaxy formation was beginning, very early .
 The major issue in manned spaceflight in 2009 was the outcome of hearings on the future of the U.S. space program . In 2009, the major issue was the fate of manned space flight .
 The Review of United States Human Spaceflight Plans Committee, known as the Augustine Commission, was appointed by Pres. Norman Augustine . The Augustine Commission was named after its chairman, Norman Augustine, after his chairman .
 It was chartered to review the future of the United States in space . Former president George W Bush’s plans to return to the Moon and continue to Mars .
 The commission concluded that NASA’s human spaceflight program was “at a tipping point” The commission said the program is at a “tipping point,” primarily due to a mismatch of goals and resources .
 Manned missions in 2009 brought the International Space Station closer to completion . Manned space missions have brought the station closer to the station's completion .
 The ISS could house a crew of six following the addition at the end of 2008 of a bathroom and a urine-distillation processor for recycling water .
 STS-126 returned with the first samples of recycled water from the urine processor, as well as frozen specimens taken from the crew over several months to help measure the long-term effects of low gravity .
 STS-127 completed the assembly of Japan’s Kibo experiment module by installing the exposed platform component . The Kibo module is a Japanese experiment module .
 The shuttle also carried a test model of the DragonEye docking target system that would be used by the commercial SpaceX Dragon spacecraft .
 The STS-128 mission took up the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module, containing 6,894 kg of supplies and scientific equipment . The mission was the first to take part in a mission to space .
 The astronauts replaced an ammonia cooling tank and retrieved specimens that had been exposed to space from the exterior of the European Columbus laboratory . The astronauts retrieved specimens from an ammonia cooler tank .
 STS-129 took up an assortment of parts, including gyroscopes and nitrogen tanks, in two ExPRESS Logistics Carriers . The last shuttle mission of the year took up parts of the last shuttle shuttle mission . The mission was the last of 2013 .
 Japan successfully launched the first H-II Transfer Vehicle with the HII rocket on September 11 . A new supply route to the ISS opened when Japan launched the new rocket . The launch was the first of its HII Transfer Vehicles .
 It docked with the ISS on September 18, taking up 4,500 kg of food, computer equipment, and other supplies . The mission to the ISS was the first to dock with the space station .
 In five spacewalks the crews replaced two science instruments, gyroscopes, star sensors, a computer, batteries, and thermal blankets . In five spacewalkers, crews replaced 2 science instruments and repaired two instruments .
 The mission had been delayed by several months from 2008 when Hubble’s primary computer failed . The mission to the Hubble telescope was delayed from 2008 to 2009 .
 This required extra time to pull the spare from storage from storage and requalify it for flight . The spare was needed to be ready for flight.
 The astronauts also opened the Advanced Camera for Surveys instrument and replaced parts at the computer board level . This is something that was never envisioned when Hubble was designed .
 After STS-129, only five shuttle missions remained before the system was retired in 2010 .
 The only interplanetary launch of the year was NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter and Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite on June 18 . The only mission to the lunar surface was the Lunar Observatory on June 4 .
 Most LRO instruments surveyed the lunar surface, searching for evidence of water in permanently shadowed craters . Most of the instruments were instruments used to search for water on the moon .
 LCROSS mission used the Centaur upper stage to strike the Moon . It was overshadowed by the launch vehicle’s Centaur launch vehicle . The mission was the first of its kind to carry out a mission to the moon .
 The LCROSS spacecraft was devised from the Centaur/spacecraft adapter and used commercial parts . It carried cameras and spectrometers to detect materials in the impact plume from Centaur's upper stage .
 The LCROSS ""shepherd” spacecraft separated from the stage on October 8 . The spacecraft is now on its way to the next Mars mission .
 Centaur and LCROSS crashed into a crater near the lunar south pole on October 9 . The Centaur was the closest to the Centaur by about four minutes . The two plowed into the same crater four minutes apart .
 The plume revealed “significant quantities of water,’s water, which would be valuable as a resource for life support and propulsion at a lunar base . The water would be used to fuel a lunar spacecraft .
 India’s Chandrayaan-1 lunar satellite failed on August 28 as a result of key guidance components’ overheating . Chandraya-1 was launched on Oct. 2008 and launched in October 2008 .
 Officials at the Indian Space Research Organisation judged the mission, India’s first interplanetary endeavour, as a success because it discovered water molecules in the lunar surface .
 The major astronomy missions of the year were Russia’s Koronas-Foton on January 30, NASA’�s Kepler on March 6, and Europe's Herschel/Planck spacecraft on May 14 .
 Koronas-Foton was part of the International Living with a Star program . Koronus-Foto is a member of the world's most famous sportswear group .
 It carried instruments to observe the most violent solar activity in the extreme ultraviolet through gamma-ray range of the spectrum . It was carried out by the International Solar System System .
 Space physics instruments monitored the response of Earth's magnetosphere to solar storms . They monitored Earth's response to the latest solar storms in the magnetosphere .
 The telescope was slightly out of focus to help it meet its goal of recording when Earth-size planets transit . Earth-sized planets transit when they cross in front of their stars .
 Light curves are light curves of some 100,000 stars . As such it produced not images or maps but light curves . Light curves were created for the first time in 100 years .
 NASA says it can observe a Jupiter-size exoplanet by its reflected light, as well as by transit . The sensitivity was great enough to detect Jupiter-sized exoplanets by its light .
 Herschel and Planck were launched separately on the same Ariane 5 rocket to orbit separately the L2 gravitational balance point between Earth and the Sun . Planck and Herschel will orbit separately to the same L2 L2 point as Planck .
 It provides an easy place to “park’s telescopes to observe deep space with virtually no radiation input from Earth . It provides a great place to "park” telescopes in space .
 Herschel became the largest space telescope, with a 3.5-m primary mirror, compared with the Hubble Space Telescope’s 2. m . It operated in the far-infrared spectrum to image stars, galaxies, and star-forming regions .
 Planck carries two millimetrewave instruments to map unevenness in the intensity and polarization of the cosmic microwave background radiation left over from the big bang . By comparison, the deepest red that the human eye can perceive is 0.77 Planck instruments .
 North Korea failed in a second alleged attempt to orbit a satellite with the Taepodong-2 launch on April 5 . North Korea has been accused of launching a satellite into orbit in violation of the law .
 North Korea claimed that it was a satellite launch . Western observers believed it was three-stage ballistic missile lofted its payload some 3,800 km .
 On August 25 South Korea also failed to launch a satellite in its first outing with the Naro 1 launch vehicle . The launch vehicle had a Russian-built first stage and a Korean second stage .
 The demonstration version of NASA's new Ares 1 -X vehicle was launched on October 28 . It's the only one in light of the Augustine report, the Ares 1X vehicle .
 The Ares I-X test rocket lifts off Launch Complex 39B at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida, on October 28 . It had succeeded in all static ground firing tests, and a structural model of the second stage and the Constellation spacecraft .
 The flight was a success, although NASA was studying to determine why the second stage and booster slowly jackknifed toward each other after separation . NASA is studying the cause of the problem .
 The recovered booster suffered a major dent in its lower section when two of its parachutes failed after opening . Two of its three parachutes had to be parachuted out of the booster's parachute .
 SpaceX scored its second success out of five attempts with the Falcon 1 vehicle . It flew from Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands and carried Malaysia’s RazakSAT communications satellite . SpaceX is a private launch company .
 SpaceX had developed and soon will test a larger Falcon 9 vehicle to carry supplies and crews to the ISS in the Dragon capsule . SpaceX also plans to test and launch a larger version of the Falcon 9 that will carry supplies .
 Advanced testing of the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket showed great promise for providing a stage capable of taking humans to Mars in less than six weeks . The rocket was developed by Franklin Chang-Diaz .
 VASIMR uses radio waves to heat ionized argon gas, thus accelerating it to high speeds . The radio waves are used to accelerate the gas to a high speed .
 While the thrust was low, it could be continuous, as opposed to chemical rockets that provide high thrust for a few minutes at most . The thrust is low, but it could provide continuous thrust for several minutes .
 Pope Benedict XVI rescinded in January excommunications of four members of the traditionalist Society of St. St. Francis . In an attempt to heal a 20-year-old schism in Roman Catholicism, he rescinded excommunication of four .
 Richard Williamson made statements denying the Nazis’ use of gas chambers to exterminate Jews . Williamson said only up to 300,000 Jews died in concentration camps instead of the generally accepted figure six million .
 The pope's rehabilitation of the bishop was denounced by Jewish leaders around the world and led Israel’s chief rabbinate to sever ties with the Vatican . Israel's chief rabbiinate severed ties with Vatican .
 Benedict said he had not known about the bishop’s views when he lifted the excommunication . The Vatican needs to make greater use of the Internet to prevent such controversies, he said .
 In August, Younis al-Astal, spiritual leader of Hamas, denounced the UN Relief and Works Agency’s reported plans to introduce lessons about the Holocaust in its schools for Palestinian children in the Gaza Strip .
 Dutch prosecutors announced in September that they planned to charge the Dutch arm of the Arab European League with having violated hate-speech laws . The group published a cartoon on its Web site that suggested that the Holocaust was a fabrication or an exaggeration .
 The church was organized as an alternative for Anglicans who disagreed with the theology of the U.S. Episcopal Church and the Anglican Church of Canada on several issues, including the sanctioning of same-sex unions .
 Robert Duncan was installed for a five-year term as the ACNA's first archbishop . Former Pittsburgh Episcopal bishop Robert Duncan has been installed for five years . Duncan is a former bishop of Pittsburgh Episcopal .
 Episcopal General Convention adopted resolution affirming that gay men and lesbians were eligible for ""any ordained ministry” in the 2.1-millionmember church . A month later the triennial Episcopal General Conference met in Anaheim, Calif., and adopted a resolution . The resolution affirms that gay
 Traditionalists who oppose liberal trends in the Anglican Communion were given a new option in October . Vatican announced the pope’s approval for the establishment of structures known as personal ordinariates, which would enable Anglicans to form their own communities .
 Anglicans would be able to maintain liturgical traditions and be allowed to have married clergy . Unmarried priests in the new structure would need to remain celibate .
 In December the Episcopal diocese of Los Angeles elected an openly gay woman, the Rev. The Rev. Jan. Sarah Schneider . Schneider was elected to the diocese in December .
 Archbishop Rowan Williams of Canterbury said that the election raised ""very serious questions’ for the Anglican family . Archbishop of Canterbury, spiritual leader of the 77-million-member Anglican Communion, said .
 Delegates to the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America’s biennial Churchwide Assembly, held in Minneapolis, Minn., voted to adopt a resolution that opened the ministry to gay men and lesbians living in “committed relationships” The resolution was adopted by delegates to the
 Leaders of the 2.4-millionmember Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod and the 390,000-member Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod criticized the move . The move was criticized by leaders of the two synods .
 A group called the Lutheran CORE announced in November that it was making plans for a new Lutheran synod for congregations that opposed the Churchwide Assembly’s action . The group had more than 80 member churches .
 In May the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland voted in Edinburgh to defer action on this issue for two years . Church courts, committees, and ministers are barred from commenting about it publicly .
 In July more than 1,600 members of the Religious Society of Friends in Britain, popularly known as the Quakers, voted to approve marriages for same-sex couples . They voted to ask the government to change the law to recognize such marriages .
 Indonesia's Muslim population, some 13% of the world’s total, is the largest of any country . The country has a Muslim population of some 203 million . Indonesia is home to the largest Muslim population in the world .
 Germany has more Muslims than Lebanon, Russia has more than Jordan and Libya combined . Russia is home to more Muslim Muslims than Jordan, Libya combined, report finds .
 Barack Obama attempted to improve his country’s relations with the Islamic world in two major speeches . Obama has been criticized for his comments on relations between the U.S. and the Muslim world .
 Scott Rennie, the Church of Scotland’s first openly gay minister, rehearses a sermon in Brechin Cathedral in May . He is the Church's first openly homosexual minister .
 Dmitry Medvedev met in July with 12 Muslim leaders in the Congregational Mosque in Moscow to ask them to speak out against Islamic extremism . Medvedeva met with 12 leaders in July to discuss Islamic extremism at the mosque .
 Leaders from the North Caucasus told him that Islamist insurgency had permeated society . A month later, at a meeting in Sochi, Russia, leaders from the region told him of an Islamist insurgency .
 The perceived lack of media attention given to the killing in the West touched off anti-German protests in Egypt and Iran .
 Wiens was found guilty of the murder in the same courtroom in November . He was convicted of the same murder in November of Wiens' murder .
 Sarkozy endorsed an initiative by about 60 legislators to have a parliamentary commission study whether to ban the wearing of burkas in public in France . Sarkozy endorses the initiative by 60 legislators .
 In June, he declared, "The burka is not a religious sign. In June in an address to Parliament, he said the burka was not religious sign .
 A spokesperson for the group said the garment had ""absolutely no place in Canada” because it marginalized women . Farzana Hassan, a spokesperson of the group, asserted that the garment was marginalized women.
 His visit was controversial because of his support for abortion rights and government funding for embryonic stem-cell research . His visit to the U.S. was also controversial because he supports abortion rights .
 Gallup Poll released in March found that 4 in 10 American Catholics believed that abortion was ""morally acceptable” and 63% backed embryonic stem-cell research . Despite the controversy, a Gallup Poll found that 63% of Americans back embryonic stem cell research .
 Two Vatican investigations of American nuns led to protests and expressions of concern by several women’s religious orders . Women's religious orders feared that the church might try to rein in nuns with more liberal beliefs or ways of life .
 Ireland's Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse released a 2,575page report documenting what it called a ""climate of fear” from the 1930s to the 1990s in schools run by the Irish Roman Catholic Church .
 Report found that thousands of students had been systematically beaten and sexually abused by priests, nuns, and other staff members . Thousands of students were abused by staff members, the report found . Report: Thousands had been beaten, sexually abused .
 Metropolitan Kirill was elected in January in Moscow to succeed the late patriarch Aleksey II as head of the church . Kirill had headed the external relations department of the Russian Orthodox Church for nearly 20 years . He was elected as successor to Aleksander II in January .
 The Ukrainian Orthodox Church-Kiev Patriarchate had broken away from the Moscow patriarchate in the 1990s . Viktor Yushchenko is the first to recognize the breakaway from Moscow Patriarchate . The church broke away from Russia's Patriarchate in 1990s and now has its own own
 In June, a group of American Christian leaders warned that the Christian population in the Holy Land was “dwindling rapidly” and might cease to exist as a viable community unless there was an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement .
 The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America voted at its biennial assembly to share full communion with the United Methodist Church . The U.S. had previously approved the agreement .
 The accord, which had taken 30 years to reach fruition, meant that the two churches recognized the validity of each other ministers, baptisms, and eucharistic services . The accord was meant to allow each other churches to recognize each other's ministers .
 In May the murder in Vienna of Guru Sant Rama Nand, who was the leader of a Sikh offshoot movement called Dera Sach Khand, led to rioting in several northern Indian cities . The murder in May led to riots in northern India .
 Mohammed Yusuf, leader of Islamic group called Boko Haram, died in July while he was in police custody in Nigeria . In July, he was killed by police in a separate incident in the country .
 The group staged uprisings in northern Nigeria in an attempt to impose strict Islamic law throughout the country . The group was trying to impose Islamic law in the north of Nigeria .
 The governors of 19 northern states set up a committee to regulate the activities of Muslim and Christian clergy . The committee was set up after the violence in northern Nigeria .
 Archbishop Williams spoke out in August against the persecution of Christians in Pakistan . Eight Christians were burned alive as homes were set on fire in clashes with Muslims .
 Metropolitan Kirill was elected in January to succeed the late patriarch Aleksey II as head of the Russian Orthodox Church . Violence had been touched off by reports that a Christian had desecrated a Christian . The violence had been sparked by reports of a Christian desecrating the Metropolitan Kir
 Anglican leader says Pakistan’s Christians were “disproportionately affected by the draconian laws against blasphemy,” which he said had been abused to settle personal grievances . He said the laws were used as a means of settling personal grievances, rather than resolving personal disputes .
 The World Council of Churches says Pakistan's laws are a major source of victimization and persecution of religious minorities . Several weeks later the Central Committee of the WCC charged that the Pakistani laws had become a source of persecution and victimization .
 Pope Benedict was criticized by several Israeli newspapers for not referring to his native Germany during a speech at the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial . During a five-day pilgrimage to the Holy Land in May, Pope Benedict visited the Holocaust memorial in Israel .
 The Tony Blair Faith Foundation joined with the U.K.’s Department for International Development and the charities Islamic Relief, Oxfam, and World Vision to sponsor a series of seminars . The seminars explore the role of religion in development work .
 In April the Vatican denounced the arrests in China of several Roman Catholic leaders, including Bishop Giulio Jia Zhiguo . The Vatican said such actions created obstacles to dialogue .
 Afghan government leaders dumped more than 1,000 books from Iran into a river in May . The contents of the books were allegedly offensive to the country’s Sunni Muslim majority .
 In September Vietnamese authorities removed followers of Thich Nhat Hanh from a monastery in Lam Dong province . The monk had helped popularize Buddhism in the West . Authorities removed followers from the Bat Nha monastery in September .
 Government officials say the action was taken because the abbot of the monastery wanted the Nhat Hanh group to leave . Government officials, however, characterized the conflict as a dispute between two Buddhist factions . They say the monks are not Buddhist .
 The French branch of the Church of Scientology was convicted of fraud and fined the equivalent of nearly $900,000 by a Paris court in October . The court also fined the church of Scientology nearly $800,000 .
 Six members of the group, which claimed to have 45,000 adherents in France, were also convicted of fraud . Judges said that no jail sentences were imposed because the church had taken steps to change some practices .
 Earlier that month the European Court of Human Rights had ruled that Russia’s ban on the Church of Scientology was illegal . The European Court had ruled earlier that month that the ban was illegal.
 The court touched off a larger controversy in November when it ruled that crucifixes should be removed from classrooms in Italy . It ruled that their display could be disturbing for non-Christian pupils .
 Swiss voters approved a constitutional ban on the construction of new minarets in a November referendum . Swiss voters also approved a ban on new minarts in November .
 In December the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life reported that nearly 70% of the world's people lived in countries with severe restrictions on religion .
 It ranked Saudi Arabia as the most restrictive country and the Middle East and North Africa as most restrictive regions . Saudi Arabia was ranked as the least restrictive country in the world by the study .
 A survey issued in April by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life found that about half of American adults had switched their religious affiliation at least once .
 Atheist groups sponsored the placement of ads with the slogan ""There’s probably no God” on buses in Britain and Spain . Atheists groups sponsored ads in the UK and Spain to promote atheism .
 Eva Brunne, dean of the Stockholm diocese of the Church of Sweden, was elected Lutheran bishop of Stockholm . Brunne was believed to be the first openly lesbian bishop in the world .
 Lutheran Bishop Margot Kassmann of Hanover, Ger., was elected in October as chairman of the Evangelical Church in Germany . Kassmann is a Lutheran bishop .
 Archbishop Vincent Nichols succeeded Cormac Cardinal Murphy-O’Connor in May as leader of the Roman Catholic Church in England and Wales . Archbishop Nichols of Birmingham, Eng., succeeded the retiring Cormac .
 Prominent religious figures who died in 2009 included evangelist Oral Roberts . Oral Roberts pioneered religious broadcasting in the 1950s and founded the eponymous university in Tulsa, Okla .
 Rev. Frederick J Eikerenkoetter II, a television minister known as Reverend Ike; Millard Fuller, founder of Christian charity Habitat for Humanity International . Reform Rabbi Alfred Gottschalk, former president of Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, ordained the first women
 The Rev. Richard John Neuhaus, a Lutheran convert to Roman Catholicism, founded the journal First Things . Stephen Cardinal Kim Sou-hwan, the first Roman Catholic cardinal of South Korea, was the first cardinal in South Korea .
 The Rev. Gerard Jean-Juste is a Roman Catholic priest and advocate for Haitian rights in the U.S. He is also an advocate for the rights of Haitian people .
 John Bowen Coburn, Patriarch Pavle, leader of Serbian Orthodox Church . Cahal Cardinal Daly, a former leader of the Roman Catholic Church in Ireland. Cahal cardinal Daly .
 Elizabeth Clare Prophet, leader of the Church Universal and Triumphant, and Lutheran Bishop Albrecht Schonherr, head of Berlin-Brandenburg in the former German Democratic Republic .
 Comedy writer Ariane Sherine helped spearhead atheist advertising campaign . Ads with the slogan "There’s probably no God" placed on buses in Britain and Spain .
 Half of the world have long asked their populations to state their religions if any, and they still do today . Much of this information is uncovered in decennial governmental censuses .
 The other major source of data each year consists of the decentralized censuses undertaken by many religious headquarters . Each year, religious headquarters censuses are conducted by religious leaders .
 Each year almost all Christian denominations ask statistical questions on major religious subjects . Christian denominations answer statistical questions about religion .
 Christians are the largest number of Christians in the world . Christians are in the majority of all religions . Christians in most of the world's major regions .
 These follow current UN demographic terminology, which now divides the world into the six major areas shown above .
 Note that ""Asia"" includes former Soviet Central Asian states, and ""Europe"" includes all of Russia eastward to the Pacific . Note that "Asia" includes the former Soviet states, while "Europe" includes "Europe", "Asia", "Europe," and "Europe")
 This column documents the annual change in worldwide religious and nonreligious adherents in 2009 . This year's change in religion and religion was the largest change in the world for the year .
 In 2009 the annual growth of world population was 1.17%, or a net increase of 78,362,400 adherents . Note that in 2009 the population of the world increased by 1.16% . In 2009, the population grew by 1% or more than 1% .
 The last column enumerates sovereign and nonsovereign countries in which each religion or religious grouping has a numerically significant and organized following . This column also includes countries with a significant religious following .
 As defined in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, a person's religion is what he or she professes, confesses, or states that it is . The 1948 U.N. Human Rights Act defines religion as a person professes or confesses to a religion .
 See the World Christian Database and World Religion Database for more detail .
 A flurry of recent books have outlined the Western philosophical and scientific basis for atheism . Atheism is a form of religion that rejects the idea of God .
 This term refers to members of Christian churches and networks that regard themselves as postdenominationalist and neoapostolic . This term is used to refer to those who regard themselves to be independent of historical, mainstream, organized, institutionalized, confessionalist Christianity .
 Non-Chinese followers of Confucius and Confucianism, mostly Koreans in Korea, are mostly Koreans . They follow the teachings of the ancient Chinese religion . They include: Confucians, Confucans and Koreans in Korean .
 Followers of local, tribal, animistic, or shamanistic religions, with members restricted to one ethnic group . Followers include members of local or tribal, tribal tribal, or animistic religions . Members of one ethnic ethnic group restricted to only one group .
 Followers of Asian 20th-century neoreligions, . . Neoreligious movements, radical new crisis religions, and non-Christian syncretistic . mass religions .
 Persons professing no religion, nonbelievers, agnostics, freethinkers, uninterested, or dereligionized secularists indifferent to all religion but not militantly so .
 Religious and semireligious brotherhoods of numerous varieties . Includes a handful of religions, quasi-religions, pseudoreligions, and parareligions .
 Together, these three major sources of data constitute a massive annual megacensus, although decentralized and uncoordinated . The data is combined to create an annual data-aggregation of data from around the world .
 This year there are two new publications both supporting and mapping the data below . This year's data is based on the data collected by the National Geographic Institutes of Conservation .
 Second, the World Religion Database, offers sources and analysis of global religious dynamics . World religion Database offers sources, analysis of religious dynamics and sources .
 This table extracts and analyzes a microcosm of the world religion table . This table is an analysis of religion's religious beliefs .
 The United States is the country with the largest number of adherents to Christianity, the world's largest religion . It depicts the U.S. with the highest number of people in Christianity .
 Each religion's Annual Change for 2000-2005 is also analyzed by Natural increase per year and Conversion increase (new converts minus new defectors) per year, which together constitute the Total Increase per year .
 The major categories in the U.S. are listed with largest (Christians) first . The largest category in the United States is Christians .
 Indented names of groups in the ""Adherents" column are subcategories of the groups above them and are also counted in these unindented totals, so they should not be added twice into the column total . Indented names of groups in the "Adherent
 All persons who profess publicly to follow Jesus Christ as God and Savior . Followers include those who profess to be publicly following Jesus Christ .
 These designations-italicized and enumerated separately here-cut across all of the six Christian traditions or ecclesiastical blocs listed above and should be considered separately from them .
 The evangelicals are Christians of evangelical conviction from all traditions . They are Christians committed to the evangel and involved in personal witness and mission in the world .
 Core Jewish population relating to Judaism, excluding Jewish persons professing a different religion . Core Jews are Jewish people professing to a different faith .
 IOC announced in October that Rio de Janeiro would become the first South American city to host the OLYMPIC GAMES, in 2016 . The IOC announced that RIO de JANEIRO would host the Games in October .
 Button was without a team following the 2008 season after Honda Motor Co. announced that it was pulling out of the sport because of the global economic downturn . His victory was one of the most surprising results in FI history, considering that the 29-year-old Button had no team .
 Brawn GP took over the Honda team a few weeks before the season-opening Australian Grand Prix on March 29 . Button will be competing in his first grand prix since 2008 .
 Button started that race from the pole and came away with the win, just his second since joining FI in 2000 . Button started the race on the pole in Melbourne, Australia, in 2010 .
 Button went on to win the pole and race at the Malaysian Grand Prix one week after his victory in Australia . Button finished the 2008 season in 18th place, finishing 18th in the standings .
 Button is the first British driver to register four straight victories in one season since Nigel Mansell accomplished the feat en route to the 1992 drivers’ title . Button posted wins in the next four races to become the first Briton to achieve the feat since Mansell in 1992 .
 Buttons amazing start in 2009 gave him an almost insurmountable 26-point lead over Brawn GP teammate Rubens Barrichello of Brazil with 10 races remaining .
 Button did not win another race all season, but he did not need to after his dominant start . Button won the first race of the season and the second in a row . Button was the only person to win a race in 2011 to retain his title .
 He wrapped up the title on October 18 with a fifth-place finish in the penultimate event, the Brazilian Grand Prix . He went on to finish third in the season finale in Abu Dhabi, U.A.E., on November 1, to end the season with 95 points .
 Sebastian Vettel finished second in the season standings with 84 points, and Ruben Barrichello was third with 77 points . Sebastian and Rauli finished in the drivers' standings at the end of the season .
 Button and Barrichello helped Brawn GP become the first team to win the constructors' championship in its debut season . The first British team to take the title since McLaren in 1998 won the title in 1998 . Button was the first to win constructors’ championship in his debut
 Button gave Britain consecutive FI titles for the first time since Graham Hill won in 1968 and Stewart in 1969 . Button also gave Britain a first consecutive FI title since the 1970s .
 Lewis Hamilton of McLaren took the title in 2008 and won two races in 2009 . Hamilton was the first English driver to win the title since Damon Hill in 1996 .
 Felipe Massa was involved in a near-fatal crash in July while attempting to qualify for the Hungarian Grand Prix . Ferrari’s Massa won a season-high six races in 2008 on his way to finishing one point behind Hamilton .
 Massa crashed into a safety barrier and suffered multiple skull fractures after a loose car part flew into him and knocked him unconscious . Massa was knocked unconscious after the crash and suffered skull fractures .
 He had surgery around his left eye and later had to have a metal plate inserted in his eye . He also had surgery to remove a titanium plate from his eye and to insert the plate .
 Michael Schumacher of Germany offered to fill in for Massa, but the 40-year-old ended his comeback bid because of lingering neck injuries from a motorcycle crash . The German driver had retired at the end of the 2006 season . Massa had retired from the sport at the
 Jean Todt replaces Max Mosley of the U.K. who had been FIA president since 1994 . In October, former Ferrari team principal was elected to replace the outgoing Mosley . The Frenchman replaces Mosley as president of the FIA .
 Mosley refused to resign in 2008 after a British tabloid newspaper revealed his involvement in a sadomasochistic sex orgy . Mosley had won a vote of confidence to remain president through October 2009 . He refused to quit in 2008 .
 Todt was backed by Mosley and British FI boss Bernie Ecclestone . He beat out Finnish candidate Ari Vatanen to win the vote .
 The sport was hit by another scandal in 2009 as former Renault team principal Flavio Briatore of Italy was given a lifetime ban by the World Motor Sport Council for having asked Brazilian driver Nelson Piquet, Jr., to deliberately crash at the 2008 Singapore Grand Prix .
 Piquet was cleared of any wrongdoing, but Renault chief engineer Pat Symonds was suspended for five years . Alonso left the team to join Ferrari in 2010, and two-time world champion Alonso left to join McLaren .
 The FIA announced budget caps and ban on in-season testing . The sport lost major sponsors such as ING, the Royal Bank of Scotland, and Credit Suisse .
 The Canadian Grand Prix, run in Montreal since 1978, has been dropped from the calendar . The French Grand Prix was also dropped, as was the Canadian GP held in Montreal in 1978 .
 Toyota-owned Fuji International Speedway said in July that it would not host the Japanese Grand Prix beginning in 2010 . Honda followed in November, Toyota followed fellow Japanese automaker Honda in withdrawing from the sport .
 2010 would mark the first time in eight years that there would be no Japanese FI team . Honda and Toyota have both been out of business in recent years .
 BMW had won only one race since it acquired the Sauber team in 2006 . BMW announced that it would not return in 2010 after only one win in six races .
 Bridgestone Corp. has been FI racing’s only tire supplier since 2007 . Bridestone announced it would not supply tires for FI after its contract expired in 2010 . FI racing's only tire company since 2007 reported that it would no longer supply tires .
 American stock car race driver Jimmie Johnson of Hendrick Motorsports won his fourth consecutive Sprint Cup championship in 2009 . Johnson won the championship with his fourth straight title .
 The 34-year-old Johnson thus achieved a feat never before accomplished in the 61-year existence of the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing . 45 drivers each earn more than $1 million in the series, with 45 each earning more than .
 Johnson won 7 of the 36 races in the series, beating 50-year-old teammate Mark Martin, who won 5.5 .
 Jeff Gordon, a four-time former titlist, won once and finished third in the overall ranking . Jeff Gordon finished third overall in the world, winning once and overall .
 Chevrolet fought off a determined bid from Toyota for manufacturer honours . It was team owner Rick Hendrick’s ninth title as Chevrolet won the title .
 Johnson earned $7,333,309 before sponsor and other ancillary awards . In a year all major American auto racing series were constricted because of difficult economic conditions .
 Toyota’s top money-winning driver, 24-year-old Kyle Busch, did not qualify for the Chase for the Sprint Cup . Busch won 20 times, including the drivers’ crown in Nationwide Series, four Sprint Cup races, and seven races in Truck Series
 Bad weather also delayed the Coca-Cola 600, the longest race on the schedule, by one day . Bad weather delayed the race for one day, with the race delayed by another day due to bad weather .
 Indianapolis Motor Speedway is the second oldest race venue in the United States . The 93rd Indy 500 was the 93rd race to be held at the Indy Indy 500 . The total purse of the race was $14,315,315.315 .
 Castroneves won the pole with a speed of 224.864 mph and then bested Dan Wheldon by nearly two seconds at an average speed of 150.318 mph in the IRL’s all DallaraHonda competition . The IRL's all-Dall
 Danica Patrick of Andretti Green finishes third in Indy 500 . Danica's best finish at Indy was her best at Indy 500, her best finish .
 Patrick signed with Earnhardt Ganassi Racing to finally attempt American stock cars for a limited schedule . Patrick will drive for the first time in the U.S. in a limited limited series .
 Juan Pablo Montoya led most of the race until NASCAR penalized him for driving too fast in the pit lane . Montoya was penalized by NASCAR for speeding in pit lane during the race . NASCAR penalizes Montoya for being too fast .
 Johnson won the $448,001 first prize over Martin . Martin faded to 11th, and Johnson finished in 11th .
 Scotsman Dario Franchitti of the Target Chip Ganassi team won the season drivers’ championship . The IRL season ended in a 1-0 victory over Franchitts of the Chip Chip-Ganassi team .
 Scott Dixon, the defending champion and teammate, also won five events . He captured five events to edge on total points Scott Dixon .
 Penske’s Ryan Briscoe (with three IRL victories) and Castroneves finished third and fourth for the season, respectively . Penske driver Castroneve finished third, fourth and fifth .
 Two formerly successful teams, Andretti and Newman/Haas/Lanigan, had no victories in the 17-race series . The title standings lead changed 15 times during the series .
 Sebastien Loeb of France and his codriver, Daniel Elena of Monaco, won the rally world rally championship . Loeb was a five-time champion driver for five years . Elena was the codriver for Loeb, who won the championship in 2011 .
 After skipping the Monte Carlo race, Loeb took the first five WRC events . After skipping Monte Carlo, he skipped the race in 2009 . Loeb has won five of the WRC races .
 Jari-Matti Latvala of Finland won the Rally of Italy (Sardinia) in Italy . A flat tire and a two-minute technical penalty dropped Loeb into fourth place in the rally . Loeb finished fourth in Italy with a flat tire .
 Hirvonen was awarded the victory in the Rally of Australia in September after Loeb was penalized for a technical infringement . Loeb, the original winner, won the event in September . Hirvonan won the rally of Australia with a Citroen team-mate .
 Loeb’s triumph in Spain put him only one point behind Hirvonen in Spain . Loeb's win in Spain puts him one point clear of Hirvonan in the title race . Hirvonens and Loeb will go head-to-head in Wales Rally of
 A mishap with his car hood in the penultimate stage cost Hirvonen more than a minute . Loeb held on for the win, giving him his 54th career victory and record sixth consecutive WRC drivers’ title .
 Citroen finished with a comfortable lead over Ford in the manufacturers' rankings . The French manufacturer finished ahead of their rivals at the top of the rankings . Ford finished second in the world's manufacturers' standings .
 The two classic American endurance races again attracted drivers and manufacturers from around the world . It was the closeness of the finishes that was notable, but it was also notable .
 Four carmakers were represented in the most powerful LMP classes . The 57th running of the 12 Hours of Sebring took place in the middle of the year .
 Matsui scored a record six runs batted in during the Yankees’ series-clinching victory . The average speed of the event was 117.986 mph, the fastest ever for the event . Matsui hit six runs for the Yankees during the series win over Japan .
 Defending champion team of Kristensen, Capello, and McNish finished third overall . The defending champion team struggled with mechanical problems and finished third in the race .
 It was Andy Pettitte’s third victory in as many clinching games during the 2009 postseason . It was his third win in three playoff games during that postseason .
 Cliff Lee pitched a complete game in game one at Yankee Stadium on October 28 . Chase Utley hit two home runs to propel the Phillies to a 6-1 victory over the Yankees .
 Burnett, who pitched seven innings, and Mariano Rivera pitched two scoreless innings of relief . Burnett and Rivera pitch seven innings of each pitch for the Yankees .
 The Phillies beat the Yankees 8-5 in game three of the World Series on October 31 . Three Yankees home runs from Pettitte hit by Alex Rodriguez, Nick Swisher, and Matsui .
 In game four the Yankees scored three runs in the ninth inning to break a tie and forge a 7-4 victory . In the game four game four, the Yankees won the game seven-4 . The Yankees won their first four games of the series .
 Rodriguez drove in the winning run with a two-out double off loser Brad Lidge . Jorge Posada followed with a tworun single .
 The Phillies averted elimination by defeating the Yankees 8-6 in game five . Utley hit two more home runs in support of the winning pitcher Lee .
 With five home runs for the Series, Utley tied a record shared by former Yankees star Reggie Jackson . Utley's five postseason home runs tied Reggie Jackson's record with five .
 The Phillies won the National League pennant by defeating the Los Angeles Dodgers 10-4 on October 21 in Philadelphia . The Phillies became the first team to reach consecutive World Series since the 2000 Yankees .
 The Phillies advanced to the NLCS by defeating the Colorado Rockies three games to one in a best-of-five series . The Rockies defeated the Phillies 3-1 in a three-game series .
 In the AL Division Series, the Yankees swept the Minnesota Twins and the Angels swept the Boston Red Sox . Both teams won by three games to none in the best-of-five series . The Yankees won the series by three-game-to-one .
 Minnesota won the AL Central by defeating the Detroit Tigers 6-5 in a one-game play-off held in Minneapolis on October 6 . The Tigers won the one-off playoff by beating the Minnesota Twins 6-4 .
 The Yankees won the AL East by eight games over the Red Sox . The Red Sox qualified for the play-off wild-card berth with the best second-place record .
 The Phillies captured first place in the NL East by six games; Cardinals topped the NL Central by 7Vi games . Dodgers won the NL West by three games over the NL wild card, Colorado .
 Joe Mauer of Minnesota batted .365 (the highest ever for a catcher) to claim his second consecutive . consecutive . batting title and the season MVP honours . Mauer batted . 365 for the Twins .
 Hanley Ramirez of the Florida Marlins won the NL batting crown with .342 . Ramirez won the batting title with a .342 strikeout rate . Ramirez also won the National League batting crown .
 Prince Fielder of the Milwaukee Brewers and Howard of the Brewers had 141 RBIs . Howard was the NL RBIs leader with 141 .
 Sports and Games: Basketball wright of St. Louis. Sabathia, Justin Verlander of Detroit, Felix Hernandez of Seattle Mariners, and Adam Wain of the Seattle Mariners.
 Zack Greinke of the Kansas City Royals scored an MLB-best 2.16 earned run average . He secured his first AL Cy Young Award . The Royals pitcher won the award for the first time .
 Brian Fuentes of the Angels had 48 saves to lead the AL . Fteath Bell of the San Diego Padres was the NL leader with 42 saves .
 Mark Buehrle of the AL White Sox pitched a perfect game on July 23 in Chicago's United States Cellular Field, beating Tampa Bay 5-0 . On July 23, the White Sox beat the Rays 5-1 .
 The perfect game was the 18th in major league history . The 30-year-old left-hander became the sixth pitcher to record both a no-hitter and a perfect game .
 Buehrle struck out six and was helped by a spectacular catch from centre fielder Dewayne Wise . Wise climbed the fence to deprive Gabe Kapler of a potential home run for the first out of the ninth .
 Wise briefly lost control of the ball but then grabbed it as he fell to the ground . Wise then grabbed the ball as he lay on the ground in the first half of the match .
 Randy Johnson pitched the last perfect game for the Arizona Diamondbacks against the Atlanta Braves in 2004 . Johnson recorded his 300th victory for the Diamondbacks .
 Jonathan Sanchez pitched a no-hitter for San Francisco on July 10, defeating the Padres 8-0 . Sanchez is a 26-year-old left-hander from the San Francisco Giants .
 Rivera registered his 500th save on Sunday . Rivera is the Yankees’ veteran relief pitcher . Rivera has been with the team since 1988 .
 Ichiro Suzuki of the Seattle Mariners smacked his 2,000th hit . Jason Giambi of the Oakland As hit his 400th home run . Ichiro hit 2,0,000 hits for Seattle Mariners .
 The AL continues its dominance in the midsummer event, extending its unbeaten string to 13 . The AL secured home-field advantage in the World Series with 13 World Series wins .
 Curtis Granderson of the Tigers tripled in the eighth inning and scored on a sacrifice fly by Adam Jones of the Baltimore Orioles to break a 3-3 tie . Granderson's triple was the Tigers' first triple in the game .
 The Rays’ Carl Crawford was voted MVP of a game in which the NL scored all of its runs in the second inning . Crawford was the Rays' MVP in the game .
 Jonathan Papelbon of the Red Sox was credited with the victory . Rivera claimed the save by pitching a scoreless ninth inning .
 Chula Vista, Calif., defeated Taoyuan, Taiwan, 6-3 to win the Little League World Series on August 30 in South Williamsport, Pa. The team then went on to win in the tournament .
 Bulla Graft singled in the go-ahead run in the fourth inning . Kiko Garcia pitched three-plus innings of scoreless relief for the U.S. .
 Taiwan seized a 3-0 lead with back-toback home runs from Wen Hau Sung and Chin Ou . California replied with a run in the third and fourth before rallying in the fourth to win .
 California advanced to the championship game by routing San Antonio, Texas, 12-2 . The nine-run outburst in the first inning featured three home runs, including a grand slam by Andy Rios .
 Venezuela's Aragua Tigers won the championship with a 5-1 record . Venezuela won the tournament with a record of 5-2 .
 Puerto Rico’s champion, the Ponce Lions, and the Licey Tigers from the Dominican Republic tied for third . Puerto Rico's champion, Puerto Rico, is Puerto Rico . The Liceys Tigers are from the Caribbean .
 Venezuela lost to South Korea by a score of 10-2 in the semifinals of the World Baseball Classic . The tournament was held in Los Angeles, California, in March .
 Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Panama, and Puerto Rico fail to reach the semifinal round of the 16-team tournament . Japan won the tournament, which was won by Japan . Puerto Rico failed to make the semifinals of the tournament .
 Havana had defeated Isla de la Juventud four games to one in the quarterfinals and Pinar del Rio four games in the semifinals to advance . It was the first championship for Havana, which had defeated the Isla .
 Isla de la Juventud infielder Michel Enriquez won the batting title with a .401 average . Isla won the title with an average of .401 .
 Alfredo Despaigne from Granma set a new Cuban league home run record with 32 . Alfredo set new record for most home runs in the Cuban league .
 Pinar del Rio pitcher Yuniesky Maya went 13-4 to lead the league in wins . Yadier Pedroso from Havana posted a leagueleading 1.91 earned run average .
 Saltillo Sarape Makers (Saraperos) in August defeated the Quintana Roo Tigers four games to two to win its first Mexican League title after nearly 40 years in the league . The Saraperos won the title in August after winning nearly 40 games in nearly 40
 The Tigers, formerly based in Mexico City and Puebla, had won nine previous championships . The Tigers had won 9 previous championships in Mexico .
 The Yomiuri Giants beat the Nippon-Ham Fighters 2-0 in game six at the Sapporo Dome, the Fighters’ home stadium, on Nov., 2009, to win the best-of-seven Japan Series by four games to two . The Giants won the
 The Giants claimed their first Japan Series title in seven years and 21st overall . The Giants won the Japan Series for the first time since 2003 . They won the title for the second time in a row .
 Shinnosuke Abe was named the series Most Valuable Player after hitting . Abe hit .304 with two home runs and five runs batted in . Abe also hit . .304 .
 Chunichi Dragons defeated the Giants four games to one in the second stage of the Central League Climax Series play-offs . The Dragons eliminated the Yakult Swallows two games to a win over the Giants in the first stage .
 Fighters beat Rakuten Eagles four games to one in the second stage of the Pacific League Climax Series . Eagles swept Softbank Hawks in two games in the first stage in the series .
 Pitchers Kazuki Yoshimi of the Dragons and Shohei Tateyama of the Swallows tied for the CL lead with 16 wins . Pitchers Yoshimi and Yasuki Yasimi are tied for 16 wins in all competitions .
 Japan defended its 2006 title in the second World Baseball Classic . Japan defeated South Korea 5-3 in the final game in Los Angeles on March 23 .
 Kobe Bryant named Most Valuable Player of the Finals after averaging 32.3 points per game . Kobe Bryant earned his fourth NBA title, his first since 2001-02 .
 Basketball Basketball Bryant scored 30 points, 6 rebounds, 5 assists, 4 blocked shots, and 2 steals . Bryant also scored 6 rebounds and 5 assists .
 The Lakers became the first NBA team since the 1989 Detroit Pistons to win a championship the season after losing in the Finals . The Lakers lost to the Boston Celtics in six games, including a 39-point defeat in the final game, in the NBA Finals .
 The Lakers ousted the Utah Jazz in the first round and then eked past the Houston Rockets in a hardfought seven-game series . The Lakers also defeated the Denver Nuggets in six games in the Western Conference Finals .
 The 2009 championship gave Phil Jackson his 209th postseason victory and a landmark 10th title . Phil Jackson passed legendary Celtics coach Red Auerbach, who had captured nine titles, to pass him .
 Kobe Bryant of the Los Angeles Lakers takes a jump shot past Courtney Lee of the Orlando Magic in the decisive fifth game of the 2009 NBA Finals . Meanwhile, it was the first title for important role players such as Lamar Odom (10th season in the NBA)
 Bryant scored 30 points in the game, which clinched the Lakers’ 15th NBA title . Pau Gasol, who had been acquired from the Memphis Grizzlies 16 months earlier, also played for the Lakers .
 In the allimportant fifth game, Gasol had a double-double consisting of 14 points and 15 rebounds . Odom added 17 points and 10 rebounds, while Trevor Ariza had 15 points and Fisher 13 .
 The Magic connected on only 8 of 27 of their threepointers in the final game . Five players scored in double figures for the Magic . The Magic are playing in the second championship round in the franchise's history .
 Orlando defeated the Philadelphia 76ers in the first round, upset the Celtics in a tough seven-game semifinal series, and reached the Eastern Conference Finals with a four-games-to-two victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers . The NBA Finals will be held in Los Angeles, California,
 The Mercury won the first matchup of the five-game 2009 Finals and then lost two straight before coming back to defeat Indiana in games four and five . The Mercury went on to win the 2009 Finals .
 The Mercury’s Diana Taurasi, the Finals MVP, scored 26 points, 6 rebounds, and 4 assists in the fifth game . The Mercury won the Finals Finals MVP with 26 points and 6 rebounds .
 North Carolina was predicted to be the best team in college basketball in 2008-09 season . Tar Heels lost their first two games in the Atlantic Coast Conference .
 By the time the teams arrived in Detroit for the National Collegiate Athletic Association Final Four in April 2009, Carolina was the big favourite again . The team did not disappoint, winning the tournament in Detroit .
 Tar Heels played through 2009 tournament like team that could accept nothing short of winning the last game . After being embarrassed in the 2008 semifinal game by Kansas, the UNC played through tough times .
 Tyler Hansbrough, Ty Lawson, and Wayne Ellington all passed on the 2008 National Basketball Association draft to make another run at a national championship . U.S. men's basketball team is ranked No. 1 in the country .
 Hansbrough ended his college career with more points than any previous ACC player in ACC history . Hans brough scored more than any other player in the ACC history. He scored more points in his ACC career than any player in history .
 Lawson had 21 points, 8 steals, 6 assists, and just 1 turnover in the championship game against Michigan State . Ellington was named Most Outstanding Player of the Final Four . Lawson also had 8 steals and 6 assists .
 Hansbrough, Lawson, and Ellington all were picked in the first round of the 2009 NBA draft . Elington was drafted from Miami Heat Heat Heat in 2010 .
 Another Big East power, Villanova, also made the Final Four but had the bad fortune of drawing North Carolina in the semifinal . Villanova will play North Carolina again in the final .
 Connecticut won its sixth national womens championship . UConn dominated from start to finish, winning every game in the 2008-09 season .
 Tina Charles was named the Most Outstanding Player of the Final Four . Charles scored 25 points and had 19 rebounds against Louisville .
 The 2008-09 team was clearly one of his best, with stars at every position . It was one of the best in the Premier League, with players at every level .
 Maya Moore is one of the most versatile talents in the history of her sport . Moore won the Player of the Year award . Moore is a sophomore at the University of Maryland .
 Every key UConn player except senior point guard Renee Montgomery would be back for the 2009-10 season . The UConn women's basketball team will return to the UConn campus .
 Spain will defend its 2006 Federation Internationale de Basketball men's world championship in Turkey in 2010 . The victory added credibility to Spain’s dream of defending its 2006 title in Turkey .
 Spain's 2.13-m (7ft) centre Pau Gasol led his team against Serbia with 18 points, 11 rebounds, and 3 blocks . The team traveling to Turkey was expected to include Gasol, who led his country against Serbia in the World Cup final .
 Spain and Serbia qualified for the 2010 world championship . Greece, Slovenia and Greece also qualified for 2010 .
 France and Croatia won classification games to join the other European qualifiers and host country Turkey . Croatia and France will play each other in the other qualifiers . Turkey will host France and Turkey in the next round .
 The United States qualified for Turkey on the basis of its gold medal at the 2008 Olympics in Beijing . Four slots were available from the Americas championship . The U.S. has won four of the four slots available .
 Canada bounced back from a string of defeats against Uruguay, Puerto Rico, Argentina, and Brazil . Canada beat Panama and upset the favoured Dominican Republic to reach the semifinals and qualify .
 Angola, Cote d’Ivoire, and Tunisia qualified from the African championship, played in August in Tripoli, Libya . Tunisia won the tournament, with Angola and Tunisia winning .
 The Czech Republic and the United States are the first names in the ring for the 2010 FIBA women’s world championship . The 2008 Olympic champion is the Czech Republic . The United States won the 2008 Olympic gold medal .
 France upset defending champion Russia in the women’s EuroBasket final in June in Latvia . Spain, Belarus, and Greece also qualified for the final in Riga, Latvia .
 Oceania’s Australia joined Asian qualifiers China, South Korea, and Japan . Brazil, Argentina, and Canada qualified from the Americas . Australia joined Argentina, Canada, Brazil and Argentina .
 Senegal and Mali go through to round out the 16-team tournament . Senegal, Mali and Senegal also made it through to the final round .
 Russian pilot Aleksandr Zubkov finished atop the overall fourman and combined World Cup standings during the 2008-09 bobsleigh season . Zubkov collected nine World Cup medals, three at Park City, Utah, and one at each other venue on the circuit . He has collected nine
 At the 2009 world championships, he finished fourth in both disciplines . The 2009 world championship was held in Lake Placid, N.Y., in February .
 Beat Hefti of Switzerland, with seven medals throughout the season, took the two-man title in overall World Cup standings and was second in combined standings . But he could not get on the podium at the world championships .
 Steven Holcomb wins four-man world championships at the world championships . Holcomb is the first American pilot to win the world championship title in four years .
 Andre Lange of Germany took silver, and Latvian Janis Minins secured the bronze . Andre Lange won the gold medal in the men's final .
 Switzerland's Ivo Rueegg and Germany’s Thomas Florschutz finished first and second, respectively, with Holcomb in third . Holcomb finished in third place .
 Sandra Kiriasis of Germany won her seventh straight overall World Cup title . She has collected seven medals in eight World Cup races . She won the women's overall title in 2012 .
 She also contributed to Germany’s world championship team title . She fell to a disappointing seventh place in the two-woman event in Lake Placid, New York .
 German bobsleigh pilot Sandra Kiriasis and her brakewoman, Berit Wiacker, push off in the World Clip event in St. Louis . Fellow German Cathleen Martini finished second in the overall World bobsled event in the event . Fellow Germany Cathleen Martini
 Kiriasis won the race en route to Kiriasis’s seventh consecutive overall World Cup title . Kiriasis has won the World Cup seven times in a row .
 The world championship gold medal went to British pilot Nicola Minichiello . British pilot won the gold medal for the first time in his career .
 Aleksandr Tretiakov of Russia won the overall World Cup title in 2008-09 skeleton season . Aleksander Tretakov won the World Cup overall in the skeleton skeleton competition .
 He earned five podium finishes during the World Cup season . He finished third at the 2009 world championships in Lake Placid, New York .
 British slider Adam Pengilly took second place at the event, his only medal of the year . Pengilly finished second in the men's individual event, the only medal he has ever won .
 Marion Trott of Germany finished atop the World Cup rankings . Shelley Rudman of Great Britain took second, and Katie Uhlaender of U.S. was third overall .
 Trott also earned the gold medal at the world championships . Amy Williams of Great Britain won the silver medal . Kerstin Szymkowiak of Germany took the bronze medal .
 Erin Hamlin won gold in 2009 at the luge world championships in Lake Placid, N.Y., in February 2009 . It was the first time since 1993 that a non-German slider had won the world crown . Hamlin became the first American to win the world luge
 The silver and bronze medals went to Germany’s Natalie Geisenberger and Ukrainian Natalia Yakushenko, respectively . The silver, bronze medals were awarded to Ukraine's Natalia Yushyakushenko .
 Tatjana Hufner finished in the top two in all nine races and first in the overall standings . Tatjan Geisenberger and Anke Wischnewski of Germany also finished in top three in the World Cup .
 Armin Zoggeler won his eighth (and fourth straight) overall World Cup title . Italian finished in the top three spots in eight out of nine races . He won his fourth straight straight World Cup overall title .
 Zoggeler was defeated for the world championship gold by Felix Loch . Loch did not compete in the first three races of the 2008-09 season but came on strong at the end .
 Italy’s Christian Oberstolz and Patrick Gruber earned the overall World Cup title . Germany, Italy, and Austria dominated the podium throughout the doubles season . Austria won the overall doubles title .
 Gerhard Plankensteiner and Oswald Haselrieder upset Andre Florschiitz and Torsten Wustlich of Germany for the gold . The Italian duo upset Florschitz and Tustlich in the final at the world championships .
 In December it appeared likely that the much-anticipated fight could take place in 2010 . It appeared likely in December that the fight would take place at the end of 2010 .
 Pacquiao continued to move from one weight division to another with spectacular results . The Filipino boxer has been known to be a mixed martial arts star .
 Ring magazine junior welterweight champion Ricky Hatton won The Ring magazine title on May 2 . Hatton knocked him out of the ring with a secondround knockout at MGM Grand .
 Pacquiao knocked out Hatton with a left hand that crashed into the side of the Englishman's jaw with such a paralyzing impact that the recipient was unconscious before he hit the floor . The 16,262 fans in attendance and a payper-view audience of approximately 800,
 Mayweather had not fought since Dec., 2007 . Mayweather returned to action on September 19 . Mayweather won a unanimous 12-round decision over Juan Manuel Marquez at the MGM Grand .
 Marquez's titles were not at stake because the bout was fought in the welterweight division . Marquez’s title was not at risk because of the bout being fought in a division that was in the middle of the ring .
 Mayweather knocked down Marquez in the second round . Mayweather's speed and size advantages carried him to an easy points verdict . Mayweather knocked Marquez down in the first round .
 The crowd of 13,116 was several thousand fewer than capacity, but the 1.05 million pay-perview buys were significantly better than expected . Pay-permission buys for the UFC event exceeded expectations .
 Pacquiao knocked down Cotto in the third and fourth rounds to take control of the fight . After taking some early punishment from his hardhitting opponent, Cotto was knocked down in the fourth round .
 The grotesquely battered Cotto was rescued by the referee in the final round of the fight . Cotto won the fight by a narrow margin of three points .
 Approximately 1.25 million pay-per-view packages were sold . A crowd of more than 16,200 packed the MGM Grand for the event .
 For the second year in a row, Pacquiao was selected as The Ring magazine's Fighter of the Year for the second consecutive year . The ring magazine's fighter of the year was selected for the first time in a year .
 The heavyweight division continued to be dominated by Ukrainian brothers Wladimir and Vitali Klitschko . The brothers continued to dominate the heavyweight division .
 World Boxing Council title defended by Juan Carlos Gomez and Chris Arreola . The bout was held in Stuttgart, Germany, on March 21 .
 Vitali defeated Kevin Johnson in his final bout of the year in Berne, Switzerland . Vitali won a 12-round unanimous decision over Johnson in December .
 More than 60,000 fans filled the Veltins Arena in Gelsenkirchen, Ger., to see him stop previously undefeated Ruslan Chagaev in the ninth round of the fight .
 The one-sided match was Wladimir's seventh successful defense of the International Boxing Federation title . The victory also earned him the vacant Ring magazine heavyweight championship .
 David Haye entered the heavyweight sweepstakes by winning the WBA belt via a 12-round decision over Nikolay Valuyev on November 7 in Nurnberg, Ger. The former undisputed cruiserweight champion won the title in Germany . Haye is now a British heavyweight champion
 David Haye was expected to add some much-needed colour to the drab heavyweight picture . The flamboyant Haye has been in a long-awaited slump in the heavyweight ranks . Haye is expected to win the heavyweight title for the first time .
 Tomasz Adamek was the reigning IBF and Ring magazine cruiserweight champion in 2009 . Tomasz made two successful defenses of the IBF cruiserweight title in 2009.
 He knocked out Johnathon Banks in the eighth round on February 27 and battered Bobby Gunn on July 11 . The fight ended in the fourth round when the referee ended the fight in the fifth .
 Both bouts were held in Newark, N.J., where a large Polish American population supported Adamek . Both bouts took place in Newark .
 Polish fighter returns to his homeland for his third bout of the year . He stopped Andrew Golota in the fifth round on October 24 in Lodz, Poland .
 The Polish Fight of the Century bout was a financial success . Golota was well past his prime, but Golota fought for the first time in his career .
 It attracted a capacity crowd of 14,000 and was viewed by more than 10 million people on Polsat, Poland’s largest television network, Polsat .
 Ring and WBC middleweight champion Kelly Pavlik was sidelined for much of the year with a staphylococcus infection . Pavlik suffered the infection after a ninth-round knockout in February .
 He returned to action on December 19, scoring a fifth-round technical knockout of Miguel Angel Espino in Youngstown, Ohio .
 Showtime launches round-robin tournament featuring six of the world’s top super middleweights . Subscription cable TV network Showtime launched the tournament on Friday night .
 Carl Froch won a close 12-round decision over Andre Dirrell on October 17 in Nottingham, Eng. WBC titleholder Froch beat Dirrell in the first series of bouts . Froch is the current WBC champion .
 Arthur Abraham knocked out former world middleweight champion Jermain Taylor in the 12th round in Berlin . On the same night in Berlin, Arthur Abraham also knocked out ex-world middleweight title holder Jermain .
 Andre Ward beat Mikkel Kessler via a 1 lth-round technical decision in Oakland, Calif. on November 21 . Ward beat Kessler via 1-1 technical decision at the Oracle Oracle Arena .
 Arturo Gatti was found dead on July 11 in Porto de Galinhas, Braz., where he was vacationing with his Brazilian wife . The former IBF super featherweight and WBC junior welterweight titleholder was found by his wife .
 Vernon Forrest was shot and killed during a robbery at a gas station in Atlanta, Georgia . Forrest was the WBC junior middleweight titleholder . Forrest had been a professional boxer for two decades .
 Sri Lankan cricket team bus was attacked on its way to the Gaddafi Stadium in Lahore, Pak., for the Second Test against Pakistan . Sri Lanka team bus attacked on March 3, 2009, on way to Gaddafi Stadium, Lahore .
 Pakistan umpire Ahsan Raza suffered bullet wounds in the chest . Six policemen were killed in the gun battle . Pakistan's national cricket umpire was injured in the incident .
 Thilan Samaraweera was hit in the left leg by a bullet and had to stay behind in the hospital as his teammates were flown home . The majority of the Sri Lankan players were unhurt in the incident .
 It was the first time that the sport had been the target of a terrorist attack . Cricket world reacted with shock after the terrorist attack in London .
 Three months earlier, in late November 2008, a terrorist attack on the Taj Mahal Palace hotel in Mumbai had resulted in the cancellation of the last two one-day internationals between England and India . The last two ODIs had been cancelled due to the terrorist attack .
 England players who had stayed at the hotel a fortnight before flew home . Test series in December was widely presumed to be canceled . England players flew home, and it is widely presumed that the Test series is canceled .
 England players unanimously agreed to return to India to play the two Tests . Kevin Pietersen captained the side after their 1-0 defeat in the first Test . The England players agreed to play in India to defy the terrorists .
 The second season of the Indian Premier League had to be moved to South Africa at short notice after security officials in India said that they could not police both the IPL and the pending Indian general election . Pakistan became a ""no-go” area for international cricket, and the second
 A thrilling double-header series between Australia and South Africa in December and early January 2009 lifted the gloom . The series was one of the most memorable in the world cricketing history .
 South Africa beat Australia 2-1 to move to the top of the world rankings . Australia lost its position as the number one team in the world for the first time in more than a decade .
 South Africa won a series in Australia for the first time . Former champions Australia lost to India and England . Graeme Smith captained South Africa .
 Australia beat South Africa by 2-1 in the return Test series in South Africa . Australia also won the second Test series by two-1 . South Africa won the other two by two Test matches in the series .
 Kevin Pietersen was dismissed from the captaincy after just three Test matches in charge . Pietersen had a personality clash with coach Peter Moores after taking charge of the England captaincy .
 Pietersen wanted Moores to go, but the selectors dismissed both . New captaincoach combination Andrew Strauss and Andy Flower were appointed for the series in the Caribbean .
 West Indies take the opening Test after a devastating spell of five wickets for 11 runs by fast bowler Jerome Taylor . West Indies desperate to win back the Wisden Trophy from England for the first time since 1997 .
 The second Test in Antigua had to be abandoned after only a few balls because the outfield was deemed unfit for play . Second Test was abandoned after just a short number of balls .
 The match has been rescheduled for the Recreation Ground, the island's former Test ground . The match was played on the island of Sri Lanka at the former Test Ground .
 England were unable to press home its advantage in the remaining Tests and lost the series 1-0 . England was unable to win the remaining three Tests in the series . England won the first Test by three wickets .
 The West Indies team went on strike after a pay dispute with the West Indies Cricket Board . Defeated in the return series in England, West Indies went on the strike after being beaten by England .
 A scratch team of second-string players lost 2-0 to Bangladesh, which had a previous Test record of 59-1 . It ranked as an alltime low for the game in the Caribbean . Bangladesh's previous record was 59-0 against a scratch team .
 The long-awaited Ashes series in England did not quite live up to the 2005 series . The result—2-1 to the home team—was the same .
 England held on for a thrilling draw in the opening Test in Cardiff, Wales, and then took the lead in the series at Lord’s . Andrew Flintoff's fast bowling spell of fast bowling by Flintoff conjured up memories of the 2005 Ashes Ashes .
 Flintoff retired from Test cricket to concentrate on playing one-day and 20/20 cricket . Flintoff, a charismatic but injury-prone all-rounder, retired from the Test to play one-and-one-day cricket .
 Ricky Ponting surpasses Allan Border’s career total of 11,174 . Captain Ponting became the leading run scorer in Australian cricket . But he was unable to avoid the ignominy of having lost two Ashes series .
 Sachin Tendulkar of India became the leading run scorer in Test history when he passed former West Indian star Brian Lara's record of 11,953 runs in the Second Test against Australia at Mohali, India . Brian Lara was the West Indian all-rounder who had scored 11,
 England won both 50-over World Cup and 20/20 World Cup . They also retained the Ashes against Australia . Charlotte Edwards' side won the ODI World Cup last year .
 Wang Bingyu defeated Sweden’s Anette Norberg 8-6 in the final in Kangnung, S.K. China won its first world curling championship on March 29, 2009 .
 Denmark’s Angelina Jensen edged defending champion Jennifer Jones of Canada 7-6 for the bronze . Canada’S Jennifer Jones won the gold medal with a 7-4 win over Denmark‘Angelina Jensen .
 Switzerland, Germany, Russia, Scotland, the U.S., South Korea, Norway, and Italy . The U.K. is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Scotland’s David Murdoch stole two points in the final end of an 8-6 victory over defending champion Kevin Martin of Canada . Murdoch won the world championship in Moncton, N.B., on April 12 .
 Norway’s Thomas Ulsrud won his third bronze with a 6-4 victory over Ralph Stockli of Switzerland . Thomas Ursrud of Norway won the bronze medal with a win over Stockli 6-3 in the final .
 The order of finish for the rest of the men’s field was the U.S., Germany, Denmark, France, China, Japan, the Czech Republic, and Finland .
 The world junior championship in March was a test event of the Olympic venue for the 2010 Vancouver Winter Games . The Vancouver Winter Olympics will take place in 2010 .
 Rasmus Stjerne wins men's title with 9-6 win over Canada's Brett Gallant . Scotland's Eve Muirhead wins her third straight gold medal and second as a skip in 8-6 victory over Kaitlyn Lawes . Rasmus Stjerne won
 American Chris Plys took the men’s junior bronze, with Switzerland's Martina Baumann earning the women's. bronze . Chris Ply won the men's junior bronze .
 Switzerland’s Toni Muller and Irene Schori earned their second straight title with a 7-4 victory over Hungary's Gyorgy Nagy and Ildiko Szekeres . At the world mixed doubles championship in Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy
 Pat Sanders downed Switzerland’s Renate Nedkoff 10-1 to win the women's title . Ingrid Meldahl of Sweden took the bronze .
 Eugene Hritzuk held off Paul Pustovar of the United States in a 4-3 victory for the men’s senior championship . Kevin Prentice of Scotland came third with Scotland’�s Kevin Prentice placing third .
 Lance Armstrong returns to cycling after three-year absence from the sport's premier road event, Tour de France . The return of American cyclist Lance Armstrong and rivalry with Alberto Contador dominated cycling headlines in 2009 .
 Armstrong fractured his collarbone during a preparation race in March but was able to contest the Giro d’ltalia . Armstrong finished 12th overall behind the winner, Denis Menchov of Russia . Armstrong retired in 2005 after having won the threeweek Tour for a
 Armstrong failed by less than a second to take the yellow jersey (worn by the overall leader) from Fabian Cancellara after the fourth stage of the Tour de France . Armstrong fell behind Alberto Contador three days later on the first mountain stage .
 Contador won with a margin of 4 min 11 sec over Andy Schleck of Luxembourg . Contador wins by 4min 11 secs .
 Armstrong finished third to become, at 37, the second oldest rider to have stood on the podium . Armstrong finished in third place at the end of the season . Armstrong is now the world's second oldest ever podium winner .
 Italian rider Danilo Di Luca failed two tests for continuous erythropoietin receptor activator during the Giro dltalia . He had finished second overall in the Tour de France .
 Tour de France stage winner Mikel Astarloza of Spain was later declared positive for EPO from an out-of-competition test taken on June 26 . The Spanish cyclist was declared positive in June 26 for the use of EPO .
 Spanish cyclist Alberto Contador won the Tour de France in 2009 . Contador rode triumphantly through the streets of Paris on July 26 after winning the 2009 Tour .
 Switzerland hosted the UCI world road championships and celebrated a home victory in the men's individual time trial . Cancellara dominated the 49.8km test to take the title for the third time .
 Kristin Armstrong regained the women's time trial title, which she had won in 2006 . Armstrong had won the title in 2006, but Armstrong won it back in 2007 . Armstrong won the time trial in 2006 and 2007 .
 Cadel Evans gave Australia its first men’s road race title . Evans attacked in the closing stages to finish 27 seconds ahead of his nearest rivals . Evans finished 27 seconds clear of his rivals after almost seven hours of racing .
 Australia’s Anna Meares had set the previous record of 33.588 sec in 2007 . She recorded a time of . 33.296 sec to take the title ahead of Australia's Meares . Meares' previous record was 33.590 sec .
 Taylor Phinney of the United States won the men’s elite 4,000-m individual pursuit at the age of only 18 . The 18-year-old became the first American man to take a senior world track title since Marty Nothstein in 1996 .
 Zenyatta and Rachel Alexandra dominated the American Thoroughbred racing landscape in 2009 . Rachel Alexandra won the Triple Triple Triple Crown for the first time in a year . The 2009 Triple Crown was the first Triple Crown in the United States .
 Horse of the Year is set to be a battle between the two for horse of the year honours . Their respective history-making seasons set the stage for a battle for the title .
 Azeri surpasses Azeri as the leading money-winning North Americanbased female horse of all time . The win vaulted her career earnings to $5,474,580, surpassing Azeri . Azeri's career earnings now stand at $5.4 million .
 Rachel Alexandra becomes first female in 56 editions of the Woodward Stakes to win the $750,000 race . She becomes the first female to do so . Rachel Alexandra notched her eighth win of a perfect season by defeating older horses .
 Earlier in the year she won the Preakness Stakes, the second jewel of American racings Triple Crown . She won the race earlier this year .
 Mine That Bird, an unheralded three-year-old, won the 135th running of the Kentucky Derby . Unheraldly-unnamed three-month-old won the race in a stunning fashion .
 Sent off at odds of more than 50-1, the bay gelding stormed from last in the field of 19 with about half a mile left to prevail by 6% lengths over Pioneerof the Nile . Return $103.20 to win, second only to the $184.
 The 42-year-old jockey, Calvin Borel, won in 2007 with Street Sense . It was the second Kentucky Derby triumph in three years for Mine That Birds .
 Borel gave up the mount on Mine That Bird to ride Rachel Alexandra in the Preakness two weeks later . Borel's decision to give up his mount was controversial, but Borel rode Rachel Alexandra .
 Rachel Alexandra becomes first filly in 85 years to master the l 3 /i6-mi test . Mine That Bird, ridden by Mike Smith, won by one length . Rachel Alexandra held off the late charge of Mine that Bird to win .
 Borel is trying to become the first jockey in history to win all three of the year’s Triple Crown races aboard different horses . Mine That Bird was not entered to race in the third jewel, the Belmont Stakes, but Borel was back up on Mine That
 Summer Bird, ridden by Kent Desormeaux, charged past Mine That Bird, which faded to third in the field of 10 . The H/2 mi classic went to the stretch as Summer Bird charged past Me That Bird .
 Wagering on racing in the U.S. in 2008 reported a more than $1 billion decline, or 7.2%, from the previous year . The year began on an ominous note when it was announced in January that wagering .
 Dwindling coverage of racing in the country’s daily newspapers was hit even further by the December 2008 layoffs of longtime turf writers Neil Milbert of the Chicago Tribune and John Scheinman of the Washington Post . Joe Hirsch, the ""dean of American turf writers,
 Hirsch joined the Daily Racing Form in 1954 and remained there until his retirement in 2003 . Hirsch was one of the longest-serving journalists in the sport's history .
 Stewart Elliott's 4,000th career victory at Philadelphia Park on January 18 . Jockey Stewart Elliott won his 4,00th career win at the park in 2013 . Stewart Elliott has won more than 3,000 races this year .
 Robby Albarado and Jose Flores reached the 4,000-win plateau on the same day . Robby's victory was the first time the pair had reached the milestone . Jose Flores also reached the same milestone as Robby .
 Hall of Fame inductees in 2009 included trainer Bob Baffert, jockey Eddie Maple, and horses Silverbulletday and Tiznow .
 Historic Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky., experimented with night racing for the first time . Three summer racing programs were presented under portable lights in June and July .
 Churchill officials began accepting bids for the installation of permanent lighting for the track’s 2010 season . Churchill officials are accepting bids to install permanent lighting at Churchill . The three night-racing cards attracted average attendance of 29,705 .
 An August 4 storm produced a record 15-cm rainfall in a little over an hour in Louisville, flooding the areas surrounding the track and creating an estimated $4 million in damage to the Kentucky Derby Museum . The museum was closed for the remainder of the year .
 Magna Entertainment Corp. filed for bankruptcy in March and announced plans to auction off its racing properties . Magna entertainment Corp. has been in bankruptcy since March .
 Remington Park in Oklahoma City was sold for $80.25 million to a subsidiary of the Chickasaw Nation . Thistledown in North Randall, Ohio, went to Harrah's Entertainment, Inc., for $89.9 million .
 12 horses died from injuries suffered on the Polytrack surface at Del Mar during the southern California track's 37-day racing meet, an increase from 6 in 2008 and 8 in 2007 . Controversy continued to swirl around synthetic racing surfaces .
 Thoroughbred horse racing prize money in Britain and Ireland fell in 2009 . Prize money in the UK and Ireland has fallen since 2008 .
 Only in France did it remain strong, thanks to progressive reductions in the pari-mutuel takeout since 1999 . The number of takeouts in France remained strong thanks to the reductions in takeout takeouts .
 The Thoroughbred filly Rachel Alexandra charges to the finish line of the Preakness Stakes on May 16 . Jockey Calvin Borel looks back at the trailing pack .
 Number of horses in training for flat racing in England fell, but the number of races increased . Number of races in England increased in recent years, but number of horses training fell .
 Sea The Stars was unbeaten in all six of his Group 1 races . The 2,000 Guineas, Derby, Irish Champion Stakes, and Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe in France .
 Mastery, winner of the Italian Derby in May, takes the third jewel in the British Triple Crown series . Mastery was the first horse to race in the Arc to win the Triple Crown in British racing .
 Scenic Blast became the fourth Australian winner of the Group 1 King’s Stand Stakes since 2003 . It is the fourth win of the Australian race since 2003, the fourth since then .
 Wesley Ward brought six horses from Kentucky to the Golden Jubilee Stakes . Wesley Ward won with two juveniles and was beaten by a neck with Cannonball . Cannonball won by neck with Wesley Ward in Golden Jubile Stakes.
 Eye of the Leopard won the Plate Trial and was the victorious favourite in the Queen’s Plate . In Canada, Eye of a Leopard was the favourite to win the Queen's Plate in Canada . The horse was victorious in the race after winning the Trial Trial and the Plate .
 He lost his way thereafter, finishing third to Gallant in the Prince of Wales Stakes . The horse finished third in the last two races .
 Perfect Shower completed the Canadian Triple Crown with a triumph in the Breeders’ Stakes . Perfect Showers won the Breeder’s Stakes with a win in the final race .
 Viewed won Australia’s Caulfield Cup in October but fell to seventh behind 9-1 upset winner Shocking in Melbourne Cup . Viewed, which in 2008 secured veteran trainer Bart Cummings’ 12th Melbourne Cup victory, was in contention to win in Melbourne . View
 Cummings horse So You Think wins Cox Plate, giving Cummings 256th Group 1 win . Cummings' 256th win in Group 1 career gives him 256th career victory .
 Kieren Fallon returned to the saddle on September 4 after having served an 18-month ban for taking cocaine . Fallon was banned from the sport for 18 months after taking the drug .
 The six-time British champion jockey was banned by the French authorities a month after his trial on race-fixing charges was dismissed in December 2007 . He was banned from riding in France for a month in 2007 .
 The British Horseracing Authority in July banned the other three professionals involved in that trial . The other three professional horses involved in the trial have also been banned .
 Karl Burke, who had trained his first Group 1 winner the previous month, was banned for a year . Karl Burke had trained the winner of the Group 1 race .
 Fergal Lynch was fined £50,000 (about $82,000) by Philadelphia Park . Lynch moved to ride in the U.S. where Philadelphia Park handed him a similar ban . Lynch has been banned from riding in the United States .
 Darren Williams was suspended for three months and then refused a license to ride again . Williams was banned from the sport for three and a half months before being refused a licence again .
 Sir Michael Stoute won his 10th training championship in Britain . Ryan Moore retained jockey Ryan Moore was champion for the third time .
 Most of his horses were ridden by Ioritz Mendizabal, who was named champion jockey for the third time . Christophe Lemaire replaced Christophe Soumillon as the Aga Khan’s retained jockey in August .
 Aidan O’Brien was champion trainer for the 12th time in Ireland . His jockey Johnny Murtagh won his fourth title with his fourth victory .
 Vincent O’Brien, the greatest trainer produced by Ireland and one of the most influential anywhere in the second half of the 20th century, died on June 1 . O'Brien was one of Ireland's most influential trainers .
 Great Leighs racecourse, which opened in April 2008, ceased to operate after its meeting on January 15 . The racecourse opened in 2008, but it has been closed since then .
 Ffos Las, with flat and jumping turf tracks, opened on June 18 . It was once the largest opencast mine in Europe, and was once Europe's largest open cast mine .
 France added a new all-weather track at Lyon, where La Soie was built on the site of the former turf course at Villeurbanne . The new track was built in 2007 on the . site of a turf course in the former . course at the former course of V
 Nad al Sheba racecourse in Dubai, where the U.S.-trained Well Armed won the Dubai World Cup by 14 lengths on March 28, was demolished immediately thereafter . Well Armed was demolished after winning the World Cup in March 28 .
 Meydan racecourse was built on the same site, with Tapeta all-weather surface replacing the dirt track . Tapeta was built in the 1930s .
 Age of Reason, trained in Dubai, won the first Qatar International Cup on February 26 . Qatar joined the countries promoting international racing as Age Of Reason won the race in Dubai .
 Muscle Hill went undefeated in a dozen starts and earned $2,456,041 in 2009 . Muscle Hill dominated the North American harness racing news in 2009 by going undefeated in 12 starts . The three-year-old trotter won $2.4 million during his career .
 His victories included the Hambletonian, the Kentucky Futurity, the World Trotting Derby and the Breeders Crown .
 Muscle Hill was touted by many veteran horsemen as the greatest trotter ever, certainly the best in recent decades . Muscle Hill will be the first horse to be retired from the trotting .
 He never seemed to be working hard to win his races but always seemed well within himself . He was always happy to win races but was always within himself even as his rivals were struggling across the finish line .
 His victory in the Hambletonian was timed in 1:50 'Is for the mile' It was the fastest clocking ever in the U.S.'s greatest trotting classic, which was begun in 1926 .
 Muscle Hill won 20 of 21 starts and a total of $3,273,342 in two seasons on the track . In two seasons, Muscle Hill has won $3.273,000 in total in two races .
 His only loss occurred in the first race of his life, when he was beaten by only a neck . Only a neck loss was his only loss .
 The top three-year-old pacer of 2009 was Well Said, a quicksilver colt with an amazing burst of speed . Well Said was the top three year-old colt of 2009 .
 He used that speed to win $1,982,654 and 10 of 14 starts, including the Little Brown Jug, the Meadowlands Pace, and the North America Cup . It's a sweep that had last been accomplished in 1991 .
 Well Said won the Meadowlands Pace by 6 lengths and the North America Cup by 3V4 lengths . Well Said did not just defeat his rivals, however, he humiliated them by winning the Meadowland Pace .
 His victory in the Little Brown Jug was closer, but he was clearly in control of that race . His victory was closer to that of the Little Jug .
 Lucky Jim is the best turnaround horse of the year, according to the best horse of all three horses . Lucky Jim was a four-year-old horse in 2013 .
 He won 17 of his 18 starts during the season and earned $1,063,618 after having been winless in nine starts in 2008 . He won the season with 17 of 18 starts, earning him $1.064,618 .
 He had shown ability in his races as a twoand three-year-old in 2007 and 2008, respectively, but had won only twice in 20 starts over those two seasons .
 Lucky Jim was moved to trainer Julie Miller in 2009 and was castrated in 2009 . Lucky Jim has been moved to Julie Miller's stable .
 Lucky Jim's only loss came in the Maple Leaf Trot, when he was caught behind a horse that slowed unexpectedly, causing Lucky Jim to lose ground . Lucky Jim was the only horse to be caught behind in the race .
 He finished fast but was still three-quarters of a length short at the finish line . He finished well but was three quarters of alength short of the winner .
 In late January, French fans saluted Pierre Levesque for having trained three consecutive winners of the Prix d’Amerique, the greatest trotting race in France . French fans also saluted the trainer for his success in the race .
 The 2009 race was won by Meaulnes du Corta, trained by Levesque but driven by Franck Nivard . The 2009 winner of the race was driven by Leavesque's former team-mate Meaulne du Corteau .
 Meaulnes du Corta was known to be a fast horse, but was also high-strung . He was also known to have been a high-stung horse .
 In the 2009 Prix d'Amerique, he was flawless as Nivard put him in front early in the 2,700-m race . The 2009 race was the first time the French team has won the race .
 Levesque also finished fifth with Offshore Dream, a horse he had trained and driven to victory in the Prix d’Amerique in 2007 and 2008 . The horse he trained and drove to win in 2007, 2008 and 2008 were both won in France .
 Sweden’s most prestigious race, the Elitlopp, was taken in late May by Torvald Palema, a trotter trained and driven by Ake Svanstedt . The Elit Klopp is Sweden's most prestigious racing event .
 Eight-year-old stallion sprints down the long homestretch at the Solvalla track . Jaded of Sweden, Offshore Dream, Nimrod Borealis and Nimrod Boralis also win .
 Shakhtar Donetsk defeated Werder Bremen 2-1 in overtime in the last UEFA Cup final on May 20 . Brazilian international Jadson kicks in the winning goal for the Ukrainian club in overtime .
 Mr Feelgood won the Inter Dominion Pacing Final in Australia in late March . He became the first horse ever to win the Little Brown Jug in the United States and then the biggest race in Australia .
 A group of New Zealanders had paid $600,000 for Mr Feelgood in late 2008 and shipped him to their homeland . A New Zealand group bought him in 2008 .
 The American import raced brilliantly to win the Inter Dominion by a neck over three-time champion Blacks A Fake .
 McCoy on Feb., 2009, became the first man to ride 3,000 winners over jumps . McCoy rode Restless d'Artaix at Plumpton . McCoy on Jan. 9, 2009 .
 McCoy went on to secure his 14th consecutive British jockey championship . Paul Nicholls was champion trainer for the fourth time . McCoy was champion jockey for 14 years .
 Nicholls won the Cheltenham Gold Cup with Kauto Star and the Queen Mother Champion Chase with Master Minded . Nicholls also won the Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup and the Hennessy Gold Cup with Neptune Collonges .
 The 2008 Australian Grand National winner, Ginolad, finished sixth and was later sent to be trained by Williams . The 2008 winner was later moved to a stable by Williams after finishing sixth in the National .
 In 2009 European national association football teams focused on qualifying matches for the 2010 Federation Internationale de Football Association World Cup . European national teams focused their attention on the qualifying matches . The 2010 FIFA World Cup was held in Brazil .
 The world’s richest football clubs seem to have escaped the global economic downturn .
 Florentino Perez returned as president of Spains Real Madrid after a three-year absence . Real Madrid dispensed with three coaches and five presidents during that time . Perez has been in charge of the Spanish giants since 2003 .
 Barcelona won the Champions League in 2009 and La Liga and Copa del Rey domestic double in Spain . Real Madrid won the La Liga title in 2009, beating Barcelona in La Liga in 2010 .
 Real Madrid’s €411 million annual income was derived from television rights, ticket sales, and marketing . In the summer of 2009 some €282 million was spent on eight additional players in trades, plus a new coach, Manuel Pellegrini . Real Madrid's €411m
 Real Madrid twice broke the world transfer-fee record in the space of a few days in June . Real Madrid paid €76 million for Brazilian international Kaka from AC Milan and then topped this by paying €94 million to Manchester United for Cristiano Ronaldo .
 Major Spanish clubs already had a substantial quota of foreigners . Half of Barcelona's squad hails from abroad, as well as 15 of 25 players on Real's first-team roster . Real Madrid face Barcelona in the Champions League on Sunday .
 Athletic Club Bilbao recruited mainly from the Basque region, having recruited mostly from the region . Athletic Club had no players at all during their time in charge of the club . The Spanish club won their first La Liga title last season .
 UEFA expressed concern over English Premier League clubs’ continued reliance on foreigners . UEFA, the European governing body, and its president, Michel Platini, questioned the teams’ ability to manage within their means .
 Manchester United was largely quiet in the marketplace in 2009 . Manchester City continued to spend freely on new players during the year . City paid out some £200 million during the same period .
 At the start of the 2009-10 season, English Premier League clubs had players from 68 different countries . Foreign imports represent nearly 60% of the 20 club rosters in the league .
 FIFA fined Chelsea and banned the club from signing players until January 2011 . London-based club allegedly induced Gael Kakuta to sign with it in 2007 while he was under contract to the French club Lens . Chelsea had allegedly induced the signing of Kakuta in 2007 to sign Kakuta .
 Manchester United fail to retain the UEFA Champions League title . United failed to win its third successive Premier League title after winning the title in 2013 .
 In the final against Barcelona, United started as the more confident team, moving the ball around with precision . United beat Barcelona 1-0 in the final of the World Cup in Rome on May 27 .
 Ronaldo's first potential goal of the game came from a free kick . Ronaldo's free kick was not one of his best attempts to open the scoring .
 South Korean Park JiSung's follow-up to be blocked for a comer kick . Spanish goalkeeper Victor Valdes spilled the ball, only for Park Ji-Sung’s follow up .
 Barcelona took the lead in the 10th minute when the ball was moved to Cameroonian forward Samuel Eto’o on the right wing . Barcelona won 2-1 at the Nou Camp on Saturday night .
 He cut inside Serbia's Nemanja Vidic and, with just a glimpse of the goal, fired the ball in off Dutch goalkeeper Edwin Van der Sar’s hand inside his near post . The ball was fired in off Holland's Edwin van der Sar's hand inside inside his
 Eto’o's goal had an uplifting effect on the Catalans, who settled down to dominate the match with close, accurate passing . Eto'o’s goal had the . effect of his goal .
 United switched to a 4-4-2 formation in the second half . Barcelona remained the more dangerous side in the first half . United moved to 4-3-3 formation in second half, but Barcelona were more dangerous .
 Barcelona beat Manchester City 2-0 at the Nou Camp on Tuesday night . Barcelona scored in the first half through a penalty kick from Xavi Hernandez . The visitors added another goal in the 70th minute .
 Xavi orchestrates the strategy and pace of the game from midfield . Xavi found the United defense in some disarray in the first half .
 Lionel Messi scored with a looping header for the 2-0 win for Barcelona . Lionel Messi was perfectly timed by the Argentine international Lionel Messi . Messi scored the winner for Barcelona in the first half of the game .
 Shakhtar Donetsk of Ukraine and Werder Bremen of Germany had faced off in the final of the last UEFA Cup . A week earlier, on May 20, Shakhtar won the final in the last competition in Ukraine .
 The match took place in the Sukru Saracoglu Stadium in Istanbul . It was the first time that a UEFA final had been held in Asia . The match was held in Istanbul, the first in Asia to hold a final .
 Shakhtar took the lead in the 25th minute through a goal by Luiz Adriano . Shakhtar adopted an attacking formation but with an isolated striker . Luiz Adriano scored the only goal of the game in the first half .
 A pass from Romanian international Razvan Rat had been aimed at Ilsinho, who collided with the referee . The pass was aimed at the Brazilian, but was not aimed at him . The incident took place in front of the referee in the first half .
 Adriano chipped the ball delicately over the advancing Tim Wiese into the German goal . Adriano then chipped it delicately into the goal in the second half .
 Werder tied the score 10 minutes later when Naldo’s strongly struck free-kick went straight at Ukrainian goalkeeper Andriy Pyatov, who fumbled the ball into his own net . Werder equalised in the second half through Naldo's strong strike . Wer
 Shakhtar wins 2-1 in overtime to claim first European trophy in Ukraine . Shakhtar's Jadson scores seven minutes into overtime to give Shakhtar victory . Ukraine wins its first European title with Shakhtar .
 Average attendance figures for the season topped those in the German Bundesliga for the first time since the English Premier League was formed in 1992 . German Bundesliga averaged 42,565 spectators per game .
 German teams at Under-17, Under-19, and Under-21 levels win European championship titles . Germany also reported success at intermediate international levels .
 At the domestic level in Europe, teams witnessed the continuing spread of rotating the player squad system . At domestic level, teams have seen the continued spread of rotation of players .
 In the English Premier League, fewer than 2% of players were always present . In the EPL, fewer players are always present in every game .
 Chelsea beat Everton 2-1 in the 2009 FA Cup final . Louis Saha scored the event’s fastestever goal in 25 seconds for Everton . Goals by Didier Drogba and Frank Lampard pushed Chelsea to victory .
 Wolfsburg won its first German Bundesliga title . Lyon failed to secure an eighth consecutive French League championship . Lyon won its eighth consecutive league title in France .
 Standard Liege won its play-off against Anderlecht after a tie at the top of the Belgian League . Ander Lecht won their play-offs after a 2-1 defeat at the hands of Belgian champions . Standard liege won their first game of the season at
 Marc Janko of Red Bulls Salzburg scored 39 goals in 34 Austrian League matches . Marc Jankso scored 39 times in 34 games for Red Bulls in Austrian League .
 Martin Kamburov of Lokomotiv Sofia was signed halfway through the season . He finished top scorer in Bulgaria with 17 goals in total for Lokomotor Sofia .
 Daniel Jarque, the 26-year-old captain of RCD Espanyol, suffered a massive heart attack and died on August 8 . Jarque was on a preseason tour in Italy when he suffered the attack .
 Brazil comfortably won the South American qualifying tournament to retain its record of having participated in all World Cup finals . Brazil won its first ever World Cup qualifying tournament . Brazil has won all four of its South American qualifiers .
 Paraguay and Chile, both under Argentine coaches (Gerardo Martino and Marcelo Bielsa, respectively), also had no problems . Paraguay, Chile and Paraguay also had problems .
 Argentina gained the fourth automatic qualifying place only on the last day with below-par performances . Diego Maradona coached by the controversial former World Cup star is in charge of Argentina .
 Lionel Messi named Player of the Year for the first time in his professional career . Lionel Messi was named the best player of the year by FIFA . Messi played professionally for Barcelona during his playing career .
 The United States qualified for the World Cup finals for the 6th straight time by winning the North, Central America and Caribbean zone . Mexico (in its 14th finals appearance) and Honduras (in their 14th World Cup appearance) Honduras won the zone . The U.S. qualified
 The United States lost 3-2 to Brazil in the Confederations Cup final . The U.S. also reached the final of the tournament . Brazil is the defending champion .
 Argentina’s Estudiantes de La Plata won the South American club championship, the Libertadores de America Cup, for the fourth time by beating Brazil's Cruzeiro 0-0, 2-1 . Brazil's Santos Santos won the tournament for the first
 The CONCACAF (Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football) club championship had an all-Mexican final for the third time in four years . Atlante beat Cruz Azul 2-0, 0-0 in the final .
 In the first womens Libertadores Cup, host Santos of Brazil, led by star player Marta Vieira da Silva, overwhelmed Paraguay’s Universidad Autonoma de Asuncion 9-0 in the final . Santos led the team to victory in the
 In the 2009 South American Recopa, Liga Deportiva Universitaria of Quito, Ecuador, defeated Brazil’s Intemacional, the 2008 South American Cup winner, in the 2009 Recopa .
 LDU also secured the South American Cup in a rematch against 2008 Libertadores finalist Fluminense . Flamengo just avoided relegation from the Brazilian championship won by popular Rio de Janeiro rival Flamengos .
 Real Salt Lake won the United States Major League Soccer title for the first time . The team was founded only in 2004, and won the league title in 2010 . Real won the U.S. MLS title in 2012 .
 Salt Lake barely qualified for the play-offs but defeated the Columbus Crew and the Chicago Fire before beating the Los Angeles Galaxy on penalty kicks in the MLS Cup final that was held on November 22 .
 In the inaugural African Nations Championship, the Democratic Republic of the Congo beat Ghana 2-0 in the final on March 8, 2009, in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire . The competition was designed for players regularly appearing in African association football leagues .
 Only eight days earlier the DRC had been beaten 3-0 in a group match by the same Ghana team . The DRC lost 3-1 to Ghana in their first game in the World Cup .
 Kaluyituka Dioko and Mbenza Bedi settled the final for the DRC, scoring goals one minute into the second period and in the 74th minute, respectively .
 Oman defeated Saudi Arabia 6-5 in a penalty shoot-out in the Gulf Cup final in Oman . Hosts defeated the Saudis in the final after a scoreless draw . The final was held in Oman by the hosts Oman on Saturday .
 Neither team had conceded a goal in 90 minutes of regular play during the tournament . During the tournament neither team had scored a goal during the 90 minutes .
 Alabama knocked Texas star quarterback Colt McCoy out of the game early with an injured throwing shoulder . McCoy did not return in his final game for the Big 12 champion Longhorns .
 Ingram became the first player in Alabama history to win the Heisman Trophy . He beat Stanford running back Toby Gerhart by 28 points in the closest vote in the awards' 75-year history . Ingram is the first Alabama player to win Heisman Trophy in history .
 The sophomore rushed for a schoolrecord 1,542 yd, gaining 6. yd per carry . He scored 15 touchdowns in the regular season .
 News involving coaches dominated college football after the regular season . College coaches dominated the news after the season .
 Notre Dame fired Charlie Weis after the Fighting Irish lost their last four games . Weis replaced him with Brian Kelly, who then left Cincinnati before the Bearcats’ loss to Florida in the Sugar Bowl .
 Florida coach Urban Meyer was on the sideline during that game, just days after he said that he was taking a leave of absence to concentrate on his health . Meyer said he will be on the sidelines for the rest of the season .
 Meyer said he planned on returning to Florida for the 2010-11 season . Meyer said after beating Cincinnati, he planned to return to the team .
 Leach was let go amid allegations that he mistreated wide receiver Adam James after he suffered a concussion . Leach had been accused of mistreating James after that player suffered concussion .
 McCoy won the Maxwell Award for most outstanding player, the Walter Camp Player of the Year award . McCoy also won the Davey O’Brien National Quarterback Award, and the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award as top senior quarterback . McCoy won a total of five awards, including the
 Case Keenum led the FBS with 44 touchdown throws and 5,671 yd passing, more than 1,400 yd better than second-place Levi Brown of Troy .
 Gerhart won the Doak Walker Award as the top running back . Gerhart finished first in the FBS with 1,871 yd rushing and tied for first with 27 touchdowns on the ground .
 Notre Dame's Golden Tate won the Fred Biletnikoff Award as outstanding wide receiver . Tate caught 93 catches for 1,496 yd and 15 touchdowns for Notre Dame . Tate also won the award for 15 touchdowns .
 Nebraska defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh won the Chuck Bednarik Award and the Bronco Nagurski Trophy as defensive player of the year . Suh was a Heisman Trophy finalist and a finalist for the Heisman Trophy .
 He also earned the Outland Trophy as outstanding interior lineman and the Rotary Lombardi Award as outstanding lineman .
 Wide receiver Santonio Holmes won the Super Bowl Most Valuable Player award after making a spectacular 6-yd catch deep in the right New Orleans Saints quarterback Drew Brees scrambles to evade Dallas Cowboys defensive end Jason Hatcher in a National Football League game .
 Brees led the Saints to a franchise-record 13-3 and a spot in the NFL play-offs . The Saints won the Super Bowl for the first time in their history .
 At the National Football League annual meeting in March 2009, the competition committee adopted a number of new rules to be put into effect during the 2009-10 season . Football Football Changes the Rules .
 The most talked-about decision was not technically a new rule but rather a clarification of the existing ""roughing the passer'' regulation . The decision was made to clarify the existing regulation of the roughing of the passer .
 The clarification would prohibit a defensive player who is on the ground from lunging at the lower legs of the opposing quarterback, though hand tackles from the position would still be allowed .
 Violation of the revised rule would trigger a 15-yd unsportsmanlike-conduct penalty . Violation would trigger the penalty of 15 yards in a row .
 The adjustment became known in the media as the ""Brady Rule" after New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady famously suffered a torn anterior cruciate ligament and medial collateral ligament in his left knee in the first quarter of the 2008-09 season .
 The loss of Brady, one of the biggest stars in the NFL, hurt both the Patriots and the league . The NFL was determined to further protect its quarterbacks .
 Critics noted that the clarification would make defenders try to act against their natural instinct to pursue the ball . It would be difficult to keep in check during the fast and furious play of a typical NFL game .
 An offensive player may not use his helmet, forearm, or shoulder to deliver a blindside block . Blindside blocks are delivered to someone who does not see it coming to an opponent's head .
 Initial contact may not be made to the head of a defenseless receiver during a tackle . Initial contact must be made with the head at the start of the tackle .
 On a kickoff, the receiving team may not use a blocking wedge (players standing shoulder-to-shoulder who run upfield in front of the kick returner) of more than two players . Kick returner may not be allowed to use blocking wedge .
 During an onside kick, the kicking team cannot have more than five players on one side of the kicker pursuing the ball . The kicking team must have more . than five . players on the side of a kicker pursue the ball.
 Another notable rule change would allow replay officials to review whether a loose ball should be judged a fumble or an incomplete pass . The rule change was not related to player safety .
 This change stemmed from a prominent event of the 2008-09 season, when an apparent fumble by Denver Broncos quarterback Jay Cutler that was recovered by the San Diego Chargers was instead ruled an incomplete pass . This change also stemmed from an incident in which Jay Cutler's apparent fumble was ruled incomplete .
 Denver scored a touchdown and the game-winning two-point conversion soon thereafter . The loss nearly cost the Chargers a play-off spot with 35 seconds remaining .
 Pittsburgh Steelers become 13th defending Super Bowl champion to miss the play-offs . Steelers failed to recover from a five-game losing streak late in the 2009-10 season . Steelers are 13th Super Bowl winner to miss play-off playoffs .
 Arizona went 10-6 for its first 10-win season since 1976 . Arizona clinched the NFC West title for the second consecutive season .
 Cardinals had last made the play-offs in back-to-back seasons in 1974 and 1975 . Cardinals last played in back to-back play-off seasons in the 1970s and '80s .
 The Indianapolis Colts and the New Orleans Saints flirted with undefeated seasons . The Colts and Saints won their first 14 and 13 games, respectively, respectively .
 The Colts’ start gave them an NFL-record 23-game regular-season winning streak dating to the previous season . The Colts started the season with a winless streak of 23 games in a row .
 Indianapolis finished with an AFC-best 14-2 and won the AFC South for the sixth time in seven seasons . Quarterback Peyton Manning won the league MVP award for a record fourth time . Peyton Manning led the Colts to an AFC South title .
 New Orleans had the best record in the NFC at 13-3, setting a franchise record for victories . New Orleans set the franchise record with 13 wins .
 New Orleans quarterback Drew Brees broke the NFL record for completion percentage in a season with 70.60 percent . Brees also broke the record for a completion percentage of 70.6 percent in 2013 .
 The Minnesota Vikings finished with their best record since 1998 and won the NFC North in their first season with Brett Favre at quarterback . The Vikings won their first game of the season with Favre as quarterback .
 Minnesota signed Favre in the off-season, and the 40-year-old veteran had one of the best years of his career . Favre signed for the Minnesota Vikings in 2012 .
 Favre threw for more than 30 touchdowns for the ninth time in his 18-year career as a starter . The quarterback threw for 4,000 yards for the sixth time in a career career . He threw for a careerlow seven interceptions for the Packers .
 Quarterback Tom Brady returned from a knee injury that kept him out for almost all of the 2008-09 season to earn Comeback Player of the Year honours . Brady led the New England Patriots back to the playoffs and earned the award . Brady was named the best player of the year
 New England became the first team to finish 11-5 and still miss the play-offs in 2008-09 . New England won the AFC East after having become the first club to do so in that year .
 The Dallas Cowboys won their second NFC East title in three seasons by defeating the Philadelphia Eagles on the last day of the regular season . The Cowboys opened their new $1.15 billion stadium last week .
 Philadelphia signed quarterback Michael Vick after he spent 18 months in a federal prison for his role in a dogfighting ring . Green Bay and Philadelphia were NFC wild cards in the NFC .
 The San Diego Chargers won their final 11 games and clinched the AFC West title for the fourth straight season . The Chargers won 11 of their 11 games in the NFL season .
 The Cincinnati Bengals captured the AFC North for the first time since 2005 . Cincinnati Bengals beat the Baltimore Ravens to the first AFC North title in six years .
 An extra lineman on the field led officials to call a penalty against the Roughriders . A failed 43-yd field goal attempt by Montreal kicker Damon Duval in the game triggered a premature celebration by the Saskatchewan players .
 With no time left on the clock, Duval was given a second try at 33 yd and scored to give Montreal the win . Duval scored to help Montreal win the game .
 Cobourne and Cahoon were named the Most Valuable Player and the Canadian, respectively, respectively . The pair were honoured at the Winter Games in Montreal .
 Calvillo led the league with 26 touchdowns and a 72.0% completion rate . He was named the regular-season Most Outstanding Player for the second straight year and the third time overall . The quarterback led the NFL's most successful season with 26 touchdown touchdowns .
 Montreal also boasted the Most Outstanding Offensive Lineman, Scott Flory, and the Most Special Teams Player, kick return specialist Larry Taylor .
 Geelong won its second Australian Football League premiership in three years with a 12.9.14 victory over St. Louis . Geelong defeated St. George in a hard-fought 12. —9 .14 victory . The win was Geelong's second premiership win in
 St. Kilda won the 2009 AFL Grand Final at the Melbourne Cricket Ground in 2009 . Melbourne defeated St. Louis in the Grand Final in Melbourne .
 A crowd of 99,251 braved cold and wet conditions to see the favourites come from behind at three-quarter time to snatch victory in a thrilling last quarter . The match was played in front of a 99,000 crowd .
 Paul Chapman was voted the Norm Smith medalist as best player in the Grand Final . Harry Taylor, who helped shut down St. Louis, was also voted best player . Paul Chapman and Harry Taylor were the stars of Geelong's victory .
 Ablett won the Brownlow Medal, for the AFL’s best and fairest player in the 22-round home-and-away season, and took home the Leigh Matthews Trophy, the AFL Players’ Association most valuable player award, for a record third straight year .
 Coleman Medal for leading goal kicker went to Carlton’s Brendan Fevola with 86 goals . He scored three more in the finals . The Coleman Medal was for the best home-and-away individual honours in the AFL .
 Daniel Rich of the Brisbane Lions received the Rising Star Award for best young player . Riewoldt was named the All-Australian captain for the first time .
 The New Zealand All Blacks reclaimed their crown as the world's best Rugby Union team in 2009 . In 2009 the All Blacks overtook South Africa with a stunning finish to the year . The All Blacks won the World Rugby Union title with a win over South Africa .
 South Africa beat the British and Irish Lions 2-1 in an epic three-Test series . They then lifted the Tri-Nations crown in September . South Africa, the 2007 World Cup champion, beat the Lions in a series in South Africa .
 South Africa lost to both France and Ireland on their European tour in November . The South Africans failed to continue this form in November, losing to both Ireland and France . South Africa are currently on a four-year tour of Europe .
 New Zealand end the year as the world's number one-ranked side . South Africa and Australia were beaten by New Zealand . New Zealand ended the year ranked No 1 ahead of South Africa .
 All Blacks had one of their worst years, losing four times in 12 months . All Blacks lost three times to South Africa and once to France . New Zealand won the World Cup for the first time since 2001 .
 England finished unbeaten in Europe with wins over England, Wales, Italy, and France . They finished strong, however, going unbeaten in the tournament .
 Before that match Australia had finished at the bottom of the Tri-Nations and failed to qualify a side in the Super 14 playoffs, and lost to Scotland for the first time in 27 years . Scotland beat Australia at the All Blacks' Rugby World Cup on Saturday .
 Ireland finished the year ranked fourth in the world in 2014 . Ireland was ranked fourth overall in the European rankings .
 Ireland won its first Six Nations Grand Slam in 61 years . Under the captaincy of Brian O’Driscoll, Ireland won the tournament for the first time in six years .
 O'Driscoll also led Leinster to that club’s first Heineken Cup victory . Paul O’Connell led the Lions’ tour to South Africa before Paul O'Connell led them .
 Ireland went unbeaten through their three Tests in November to become the first major Test side since the game turned professional in 1995 to compete an entire calendar year without losing . Ireland became the first Test side in a calendar year to compete without losing in a major Test match .
 England prop Matt Stevens banned for two years after testing positive for cocaine in January . Justin Harrison banned for eight months after he acknowledged having taken the drug .
 This was followed by bans for three other players who refused to take drug tests . Three other players were also banned for failing to take tests .
 One of English rugby's most famous clubs, Harlequins, was embroiled in a scandal of its own . The club is currently embroiled in an ongoing battle with rugby union officials .
 Dean Richards, the team's director of rugby, was banned, along with wing Tom Williams, after they admitted to having used fake blood to pull off a substitution in a Heineken Cup match . Richards and Williams admitted to using fake blood for a substitution .
 The Pretoriabased Blue Bulls beat the Chiefs in the Super 14 Super 14 final . The South African side beat New Zealand's Chiefs from New Zealand in the final .
 Leicester was the English champion in Europe, and Munster picked up the Magners League . Munster won the league for the first time in their history . Leicester beat Munster in the league .
 Rugby sevens was readmitted into the Olympic Games for the first time in 2016 . The Rio de Janeiro Games will begin in 2016, beginning with the Rio Games in Rio de Rio .
 Invictus, a Hollywood blockbuster movie about South Africa’s upset victory in the 1995 World Cup, had its premiere in Los Angeles in December . South Africa won the tournament in South Africa in 1995 .
 59-year-old Tom Watson of the United States tried to win a record-equaling sixth British Open championship . Watson became golf's oldest major winner by 11 years in July 2009 . Watson's bid to become the sport's oldest ever major winner in 2009 captured the public's imagination
 Watson was one putt away from accomplishing this feat on the same Turnberry course in Scotland where he had beaten Jack Nicklaus in 1977 for the second of his five victories . Watson had had hip-replacement surgery nine months earlier than when he had won in 1977 .
 Watson’s approach went just over the green, but he putted 3 m past the hole . Watson's birdie was a par four that would have been enough to clinch the title . Watson had a birdie in the final round of the tournament, but his approach went over
 He missed his putt from there and fell into a tie with fellow American Stewart Cink at a two-under-par 278 . He missed the putt and missed a putt in the final hole .
 The four-hole playoff proved to be a one-sided affair, though, as Watson appeared to run out of steam . Cink captured his first major by six strokes .
 Kenny Perry almost rewrote the record books in the Masters Tournament at the Augusta National Golf Club in April . The 48-year-old American won the Masters tournament at Augusta National in April 2014 .
 Perry was two strokes in front with two holes to play, but bogeyed both . He finished regulation play with an aggregate score of 276, 12 under par . Perry was playing alongside compatriot Chad Campbell and Argentina's Angel Cabrera .
 Toni Watson failed by one stroke to win in regulation play at the British Open in July . Cabrera became the first South American golfer to win two majors in a row . Cabrera is the first golfer from South America to have won two majors .
 Lucas Glover, 29, had previous best performance in a major had been 20th place at the 2007 Masters . The 29-year-old American finished in 20th at the Masters in 2007 .
 Glover took the title by two strokes with a four-under-par total of 276 . The unassuming Glover won the tournament by two shots . Glover was the only player to break the course record for the first time .
 World number one Eldrick Woods has struggled in the first three majors of the season . Woods failed to make the cut for the first time since the 2006 United States Open . Woods had spent eight months recuperating from reconstructive surgery following his 2008 US Open victory . Woods finished in a
 In March he won his third event of the season, however, and after four more victories in his next 10 starts, he finally looked set to add to his major haul . The PGA championship was held at Hazeltine National in Chaska, Minn.
 Woods was two strokes in front after 54 holes at the start of the tournament . Woods had all his previous 14 major successes come when he was in the lead with a round to go . Woods was in contention for a second straight major victory .
 Yang Yong-Eun became the first Asian male golfer to win a major in 2013 . The 37-year-old was overtaken by South Korean, who won the tournament in South Korea .
 Only 478th in the world at the start of the season, Yang had already risen to 110th by the time of the PGA championship . Yang was only 478st in world at start of season, but is now 110th in world rankings .
 Yang hit 190m approach over trees and greenside bunker to within 4 m of the flag . A chip-in eagle at the 14th hole and a closing birdie were the defining moments of Yang's historic three-stroke eight-under-par victory . Yang hit a 190m
 Woods had a small measure of revenge two months later when he and Yang met again in the Presidents Cup singles at Harding Park in San Francisco . Woods and Yang were victorious in the singles in the first match in September .
 A crushing 6 and 5 victory over Yang gave Woods a perfect five wins out of five matchups as the United States defeated the International side 19V4-14V4 . Woods has now won five of his five matches against Yang .
 Italy captured its first World Cup as brothers Edoardo and Francesco Molinari rallied on the final day to beat Ireland and Sweden . Sweden and Ireland tied for second place, by one point .
 Woods captured the $10 million bonus on offer in the PGA Tour’s FedEx Cup play-off series . Woods finished the year as leading money winner for the ninth time with $10,508,163 . Woods won the FedEx Cup for the second time in three years .
 His victories included the World Golf Championships-Bridgestone Invitational for a seventh time . He won the tournament for the seventh time in his career . The tournament was held at Bridgestone in Ohio .
 On December 11, Woods announced he would be taking an ""indefinite break” from professional golf . Woods admitted that he had engaged in marital infidelities in December . Woods said he will be taking a break from golf .
 Lorena Ochoa of Mexico continued to hold the world number one position throughout 2009 . Four new Ladies Professional Golf Association major champions were crowned in 2009 .
 Brittany Lincicome was successful at the Kraft Nabisco Championship in Rancho Mirage, Calif. The American was victorious in the event . Brittany was the first woman to win a major tournament in her career .
 Scotland’s Catriona Matthew had given birth to her second child just 11 weeks earlier . She and her husband had had to flee an apartment fire in France just a week earlier .
 Rookie of the Year Shin Ji-Yai of South Korea led the LPGA money list with $1,807,334 . Ochoa was Player of the year for the first time in his career .
 The United States and British men’s amateur championships were notable for the fact that both produced their youngestever winners . The U.S. and British amateur championships are notable for their youngest ever winners .
 Matteo Manassero triumphed at age 16 in British Amateur at Formby in England . A month later he finished 13th in the British Open in England, a month later in the same month .
 17-year-old South Korean An Byeong-Hun wins United States Amateur at Southern Hills in Tulsa, Okla . ByeongHun is the son of two Olympic table tennis medalists .
 The European Tour had seen only one amateur winner prior to the 2009 season . Two more arrived in the space of four months in the last four months of 2009 .
 Danny Lee becomes Johnnie Walker Classic’s youngest-ever champion in Australia . Lee is the U.S. Amateur champion in the United States Amateur Amateur Division . Lee becomes the first time Lee has won the tournament in his native New Zealand .
 Economic pressures led to a 25% reduction (from $10 million to $7. million) in both the event prize fund and the season-ending bonus money . Ice Hockey on the Ice Hockey World Championship was held in 2007 .
 Golf has been included in the Olympic Games for the first time since 1904 . The International Olympic Committee voted in October to include the sport in the program for the Rio de Janeiro Games in 2016 . Golf is the first golf event in the Olympics to be included on the program .
 World's top 15 players and two representatives from different countries to make up 60strong fields . The plan was for men's and women’s 72-hole stroke play events involving the world’�s top 15 .
 At the 2009 artistic gymnastics world championships, China earned the most medals with nine, including six gold . China won the most gold medals at the 2009 world championships in London .
 American teammates Bridget Sloan and Rebecca Bross battled for the women’s all-around title . American teammates Sloan and Bross won the gold medal . Sloan: "It's a very difficult year for me to say goodbye to my teammates"
 Sloan won the title with a score of 57.825 to Bross’s 57.775 . Bross led after the first three rounds of competition . Sloan suffered a fall during her routine in the last rotation .
 Kayla Williams won the gold medal in the vault vault . Switzerland's Ariella Kaeslin secured the silver, and France’s Youna Dufournet earned the bronze .
 He Kexin of China defended her title, followed by Tsurumi in second place . Bross and Romania’s Ana Porgras tied for third place in uneven bars final . Heexin was the 2008 Olympic champion .
 China’s Deng Linlin won the balance beam title, ahead of Lauren Mitchell of Australia and Ivana Hong of the U.S. in second and third place .
 The floor exercise title went to British gymnast Elizabeth Tweddle . Mitchell Mitchell was second, and China’s Sui Lu was third .
 Kohei Uchimura of Japan won the men's all-around title, scoring 91.500 points . On the men’s side, he scored 91.5 points .
 Daniel Keatings took second, and Russia’s Yury Ryazanov was third . Britain's Daniel Keatsanov took second and third place .
 Russia's Yevgeniya Kanayeva wins the rhythmic gymnastics world championships in September . Sadly, the Russian gymnast was not able to compete in the finals .
 Ryazanov, age 22, was killed in a car accident just days after the world championships concluded . Ryasanov was a member of the world team that won the world championship .
 Gymnasts from China triumphed in four of the six men’s individual events . Gymnast from China won four of six individual events in the competition .
 Zhang Hongtao won the pommel horse, followed by Hungary's Krisztian Berki and Australia’s Prashanth Sellathurai . Zhang won the event for China, China and the Netherlands .
 Yan Mingyong edged out 36-year-old former champion Iordan Iovtchev of Bulgaria and Ukraine’s Oleksandr Vorobiov of Ukraine . On rings Yan Mingo edged out former champion and former champion of Bulgaria Iordan .
 Wang Guanyin took the parallel bars, with his teammate Feng Zhe in second place and third . Japan's Kazuhito Tanaka came in third .
 Zou Kai won horizontal bar, ahead of Dutch gymnast Epke Zonderland and Igor Cassina of Italy in second and third place, respectively . Zouai also took horizontal bar .
 Russian Yevgeniya Kanayeva won all six events in which she competed at the rhythmic gymnastics world championships in Mie, Japan, in September .
 She took the gold medal in all four apparatus finals (rope, hoop, ball, ribbon) and in the individual all-around competition . She also secured the highest personal score in Russia’s team gold .
 Italy pulled ahead of Belarus and Russia to win the group allaround event . Italy won the group event ahead of the Belarusians and Russia .
 Sid (“the Kid"") Crosby led his team to the 2009 Stanley Cup championship, his first NHL title and the third in the history of the Pittsburgh Penguins . Crosby captained the Penguins to the first Stanley Cup title of his career .
 The Penguins meet the Detroit Red Wings in a rematch of the 2008 final . The Red Wings had won in six games . The Penguins beat the Red Wings 6-3 in the final .
 The Wings were favoured to repeat and quickly won the first two games in the 2009 best-of-seven final . Wings were favourites to win the 2009 series . Wings won the series 3-2 in five games .
 Pittsburgh stormed back to win four of the next five games to capture the championship . The Penguins won the series 2-1 in a tense game seven .
 Pittsburgh's Canadian-born captain and his relatively young squad won the gold medal . The thrilling final was instantly hailed as a classic, and it was sweet redemption for Pittsburgh . Pittsburgh won 2-1 in a thrilling final at Soldier Field .
 Malkin became the first Russian to be presented with the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player in the play-offs . Malkin is the first player to receive the award in the NHL's history .
 Malkin was also the first player to lead the NHL in scoring in both the regular season and the play-offs since Mario Lemieux did it in 1992 . Malkin is the first Pittsburgh player to do it in both seasons and the playoffs .
 It was the third time in four seasons that the flashy Russian had topped the 50-goal threshold . It was third time this season that he'd topped the threshold .
 Ovechkin was the runaway winner of the Hart Trophy . The award was presented to the most valuable player during the regular season . He was the most successful player in the NHL this season .
 Ovechkin becomes the first repeat winner of that award since Dominik Hasek of the Buffalo Sabres won back-to-back Harts in 1997 and 1998 . The Capitals won the award for the first time since 1997-1998 .
 Ice Hockey NHL history, with 1,641 points accumulated during his 20 seasons in the NHL . Ice Hockey . NHL history . Ice hockey history .
 The 35-year-old goaltender had bounced around the minors and Europe for almost a decade before finding a home in the NHL with the Boston Bruins . Tim Thomas was one of the more heartwarming stories of the regular season .
 Thomas was presented with the Vezina Trophy as the NHL’s top goaltender . Thomas had a remarkable season, leading the league in save percentage and goals-against-average . Thomas led the NHL's top goal-scoring team .
 Columbus goalie Steve Mason named Rookie of the Year . Boston's Zdeno Chara named top defenseman and coach of the year . Boston’s Claude Julien was named Coach of the Season .
 Martin Brodeur passed the legendary Patrick Roy for the most career victories by a netminder . The New Jersey Devils goaltender returned to the lineup after a long absence due to injury . Brodeurs passed Roy for most career wins by a goalie .
 Brodeur recorded his 552nd victory on March 17, 2009, with a 3-2 victory over the Chicago Blackhawks . Brodeurs recorded 552th victory in his career .
 The NHL staged another successful Winter Classic, a regular-season game played outdoors . The Blackhawks and Detroit played at Chicago’s Wrigley Field, a historic baseball park .
 Columbus Blue Jackets qualify for a play-off berth for the first time in the eight-year history of the franchise . Columbus finished third in the NHL last season with a goal difference . The Columbus team won their first two games in the league this season .
 The Montreal Canadiens celebrated its centennial season but suffered through controversy on and off the ice . The Habs had a disappointing season in the NHL this year . The Montreal franchise has been in the spotlight for several years .
 There were reports that two of Montreal’s players were socializing with a gangster, and the owner had begun the process of selling the team . The owner of the Montreal Canadiens is believed to be selling the franchise .
 Coach Guy Carbonneau was fired mid-season and replaced by Bob Gainey . The team was swept out of the playoffs in four consecutive games by Boston in the first round .
 At the end of the season, the Phoenix Coyotes filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection . Owner Jerry Moyes said that he had lost more than $200 million since 2001 .
 The bankruptcy court had to decide who would take over the team and whether a new owner had the right to move the franchise . As a result, protracted legal proceedings ensued as a result of the bankruptcy court .
 July 1, the day that players without contracts became free agents, brought the usual frenetic roster changes . July 1 is the day players without contract become free agents . Players without contracts are allowed to leave the NFL without a contract .
 Chris Pronger was traded from Anaheim to Philadelphia . He is one of the best defensemen in the NHL . The Flyers traded him to the Eagles for $30 million .
 Russia and Canada faced off in the International Ice Hockey Federation men’s world championship in May 2009 . Just as the Stanley Cup championship was a repeat of the previous year's NHL final, so too was the IHF world championship final .
 The Russians beat the Americans 2-1 in a thrilling, well-played game that careened from one end of the ice to the other . Once again the Russians captured the gold, with a thrilling game that took place in Sochi .
 Aleksandr Radulov scored the winning goal in the second period . The goal came off a 2-on-l break . The win for the Russians was their first in the NHL .
 Oleg Saprykin had tied the game after Jason Spezza had put Canada into a short-lived 1-0 lead . Jason Spezzler had given Canada a 1-1 lead in the first half of the game .
 Both goalkeepers Ilya Bryzgalov and Dwayne Roloson were spectacular for Russia and Canada . Each made several tough saves to keep the game close .
 Ilya Kovalchuk was a dominant force throughout the game . He was doubleshifted throughout the final and spent more than half of the game on the ice .
 Kovalchuk was named Most Valuable Player and top forward of the tournament . He was named top forward in the tournament for his performance .
 Andrei Mezin of Belarus was honoured as the top goaltender at the championship . Canada’s Shea Weber was named best defenseman at the tournament .
 Sweden defeated the United States 4-2 in the bronze medal game . Carl Gunnarsson scored the winner in the third period . Sweden also defeated the U.S. in the final .
 Sweden had lost in the bronze medal match at the two previous previous world championships . It was a measure of redemption for Sweden, which had lost the bronze in the previous two previous matches .
 The Swedes won the gold medal with their backup goaltender Stefan Liv . Jonas Gustavsson returned to Sweden to be with his ailing mother . Jonas Liv was the projected starter .
 At the women’s IIHF world championship, Canada and the U.S. again faced off for the gold medal . Canada won the tournament in April .
 The Americans pulled away in the third period en route to a 4-1 win . For the second year in a row, the U.S. won the women's world championship for the third time .
 Caitlin Cahow’s second goal of the game clinched the game, clinching the Penguins victory . The game, closer and more exciting than the final score might indicate, was clinched by Cahow's second goal .
 Malkin won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player in the tournament . Malkin was named the most successful player in NHL history . He was named as the top scorer in the NHL .
 Kim Yu-Na of South Korea takes a 3-1 lead midway through the final period at the world figure skating championships in March . Kim's graceful style in the final free skate gives her a graceful style .
 The United States goaltender Jessie Vetter finished with a spectacular 39 saves . The U.S. goalie finished with 39 saves in the United States .
 Canada's Charline Labonte was named the tournament’s best goaltender . Vetter was given the nod as the all-star netminder by the journalists on hand .
 Finland’s Jenni Hiirikoski was acknowledged by the directors as the top defender . Hayley Wickenheiser was named top forward for Canada .
 Finland defeated Sweden 4-1 in the bronze medal game . Michelle Karvinen scored twice for the Finns as they won the game .
 Tavares finished the tournament with 15 points, second only to Cody Hodgson’s 16 points . Canada won its fifth consecutive gold medal, thanks to a 5-1 victory over Sweden in the final .
 Hodgson scored twice in the final game, which was played before a tournament record crowd of 20,380 spectators . Hodgson scores twice as England beat Croatia 2-0 in the tournament .
 South Korea's Kim Yu-Na established herself as the one to beat in Canada in 2009 . The 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver are on the horizon in Vancouver .
 Kim gave her homeland its first senior-level world figure skating title . Kim had a record-setting performance at the International Skating Union world championships in March .
 Kim was a stunning 16. points ahead of silver medalist Joannie Rochette of Canada . Defending champion Asada, who finished fourth behind 2007 winner, finished fourth .
 Kim also posted victories at Skate America, the Cup of China, and the Four Continents event in February .
 She failed to win her third straight Grand Prix title, however, finishing second to Asada . Asada finished second in the women's Grand Prix in Japan .
 Kim dominated at the world championships, but the American women failed to medal for a third straight year . Kim won the gold medal for the first time in three years .
 Alissa Czisny finished in 11th place and Rachel Flatt in 5th . The United States would be sending only two women to the Olympics for the second time since 1924 . The U.S. will be sending just two women for the first time in history .
 Evan Lysacek became the first American man to win the world championship since Todd Eldredge in 1996 . He is the first U.S. man to do so despite a stress fracture in his left foot to win .
 Patrick Chan of Canada captured the gold at the Four Continents in Vancouver . Patrick Chan won the silver medal in the men's individual event . Chan also won the gold medal at the Olympics in Vancouver, Canada .
 Former world champion Brian Joubert of France won the bronze in Los Angeles . Joubert won the European figure skating championships in Helsinki in January .
 Russia’s first medal of any kind at the world championships since 2005 . Ice dancers Oksana Domnina and Maksim Shabalin edged Tanith Belbin and Benjamin Agosto of the United States .
 Yuko Kawaguchi and Aleksandr Smirnov finish behind silver medalists Zhang Dan and Zhang Hao of China and Zhang Dan of China . Germany’s Aliona Savchenko and Robin Szolkowy of Germany also won gold in pairs .
 Savchenko and partner Szolkowy also won the gold at the European championships . Savchenko won the silver medal at the 2010-11 European Championships .
 American Shani Davis was again the star of the 2008-09 speed-skating season . Davis defended his World Cup titles in the 1,000 m and 1,500 m . Davis set world records in both of those distances .
 At the World Cup speed-skating final near Salt Lake City, Utah, in March 2009, Davis became the first skater to go 1,500 m in less than 1 min 42 sec, finishing with a time of 1 min 41.80 sec. Davis was the first to
 Davis wins his second straight World Cup season title in the 1,500 m, well ahead of fellow American Trevor Marsicano in second place . That win also gave Davis his second consecutive World Cup title in 1,000m . Davis also won the World Cup for the first time in
 One day after establishing the 1,500m world record, Davis set the world mark at 1 min 6.88 sec, but that record proved to be short-lived when Davis later finished in 1min 6.42 sec. Davis and Marsicano set the record in the 1
 Davis won the season title in the 1,000 m for the second straight year and the third time in four seasons . Davis won his second straight season title for the first straight year .
 Davis also set a track record with a time of 1 min 8.66 sec to win the 1,000 m and earn the overall title at the world sprint speed-skating championships held in Moscow in January . Davis set the world record for the 1m and 1m 1m
 Davis and Marsicano won gold and silver medals in the 1,500 m at the world single-distance championships in March . The event took place at the Richmond Olympic Oval, the speed-skating venue for the 2010 Vancouver Games .
 He won both the 5,000and 10,000-m races in Vancouver and at the world championships in Hamar, Nor., in February . It was his third straight straight allaround speed-skating title .
 The trimaran 1’Hydroptere, under the command of French skipper Alain Thebault, surges to a world-record sailing speed of 50.17 knots over one nautical mile .
 Christine Nesbitt and Kristina Groves won the 1,000 m and 1,500 m World Cup season titles . Groves also won the women’s title for the second straight year .
 In July five-time Olympic gold medalist Claudia Pechstein of Germany received a two-year ban because of blood doping . In July she received two-years ban for blood doping because of a blood doping scandal .
 South Korea’s Lee Ho-Suk won the 1,000-m and 1,500-m events at the ISU short-track world championships held in Vienna in March . He finished second in the 3,000 m event to take the men's overall title .
 Societe Nautique de Geneve selected the emirate of Ras al-Khaimah, in the U.A.E., as the venue, but the court later ruled that under the Deed of Gift the race had to take place either in the Southern Hemisphere
 In November SNG issued the official notice that the Cup would take place in Valencia on Feb.-25, 2010 . The Cup will take place on February 25, 2010.
 At Key West Race Week in January 2009, entries were down 30% . Three racing circles provided the superb competition expected in this nearly ideal location for winter sailing .
 A wide variety of boats participated, from supermaxis to family-crewed Swans . Supermaxis, supermaxes, super-yacht cruises were among the boats participating .
 The boats raced inshore between legs, adding points to their score in round-the-buoy events . The boats were added to their scores in round the-buoys events .
 The Transpacific Race in July allowed the supermaxis to join the fleet, with their own prizes . Supermaxis were allowed to join in July with prizes and prizes .
 A new course record was established by the 30.5-m Alfa Romeo in 5 days 14 hr 36 min. Predictably, a new race record was set by the Alfa .
 In the Fastnet Race, the big boats dominated the results . The big boats dominate the race .
 ICAP Leopard was first to finish, and the new 22-m IRC-handicapped RAN 2 won on IRC-corrected time . The new 22 m IRC-handed RAN2 won the race on IRC time .
 Banque Populaire V, the world's largest trimaran at 40 m, set a Transatlantic sailing record in 3 days 15 hr 25 min 48 sec, achieving an average speed of 32. knots . Banque populaire set the Transatlantic record of 3 days in 3
 It also established a new 24-hour distance mark, logging 907. nautical miles at an average speed of 37. knots . The ship set a new speed of 47 knots .
 Michel Desjoyeaux won his second Vendee Globe race (solo nonstop circumnavigation) in a water-ballasted monohull IMOCA 60 . He set a new record of 84 days 3 hr 9 min. Michel set new record .
 Wild Oats XI, which took its fourth consecutive first-to-finish-line honours in 2008, was second . Alfa Romeo, a 30.5-m yacht from New Zealand, is second behind Wild Oat XI, in 2008 .
 Two True was declared the overall winner after a collision protest was dismissed . Two True won the overall title in the event after a colliding protest .
 The 2008-09 Alpine skiing season saw Aksel Lund Svindal make a triumphant return to the top . Svindal won the men’s overall International Ski Federation World Cup title . The season ended with a victory for Svindal .
 Svindal had won the men’s overall crown in the 200607 series but missed most of the 200708 season owing to injuries . Svindal won the overall series in 200607 and 200708 series .
 Lindsey Vonn won the women's overall World Cup for the second straight year . Vonn showed why she is considered one of the best skiers in the world . The American won the World Cup overall in 2010 .
 Svindal held off Austria’s Benjamin Raich by only two points in 2008-09 . Svindal captured three World Cup races, and Raich won four .
 Svindal also took the supergiant slalom season title and finished in the top five in both the downhill and giant slaloms standings . Svindal won the super-giant and super-saltom season titles .
 Switzerland’s Didier Cuche secured his first GS season title after reigning as the downhill champion in 2006-07 and 2007-08 . The GS season is the first time the Swiss has won a GS title .
 France’s Jean-Baptiste Grange cruised to his first season title by 87 points . In slalom, Grange won his first title by a staggering 87 points at the top of the standings .
 Carlo Janka of Switzerland earned his first World Cup season crown in combined . Carlo Janko of Switzerland won his first combined World Cup title in combined.
 She also dominated in downhill to take her second straight season title in that discipline . She also won her first super G title in super G after winning the final race of the season .
 Overall in 2008-09, Vonn finished on the podium 16 times and won 9 World Cup races . Vonn won 9 of the 16 races in the World Cup overall . Overall overall, she won 16 of the nine World Cup titles .
 Finland’s Tanja Poutiainen, the 2005 season winner in the discipline, hung on to beat Kathrin Zettel of Austria by just seven points . The women's GS champion was not so clear-cut, but Finland's Tanja won in 2005 .
 Anja Parson, a five-time Olympic medalist, won the combined discipline by 25 points over Vonn . Parson won her seventh career World Cup season title and her first since 2005-06 .
 Canada's John Kucera secured his first world championship title, in the downhill . Canada's first ever downhill downhill title came in a straight downhill finish .
 Vonn won the gold in downhill and super G, and Zettel captured the super combined . Riesch and Holzl won the slalom and GS gold in the women's event . Zettel won the super-combination gold .
 Dario Cologna of Switzerland earned the men’s overall cross-country World Cup title in 200809 by winning the last competition of the season . The Swissman won the final race of the World Cup in the final event of the winter season .
 Norway’s Ola Vigen Hattestad won gold medals in individual sprint and team sprint at the 2009 FIS Nordic world ski championships in Liberec, Czech Republic .
 Pietro Piller Cottrer of Italy won the World Cup season title in distance in distance . Pietro Piller Cottrer won the world Cup season in distance.
 Poland's Justyna Kowalczyk ended the two-year run of Finland’s Virpi Kuitunen as overall and distance champion . Finland's Virpi was also the runner-up in the women's field .
 Petra Majdic of Slovenia won the sprint sprint title for the second straight season . Petra Majidic won the Slovenian sprint title in 2011 .
 In Nordic combined, Finland’s Anssi Koivuranta captured his first overall title . Koiviranta won seven World Cup titles in Nordic combined .
 Magnus Moan of Norway finished second, Bill Demong of America placed third for the second straight season . Magnus Moans of Norway placed second, and Bill Demongs of America came third for second straight year .
 Lindsey Van achieved the first women’s FIS ski jumping world championship in Liberec, with a winning jump of 97.5 points . American Lindsey Van won the title with a 97.3 points .
 Canadian Alexandre Bilodeau won the 2008-09 World Cup moguls title . Australia’s Dale BeggSmith had taken the crown the previous three seasons . Canada’e won the moguls crown in 2009 .
 Steve Omischl of Canada wins his third straight aerials World Cup title . Lydia Lassila of Australia takes the women's crown after having finished second in 2007-08 .
 France’s Ophelie David won her sixth straight season title in ski cross . American ski jumper Lindsey Van holds her skis aloft to celebrate after winning the gold medal in the first-ever women's world championship .
 Ski halfpipe titles went to France’s Kevin Rolland and Virginie Faivre of Switzerland . Rolland won the halfpipe title in a halfpipe event in the past .
 Austria's Siegfried Grabner won the overall World Cup snowboard title in 2008-09 . Grabner also won the season crown in parallel in parallel to the overall title .
 Markus Schairer won the snowboardcross season title for his compatriot Markus Schairesr . The snowboard cross season title went to Schairester . Markus won the title in Germany .
 Ryo Aono of Japan won the halfpipe title . Austria’s Stefan Gimpl took the big air crown for the second straight season . Austria's Stefan G implose won big air title in big air .
 Lindsey Jacobellis finished second overall for the second consecutive season and won SBX title . American finished 2nd overall in the SBX for the first time in three years . She finished second in the overall standings .
 Liu Jiayu of China was the halfpipe season champion . Amelie Kober of Germany won the women’s parallel in parallel . Liu Ji-juan of China won the half-pipe season .
 The highlight of 2009 was to have been acceptance of squash into the program for the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Olympic Games . The highlight was acceptance of the sport into the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio .
 A strong bid had been mounted accentuating the universality, competitive structure, and other benefits that made squash a contender . The squash world champions were defeated in the first round of the competition .
 Only golf and rugby sevens were accepted by the International Olympic Committee for the 2016 Games . As a result, squash would need to wait another four years to try again to qualify for the Games .
 Egypt won the men’s world team championship in Odense, Den., in October . Egypt took the title for the second time with a squad featuring three of the topfour-ranked players .
 Defending champion England lost to France in the semifinals and to Australia in the play-off for the bronze medal . England also lost to Australia for the third place in the tournament .
 Amr Shabana won his fourth World Open title when he beat defending champion Ramy Ashour . One month later in Kuwait, there was an all-Egyptian final in the men’s World Open .
 Nicol David won the women’s World Open in Amsterdam in September . Nicol David, who was based in Amsterdam, won the tournament in that city .
 She beat Australian-born Natalie Grinham, who had recently gained Dutch citizenship, 3-11, 11-6,11-3 in the final . She beat her fellow Dutchwoman, Natalie Grineham, in a three-set victory .
 This was the fourth World Open title in five years for David, the sport’s number-one-ranked woman since 2006 . David is ranked No. 1 in the world, the highest in women's tennis rankings, in 2012 .
 Egyptian double in the world under-19 individual championships in August . Swimming at junior level there was an Egyptian double at the junior level .
 13-year-old Nour El Sherbini became the sports youngest-ever world champion . She beat countrywoman Nour . El Tayeb in the final to claim the title .
 The sport of swimming was marred by widespread use of illegal performance-enhancing drugs in the 1990s . In 2009, swimming was again fraught with controversy over the use of swimsuits made from high-tech materials .
 The dispute led to the banning of nontextile swimsuits beginning in 2010 . The dispute overshadowed the performance of the athletes in major meets around the globe . The 13th FINA world championships were held in Rome on July 17-August 2 .
 It forced the incumbent FINA president to abandon his reelection bid and led to serious discussion of a radical revision of FINA’s structure . It also led to a radical discussion of the FINA structure .
 The championships produced no fewer than 43 world records in the 40 events that were contested . The championships were held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil .
 By the time the meet ended, only a handful of prechampionship world records remained intact . 73 new long-course world records had been set in 25-m short-course competitions . Another 74 new world records were set in competitions in the 25-meter competitions . Several of
 Michael Phelps opted to swim “only"" three individual events and all three relays . Phelps took a three-month break from the sport after the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games . Phelps swam in the men's individual events at the Olympics in 2008 .
 Cavic was faster for the first 50 m, and his lead over the American was even greater than in Beijing . Cavic's lead over U.S. Olympic champion was faster than Cavic had been in Beijing in 2008 .
 Phelps touched first in 49.82 sec, just 0.13 sec ahead of Cavic . The two men became the first in history to crack the 50-sec barrier . That just meant a greater challenge for Phelps .
 Phelps racked up more gold as a member of the three U.S. relay teams . Phelps won more gold than any other relay team member .
 Paul Biedermann proved that on any given day, no one is unbeatable . Phelps’s superb performance proved that no one can be unbeatable on any day .
 Cielo took the sprint double, charging through the 50-m freestyle in 21.08 sec, just off world record Fred Bousquet’s world record . The 50-meter freestyle was just 0.13 sec ahead of Bousquet in the race
 Federica Pellegrini and Britta Steffen provided much of the fireworks in the women's competition . Italy’s Federica Perez and Germany’�s Steffen were the stars of the show .
 Swimming World’s female World Swimmer of the Year . Pellegrini swam to two barrierbreaking victories in Rome and narrowly beat Steffen over Steffen .
 Kukors had not even made the United States team in this event at the national trials but was added to the event squad when another swimmer decided not to compete in it . Astonishingly, he had not made the U.S. team in the event at national trials .
 The sport of swimming faced one of its most difficult challenges in 2009 . Athletes, coaches and swimsuit companies squared off over the growing use of performance-enhancing high-tech swimsuits .
 The most radical version of this swimsuit line was a full bodysuit that covered the swimmer from neck to ankles . The most extreme version of the suit was a bodysuits that covered all of the body .
 Swimming had seen full bodysuits before the LZR, most notably when Australia's Ian Thorpe set world records in 2000-02 while wearing Adidas's bodysuit .
 There was no convincing evidence that the suit made anyone faster, and in October 1999 FINA had approved the bodysuits for competition . FINA approved the suit for competition in 1999 .
 Several companies created new bodysuits for the 2000 and 2004 Olympic Games, but post-Olympic analyses cast doubt on any claims of performance enhancement .
 LZR-related world records were set within days of the swimsuit's introduction . It was the first in what became a torrent of increasingly meaningless records . The swimsuit is now the world's most popular swimsuit .
 At the 2009 FINA world championships, 40 events were contested and 43 world records were unceremoniously overthrown . The 2009 world championships were held in Shanghai, China .
 By the end of 2009, the total number of world records broken in those 23 months stood at a staggering 255 .
 Critics claimed that the suits undermined such values as hard work, superb conditioning, and technical mastery . Some coaches and sportswriters claimed that they undermined those values of the past .
 FINA officials dismissed the dissenters as misguided and pointed to innovations that transformed other sports . The fibreglass pole in pole vaulting and the dapskate in speed skating are examples of innovations that have transformed sports .
 High-tech swimsuits kept evolving, especially as more manufacturers entered the fray .
 U.S. delegation offered motion to allow only textile swimsuits, eliminate compression-enhancing features such as zippers . The arms remained uncovered for both sexes, with arms remaining uncovered .
 The ban was to become effective on Jan. 2010, bringing to a close the era of the performanceenhancing high-tech suits . The ban will be effective in 2010 .
 Maglione promised to stay in office for only one term . Larfaoui withdrew from the contest, and Maglioni was elected president in July .
 Chinese divers won every international meet that they entered in 2009 and then overwhelmed the rest of the world's divers at the world championships in Rome . They took gold in 7 of the 10 events and took 14 medals of a possible 16, including seven golds .
 Guo Jingjing won both 3-m springboard and individual individual and (with teammate Wu Minxia) the synchronized crowns . It is the fifth consecutive world championship win for China .
 Chinese veterans Chen Ruolin and Wang Xin won the 10m synchronized event . Chinese veterans also won 10m synchronised event in the 10-metre event .
 Paola Espinosa won her country’s first-ever diving world championship gold medal . She came from eighth place to upset Olympic champion Chen Ruolin decisively in the 10-m final . China's Olympic champion Ruolin won the gold medal for the first time .
 In the 1-m springboard, Russia’s Yuliya Pakhalina scooped the gold . In the non-Olympic event, she won the gold medal in the springboard event .
 Tom Daley pulled off the biggest upset in the men’s competition . The 15-year-old sensation pulled off an upset to win the gold medal .
 Daley jumped from fourth to first on his two final dives in the 10-m platform . Daley received eight perfect 10s from the judges . He defeated China’s Qiu Bo and Zhou Luxin to win the title .
 Qin Kai nipped teammate Zhang Xinhua and Australia’s Matt Mitcham to take the 1-m springboard . Qin Kai beat teammate Xinhua Xinhua to the title . Australia's Mitcham also took the 1m spring board .
 Chong proved his Olympic gold medal in the 3-m springboard was not a fluke by winning the event in Rome . Chong proved he had the ability to win the event at the Olympics in 2012 . Chong won the gold medal at the 2012 Olympics in the same event .
 The synchronized events showcased the near-perfect technique of the Chinese divers . The synchronized event was a near perfect display of the divers .
 China's Huo Liang and Lin Yue triumph in 10-m contest . The United States nipped Cuba for the silver medal . Qin Kai and Wang Feng won the 3-m 3m event .
 Russian athletes captured six of the seven gold medals at the 13th FINA synchronized swimming world championships in Rome . Russian athletes nearly duplicated their sixgold, one-silver effort at the 2007 world championships . Russia won six gold medals, one silver, and one gold medal each at the
 Spain, with a total of seven medals, topped Russia in the final standings . Spain topped Russia with seven medals . Russia had seven medals in all competitions .
 China, led by the Jiang twins—Tingting and Wenwen, was a distant third with one silver and four bronze medals . Canada and Italy were also in the top three, followed by China .
 Swimmers from 42 countries competed in the synchronized events in Rome . 10 countries, including Japan and the U.S., failed to medal in the event .
 Three Russians, all veterans with long international careers, topped individual medal count . Three Russians topped the individual medal list .
 Gemma Mengual, a 32-year-old Spaniard, took home one gold and four silver medals . Mengual also took home four silver and four gold medals .
 Roger Federer of Switzerland was the 2009 Player of the Year in tennis . Federer became only the sixth man in history to win all four Grand Slam events . Federers was the only man in tennis history to have won all four Slams .
 Juan Martin del Potro of Argentina beat Roger Federer of Switzerland in the United States Open men's singles final on September 14 . Del Potro set an all-time record for men when he captured the All-England title in England in September .
 The world No 1 finished 2014 at number one in the world in the Association of Tennis Professionals rankings for the fifth time in a six-year span . He then finished the year at No 1 in the World in the ATP rankings for fifth time .
 Juan Martin del Potro of Argentina garnered his first Grand Slam title at the United States Open . The towering 2-m (6-ft 6in) de Potro won the tournament at the U.S. Open in New York .
 Rafael Nadal becomes the first Spaniard to win the Australian Open title on a hard court . Nadal is the first to win a major tournament title on an Australian Open hard court in his first major tournament .
 Serena Williams of the United States secured the Australian Open and Wimbledon crowns . Williams ended a year as the Women’s Tennis Association number one player for only the second time in her career .
 Russian Svetlana Kuznetsova took her second career major singles title, winning the French Open . It was her second major title in her career, winning her second French Open title .
 Kim Clijsters came out of a 27-month retirement to win a second U.S. Open in only her third tournament back in action . The Belgian won the tournament for the first time in 27 months . Clijster won her second United States Open title with a straight-
 The highestpaid woman on the Sony Ericsson WTA Tour was Williams, with $6,545,586 . Williams was the highest paid female player on the tour in 2013 .
 Federer was the top prize-money winner on the ATP World Tour, at $8,768,110 . Federer won the tournament at a total of $8.768,000 .
 Nadal beats Federer 7-5, 3-6, 7-6 7-4 7-7, 6-2 in the final . Nadal and Federer put on a stupendous display of shot-making craftsmanship .
 Nadal beats Roger Federer in Grand Slam finals for the third time in a four-tournament span at the majors . The victory gave the Spaniard a 5-2 edge over his chief rival in grand slam finals . Nadal has won 5 of his Grand Slam titles over Fed
 Nadal was stretched to his limits against Fernando Verdasco in a semifinal showdown . Nadal won 6-3, 6-4, 6.5, 7-6 (7-5), 6-5 (7.5) Nadal will face either Nadal or
 Nadal was down at 4-4, 0-30 in the fifth set but rallied for a 6-7, 6-4 win over Novak Djokovic . Nadal won 6-6, 7-6 , 6-3, 6 .4, 6.7
 Number two seed Serena Williams crushed third-seeded Dinara Safina of Russia 6-0, 6-3 in the women’s championship match . Number three seed Safina was the third seed of Russia .
 Williams was on the brink of defeat in her quarterfinal with eighth-seeded Kuznetsova . Williams escaped to win the match 5-7, 7-5, 6-1 in the second set . The Russian served for the match in the first set, but Williams
 Nadal has never been beaten at Roland Garros and has yet to lose a best-of-five-set match anywhere on clay . Heading into his fourthround contest against Robin Soderling of Sweden, Nadal had never lost a match on clay in Paris . Nadal
 Federer had lost to Nadal four years in a row at Roland Garros (including three consecutive finals) Nadal also struggled in the fourth round . The world No 1 lost to the Spaniard in the final four years of his career .
 Federer trailed by two sets to love and was down break point at in the third set . The Swiss champion rallied to beat Tommy Haas in five sets . Federer's forehand winner saved the Swiss champion .
 He beat Soderling 6-1, 7-6, 6-4 in the final . He survived another five-set skirmish with del Potro in the semifinal . He then beat the world No. 1 seed seed 6-2, 7.6 and 6-
 Number seven seed Kuznetsova beats second-seed Williams 7-6, 5-7, 7-5 in quarterfinal match of the tournament for the women . American Williams was the second seed in the quarterfinals of the women's event .
 Top seed Safina Kuznetsova defeats 6-4, 6-2 in the final at Roland Garros in Paris . Topseeded Safina is seeking a second straight French Open title match . She is the first woman to win a French Open since 2004 .
 Roger Federer beats Andy Roddick in Wimbledon final for third time in a final in a row . Federer had taken only one set in their two previous title matches on Centre Court .
 Andy Murray will miss out on becoming the first British man to reach the final at Wimbledon since Bunny Austin lost to American Don Budge in 1938 . Roddick defeated Andy Murray in straight sets to reach his first Wimbledon final .
 Roddick gave one of the signature performances of his career, taking the opening set and leading 6-2 in a pivotal second-set tie-break . Federer collected six points in a row to salvage the set .
 The 77-game match was the longest-ever Wimbledon final at Wimbledon . The 30-game fifth set was likewise the longest ever fifth set . The match was also the longest in the 77-match final .
 Federer served a career-best 50 aces as he collected his record 15th Grand Slam title . American Pete Sampras, who had won 14 majors between 1990 and 2002, watched in the stands . Federer won his 15th Slam title with a 6-4 6-3
 Serena Williams beats her sister Venus in the final 7-6 , 6-2 . Serena wins her third championship singles title . Venus Williams wins her first title in her career .
 Serena, who did not lose her serve once in the match, defeated her older sibling for the sixth time in eight head-to-head clashes in the majors . Serena defeated her sister in straight sets for the first time in a row .
 Venus beats Safina 6-1, 6-0, and Serena beats Yelena Dementiyeva 6-7, 7-5, 8-6 . Serena battles back from match-point down to beat Yelena in the semifinals . Venus beats top-seeded
 Argentina’s del Potro lived up to the expectations of many authorities by securing the last major championship of the year . Del Potro secured the title with a straight-sets victory over Roger Federer at Wimbledon .
 In the semifinals he blasted Nadal off the court 6-2, 6-1, 6, 2-2 in the semifinals . In the final he toppled Federer 3-6, 7-6 and 4-6 in the final . He also beat Federer in the other
 Track and Field knocked out that illustrious duo in the same Grand Slam event . Track and field knocked out the same illustrious duo . It was the first time they had been knocked out of the same event .
 Federer served at 5—4, 30-0 in the second set but was surprisingly broken . Federer, in pursuit of a sixth consecutive United States Open title .
 In the fourth set, Federer was twice just two points away from prevailing, but del Potro held on to get the win . Federer won the first set in four sets .
 The unseeded Clijsters, a wild card, played arguably the best tennis of her career to regain the crown that she had garnered four years earlier . She was unseeded and unseeded to win her first title in four years .
 Serena Williams will play Marion Bartoli of France, Venus Williams and Chinas Li Na in the semifinals . The Belgian will play Serena in the last four of the tournament . Serena will play Venus in the other semifinal .
 Williams verbally lashed out at the lineswoman who made that call . Williams was penalized for a point penalty because she had earlier been warned for racket abuse .
 Williams was fined $10,000 by the United States Tennis Association for her tirade . She was later assessed an additional $82,500 by the International Tennis Federation . Williams was put on probation for two years and warned that another “major offense” in that span would result
 Nikolay Davydenko defeated Federer for the first time in a straight-set final in London . The Russian beat del Potro in straight-sets in the ATP World Tour Finals final in November .
 Serena Williams beats her sister Venus in the final of the Sony Ericsson Championships in Doha, Qatar . Serena wins 6-6 6-3 6-4 6-5 6-7 7-6 victory over sister Venus . Venus Williams wins the women's singles final in
 Italy beat the United States 4-0 in the Fed Cup final held in Calabria, Italy . Francesca Schiavone and Flavia Pennetta led Italy to the title .
 Spain defeats the Czech Republic 5-0 in the final in Barcelona . Spain wins its second straight Davis Cup in a row . Nadal and Ferrer helped Spain to the title .
 Usain Bolt of Jamaica made the 2009 track and field season his own . He improved his individual sprint world records and won three world championships golds . Bolt won three golds at the 2009 world championships .
 Nine meet records were broken at the International Association of Athletics Federations world championships in 2009 .
 Bolt attributed his early jump to playful competition with his Antiguan training partner, Daniel Bailey, to see who could achieve a faster reaction time . Bolt said the early jump was due to a playful competition between him and Bailey .
 Bolt incurred no penalty, but a new rule to take effect in 2010 would trigger immediate disqualification for any false start . Bolt incur no penalty but new rule will take effect next year . New rule would disqualify Bolt from the 2010 Olympics .
 Bolt propelled his 1.96-m frame from the blocks with phenomenal speed . With a legal 0.9m/sec wind behind him, the 0.96m frame was propelled to the top of the world . Bolt was the first person in the world to win a gold medal
 Gay held a 0.01-sec margin over Olympic silver medalist Richard Thompson of Trinidad and Tobago as Gay ran in fourth place . Gay led the field with his fourth stride, at which point his closest competitors had already taken five steps .
 Gay raced into second place but proved powerless to stop Bolt from widening his lead to more than 1. m (nearly 5 ft) at the finish . Over the next 20 m, Gay raced in second place, but was unable to stop the Jamaican .
 Gay’s time of 9.71 sec left former world record holder Asafa Powell of Jamaica a thoroughly beaten third . Bolt's 9.60-sec barrier paled behind Bolt's rush under the 9.59 sec barrier . Gay's time was 9.70 secs,
 Bolt shattered the record by 0.11 sec with a 6-m winning margin . Bolt was comfortably leading Shawn Crawford at the halfway point with a split of 9.92 sec .
 For the first time in history, five finishers bettered 20.00 secs in one race . Five runners bettered the 20secs in the first race of the day .
 Bekele sprinted away from Zersenay Tadese of Eritrea on the last lap of the 10,000-m final to win in 26 min 46.31 sec, a meet record that lowered his own standard set in 2003 .
 The victory earned the 27-year-old Bekele a clean sweep of all world and Olympic gold medals in the event since 2003 . It is the first clean sweep in the history of the Ethiopian 5000m steeplechmurders .
 In the 5,000 m, Bekele outkicked defending champion Bernard Lagat of the United States to match his double victory of the Beijing Olympics . He becomes the first man to win the long-distance track double at a world championships .
 Anita Wlodarczyk of Poland set the only women's world record in Berlin in the hammer throw . Anita set the world record for the women's hammer throw in Berlin, Germany .
 At the IAAF world championships in August, Anita Wlodarczyk of Poland set the only women’s world record, a stunning 77.96 m in the hammer throw . The defending champion Betty Heidler, the defending champion, raised the women's hammer throw at
 Volleyball the meet record by 7 cm in the qualifying round to 75.27 m (246 ft 11 in) and subsequently took the lead from Wlodarczyk in the first round of the final . The meet record was set in the final of the World Championships . Vol
 In the second round, Wlodarczyk spun the hammer out to 77.96 m to take gold and the world record . In the first round, he spun out 77.95 m to win gold and take gold .
 While celebrating, Wlodarczyk stepped on the track's curb and sprained her ankle so badly that she was forced to skip the rest of the season . The injury was so severe it forced her to skip her entire season .
 Semenya won the championship in 1 min 55.45, flexing her arms in a bodybuilder’s pose as she crossed the line . Jepkosgei advanced to the semifinal on appeal and then earned a place in the final .
 Semenya skipped the postrace press conference and returned home to a heroine’s welcome .
 A media frenzy began with a leaked report that the IAAF had conducted sex tests on the powerfully built 18-year-old Semenya to determine if she was really a woman . The IAAF has denied that the report was true .
 ASA Pres. Pres. Semenya was suspended from the IAAF after the incident . She was the first woman to be banned from running for more than a year .
 Leonard Chuene angrily denied knowing that sex-verification testing was conducted on Semenya in South Africa before the championships . Chuene said he did not know about the sex-test taking place before the championship .
 The furor grew more heated after press reports alleged that testing had shown Semenya to have an intersex condition . Press reports alleged Semeny had a condition called intersex .
 The unconfirmed accounts claimed that she had internal male genitalia and testosterone levels three times higher than normal for a woman . Levels that could impart an athletic advantage could be attributed to her athletic advantage .
 The IAAF reserved comment on the reports until its council meeting in November . The reports will be made public until November .
 IAAF says medical testing of Semenya was not complete and that the council would not discuss the case until further notice . Two days before that meeting, IAAF issued a statement saying that medical testing had not been completed .
 South Africa’s sports ministry announced that the IAAF had agreed to let Semenya keep her medal and prize money . The IAAF declined to comment on the claim, but the South African sports ministry said it would let her keep the medal .
 The Golden League series, in which athletes winning their event at each of six elite European invitational meets split a $ 1 million jackpot, had its swan song in 2009 . Athletes winning at each event in each of the series split $1 million .
 Bekele extended his unbeaten streak at 5,000 m to 17 finals and his streak at 10,000m to 12 finals . He extended his winning streak at 5000m to 10m and 5m m finals .
 Valerie Vili stretches her unbeaten skein to 25 finals, the longest at the elite level in any individual event . Vili is the reigning Olympic and world champion in the shot-putter event .
 The IAAF was to replace the Golden League and the WAF in 2010 with a new Diamond League . The Diamond League will be a series of 14 meets in Asia, Europe, the Middle East, and the U.S. with $6. million in prize money on offer .
 Isinbayeva, who had not lost for six seasons, placed second behind Poland’s Anna Rogowska at the London Grand Prix meet in July, and at the world championships she no-heighted . She placed second in the women's final at the World Championships in
 The result came from retesting of Beijing Olympic samples after a test for the previously undetectable drug had been developed .
 Ramzi proclaimed his innocence, but in November the IOC stripped him of his medal . Ramzi was stripped of the medal in November . The IOC stripped Ramzi of his gold medal .
 Ethiopia’s Haile Gebrselassie did not run the fastest marathon of the year . For the first time since 2004, he did not win the marathon in that year .
 Duncan Kibet narrowly defeated his countryman James Kwambai with the same time, 2 hr 4 min 27 sec, in Rotterdam, Neth. That honour went to 31-year-old Kenyan Duncan Kebet, 31, who narrowly defeated fellow Kenyan James Kw
 No marathoner besides Gebrselassie had ever run faster . The pair spearheaded an onslaught of fast times in the marathon .
 The 25 sub-2-hr 7-min marathons run in 2009 races accounted for a quarter of history’s total . The 25 races in 2009 were the first to run in sub 2-hour 7-minute races in history .
 The women’s title went to Irina Mikitenko of Germany, a repeat series winner, who won in London and placed second in Chicago .
 Kenya and Ethiopia shared top honours at the world cross country championships . Kenya won the world championships in Amman, Jordan, in March .
 Kenya won three of the four team titles, including the senior men's and women’s . Florence Kiplagat won the individual title, which went to her as well as the senior women's individual title . Kenya also won the team title, including senior men and women's
 Ethiopia won the other three individual titles and the junior women’s team crown . Ethiopia won all four individual titles . Ethiopia also won the junior team title .
 Jen Kessy and April Ross defeated Juliana Felisberta Silva and Larissa Franca of Brazil to win the women’s gold medal at the 2009 Federation Internationale de Volleyball beach volleyball world championships in Stavanger, Nor.
 Talita Antunes and Maria Antonelli beat fellow Brazilians Ana Paula Connelly and Sandra Pires Tavares to earn the bronze . Talita and Maria won the bronze medal .
 Kessy and Ross had finished in 37th place at the 2007 world championships . Ross finished 37th at the world championships in 2007 .
 Brazil recaptured the world’s top position in both men and women's indoor volleyball . Brazil won the world's top ranking in indoor volleyball in 2012 . Brazil also won the gold medal in the men's and womens' event .
 Brazil wins its sixth title in the past seven World League competitions and its eight overall . It was Brazil's sixth World League title in seven competitions .
 Sergio Dutra Santos of Brazil was named the tournament Most Valuable Player . Sergio Santos was named Brazil's most successful player in Brazil .
 Brazil’s women won their eighth FIVB Grand Prix title . Brazil posted a perfect 5-0 record during the final round of the final event in Tokyo . Brazil won the title with a perfect record of five matches .
 Brazil closed out the calendar with a victory at the FIVB Grand Champions Cup men’s tournament in Japan . Brazil won the tournament with a 3-1 win over the Netherlands .
 In the women's competition an undefeated Italian team upset the defending Brazilians . Defending Brazilians settled for second place in the competition .
 The 2009 International Weightlifting Federation world championships were held Nov.-29, 2009, in Koyang city, S.Kor .
 Six senior world records were broken, four of them in the women’s division . Four of the six world records broken were broken by the women .
 In the women’s competition the 63 medals were all won by athletes from Asia and Europe . The 63 medals all were won by Asian and European athletes .
 China finished with the most medals, 16 . Kazakhstan had more gold in addition to 1 bronze . As in past years, China won more gold than Kazakhstan .
 Other countries with multiple medals included Russia with 9, Turkey with 8, and Armenia and South Korea with 6 each . Russia, Turkey and Armenia also had multiple medals .
 In September 2009 Russia earned four gold medals and easily won the Federation Internationale des Luttes Associees men’s world freestyle wrestling championships, held in Heming, Den. Russia won the tournament .
 Selcuk Cebi at 74 kg and Nazmi Avluca at 84 kg. Turkey won gold medals in 74 kg, 84 kg and 74 kg . Turkey also won gold in the 74kg and 84kgs .
 Asashoryu began the year with a win in the Hatsu (New Year’s) Basho in January and won the Aki Basho (September) in September . He has also won two other Basho titles this year .
 Harumafuji had changed his shikona from Ama in late 2008 upon his promotion to ozeki rank . The ozeki won the Natsu (summer Basho) Basho in May . Harumfuji won the summer Basho .
 popular ozeki Kaio completed his 98th basho, eclipsing the record that was formerly held by Takamiyama . Despite a mediocre win-loss record in 2009, Kaio finished with a mediocre .
 Takamiyama, born Jesse Kuhaulua, retired as sumo’s first Hawaiian stablemaster in June . He handed his coaching duties to Ushiomaru, who is now the stablemaster of Ushimaru . TakamiYama retired from sumo in
 Russian freestyle wrestler Besik Kudukhov throws Zalimkhan Huseynov of Azerbaijan in the 60-kg final at the world wrestling championships in September . Besik, Besik and Besik won the gold medal in the freestyle freestyle final .
 Lin Dan of China won his third straight world badminton title . Lin Dan has won three straight world titles in a row . He is the first Chinese player to win three straight titles .
 The Tigers were eliminated from the National League for the first time in 2009 . The Tigers won't be the first team to win a National League title since 2008 . The Angels won the World Series in 2008 .
 Japan Series* Year Winning team Losing team Results 2007 Chunichi Dragons Nippon-Ham Fighters 4-1 . 2008 Seibu Lions Yomiuri Giants 4-3 . 2009 Seibibu Lions Yomouri Giants Nippo-Giants 4-2 . 2009
 Oklahoma City 23 59 31 Sacramento 17 65 48 Memphis 24 58 30 Year Winner Runner-up *Qualified for play-offs . Clippers 19 63 46 *New Orleans 49 33 5 World Basketball Championship .
 Luge World Championships* Year Men Women Doubles Team 2007 2008 2009 D Moller F Loch F Loch T Hufner E Hamlin P Leitner, A Resch A Florschiitz, T Wustlich G Plankensteiner, O Haselrieder
 Wang's team upset Sweden in the final for China’s first world curling title . Wang’ team upset the Swedes to win their first world title in a row .
 Ireland Irish Two Thousand Guineas Mastercraftsman J Murtagh Irish Derby Fame and Glory . Irish Oaks Sariska J Spencer Irish Champion Stakes Sea The Stars M Kinane Prix Jean-Luc Lagardere Grand Criterium Siyouni .
 Lemaire Hong Kong Gold Cup Viva Pataca D Beadman Singapore Airlines International Cup Gloria De Campeao T Pereira Canada Queen’s Plate Stakes Eye of the Leopard .
 Foil Epee Sabre 2007 V Vezzali B Heidemann Ye. Ye. Foil Foil Sabre . Ye. Vezzli B Heemann Ye . Ye . Vezzalli B Heiemann Ye was the first person to win a gold medal in
 Netchayeva Poland France France France 2008* V Vezzali B Heidemann M Zagunis Russia France Ukraine 2009 A Shanayeva L Shut ova M Zaggunis Italy Italy Italy Ukraine 2009 V. Zagunski was the Olympic champion in 2008
 Year Winner Runner-up 1998 Netherlands Spain 2002 Germany Australia 2006 Germany Australia . World Cup Field Hockey Championship—Women Year Winner runner-up .
 1998 France 2002 Brazil 2002 Brazil 2006 Italy* 3 Brazil 0 2 Germany 0 1 France 1 *Won on penalty kicks . 2006 Italy won on penalties . France won on penalty kick .
 FIFA World Cup—Women Year Result 1999 United States* 2003 Germany 2003 Germany 2007 Germany *Won on penalty kicks . Germany beat the United States on penalties .
 2008-09 FC Barcelona 2 Manchester United 0 . 2008-2009 Shakhtar Donetsk f 2 Werder Bremen (Werder) *Won on penalty kicks . 2009-09 Shakhtar St Petersburg (St Petersburg) FC FC Barcelona f 2 . 2008/09 Shak
 The Libertadores de America Cup has been awarded the Copa America Cup for the first time since 2001 . The tournament has been held in Brazil, Mexico and Colombia .
 World Gymnastics Championships—Women Year All-around team All-Around individual Balance beam 2007 United States S Johnson N Liukin 2008* China N Liuukin S Johnson 2009 not held B Sloan Deng Linlin Year Uneven parallel bars Vault Floor exercise 2007 K S
 Ice dancing champions Oksana Domnina and Maksim Shabalin go for the gold at the world figure skating championships . The Russian team won the gold in the ice dancing competition .
 Islanders 26 47 9 - Tampa Bay 24 40 18 - Islanders . Islanders 26 . 47 9 Tampa Bay . Islanders . 24 .
 Nashville, Nashville, St. Louis, Minnesota, Dallas and Dallas all qualify for play-offs . Los Angeles, Colorado, Los Angeles and Los Angeles also qualify for the playoffs .
 Shani Davis of the United States races to a 1,000-m world record of 1 min 6.42 sec at a speed-skating World Cup event .
 Davis set three world records and won the men's world speed-skating sprint championship in 2009 . Davis won the world sprint world championship in 2010 .
 World Judo Championships—Women Year Open weights 48 kg 52 kg 57 kg 2005 2007 2009 M Shintani M Tsukada Tong Wen * Y Bermoy R Tamura Tani T Fukumi Li Ying Shi Junjie .
 World Rowing Championships—Women The Boat Race* Year Single sculls Min:sec Coxless pairs min:sec Winner's time Margin of 2007 Ye. Ye.
 Cambridge 79, Oxford 75, 2008* C Evers-Swindell, 7:07.32 Belarus 6:39.89 1 draw . Cambridge 79-Oxford 75, in 2008, in a draw .
 2007 Great Britain 6:30.81 United States 6:17.20 2008* China 6:16.06 U.S. 6:05.34 2009* Ukraine 6:18.41 United States . 2009 M Fularczyk, J Michalska 6:47
 Dempsey Great Britain tWinner under Offshore Rating Rule scoring . RS:X N Dempsey Great British tWinner . Dempsey Great Great Britain . Dempsey tWinner in Offshore Review Rule scoring.
 RS:X M Alabau Spain Year Winning yacht Owner/Skipper tWinner under IRC scoring . RS: X M Alabeau Spain year Winning yacht owner/skipper skipper .
 Jensen Australia 2. metre J Ruf 2 metre J. Ruf United States 2 metre Jensen Australia . Jensen won the overall title based on corrected time . Overall winner based on correct time .
 Aamodt A. Parson J Mancuso M Dorfmeister 2007 M Matt A Svindal P Staudacher S Zahrobska N Hosp A Parson Austria 2009 M Pranger C Janka D Cuche M Riesch K Holzl
 World Alpine Skiing Championships were held in 2006 and 2009 . A Deneriaz M Dorfmeister, A Parson, A Svindal, A Zettel, J. Kostelic, A. Kucera and A. Zettel were Olympic champions in 2006 .
 World Nordic Skiing Championships—Men Year Sprint Team sprint Double pursuit 15 km 30 km 50 km Relay 2006* B Lind Sweden Sweden A Veerpalu Ye. Ye. VeerPalu Ye . Ye was the first person to win a gold medal at the World Skiing
 Aksel Lund Svindal of Norway won the gold medal he won at the world championships in 2007 . Svindal won the world ski championship gold medal at the 2010 Winter Olympics .
 Ye. Taylor, J Warmer, K Clement, A Felix, M Wineberg, L Demus, S. Richards, L. Merus, D Thomas and Y. Rybakov pole vault . Ye. Thomas pole vaulted for the first time in his career .
 Ye. Gushchina, O Krasnomovets, T Levina, N Nazarova, N Antyukh) O Zykina) high jump Ye. O Zy-Zeykina (O Zy-Nazarova) high jumped Ye.
 Many countries are suffering from the effects of a global recession, many countries are struggling with high unemployment and SHRINKING budgets .
 Germany prepared festivities in remembrance of the fall of the BERLIN WALL 20 years earlier . China marked the 60th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic .
 The United Nations in 2009 continued its efforts to deal with important global issues on many fronts . The U.N. was forced to do so in the context of the continuing global economic and financial crisis .
 It was the UN Year of Climate Change, but little progress toward a comprehensive global climate change agreement emerged . Little progress was made in the UN year of climate change . The United States and the United Kingdom are the world's only two countries .
 The global food crisis persisted, but few new concerted global actions were targeted for dealing with it coherently . Food crisis has been a global problem for years, but little progress has been made in tackling it .
 Afghanistan rose to the top of the global security agenda as insecurity and the death toll there mounted significantly during the year . The death toll in Afghanistan has risen significantly in 2014 .
 Progress toward attainment of the Millennium Development Goals stagnated along with the global economy . Progress toward achieving the goals has stagnated since the 1990s .
 2009 marked the return to greater engagement in multilateral affairs of the United States, led by the new administration of Pres. Barack Obama .
 The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan continued to dominate global peace and security news . CNN's John Defterios reported on the wars in both countries .
 Much of the violence centred on and the follow-up to the presidential elections . The violence occurred in the lead-up and follow up to the elections in 2012 .
 On October 28 five staff members of the UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan were killed in a suicide attack in Kabul . This fact was highlighted by the attack on October 28, which killed five UN staff members in Afghanistan .
 UNAMA estimated that Afghan civilian deaths exceeded 2,000 during the first 10 months of the year . UNAMA estimates that Afghan civilians died in the last year's fighting .
 The UN Assistance Mission for Iraq continued its work in support of political reconciliation, institution building, and establishment of the rule of law in the country .
 At the end of the year, the UN fielded 17 peace missions with more than 117,000 troops, police, and civilians . The UN fielded a total annual budget of nearly $7. billion .
 The UN Security Council authorized the deployment of 5,500 uniformed personnel to replace the European Union EUFOR military force in January . Highlighting the situation in Africa, the Security Council in January approved the deployment . EUFOR will replace the EUFOR .
 By the end of November 2009, the hybrid U.N./African Union Mission in Darfur had increased to 19,588 uniformed personnel .
 The primary mandate of the force remains the protection of civilians and humanitarian assistance providers . The force is tasked with monitoring the implementation of agreements and the development of political processes .
 As in 2008, UNAMID’s work remained hampered by the lack of transport and aviation assets and logistic support . UNAMid's work was hampered by a lack of transportation and aviation support .
 The UN Mission in the Sudan continued its main mandate to help resolve core issues that stood in the way of implementation of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement . The mission continues its main mission to help .
 By December UNMIS, with 9,955 uniformed personnel in the field, had nearly reached its authorized level of 10,000 . By December, UNMis had 9,000 uniformed people in the force .
 In November 2008 the Security Council authorized the expansion of the force by 3,000 military and police . 20,255 uniformed personnel were in the field in November 2009 .
 UN Operation in Cote d'Ivoire stood at more than 8,000 in October 2009 . Meanwhile, the UN operation stood at over 8,500 in October .
 At year’s end the Security Council approved sanctions on Eritrea for aiding Somali insurgents and continuing its conflict with Djibouti . Eritrea has been accused of aiding Somalis in Somalia .
 Preventative diplomacy and the use by Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon of special and personal representatives and envoys became ever-increasing tools in the UN’s peace-building efforts . Preventative diplomatic efforts are becoming increasingly important in the United Nations .
 In 2009 such special envoys were actively engaged in more than 30 countries or regions . More than two dozen other UN emissaries were assigned to deal with specific global policy issues .
 The importance placed on postconflict peace building also grew in recent years . The importance of peace building in post-conflict conflict has grown over the years .
 By April 2009 the UN’s Peacebuilding Fund had received more than $300 million in contributions . More than $131 million had been allocated to 12 countries for 65 projects .
 The review process for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons picked up momentum . A formal review conference was in the works for 2010 .
 Nuclear and conventional weapons proliferation remained an important agenda item, with particular focus on North Korea and Iran . Iran and North Korea were the focus of the meeting .
 Iran conducted a second nuclear test in May 2009 in violation of Security Council resolutions . Concerns have continued over Iran’s evolving nuclear program .
 UN member states agreed to a timetable for negotiating an arms trade treaty by 2012 . UN members of the world agreed to the talks on October 30 . The treaty would be negotiated by the end of 2012 .
 In September 2008 the UN General Assembly renewed its commitment to the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy that it had adopted two years earlier . The strategy was renewed in September 2008 .
 A UN Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force had been established in 2005 . Secretary-General Ban requested to make the necessary institutional changes to enhance the organization’s support of the task force . The task force was organized around eight working groups focusing on cross-cutting themes .
 The UN Security Council passed a U.S.-sponsored resolution to revise the content and process of the UN 1267 Committee’s sanctions list, making it more transparent and fair and providing recourse for individuals and firms wrongly included on the UN sanctions list .
 The primary purpose of the UN list was to serve as a tool for governments to deny terrorists access to funding, weapons, travel, and other resources . The list was created by the UN in 2003 .
 UN humanitarian relief efforts reached near-record levels in 2008, responding to 55 emergencies, including natural disasters, the global food crisis, and civil conflict . UN humanitarian aid efforts responded to 55 crises in 2008 .
 The UN launched a $7.7 billion appeal for contributions for 2010 to assist 48 million people in 25 countries . UN launched the appeal in late November 2009 to help the world's poorest people .
 In addition, another 839,000 individuals filed claims for asylum or refugee status . 827,000 cases awaited determination at the end of the year .
 Nearly half of refugees who were receiving assistance from UNHCR were from Iraq and Afghanistan . Another 20% of refugees were from Africa .
 More than two-thirds of the world's displaced peoples remained inside their own countries . More than 2,000 displaced people remain in their countries .
 The number of internally displaced persons remained around 26 million for the second consecutive year . Around 26 million internally displaced people remain in the country .
 Sudan, Colombia, and Iraq were home to the largest number of internally displaced persons . Nineteen African countries accounted for 11. million IDPs, including Sudan and Colombia .
 The United States sought and won election to the world’s highest human rights body in May 2009 . Reversing the administration policy of former president George W Bush toward the UN .
 President Obama moved to ban the use of torture by the U.S. military . He issued an executive order to close the Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, detention centre within one year .
 A military judge at Guantanamo and later the United States Senate moved to block the order . The U.S. Senate blocked the order, however, and a military judge blocked it .
 The measure would need approval by the United States Congress, however, however .
 UNHCR expressed concern over excessive use of force and human rights violation by Iranian security forces . UNHCR has called on the government to halt these activities .
 Only six years remained until the 2015 target deadline for achieving the MDGs .
 The global economic downturn had a significant impact on the MDG process . The MDG is based on the findings of the World Economic Development Council .
 Progress toward achieving the goals was slowed in many areas and even reversed in others . Progress toward the goals were slowed in some areas, even reversed .
 The UN estimated 55 million to 90 million more people would be living in extreme poverty than had been anticipated prior to the economic crisis that began in late 2008 . In regard to MDG 1—reducing extreme poverty— the strides made during the preceding decade and a half were blunted
 Women continued to be much more vulnerable with regard to sustainable livelihoods . Four years after the MDG target date for reaching gender parity in primaryand secondary-school education, girls lagged behind .
 Maternal health is the MDG on which there has been the least progress to date . The MDG is the most elusive quest to date, with little progress on the issue . The U.N. agency is working to improve the health of women in need .
 The UN reported that the gap between the goal of creating an international trading system that was rule-based, predictable, equitable, and nondiscriminatory is widening . The UN said the gap was widening between the 2009 global trading system and reality of the 2009 system was widening .
 Official development assistance reached its highest level ever in 2008 . In 2008 official development assistance increased by 10% in real terms over 2007 . Official development aid increased by more than 10% over 2007.
 Over the previous decade, assistance to less-developed countries —especially sub-Saharan African countries — had increased substantially . Sub-Saharan Africa is one of the world's poorest countries .
 The world food crisis that had significantly worsened in 2008 remained one of the world’s greatest challenges in 2009 . World food crisis was one of world's greatest challenges .
 Despite a decrease in prices in late 2008, food costs continued to be high . Food costs were high in 2008, according to the USDA .
 A World Food Summit on food security was held in Rome on Nov.-18, 2009 . The summit took place in Rome, Italy .
 The final conference document, while calling on governments to reinforce efforts to meet the MDG target of reducing hunger by half by 2015, contained no new financial commitments for doing so . The conference document was released on Monday .
 The World Bank announced in late November that it had launched a $1.1 billion trust fund to promote agricultural production in poor countries . The fund will be used to promote agriculture in poor nations .
 By year’s end 12,220 deaths had been reported worldwide, and the World Health Organization had declared the pandemic on the decline .
 Deaths from measles dropped 74% from 2000 to 2007 . As a result largely of global and regional immunization campaigns, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, deaths from measles have declined 74% .
 Nearly a million people die annually of malaria annually of the disease . The global campaign against malaria made inroads, but nearly a million died annually .
 Malaria deaths were highly regionalized, with 89% in sub-Saharan Africa in 2008 . The overwhelming majority of those killed were children .
 In December 2009, news broke of a new drug-resistant strain of malaria in the Cambodia-Thailand border region .
 Globally, the number of people living with HIV/AIDS continued to hover around 33 million . Globally there are 33 million people worldwide with the disease .
 In Eastern Europe and Central Asia, HIV prevalence rates had doubled since 2001 . The number of persons living with HIV/AIDS had ballooned from 630,000 in 2001 to 1,600,000 .
 Two-thirds of persons living with HIV were located in sub-Saharan Africa . Most of these were women, most of whom were women . The world's largest number of people with HIV is located in Africa .
 Maternal mortality continues to plague the LDCs worldwide . In 2005 (the year for which the most recent statistics were available), more than half a million women and girls died annually .
 Half of all maternal deaths occurred in sub-Saharan Africa, and another third occurred in South Asia . Half of the deaths were caused by maternal causes, such as death from childbirth .
 UN Environment Programme called for a 'Global Green New Deal' in October 2008 . UN launched the Green Economy Initiative to provide a long-term strategy for dealing with global environmental degradation .
 Ban challenged member states to provide investment to create millions of green jobs . Secretary-General Ban reiterated this call two months later . Ban: Investing in green jobs is a priority for the UN .
 A series of major international conferences were held, culminating in a final global agreement in Copenhagen in December to replace the Kyoto Protocol . The Kyoto Protocol, which was scheduled to expire in 2012, was replaced by Copenhagen .
 Secretary-General Ban’s restructuring of peace and security operations continued during the year . Peacekeeping operations, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions, were restructured .
 In an attempt to revitalize the UN Secretariat, the General Assembly agreed to streamline the organization’s personnel and service-delivery systems . The General Assembly has been tasked with streamlining the organization's personnel .
 The European Union faced a series of daunting challenges as 2009 opened . The EU was the first major institution to enter the continent's borders .
 At the top of the list was how to respond to the global economic crisis . At the time, the most urgent question was how best to deal with the crisis .
 The bloc’s drive to reform its own institutions so they could perform better with an enlarged membership of 27 remained in deep trouble .
 The EU’s Lisbon Treaty was drawn up with the intention of pooling more powers at the European level, in part by creating the new posts of the EU president and a more powerful foreign policy chief .
 The idea was that if Europe could speak as one, rather than as 27, it would be far better able to punch its weight in global negotiations, whether on trade, foreign affairs, or the environment .
 Some member states were determined not to back the deal, arguing that too much power was being transferred from national governments to Europe . Yet some members of the European Parliament say too much of power is being transferred .
 Ireland rejected the treaty in a referendum in June 2008 . It was just these kinds of concerns that had led Ireland to reject it in a 2008 referendum .
 Countries such as the Czech Republic were also showing a reluctance to sign up .
 If just one of the 27 states refused to agree, the treaty would be dead . The treaty would have been dead if it were not agreed .
 Ireland had to be persuaded to vote again, and the other doubters must be won round . Somehow, Ireland must have been persuaded to return to the polls again . Ireland will be the first country to hold a referendum on the EU in 2015 .
 There are divisions over plans to expand the community farther eastward by admitting new member states in years to come . There were also divisions .
 The question of whether Turkey should win admission continued to split the union . Turkey is the only country in the world to admit to the U.S.
 Rather than forge a spirit of unity, the economic crisis opened up deep divisions, says David Cameron . The crisis has left the country with deep divisions and deep divisions .
 Czech leaders accuse France of pushing protectionist policies to help its own car industry . Czechs held the rotating presidency of the EU for the first six months of 2009 .
 Nicolas Sarkozy responded to the economic downturn by criticizing French car companies that relocated plants to Eastern European countries in an effort to cut costs . Sarkozy's response to the crisis was criticized by Eastern European nations .
 Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek accused Sarkozy of having adopted ""beggar thy neighbour" policies to protect France's interests . Czech PM: Sarkozy has adopted policies to 'protect France’s interests' Czech PM says Sarkozy's policies are 'begg
 It seemed that some countries were looking to their national interests, not the broader European one . The economic difficulties were forcing some countries to look to their own interests, it was said .
 The arguments spilled over into discussions of whether the EU should back big fiscal stimulus packages or keep a tight rein on borrowing . The EU is debating whether big spending packages should be backed by the EU .
 European Union's circle of stars logo is projected onto Lisbon's historic Belem Tower as fireworks light up the sky in celebration of the entry into force of the EU’s Lisbon Treaty after eight years of negotiations . agree to disagree and to launch their own fiscal stimulus packages .
 In June the EU staged elections to the increasingly powerful, but still fledgling, European Parliament . The European Parliament is the largest and most powerful body in the EU .
 Centre-right parties enjoyed the greatest success in Poland . Former Polish prime minister Jerzy Buzek was elected the body’s president in July .
 Centreleft parties in power in countries such as the U.K., Spain, and Portugal took a battering in June elections because they were blamed for the economic downturn . Centre left parties took a hit in June because of the downturns .
 Far-right parties took advantage of rising nationalist sentiment and suspicion of remote government . Most alarming was the success of far-right political parties .
 It was the first time that the party had ever gained a foothold in Europe’s emerging legislative assembly . The first time the party has ever gained foothold in the European Parliament .
 Far-right parties increased their votes dramatically in several other countries, including Austria, The Netherlands, Hungary, Denmark, and Finland . Far-Right parties increased votes in Austria, the Netherlands and Hungary .
 It was another alarming sign that the people of Europe were splintering off from a political elite intent on centralizing its power base at a European level . Europe's political elite is trying to centralize its power at the European level, says CNN.com .
 By early summer, the EU was renewing its enthusiasm to drive forward with political integration and expansion . The EU was renewed its enthusiasm for political integration .
 Turkey expressed its continued eagerness to join the union, although its bid met with intense resistance from countries such as Austria and France . Turkey expressed an interest in joining the union . Austria, France and Austria have expressed opposition to Turkey's bid .
 Albania and Iceland formally applied for membership in the EU in 2009 . Both countries are expected to join the European Union in 2015 . Albania is one of the two countries in the process of joining the EU .
 Iceland had long stood aloof from the EU, believing it could thrive on its own . But the economic crisis that had ravaged its banking system left it feeling vulnerable . Iceland's economic crisis has left the country feeling vulnerable and vulnerable .
 Carl Bildt, foreign minister of Sweden, welcomed Iceland's newfound community spirit . Sweden assumed the presidency of the EU in June, which had assumed presidency in June .
 The country’s existing level of economic integration with the rest of Europe, Bildt said, would allow it to be placed on a “shorter track’’ for membership than states that were economically and politically less prepared, such as the Balkans .
 The bloc's leaders tried to reinvigorate the union's stalled reform process . Meanwhile, the bloc’s leaders are also trying to reform the EU .
 Measures agreed to make Lisbon Treaty more acceptable to the Irish . They agreed to measures designed to make the treaty more acceptable . The Irish agreed to the measures in order to make it acceptable to them .
 New guarantees ensured that Ireland would retain its military neutrality and the right to determine its own taxes and policies on issues such as abortion . Ireland would also retain its right to decide its own tax and abortion policies .
 Ireland held a second referendum in October, and this time Irish voters backed the treaty by 67.1% to 32.9% . The vote was a swing of 20.5% to the ""yes" camp since the summer of 2008 . Ireland's second referendum was held in October
 The only country left to put its name to Lisbon was the Czech Republic . The Czech Republic was the last country to put their name to the city .
 Czech Pres. Martin Dubrovrovich received further guarantees for his country . Dubrovich was forced to step down from his post in the Czech Republic .
 Vaclav Klaus reluctantly ratified the treaty in November . Klaus, a strong Euroskeptic, reluctantly ratified the treaty .
 There was no time for self-congratulation, however, since arguments had already begun over who should fill the top posts created under the Lisbon Treaty . The first permanent president of the European Council is first permanent European Council .
 The role was not clearly defined in the treaty, it was obvious that it would carry huge power and prestige . Although the role was unclear, the treaty would carry a huge power .
 The occupant would represent the EU in global meetings and serve as the face of Europe . The occupant of the post would serve as Europe's face and represent the continent .
 For weeks there was discussion about whether Tony Blair, the former U.K. prime minister, should be given the role . For weeks, there were discussions about whether Blair should have been given the post .
 Many member states objected to Blair, mainly because of his support for the war in Iraq and the U.K.’s failure to adopt the euro during his tenure as prime minister . Many members of the European Economic Community objected to the former leader .
 At a summit in late October, it became clear that even France and Germany -- the “big two” of the EU -- had profound doubts about Blair . Blair was the prime minister of the UK in the 1990s .
 Decision postponed to another meeting in midNovember . Other names were floated, but as agreement proved elusive, the decision was postponed .
 Blair was rejected by EU leaders in favour of Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy . Blair was the prime minister of the UK in charge of the EU .
 The decision was made to appoint a low-key figure who was little known outside Belgium . Rather than opting for a world-renowned figure who would have overshadowed the 27 EU heads of government, the decision was decided to appoint an effective organizer .
 Baroness Ashton appointed as first high representative for foreign affairs and security policy . The appointment was also something of an anticlimax . Ashton is also the EU trade commissioner .
 The European Union has shown that it is pressing ahead after an eight-year struggle to modernize .
 Baroness Ashton is the new European Union high representative for foreign affairs and security policy . She has been in charge of foreign affairs, security policy for the EU since 2007 . She is also the new head of the European Union's foreign policy body .
 EU had taken a lead role in pushing for firm commitments backed by international law . The EU had set its sights on a deal that would have committed countries to a 30% cut in emissions by 2020 .
 Much of the detail was struck by the United States and China, and this left the impression that the EU had been bypassed . When a deal finally came, much of the details were struck by U.S.
 The accord contained aspirations to cut emissions and finance measures to mitigate the effects of climate change in poorer countries . But there was nothing legally binding to the agreement .
 The accord fell far short of the EU’s hopes and showed that in China it had an increasingly powerful force to confront in global affairs .
 The global financial crisis that began in 2008 set the agendas for many multinational and regional organizations in 2009 . MULTINATIONAL AND REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS in 2009 set the agenda for many organizations .
 The focus of many such groups was on stimulating recovery, providing greater regulation of financial institutions, and increasing cooperation .
 In April and September, G-20 leaders met to discuss the economic crisis and the reform of financial regulatory systems . In September, they met to jump-start the Doha round of World Trade Organization negotiations . In April, leaders met in Doha to discuss economic crisis, reform of
 The summits largely produced agreements to continue talking about the issues . The summit is expected to continue to meet in the coming weeks .
 The September summit approved the “Pittsburgh Pact,"" which signified the G-20’s new role as the primary forum for global economic cooperation . The Pittsburgh Pact was approved by the September summit .
 Leaders adopted broad outlines for stronger capital standards for banks and greater voting power in the IMF and World Bank for China and other fast-growing developing countries . The leaders also agreed to stronger capital requirements for banks .
 In June the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) held their own, inaugural summit . In June, BRIC nations Brazil, Russia and India met in Brazil .
 The U.S. dollar's status as the world reserve currency has drawn together the group . The group was drawn together by their dissatisfaction with the U.K.'s role in the global financial system . The dollar accounts for about 15% of the world economy .
 The BRIC countries were a disparate group, however, and their summit produced more rhetoric than substance . The summit was held in Moscow, Russia, China, Russia and Brazil .
 The financial crisis took precedence over the usual regional security issues . At the year's two summits of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization summits, the financial crisis was a priority .
 Summit communiques stressed the priority of speeding the implementation of plans to increase international cooperation within the region . Summit communique stresses the priority is speeding up plans to speed up international cooperation .
 Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation celebrated its 20th anniversary in 2009 . The group is based in the Middle East and North America .
 The November summit was short on substance and long on rhetoric about recovering from the financial crisis, strengthening regional integration, resisting protectionism, and concluding the Doha negotiations .
 The October summit of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations was attended by leaders from China, Japan, South Korea, Australia, India, and New Zealand . The summit was held in October .
 Their agenda included discussing the expansion of regional trade, finding new paths to growth independent of U.S. and European markets . They also addressed the poor transportation infrastructure in parts of the region .
 The ASEAN Free Trade Area would initially eliminate tariffs on more than 87% of imports within six of the member countries . The trade area would be implemented in January 2010 .
 In late October ASEAN also inaugurated its Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights . The commission will help promote social development and justice .
 The commission, however, encountered charges that it would be a “toothless” body, given ASEAN members’ strong adherence to the norm of noninterference . The commission has been charged with being a ‘toothlessly’ body .
 Organizations in Latin America and Africa also dealt with challenges to democracy . They called for increased economic cooperation and reforms of global financial architecture . Organizations also called for greater economic cooperation .
 The Organization of American States and the South American Common Market were involved in a crisis in Honduras . Honduras's elected president was ousted in a coup in June . The coup was a coup that overthrown the president .
 The OAS suspended Honduras and led efforts to mediate a solution, but little progress has been achieved . These groups called for his reinstatement, and the OAS also suspended Honduras .
 The OAS voted to lift Cuba’s long suspension from the organization, provided that Cuba met certain conditions . Cuba's long suspension is a major step toward lifting Cuba's ban from the OAS .
 African Union involved in political crises in Madagascar, Zimbabwe, Niger, Guinea, and Guinea-Bissau . The African Union and the Southern African Development Community were involved in the crises .
 Both the AU and the SADC suspended Madagascar, and the AU led mediation efforts concerning that country’s transitional government and elections .
 ECOWAS suspended Niger and appointed mediators to address the situation in both Niger and Guinea in October . Niger was suspended following an extraordinary summit in October and Guinea was also suspended .
 The AU continued to bear a significant burden for peacekeeping in the Darfur region of The Sudan and in Somalia .
 Sudan has rejected the International Criminal Court’s arrest warrant against Sudanese Pres. Omar Hassan al-Ahsan . The Arab League had been vocal in rejecting the arrest warrant for Sudanese president .
 Bashir was welcomed at both the AU and Arab League summits . Both organizations supported the creation of a hybrid tribunal of Sudanese and foreign judges appointed by the AU to try Bashir .
 Dependent States ing military operations there were operations there in late 2008 and early 2009 . The U.S. was involved in military operations in the region .
 The league’s secretary-general submitted a request for an International Criminal Court investigation of war crimes committed in Gaza . In September, following publication of a UN fact-finding commission's report, the league's secretary general submitted .
 The league faced problems with unity in 2009, calling for a freeze on the expansion of Jewish settlements in the Israeli-occupied territories as a prerequisite for peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians .
 Denmark’s Queen Margrethe II handed over the official self-rule documents in Greenland . The ceremony was attended by dignitaries from 17 other countries and territories . The Danish queen handed the documents over to Greenland in Nuuk, Greenland .
 In October an unexpected source of rare-earth metals was discovered in Greenland . The discovery could challenge China’s domination of world supplies of the metals . China has been the dominant supplier of rare earth metals .
 Greenland would keep half of the income from oil and minerals, with the ultimate goal of full financial and political independence . Greenland would also seek to become independent from Denmark . Greenland has a long-term goal of financial independence .
 Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos arrived in Gibraltar for talks with his British counterpart, David Miliband, and Gibraltar Chief Minister Peter Caruana . On July 21 Spain's foreign minister arrived at Gibraltar to meet with David Miliband .
 Former governor Anibal Acevedo Vila was acquitted in March on several corruption charges . The charges had dogged him throughout his unsuccessful 2008 reelection campaign against Fortuno Fortuna .
 President-elect Barack Obama reassured Puerto Rico in early January that its current Commonwealth status would be examined again during his term in office . In July the United States House of Representatives approved another referendum for Puerto Rico . Puerto Rico is currently a Commonwealth .
 Referenda on the territory’s constitutional status had been held previously in 1967, 1993, and 1998 . All of those referenda rejected the options of statehood or independence .
 The Dutch territory of Curasao in a nonbinding referendum in May narrowly approved the 2006 agreement . The 2006 agreement was designed to elevate Curasa to the status of an autonomous territory within The Netherlands . Curasasa is now an autonomous autonomous territory in the Netherlands . The Dutch
 Civil unrest returned to the French dependency of Guadeloupe in February, with at least one death reported . Violence and looting occurred against the background of a general strike that began in January and spread to Martinique .
 Union leaders blame high prices and “inadequate’s wages for withdrawal of labour . Union leaders blamed high prices for their withdrawal of work in Canada .
 The strike was called off in March after agreement was reached on a new wage deal for lowerpaid workers . The strike ended in March .
 In August the U.K. government suspended parts of the constitution of its Turks and Caicos colony, removing the premier and cabinet and dissolving the 21-member House of Assembly . In August, the British government removed the prime minister and cabinet from the island .
 The day-to-day running of the colony was transferred to the U.K.-appointed governor, Gordon Wetherell . The colony is now a British colony .
 The action was taken following the interim report of a commission of inquiry set up in July 2008 . Commission of inquiry was set up to investigate allegations of corruption against elected officials .
 In July 2009 the U.K. said it was considering a criminal investigation of former premier Michael Misick and four of his cabinet ministers . The commission found that corruption was “endemic,” and in July 2009 it was .
 A masked protester displays a Puerto Rican flag during a peaceful demonstration in San Juan on October 15 . Puerto Rico is a U.S. Dependent States of Puerto Rico .
 Thousands of demonstrators gathered to protest the layoff of some 20,000 government workers in the U.K.’s Cayman Islands, taking 9 seats in the 15-member Legislative Assembly .
 The Movement for Change and Prosperity regained office in Montserrat in September . Reuben Meade led the party to victory in the general election, winning six out of nine seats .
 Bermuda Premier Ewart Brown’s decision to give sanctuary to four Chinese Muslim Uighurs triggered a motion of no confidence against him in the Bermuda parliament, which he survived . Brown's decision to grant sanctuary to the four Chinese Muslims on their release from Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, triggered
 The U.K. government expressed displeasure that the premier had not discussed the matter with the Britishappointed governor beforehand . The premier did not discuss the issue with the governor beforehand, the British government said .
 That same day the resulting tsunami struck American Samoa, killing more than 20 people . The resulting tsunami caused extensive damage in the capital Pago Pago .
 U.S. minimum wage increase blamed for cutbacks at tuna canneries . American Samoa already faced economic problems .
 In September the government sought a loan in a last-minute bid to retain 2,000 jobs by purchasing one cannery . The cannery was scheduled to close at month’s end .
 In September the first U.S. military and related personnel arrived in Guam from the Japanese island of Okinawa . In September, the first United States military and . related personnel . arrived in September .
 Japan had provided $740 million for rebuilding Guam’s aging infrastructure . Japan was funding a significant part of the bill for the relocation of 8,000 U.S. marines and 9,000 dependents .
 A U.S. congressional report suggested that this funding would not be sufficient to cover the costs of the realignment agreed to in 2006 . A United States congressional report said this funding could not be enough .
 An Asian Development Bank report in August asserted that in the Cook Islands lending to business was down, import demand and export volumes were low, and tax revenue was falling .
 The local economy received a boost in the second half of the year from the Pacific Mini Games and aggressive marketing of tourism .
 Cook Islands also submitted a claim in the UN to 400,000 sq km of extended continental shelf that might contain valuable manganese nodules . Cook Islands submitted claim in UN in bid to extend continental shelf . Cooks also submitted claim to 400sq km of continental shelf with mangan
 Gaston Tong Sang, facing a vote of no confidence, resigned on February 7 after only nine months in office . Tong Sang resigned after only 9 months of office .
 The territory’s Assembly elected its own speaker, former president Oscar Temaru, as Tong Sang's replacement . Former president Tong Sang was elected as president of Tong Sang .
 On November 24, Temaru's coalition government fell to a no-confidence motion and was replaced by one led by Tong Sang . Tong Sang is Tong's fourth prime minister since the 2008 election .
 In September former president Gaston Flosse was convicted on the first of several charges of corruption . He was ordered stripped of his Senate seat in September .
 Flosse appealed the loss of his seat, and thus his immunity, to the French constitutional court . He appealed his immunity to the court .
 This loss of immunity allowed the prosecutor to detain Flosse while the corruption inquiry proceeded . The prosecutor was able to detain him while the investigation was carried out .
 The territory received some $232 million in aid from the French Development Agency in 2008 to offset the declining economic conditions and to generate growth . The territory was given the aid in 2008 .
 A Council of State in Paris annulls a French Polynesia Assembly vote to suspend a controversial pearl export tax until December 2009 . French Polynesian Assembly voted to suspend the controversial export tax . A council of State annulled the vote .
 The New Caledonian Congress named Philippe Gomes as the new head of government . After provincial elections in May, Gomes became the new leader of the state . Gomes was elected in May .
 Tension arose in May as members of the Kanak USTKE union confronted local aviation interests and French police at the domestic airport . Six union leaders were jailed for up to one year in May .
 The French sent additional paramilitary forces to the territory . Antarctica sponsee, the French sent extra paramilitary forces .
 The union suspended its strike in June after a Court of Appeal rejected its appeal in September . The union resumed its general strike and prepared to appeal the imprisonment of its leaders to Frances highest court .
 On March 29, 2009, voters on Mayotte voted in a referendum on the islands future relationship with France . Mayotte is the only one of four islands in the Comoros group that voted in 1974 to remain a French dependency .
 More than 95% approved a change of status from that of a departmental collectivity to an overseas departement of France . The move was approved by more than 95 per cent of voters .
 This would require replacing the local Muslim legal system, including the practice of polygamy, with French law . This would necessitate replacing local Muslim law with that of France .
 Comoros protested the vote and criticized the treatment of Comoran immigrants to Mayotte . Comoros, which did not recognize French rule in Mayotte, protested the decision .
 Civil unrest in French Caribbean dependencies flared over high prices and inadequate wages . It spread to Reunion, where protesters called for a general strike on March 10 .
 In early 2009 the Chagos Conservation Trust and other environmental groups called for the creation of a marine reserve in the uninhabited British Indian Ocean Territory .
 Australian Immigration Minister Chris Evans was forced to double the size of the Australian detention centre on Christmas Island to house 2,300 people . The detention centre has been doubled in size to house more than 2,000 people .
 This follows a sharp increase in the arrival of asylum seekers on boats sailing into Australian waters . This followed a sharp rise in asylum seekers sailing into Australia's waters in recent months .
 Late in the year the Australian government transferred some asylum seekers to mainland Australia for processing . Late in this year some were transferred to mainland Australian for processing purposes .
 Evans rejected claims by Tony Abbott that the government had abandoned offshore processing of asylum seekers . Evans said the government was committed to mandatory detention of unauthorized boat arrivals . Evans also reiterated that the new Australian opposition leader, Tony Abbott, was committed .
 There is no indigenous human population, and there is no land-based industry . There is also no land based industry in Australia .
 The 47-nation Antarctic Treaty is the managerial mechanism for the region south of latitude 60° S, which includes all of Antarctica . It is managed by the 47 nations that signed the treaty .
 The treaty reserves the area for peaceful purposes, encourages cooperation in science, prescribes environmental protection . It allows inspections to verify adherence, and defers the issue of territorial sovereignty .
 They also agreed to support the International Maritime Organization’s efforts to ensure the safety of Antarctic shipping and to petition the IMO to extend the . Antarctic Special Area northward to the Antarctic Convergence in order to protect the region's marine .
 Representatives also recognized the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty in December 1959 .
 In a declaration they acknowledged the treaty’s contribution to promoting peace and international cooperation in the Antarctic region . They reaffirmed commitment to the objectives and purposes of the treaty .
 The most recent International Polar Year program ran from March 2007 to March 2009 . In a second year they recognized the role of polar science in understanding climate change .
 During the ATCM the Committee for Environmental Protection discussed or proposed for discussion 2 new and 11 revised management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas . The committee also proposed or proposed discussion of the plans .
 Committee also discussed the impact of nonnative species in the region . Committee agreed to study the environmental impacts of tourism and nongovernmental activities in Antarctica .
 During the 2008-09 austral summer, 37,858 tourists visited the continent, with some 37,585 arriving by ship . During the same period of summer, there were 37,000 tourists by ship alone .
 The red represents areas where temperatures increased the most over the period . The dark blue represents areas with a lesser degree of warming .
 Antarctica New Zealand was to lead the estimated $6 million project and cover most of the cost as part of its contribution to the shared logistics pool with the U.S. Antarctic Program . The United States Antarctic Program transported most fuel, personnel, and materials to the continent .
 The project would cut fuel consumption by about 463,000 litres every year . Wind-generated electricity would reduce greenhouse gas production by 1,242 tons of carbon dioxide annually . Wind power would reduce carbon dioxide production .
 The wind-generated electricity would supply about 15% of McMurdo’s annual demand . The smaller New Zealand station would draw about 87% of its electricity requirements from the U.S. system .
 The two countries expected the wind farm to be operational in February 2010 .
 The United States Antarctic Program was to complete the modernization of the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station during the 2009-10 austral summer . The U.S. Antarctic Program completed the modernization in 2009/10 .
 The final phase would be the demolition and removal of the South Pole geodesic dome . The dome would be removed from the site .
 A fire destroyed a building, killed one person, and injured two others at the Russian station Progress, located in East Antarctica . The fire occurred in the 2008-09 austral summer .
 The injured, who were part of a 10-person construction team, were taken to China’s nearby Zhongshan station .
 Kunlun station was China’s third Antarctic station . It was located in East Antarctica at Dome A, about 4,093 m above sea level . It is China's third Antarctic Antarctic station, located in east Antarctica .
 Researchers have found unexpected evidence of a remarkably warm period in Antarctica 15. million years ago . Researchers say they have found unusual evidence of an unusually warm period .
 Evidence found in a sedimentary core, drilled from the seafloor underneath the Ross Ice Shelf, shows that even a slight rise in atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide affected the stability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet .
 The dynamics of ice sheets were not well understood before this discovery . Discovery improved scientific understanding of the mechanisms that controlled the growth, melting, and movements of ice .
 The authors predicted that seas would rise unevenly because of the shift in a huge mass of ice away from the South Pole would subtly change the strength of gravity locally and the rotation of the Earth .
 In October, NASA scientists reported in the journal Science that over the past seven years ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica appeared to be shrinking faster than originally thought .
 The Arctic Ocean, 14.09 million sq km in area, constitutes about two-thirds of the region . Arctic Ocean constitutes about 2.3 million sqkm in area . The region is about two thirds of the size of the world .
 International organizations concerned with the Arctic include the Arctic Council, Barents Euro-Arctic Council, Inuit Circumpolar Council, and Indigenous Peoples' Secretariat .
 Arctic summer sea ice hit its 2009 annual minimum on September 12 . Sea ice levels hit the 2009 minimum for the first time in the year .
 The 2009 minimum was the third lowest on record, 24% below the 1979 to 2000 average . At 5. million sq km of coverage, the 2009 minimum is the lowest ever minimum .
 The U.S., Canada, Denmark, Norway, and Russia continued their interest in the more open and accessible Arctic Ocean . The countries bordering the Arctic region (U.S. and Canada) continued to interest .
 Much of the ongoing undersea mapping work carried out in 2009 was done jointly by pairs of countries .
 Russia and the United States conducted collaborative research in the Chukchi Sea . The United States and Canada worked together in the Beaufort Sea . Canada and Denmark worked cooperatively in the high Arctic .
 During the year the countries bordering the Arctic continued the process of establishing rights to territory and undersea resources under the aegis of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea .
 In April the UN confirmed Norway’s claim to extend the boundary of its continental shelf, based on undersea mapping submitted in 2006 . The UN confirmed in April that the claim was based on a 2006 undersea map .
 The decision added some 235,000 sq km to Norway's continental shelf area . The decision was made in 2008 .
 Russia’s claim for Arctic undersea rights was submitted in 2007, and the country continued to carry out research to support its claim .
 Canada was expected to submit a claim by 2013, and Denmark was to make its proposal by 2014 . Denmark was also expected to make a claim in 2014 .
 In August the U.S. introduced a moratorium on commercial fishing in its exclusive economic zone off the Arctic coast of Alaska .
 The moratorium was announced to provide time to determine the level of fish stocks, the role of Arctic fish in the ecosystem, and their response to changing sea ice conditions .
 Fishing fleets worldwide had expressed interest in expanding operations into the newly opening waters of the Arctic . Fishing fleets have expressed interest expanding their operations .
 Arctic Council released a major report on Arctic marine traffic in spring 2009 . The Arctic Council report was released by the Arctic Council in 2009 .
 Transport activity is expected to increase from fishing, resource development, tourism, research, and commercial shipping .
 Report made recommendations for search-and-rescue capabilities in the event of accidents and spills . Report: Search and rescue capabilities should be used in accident and spill situations .
 Just weeks before the report was released, a Russian nuclearpowered ice breaker collided with an unladen oil tanker in the Kara Sea . The report comes just weeks before it was released .
 Two German cargo ships successfully completed the transit in September 2009 . Two of the ships completed the transatlantic transit in 2009 .
 The new Russian ice breakers 50 Let Pobedy and Rossia accompanied the ships along the most northerly section of the passage .
 In July the United States introduced bills to build two new ice breakers for use in polar waters . The U.S. also wants to coordinate shipping infrastructure with other Arctic countries .
 Russia also had plans to add another six nuclear-powered ice breakers by 2020 . Russia had also planned to add six more nuclear powered ice-breaking icebreakers .
 In May Russia began construction on the world's first nuclear power plant on an offshore platform . Russia has begun construction of the plant on a platform in an offshore area .
 An additional three offshore nuclear plants are in the plans for coming years . An additional 3 offshore plants are also planned for the future .
 The platforms were intended to have multiple uses, one of which was to supply power for exploration for and development of petroleum and natural-gas reserves . One of the platforms was intended to be used for exploration of and developing natural gas and oil reserves .
 Earlier in the spring, Norway had launched two new offshore semisubmersible rigs designed for harsh environmental conditions and ultradeepwater drilling .
 In 2008 the United States Geological Survey had determined that the Arctic contained 13% of the global oil reserves . The majority of these reserves are located along the Russian continental shelf . U.S. Geological Survey: Arctic contained 30% of global gas reserves .
 Progress was modest in 2009 on two major pipeline projects in North America to connect hydrocarbon reserves in the Arctic to U.S. and Canadian markets . Progress in 2009 was modest, but progress was modest on pipeline projects .
 Interest in northern gas, however, had diminished as a result of technological innovations in drilling, experts say .
 Improvements in steam-extraction technology, known as hydraulic fracturing, were revitalizing natural gas reserves that were closer to markets . Improvements in hydraulic fracturing technology, such as fracking, have revitalized natural gas .
 Methane also exists in the Arctic permafrost, both in the tundra and in the undersea frozen layer of the continental shelf . Methane is the principle component of natural gas .
 New studies in 2009 focused on determining how much methane and carbon dioxide was stored in the Arctic and what quantity of these greenhouse gases might be released as the Arctic warms .
 The concern was that the addition of large amounts of the two gases could create a feedback loop that would accelerate climate change . The concern is that the added gases create a negative feedback loop .
 One study estimated that some 1. trillion tons of carbon dioxide were stored in frozen soils . That figure is twice what had been previously estimated . The study was published by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization .
 Studies in the Arctic and elsewhere conducted into developing technologies that could harvest methane hydrates to use as a fuel .
 methane is 20 to 25 times more potent than carbon dioxide as a greenhouse gas . Methane is a potent greenhouse gas, and could be a significant source of carbon dioxide . The result from such harvesting could be significant .
 A Canadian study revealed that caribou and reindeer herds across the Arctic had declined by some 60% over the previous 30 years . Caribou herds across Arctic have declined by 60% in 30 years, study found .
 Caribou and reindeer were considered a cornerstone species for the subsistence economy of the Arctic’s indigenous peoples . Caribou was considered to be the cornerstone species of the indigenous peoples' subsistence economy .
 Polar bears, also critical to the economy and culture of indigenous peoples, had been under threat from climate change . Polar bears were listed as a threatened species in 2008 by the United States government .
 Indigenous Peoples' Global Summit on Climate Change was hosted by Inuit Circumpolar Council in April 2009 .
 Ban Ki-Moon traveled to the Arctic before attending the World Climate Conference in Geneva in September . The UN SecretaryGeneral traveled to Arctic in the summer . He is scheduled to attend the world climate conference .
 His pronouncements added urgency to the UN Climate Change Conference that convened in December in Copenhagen to negotiate the treaty that would succeed Kyoto Protocol .
 Leaders at the conference were unable to arrive at a treaty to succeed the Kyoto Protocol . But they did reach agreement on an accord that would see negotiations continue in 2010 .
 The war in Afghanistan assumed a higher global profile in 2009 as Taliban attacks inside Pakistan demonstrated the international character of the Islamist insurgency in both countries . Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran also include Afghan refugees .
 United States and NATO troop levels in Afghanistan rose above 100,000, most of them American . U.S. and NATO troops in Afghanistan now number more than 100,500 .
 President Obama authorized higher troop levels and replaced NATO’s commander in Afghanistan . He authorized higher levels of troop levels .
 Economic reconstruction and the training of Afghan forces became high priorities in Afghanistan . Economic reconstruction, training and economic reconstruction were high priorities for Afghanistan .
 In recognition of the regional nature of the opposition, U.S. policy would view Taliban activity on both sides of the Afghanistan-Pakistan frontier as a whole . Taliban activity would be viewed as part of the Afghan-Pakistan border .
 The U.S. is reaching out to moderate Taliban, especially to those fighting for money rather than ideology . There was a new willingness on the part of the United States to reach out to moderates .
 Many Western policy makers saw the insurgency in Afghanistan as composed of three groups . The Taliban has been fighting for independence in Afghanistan since 2001 .
 First, the Taliban group led by Mullah Mohammad Omar, was loosely organized and active mostly inside Afghanistan . Mullah Omar's group was active mostly in Afghanistan . The Taliban group was based in Afghanistan and led by Omar .
 Many of this group’s members were Pashtuns who fought for local or tribal issues and might respond to programs addressing their concerns . Many of the members of the group were members of Pashtun .
 A second Taliban group, led by members of the Haqqani family, was credited with having introduced suicide attacks and bombings of public buildings to Afghanistan . The group is said to be connected with both al-Qaeda and elements of Pakistan’s military .
 The group led by the warlord Gulbuddin Hekmatyar remained independent of the Taliban while sharing their Islamist orientation . Finally, the group shared an Islamist orientation with the Taliban . The Taliban was defeated by the Taliban in 2001 .
 It is not known whether Hekmatyar might find common ground with the government of Pres. Assad Assad .
 Throughout the year interest focused on Afghanistan’s second presidential election, in which Karzai stood for reelection . The election was held in Afghanistan's second election, held in 2009 .
 Registration was under way in the winter for a vote anticipated in the spring . The vote is expected to take place in spring 2015 .
 According to Afghanistan's constitution, Karzai’s term would end on May 22 . According to the constitution, the president's term is due to expire on May 23 .
 In January, the Independent Election Commission announced that the election would be delayed until August 20 . Security and weather concerns prompted the delay . The election commission was appointed by President Karzai, appointed by him .
 Many Afghan politicians argued that the decision was illegal . Although it was backed by the UN, the U.S., and other international leaders, many Afghan politicians rejected it .
 The controversy continued until the end of March, when the Supreme Court announced that Karzai could hold office until the August election . Karzai has been in office since March, but the court ruled that he can continue to hold office .
 An Electoral Complaints Commission, which included UN observers as well as Afghans, was charged with investigating and ruling on reported irregularities . An electoral commission was set up by the UN to investigate and rule out irregularities .
 The election provoked thousands of complaints of ballot fraud, and counting continued for two months . Thousands of complaints were made .
 The first count gave Karzai enough votes to avoid a runoff, but several hundred thousand ballots in his favour were eliminated when convincing evidence of mass fraud was brought to light . Karzai won the first count in Afghanistan's first election since 2001 .
 A runoff between Karzai and former foreign minister Abdullah Abdullah was ruled necessary . A runoff was also ruled necessary for the Afghan president .
 Abdullah demanded that officials overseeing the election be replaced to prevent further fraud, but he was ignored . Abdullah demanded the election officials overseeing it be replaced, but they were ignored .
 On November 1 he withdrew his participation, and Karzai was declared the winner without the need for a second vote . Karzai's victory was declared after he withdrew from participating in the vote .
 The president immediately pledged to remove the taint of corruption from his government . President Barack Obama has pledged to do so .
 New strategies could not disguise growing tensions between the Afghan government and its international defenders . Afghan government: New strategies must be used to deal with growing tensions with international forces .
 NATO’s revised rules of engagement, its air strikes continued to cause civilian casualties . NATO air strikes in Afghanistan have caused civilian casualties in the past year . NATO's air strikes continue to cause casualties in Afghanistan .
 Many Afghans have openly criticized foreign troops for not protecting the population . Many Afghans, including Karzai, openly criticized the foreign troops .
 International leaders pointed to the corruption and inefficiency in Afghanistan’s government and demanded reform . International leaders were becoming discouraged by so few signs of success in Afghanistan .
 In March the parliament passed, and Karzai signed, a bill legalizing the traditional family law of the Hazara . Law that was to apply only to this Shi'ite province was to only apply to this Shiite Muslim nation .
 Shi'ite parliamentarians argued that it was legal recognition of Hazara culture . Many inside and outside Afghanistan denounced the law for infringing on women's rights . Shi'ites argue that the law was a recognition of the Hazara religion .
 In July, Karzai enacted a revised version of the Hazara family law . It forbade a woman to work outside the home without her husband’s permission and allowed a man to withhold food from his wife .
 The year saw a shift in attitudes toward NATO shipments to Afghanistan . Russia and Central Asian countries allowed only nonlethal supplies to cross their countries . NATO shipments were allowed to cross the border with arms .
 Several Asian countries voiced new warmth and friendship toward Afghanistan’s government . Afghanistan's government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 China offered expanded economic cooperation but remained noncommittal on requests to open the border of Afghanistan’s Vakhan region to trade . China has offered to expand economic cooperation with the Afghan government .
 India too was eager to participate in Afghanistan’s development, and even Japan offered extensive financial aid to the country .
 Afghanistan established its first national park, Band-e-Amir, in April . The park is located in a region renowned for the intense, clear blue of its mountain lakes . Afghanistan's national park was established in March .
 Albania was admitted to NATO at the alliance’s summit in Strasbourg, France, on April 4, 2009, and formally applied for full EU membership on April 28 . Albania is located in Albania's capital, Tirana .
 The EU considered the general elections held on June 28 to be a litmus test of the country’s progress . The European Union considered the elections held in June to be the country's progress .
 By introducing a new electoral system in which seats are allocated proportionally by districts, legislators had significantly diminished the chances of small parties to win seats . New electoral system had introduced a new system which allocates seats proportionally .
 Albania's first coalition government included parties from both the left and the right . This marked a turning point in postcommunist Albania’s polarized political culture .
 In Berisha’s new cabinet, Ilir Meta becomes foreign minister . Meta is the LSI leader in the new government .
 A trial opened on October 29 of 29 persons accused of negligence and murder in connection with the blast . A trial of 29 people is expected to begin on October 31 .
 They included former army chief of staff Luan Hoxha and four senior executives of the Alba-Demil Co. Co., which operated the facility in Gerdec .
 Opposition PS, led by Tirana Mayor Edi Rama, boycotted the constitutive session of the parliament on September 7 . The opposition argued that there had been irregularities in the electoral process .
 Albania's political parties should end the "politicization” of the electoral process, the EU said . The EU stated that although Albania had made progress in its voting system, its political parties must end the ""politicized” process .
 Albania's prime minister and his Turkish counterpart inaugurated a highway linking the KosovoAlbania border with Albania’s main road system . In one such case, just three days before the elections, Berisha and Recep Tayyip Erdogan held a ceremony to inaugurate a central stretch of highway
 The entire highway is expected to be finished in the spring of 2010 . It would reduce travel time between Kosovo and the Albanian capital from up to eight hours to only about three .
 The event highlighted the importance that Berisha placed on developing ties with Kosovo . Berisha's visit to Kosovo highlights the importance of developing ties .
 Bamir Topi and his Montenegrin counterpart, Filip Vujanovic, pledged to strengthen ties between their countries . They pledged to build a highway along the Adriatic coast . The two countries will also discuss building a highway between them .
 Berisha proposed to legalize same-sex marriage and adopt the euro as Albania’s currency . Berisha also proposed to adopt the Euro as the country's currency . Albania's prime minister has been in office since 2007 .
 In the second quarter of 2009, the unemployment rate was 12.7%, and GDP growth was estimated at 5.3% year-on-year . In 2009, unemployment was at the highest level in the United States . GDP growth in 2009 was estimated to be 5.2%
 Constitutional amendments that favoured the incumbent had been promulgated by presidential decree on Oct., 2008, and approved overwhelmingly by the parliament on Nov. 2008 . The ground had been well prepared, with the ground being well prepared for the election .
 The amendments removed the bar on a president’s serving more than two consecutive terms . The government is answerable to the president rather than the bicameral parliament . The parliament reserved the formal right to reject the prime minister's program .
 Abdelaziz Bouteflika (see BIOGRAPHIES) announced that he would stand for reelection in November 2012 . Boutfelika is the first president of the country to seek re-election .
 Observers believed that the actual turnout was probably about 30%, with the president receiving about half of the vote . Observer: Turnout was about 30% with about half the vote.
 Bouteflika was believed to be grooming his younger brother, Said, as his successor . Said is believed to have been the prime minister of Saudi Arabia's first Gulf Arab state . Boutefluk was assassinated in 2003 .
 A new political party loyal to the president is being formed, and Said is expected to lead it . Said was expected to become the party's leader . Said is also expected to be the leader of the country's first political party .
 The February announcement that Bouteflika would seek a third term was greeted by a wave of violence . The violence is normally suppressed in winter because of the severe weather .
 An attack near Jijel killed nine security guards and injured two others . Nine security guards were killed in the attack, including two security guards . The attack was carried out in the town of Jijela .
 In June, eight policemen and two civilians died in Boumerdes province, followed by 19 gendarmes in an attack on a Chinese construction project near Bordj Bou Arreridj . Then, eight people died in the attack on the Chinese construction site .
 At the end of the month, five communal guards were killed and two others kidnapped in Khenchela province . At the same month, 5 communal guards killed and 2 others kidnapped . Five communal guards have been killed in the province .
 In late July the security services killed a would-be suicide bomber in Dellys . The security services also killed a man who wanted to carry out a suicide bombing .
 Five more people died in an attack in Jijel province at the end of the month . Three soldiers were killed in September in a shootout between security forces and a terrorist group in the town of Boumerdas .
 The geographic range of the attacks widened over northern Algeria in 2009 . The number of violent deaths had diminished slightly .
 Andorra Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat continued to be a cause for concern in Algeria . Algeria's Algeria-based Salafists have been a major concern in recent years .
 At the start of June, the group killed a British hostage in neighbouring Mali . It later released a Swiss hostage it had held in Mali for a $4 million ransom .
 Algeria joined a new 25,000strong security force initiative with Sahel countries and the United States . Algeria joined the initiative with the U.S. and the Sahel nations .
 Algeria canceled the purchase from France of four frigates for its navy . Algeria is looking to Italy and Britain instead of France for major arms purchases . Algeria has been criticized for its lack of defense spending .
 Measures introduced by Algeria to increase control over foreign investment were beginning to scare off investors in 2009 . Measures include a demand that Algeria serve as the majority stakeholder in joint ventures .
 The new policy was the result of the president’s personal resentment of the failure of foreign investors, particularly oil companies, to reinvest profits, he said .
 In parliamentary elections held on April 26, the PS claimed 45.03% of the vote and 14 of the 28 seats in the General Council . The PS claimed 15 of the seats in General Council, 14 of which they hold .
 Bartumeu was a founding member of the PS and had been a leader of the opposition in the General Council since 2005 . He was a leader in the opposition to the government from 2005 to 2010 .
 Andorra and France signed an agreement in September aimed at facilitating the exchange of tax information . As head of the government, he vowed to improve fiscal and banking transparency . The agreement was reached in September .
 Andorra was reported to be discussing similar agreements with a number of other countries . The agreement is said to be in place with other countries around the world .
 Angola pledged to maintain place as one of the world’s 10 fastest-growing economies . The government pledged to implement plans for national reconstruction, macroeconomic stability, poverty reduction, and the revival of agricultural production .
 Angola had become sub-Saharan Africa’s largest oil producer, ahead of Nigeria and Libya . Non-oil sector of the economy had grown even more rapidly than oil, a positive step toward diversification .
 Angola’s role in the African Union, the Southern African Development Community, and the UN Human Rights Council became increasingly important, underscored by Italy's invitation to Angola to participate in the Group of Eight summit on the world economy . Angola's role in Africa's African Union and the
 Angola’s continued economic success, political stability, and importance in southern African power relations attracted significant investment overtures from China, the U.S., and Europe . China, Europe, and China are interested in investing in the country .
 President dos Santos’s 30 years of experience as head of state accounted for his administration's skilled and tough negotiation with international financial agencies, multinational firms and governments .
 Angola secured at least $13 billion in oil-backed loans from China . China is a key participant in reconstructing Angola after its prolonged civil war . Angola secured a large majority of its oil wealth from China in recent years .
 Pope Benedict XVI traveled to Angola in March . Bilateral trade volume between China and China is the largest in the world .
 China pledges to help devise and implement agricultural-development programs in Huila and Uige provinces . China also pledged to help develop agricultural-research programs .
 In September Angola and the IMF settled their differences and resumed talks about loans . Angola is one of the world's most impoverished countries . Angola's economy has been hit by a series of problems with the IMF .
 By year’s end the constitution remained unfinished, and a presidential election that should have occurred in 2009 had not been scheduled . By the end of the year, the constitution had remained unfinished .
 In March heavy rains caused devastating floods in Luanda, Cunene province, and elsewhere . 220,000 farmers were displaced . In March, heavy rains in Cunne province, Angola, caused flooding .
 Aid agencies warn that damage of 130,000 ha of farmland might result in serious food shortages . Aid agencies warned that the damage could lead to food shortages in Cunene province .
 Demining operations in 18 provinces continued along the railways, telephone networks, and electricity lines, making train travel more secure and expansion of the infrastructure possible . Demining continues along railways, phone networks, electricity lines .
 Angola has seen an unusual number of high-profile official visits by international leaders . Angola has emerged as a continental power in the past year .
 Chinese Minister of Commerce Chen Deming, Pope Benedict XVI and Russian Pres. Vladimir Putin attended . Pope Benedict Benedict XVI was also in attendance .
 Medvedev and Castro reinforced their countries’ historic ties with Angola’s liberation movement and postindependence development . Malloch-Brown and Clinton were intent on securing favourable trade positions .
 One of the main charges involved the sale of about $8 billion in certificates of deposit that were issued with promise of improbably high interest rates .
 Stanford International Bank was Antigua and Barbuda's second biggest employer, after the government . The bank was the country's second largest employer, behind the government, in the country .
 Prime Minister Baldwin Spencer described the situation as having “profound implications” for the country . Prime Minister said the situation was having ‘profound consequences’ for the UK .
 Stanford’s impact on Antigua and Barbuda and the Caribbean as a whole also extended to cricket, cricket, in which he had poured millions of dollars in the past few years . Stanford's impact on the region's most popular game also extended also to the region’
 The Stanford debacle was expected to have repercussions for the country’s reputation as an offshore financial centre . The Group of 20 decision at its summit in April to impose sanctions on financial centres that failed to comply with internationally agreed-upon standards .
 Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner began 2009 with low public approval ratings, rising dissent within her Peronist movement, and serious economic difficulties stemming from a combination of global recession and her government's mismanagement of economic policy .
 In March Fernandez de Kirchner unexpectedly reformed the electoral law in order to set June 28 as the date for midterm congressional elections . One-half of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies and one-third of the Senate (24 of 72) were to be elected .
 Fernandez de Kirchner’s spouse, former president Nestor, was the de facto leader of Argentina . Nestor left office in 2007, but continued to be the country’�s de facto political leader . He faced opposition from a non-Peronist opposition alliance
 The Chamber list headed by Kirchner utilized copious amounts of government resources to support its campaign . The Chamber of Commerce head said the list of candidates for the job was headed by the government .
 The independently wealthy de Narvaez matched Kirchner’s campaign spending to a considerable extent . Stolbizer's impoverished campaign struggled to gain traction among voters .
 In the federal capital district, the Kirchners’ list placed fourth . Santa Fe and Cordoba, the country’s two other large provinces, came in third and fourth . In Santa Fe, Cordoba and Santa Fe also came in fourth .
 Kirchners failed to achieve victory in a single one of the four districts they were in . These four districts accounted for 62% of the population, and the Kirchners failed to win in one .
 Government supporters won 47 and 8 seats in the Chamber and Senate, respectively . Overall, government supporters won 8 and 47 seats in Senate .
 The days in which the Kirchners could rely on a disciplined legislative majority to approve their legislative initiatives were clearly in the past . The days of a disciplined legislature majority are clearly behind them .
 Many hoped that the Kirchners’ electoral defeat would lead them to adopt a more consensual governance style, to the contrary . The Kircheners ratcheted up their level of conflict and antagonism with a host of groups, including the principal agricultural organizations, the major media companies
 Health Minister Graciela Ocana resigned, and several Cabinet moderates, in particular Cabinet Chief Sergio Massa, were replaced . In addition to the election, several Cabinet members have resigned .
 Ad hoc parliamentary commission that was investigating Yerevan’s postelection clashes suspended its activities in early May 2009 owing to friction between government-appointed and opposition members .
 On September 16 the ad hoc parliamentary commission ruled that the police had acted correctly in using force against opposition demonstrators . The commission also ruled that police acted correctly against opposition protesters .
 The Armenian parliament declared an amnesty for dozens of opposition supporters jailed for their imputed role in the postelection violence . Under pressure from the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, on June 19 the parliament declared the amnesty .
 The HAK protested that the voting was marred by largescale fraud, and its members collectively rejected their municipal council mandates . HAK protests that the elections were marred .
 Armenia's GDP plummeted by 18.5% during the first seven months of 2009 . The country’s GDP began to stabilize after receiving emergency loans from international financial institutions .
 In June the United States cut aid to Armenia by one-third owing to concern over the handling of the 2008 presidential elections and subsequent protests . In June, the U.S. cut the aid by a third of the amount to Armenia .
 Turkish and Armenian governments announced on April 22 that they had reached an agreement on a framework for normalizing relations . On April 22, the governments of Turkey and Armenia announced that they would normalize relations .
 HHD formally quit the four-party governing coalition to protest what it termed Sarkisyan’s overly conciliatory Turkish policy . Shortly thereafter, the HHD officially quit the coalition . The HHD said it was unhappy with Sarkisian’�s ‘over
 Armenia and Turkey made public two protocols on August 31 on establishing diplomatic relations . The protocols include opening their mutual border and opening their respective borders . The two countries also made public protocols on opening their borders .
 The Armenian and Turkish foreign ministers signed protocols on October 10, but neither country’s parliament immediately ratified them . The protocols were signed by the foreign ministers of Armenia and Turkey .
 President Sarkisyan visited Turkey to attend an association football match between the two countries’s teams . Shortly thereafter President Sarkesyan visited the Turkish Pres. Recep Tayyip Erdogan to attend the match .
 In early 2009 Australia was devastated by bushfires, with many homes in the state of Victoria razed to the ground . Some homeowners were burned alive in their houses .
 The general public rallied behind survivors; appeals for donations were successful . The funds combined with major government assistance to speed up the rebuilding process, which began as soon it was safe to reenter the burned-out zones .
 Kevin Rudd’s government introduced legislation to launch a carbon-trading scheme to tackle global warming . Australia had the highest per capita carbon emissions in the developed world .
 In August Parliament rejected the plan to introduce carbon permits costing $A 10 per ton from July 2011 . Opposition senators defeated the bill by 42 votes to 30 .
 The legislation was defeated a second time in December when it was reintroduced . It was defeated in December after being reintroduced again .
 Rudd was forced to reshuffle his front bench in June after Joel Fitzgibbon resigned as minister of defense amid allegations of misconduct . The reshuffle was prompted by a series of allegations against the former minister .
 UN special rapporteur on indigenous rights criticized Northern Territory intervention . James Anaya criticized the Northern Territory's intervention in August . The Northern Territory is the only Aboriginal community in Australia .
 Experts estimate the number of affected wildlife could climb well into the millions . In addition, more than 2,000 homes were destroyed, and experts say wildlife could also be affected .
 Australia had often suffered from deadly bushfires, most notably the 1939 ""Black Friday"" blaze in Victoria, in which 71 people were killed, and the 1983 ""Ash Wednesday"" fires in Victoria and South Australia, where 75 people perished . With its abundant forests and hot dry climate, Australia
 The scale of the recent fires was unprecedented and left the country in a state of shock . Extreme weather conditions coupled with a severe drought that had created tinder-dry vegetation across the state was unprecedented .
 On February 7, Victorians were told to brace for the ""worst day"" in the state's history . Weather forecasters warned of a record heat wave with temperatures soaring to 46 degrees Fahrenheit .
 That day more than 47 major fires erupted across the state, 14 of them claiming lives or causing significant damage . That day 14 of the 47 fires claimed lives or caused significant damage or were caused by fires .
 The flames quickly jumped a major highway and roared into a forest where they turned into a giant fireball . The flames dwarf the resources of local firefighters who could only flee in its path .
 Aided by steep slopes and powerful winds, this fire raced through a series of townships, including Kinglake (where 38 people died), Strathewen , and St. St. Louis .
 Residents of St. Andrews were surprised by the deaths of 12 people . Many residents were trapped in their homes . Many were trapped inside their homes after the tragedy .
 Some sought to escape by car as the fires approached, but dozens died on the roads as they were overtaken by the fire . Dozens of people are believed to have been killed in the fires in the area .
 Late in the afternoon a sudden change in wind direction pushed the fire to the northeast, bringing new towns into its path . A sudden change of wind direction pushes the fire north of the fire .
 A parallel fire, known as the Murrindindi fire, also blew to the northeast, swallowing the unsuspecting tourist town of Marysville, where 34 people lost their lives . A parallel blaze also swept the town, also killing 34 people, also swept through the town of Mur
 Fire experts said that these two fires alone released energy equivalent to 1,500 Hiroshima-sized atomic bombs . Experts said the two fires released enough energy to release enough power to release Hiroshima-size atomic bombs to release .
 Fires also ravaged other parts of the state, including the eastern region of Gippsland, where 11 people were killed . 11 people died in the fires, including 11 in the eastern part of Victoria .
 In some townships there was no more than a handful of survivors after the fires swept through . Some townships were overrun by the fires, leaving no survivors .
 The township of Flowerdale, 65 km north of Melbourne, was razed to the ground . Flowerdale was the township of the township, 65km north of the Melbourne suburb .
 The government announced that a Royal Commission would be formed to look into the disaster . The government declared that emergency services had done the best that they could in the face of an unprecedented natural phenomenon .
 Country Fire Authority gave inadequate warnings to communities in the fire's path, report says . Public warnings given to communities were inadequate and in some cases nonexistent .
 CFA personnel in charge of managing the fires failed to issue timely warnings, with the result that many people did not know that they were in danger until the fire was upon them . It revealed that the CFA failed to give timely warnings .
 Serious deficiencies were pinpointed in the command and control systems of the emergency services agencies . The problem led to confusion, inertia, and poor decision making at crucial times, officials say .
 Report recommends changes to the ""stay or go" policy . The policy had advised residents to choose between remaining and defending their property against a fire or leaving early .
 Victorian government pledges to implement interim recommendations in time for the 2009-10 fire season . Victorian government pledged to implement all of the Royal Commission's interim recommendations .
 The Commission's final report was expected in July 2010 . Alcohol were discriminatory and breached Australia’s treaty obligations . The Commission was expected to report in July .
 Rudd authorized ministerial priority to find ways to reduce the numbers of Aborigines in prison and improve Aboriginal life expectancy . Rudd said it was a priority for the government to reduce Aborigine prison numbers .
 At the beginning of 2009, Australia's national accounts were in a relatively healthy condition, largely because of mineral exports to China . In 2009, the country's national account was in a healthy condition .
 In April the national airline Qantas announced that 1,750 jobs were to be eliminated and deferred new aircraft delivery . The national airline announced in April that it had to cut the number of jobs .
 In May budget the government followed up its previous policies of cutting interest rates and giving handouts to appropriate sectors of the population, including pensioners, the unemployed, and Aborigines . In the May budget, the government cut interest rates, and gave handouts for pensioners and the
 Treasurer Wayne Swan expected growth to fall by 0.5% and unemployment to rise to 8.25% . Unemployment is low by international standards but unacceptably high in Australia .
 As a result, fiscal 2009 saw a record deficit and unprecedented revenue losses . Fiscal 2009 was a year of unprecedented losses for the government .
 The stunning rebound of Chinese industrial production helped Australia shrug off the global financial crisis better than anyone expected . Australia became the first major world economy to raise interest rates since the crisis began in October .
 Rudd government faced its most serious foreign crisis since it took office in 2007 . In a series of disputes with China, the Rudd government has faced its worst foreign crisis .
 Stem Hu, head of Rio Tinto's iron ore operations in China, was arrested for industrial espionage and bribery . Hu was arrested along with three senior Chinese employees of Rio . Hu, a Chinese-born Australian citizen, was also arrested .
 Canberra declined to refuse a visa to the exiled Uighur leader Rebiya Kadeer, even when asked to do so by China . Beijing canceled a scheduled visit to Australia by Vice Minister He Yafei .
 The SPO and OVP both had about 31% support in August, according to polls .
 Support for the FPO rose to 21%, and the party seemed poised to remain one of the largest forces in Austrian politics . The FPO is expected to remain a major force in the country .
 The FPO campaign in the European Parliament elections was highly provocative, however, as a result of its anti-Muslim and anti-Jewish statements . FPO's anti-Semitic statements were 'highly provocative' and 'very provocative'
 The FPO has left no viable alternative to an SPOOVP grand coalition . This made it difficult for the OVP to find domestic or international acceptance for a possible partnership with the FPO .
 While the BZO remained popular in Carinthia, its support dwindled elsewhere in Austria following the sudden death in October 2008 of its leader, Jorg Haider .
 Austria's economy contracted sharply in 2009, largely owing to a significant fall in investment and exports . Austria's economic growth in 2009 was largely driven by a drop in investment, exports .
 In the first half of the year, investment was severely restrained by a dramatic drop in manufacturing output . Manufacturing output stabilized midyear and began to recover very slowly thereafter .
 Investment also contracted owing to low business confidence and tight credit conditions . Low business consumer confidence also contributed to the drop in investment investment .
 Exports declined drastically in 2009, largely as a result of a contraction in GDP growth in Germany, the rest of the euro area, Russia, and Central and Eastern Europe . Austria's main trading partner, Germany, is Austria's biggest exporter .
 Chancellor Werner Faymann’s SPO-led government accelerated the tax cuts originally planned for 2010 to take effect in 2009 . Germany's economic-recovery program introduced to ameliorate the impact of global economic recession on consumers and businesses .
 Measures to boost domestic demand included abolishing student fees, extending family allowances, increasing care subsidies, allowing investment into infrastructure, promoting research and development .
 Finance Minister Josef Proll of the OVP reported that the government expected the deficit to reach 3.5% of GDP in 2009 and 4.7% in 2010 . Proll said that the deficit will reach a deficit of 3.3% in 2009, 2010 .
 The European Commission announced in late June that before the end of the year it would initiate procedures against Austria for having exceeded the 3% of GDP threshold established in the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact . Austria has exceeded that threshold .
 By mid-2009 most of the country’s largest banks had received state aid . Most of the biggest banks in the country received state help .
 On March 18 voters approved sweeping amendments to the constitution, one of which empowered Pres. Barack Obama . Voters also approved sweeping changes to state constitution .
 Ilham Aliyev to seek additional terms as president after the expiration of his current term in 2013 . Ilham is expected to be re-elected as president of Azerbaijan in 2014 . He will be allowed to hold additional terms in office after his current current term expires in 2015 .
 In August draft amendments to the law on political parties were announced that, if voted into law, would impose new restrictions on party registration and funding . Draft amendments would impose restrictions on registration and party funding .
 On January 1 a radio ban took effect that barred international broadcasts from being featured on national frequencies . The ban was imposed on January 1 .
 Journalists and nongovernmental organization workers were denied entry to the hearing proceedings . Individuals who appeared outside the courthouse in a show of support were arrested .
 Azerbaijani security services summoned for interrogation several of the 43 people who voted for Armenia in the Eurovision Song Contest . Azerbaijan's security services are questioning several of those who voted in Azerbaijan's vote for Armenia .
 26 men accused of having engineered an explosion in Baku’s Abu-Bakr mosque were sentenced to between 2 and 15 years’ imprisonment . In early November, after a four-month trial, 26 men were found guilty of the attack .
 On October 5 four Azerbaijanis and two Lebanese citizens were jailed for planning a terror attack on the Israeli embassy in Baku . Four Azerbaijanis were jailed on October 5 for planning to attack the Israeli Embassy in the country .
 The economy was badly affected by the global financial crisis . The financial, construction, and petrochemical sectors were badly affected in 2008 .
 GDP growth slowed dramatically, reaching only 2.7% during the first seven months of the year . GDP growth growth slowed significantly in the first half of 2014, reaching 2.8% .
 In 2009 President Aliyev met several times with his Armenian counterpart, Pres. Armenians . In 2009, Azerbaijan's president met with the Armenian counterpart in Azerbaijan .
 The two failed to reach a formal settlement on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict . Serzh Sarkisyan and Serzh Karabakh met in Armenia to discuss the conflict . The two have been unable to reach an agreement .
 In April the announcement of the incipient Armenian-Turkish rapprochement— and the subsequent commitment by those two countries in October to establish diplomatic relations—occasioned official protests from the Azerbaijani government . In October, the two countries agreed to establish relations .
 Azerbaijan could choose Russia, rather than Turkey, as the route for future gas exports . President Aliyev declined to attend a UN-sponsored conference in Istanbul in early April .
 Azerbaijan signed deal that gave Russia the right to purchase gas from the Shah Deniz field beginning in 2014-15 . On June 29 Azerbaijan had signed a deal with Russia’s Gazprom that gave Gazprom the right .
 Area claimed overlapped into U.S., Haitian, Cuban, and Turks and Caicos waters . Negotiations on the proposal with other countries would be required .
 Cuba reportedly was preparing to drill in the Cay Sal Bank area that The Bahamas regarded as its own . The Bahamas considered the area to be its own, adding urgency to the need to settle maritime boundaries on a permanent basis .
 The Bahamas was moving ahead as fast as it could to expand the role of renewable energy in its energy matrix . Like elsewhere in the Caribbean Community region, The Bahamas is moving ahead to expand its renewable energy portfolio .
 By midyear the Bahamas Electricity Corporation had short-listed as many as 13 proposals for various types of renewable-energy projects . In December, six companies were still considering bids by six companies .
 Privatization of government-owned assets is still on the agenda in the Caribbean . The Bahamas proved no exception to the idea of privatization .
 The labour sponsorship system had been criticized by international human rights groups as operating in a mode little short of slavery . The Labour sponsorship system was riddled with corruption .
 Most of the remaining Gulf countries subsequently indicated that they would revise their own sponsorship laws . Most of them indicated they would revamp their sponsorship laws in the region .
 Bahrain imposed severe restrictions on live entertainment and the consumption of alcohol in most of its hotels . The Bahraini government imposed strict restrictions on the use of alcohol and live entertainment .
 Bahrain had been known as an oasis of tolerance surrounded by mostly conservative Islamic countries . Bahrain faced a possible impact on its tourism industry . The country had traditionally been known for tolerance .
 Construction of the long-awaited 40-km -long “Friendship Causeway"" linking the island of Bahrain to Qatar was scheduled to begin in 2010 . The construction of the 40-kil-long ‘friendship causeway’ was scheduled for 2010 .
 The estimated $2.2 billion project is expected to take four years to complete . The estimated four-year project will cost $2 billion .
 The election that had taken place on Dec., 2008, was important for many reasons . The election was important to many reasons, including the future of the country .
 Many political leaders were jailed on charges ranging from graft to the illegal possession of liquor . First, it marked the end of the two-year rule of an unelected militarybacked interim government .
 The election saw the overwhelming defeat of the pro-Islamist rightwing alliance that had ruled for five years prior to the interim government . More significant, however, was the fact that the election witnessed the overwhelming victory of the right wing alliance .
 Prior to the election, a number of detained politicians were released on bail . Charges against many of them, including Hasina, were eventually dropped .
 At least 74 persons, including 57 senior military officers, were killed by the guards during the insurrection . Guards reportedly had reportedly been upset over their pay and living conditions .
 The mutiny ended after the government offered the mutineers an amnesty deal . But Hasina later rescinded amnesty for those directly responsible for the killings .
 The government seemed to be teetering on the edge of collapse in the wake of the mutiny . The army accused it of having failed to protect the lives of military personnel .
 The army wanted the suspects in the killings to be tried under military law . The government decided to create a special civil tribunal to handle the prosecutions .
 The year also saw a sudden increase in extrajudicial killings carried out by police and the Rapid Action Battalion, the country’s elite antiterrorism force .
 In the first nine months of the year, 97 such killings took place, which prompted criticism of the battalion by human rights organizations . The battalion has been criticized for the killings .
 In April the government announced plans to investigate and prosecute persons for war crimes committed during Bangladesh’s 1971 liberation struggle .
 Bringing war criminals to trial was a popular campaign pledge made by the Awami League . But the move was opposed by the country’s pro-Islamist parties . Several of these parties had allegedly collaborated with Pakistani forces in 1971 .
 On the economic front, imports declined by 20% and exports by about 3% in July-August compared with the same period a year earlier . Imports declined by about 20% .
 Agricultural output growth reached 4.6%, and ready-made-garment sector remained strong . Exports growth of more than 20% during the first half of the year .
 Renewable and alternative energy would also be a key part of the program . The expansion of renewable energy would be key to the government's plan .
 In May Barbados removed the death penalty as a mandatory sentence for murder . Barbados has removed the mandatory sentence since colonial times . The death penalty has been in place since the colonial era .
 Judges would be able to determine the type of sentence to be imposed on convicted murderers, taking into account the circumstances of each case . Henceforth, judges would be . able to . determine the . type of . sentence . Judges would then be able . to decide the type . of sentence
 Barbados’s ""get-tough” immigration policy upset many of its fellow Caribbean Community member states, which regarded it as inconsistent with regional principles . Barbados's immigration policy angered many of the Caribbean Community members states .
 In July, Prime Minister David Thompson announced that the policy would remain in place .
 Thompson repeatedly asserted that Barbados’s economy had weathered the economic storm better than most Caribbean countries . Barbados is experiencing an “unacceptably high” level of immigration, Thompson said .
 In May, Thompson decreed that Caricom nationals living illegally in Barbados had six months to prove that they had resided in the country for at least eight years prior to Dec. 31, 2005 . They needed to pass a security background check and provide evidence of employment .
 Those who did not regularize their status would be deported when identified . Those who didn't regularize status would have to be identified .
 Belarusian ruble devalued by 20.5% against U.S. dollar on January 2 . Official currency devalued against the United States dollar . The official currency, the Belarusian Ruble, has been devalued since 2008 .
 Export of heavy transport vehicles to Russia fell by 55.3% between January and August . Trade with Russia declined by more than 40% overall . Exports of heavy vehicles to the Russian market fell by over 55% in a year .
 On October 28, the government abandoned its regulation of retail prices other than for “socially important products’’ such as milk, meat, salt, and sugar . The government has now abandoned its retail prices for other products .
 The country's complex relationship with Russia overshadowed other events . Russia's relationship with the U.S. overshadowed the events in Washington .
 In May Russia refused to provide Belarus with the remaining $500 million of a $2 billion loan that had been negotiated in 2008 . Russia also refused to give Belarus the rest of the $2billion loan . Belarus is one of the poorest countries in the world and has been hit hard by
 Belarus sells 95% of its dairy exports to Russia . On June 6, after Belarus held talks with the EU on dairy exports, Russia instituted a ban on all Belarusian products .
 Belarus had expressed its anger by skipping a meeting of the Collective Security Treaty Organization in Moscow . The ban was eventually lifted on June 17, but not before Belarus skipped a meeting . Belarus had been scheduled to take up the rotating chairmanship of the Organization .
 Alvaksandr Lukashenka also maintained that his country would not be pressured by Russia into recognizing the breakaway Georgian republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 On July 31 Lukashenka did participate in a CSTO meeting in Kyrgyzstan . He refused to sign documents creating a collective rapid-response force to meet regional security threats . The move was made in response to a threat posed by Russia .
 He eventually signed in October and committed 5,000 troops to the force . He eventually committed in October .
 Russia provided funding and expertise for the construction of a nuclear plant at Astravets in Belarus’s Hrodna region . Russia also provided funding to build the nuclear plant .
 In mid-September Lukashenka declared that Europe's policy of isolating Belarus had failed . Belarusian leader made a highly publicized visit to Lithuania, where he declared that the European policy of isolation had failed.
 The goal of the project was to promote economic integration and enhance political links between EU border countries . The project was also to promote political links and economic integration .
 The results of the accounting were expected to be released in February 2010 .
 The government contained the same five political parties as its predecessor . The French-Dutch-speaking Liberals and Christian Democrats were the same party .
 The government was forced to resign after ministers were accused of intervening in the judiciary .
 After elections in June different combinations of political parties were formed to govern the three regions . The federal coalition held firm, but after elections, different combinations were formed .
 A bitter row between Francophone Liberals and Socialists ruled out any partnership between them in French-speaking Wallonia and the bilingual Brussels-Capital Region .
 A newly opened museum in Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium, is dedicated to cartoonist Herge . Herge was the creator of the comic-strip character Tintin .
 Yves Leterme returned to the government in the summer of 2009 as foreign minister . He was forced to resign as prime minister in December 2008 after being forced to step down .
 Guy Verhofstadt is the leader of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe in the European Parliament . He is the former prime minister of Belgium .
 King Albert gave Leterme a second chance at the prime ministership . King Albert appointed him as Belgium's head of government after Van Rompuy's resignation .
 Belize sary in each of the next four years if the annual budget was to be balanced by 2013 . Belize's annual budget will be balanced in each year if the budget is to be paid back by the end of the year .
 IMF predicted that the country’s economy would shrink by 3.8% in 2009—the biggest decline since 1939 . In the first quarter of the year, there were a record number of bankruptcies . IMF predicts that the economy will shrink by 4.6% .
 In February angry Fortis shareholders narrowly rejected a government-backed plan to sell 75% of the Belgian bank to France’s BNP Paribas .
 The sale was approved in April after further negotiations between the Belgian government and the prospective French buyer . After further negotiations, the French government approved the sale .
 The Flanders-based banking and insurance group KBC reported first-quarter losses of about $5 billion . Two weeks later, the federal government provided the company with an initial loan guarantee of $31. billion .
 A 2005 agreement between Belgium and The Netherlands about a Dutch estuary continued to remain controversial . In foreign affairs, the agreement remained controversial .
 The Dutch promised to widen the estuary, which provided Antwerp with access to the North Sea, but the work had not yet begun . The Dutch had promised to . widen the . estuary but work was not yet done .
 Museums dedicated to two of Belgium's most famous citizens debuted in 2009 . Museums are dedicated to Belgium's two most famous people .
 In June a museum devoted to Herge, the pen name of Georges Remi, opened in Louvain-la-Neuve to honour the 80th year of his creation of the comic strip character .
 Kim Clijsters and Justine Henin have decided to come out of retirement . Belgian tennis fans were given a major treat when the country’s two leading women players decided to return from retirement .
 Mayan leaders sought to prevent the granting of lands in their villages . The government was engaged in many litigations with groups challenging its constitutional amendments .
 The new government rejected the terms of a 2005 secret Accommodation Agreement signed with the former administration of Said Musa . The agreement guaranteed the telecommunications company Belize Telemedia Ltd. a 15% rate of return or a tax holiday .
 To end the legal struggles, the government nationalized the Ashcroft-owned Telemedia . Telemedia was nationalized by the government in August 2009 .
 The fall in the price of petroleum, the loss of tourists' dollars, and debt servicing added to the downturn . The country's economy has been hit hard by the fall in recent years .
 Belizean government committed to pursuing the process of resolving the territorial dispute with Guatemala . Belizeans remain committed to resolving the dispute .
 In 2008 Belize had signed a special agreement with Guatemala, subject to simultaneous referenda, to refer the latter’s claim to the International Court of Justice . Belize and Guatemala signed the agreement in 2008 subject to a referendum .
 In early August cheering citizens welcomed home the men’s national basketball team . The team returned to the U.S. in early August .
 Aboubacar Aboudou, former director of the program, blamed inadequate controls that allowed unscrupulous intermediaries to take advantage of borrowers . The program's former director said inadequate controls let unscrupulous agents take advantage .
 Since its inception in 2007, the scheme had made more than 500,000 loans . Since 2007, it has made over 500,500 loans .
 In February the Ministry of Energy and Water blamed corrupt public officials for the slow progress in implementing multination donor projects .
 Thomas Yayi Boni suspended Minister for Urban Affairs Franqois Noudegbessi pending an investigation into the disappearance of €9. million that had been allocated to finance the summit of the Community of Sahel-Saharan States held in 2008 in Cotonou .
 The government announced on February 3 that substantial offshore oil reserves, estimated at 14,000 bbl a day, had been found . Government announced the discovery of the oil reserves in February .
 On February 7 the World Bank granted Benin $30 million for the creation of small businesses and the provision of electricity to less-developed parts of the country . The World Bank also gave Benin the money to create small businesses . Benin is the only African African country to receive the
 On May 31 Germany awarded Benin €50 million for improvements in infrastructure . Benin was awarded the money by Germany for improvements to infrastructure .
 The hospital ship Africa Mercy docked in Cotonou in February for a 10-month stay to provide free surgery and other essential medical care . The ship is the first ship to dock in the country since it arrived in February 2013 .
 UN agencies stepped up efforts to assist the cashstrapped government . In July, massive flooding displaced more than 20,000 people throughout the country . UN agencies are stepping up efforts following massive flooding .
 The European Union on April 8 added Benin's air carriers to its aviation blacklist . Benin air carriers were added to the European Union's blacklist . The EU has also blacklisted Benin airlines .
 Airliners considered unsafe were forbidden to fly to any EU member country . Airliner considered unsafe would be banned from flying to EU member countries .
 Indian Home Minister P Chidambaram paid a threeday visit to Bhutanese Prime Minister Lyonchen Jigmi Thinley to India . The visit follows the official visit in June of the Prime Minister to India where discussions focused on the exportation of hydropower to India
 Discussions focused on security issues along the border and activities of militants in the northeast . Discussions also focused on the activities of militant groups in northeast .
 Bhutan enjoyed robust economic growth of more than 8%, according to the country’s Labour Ministry . The unemployment rate jumped to 4% in 2009 from 3.7% in 2007 .
 All 20 of Bhutan's 20 districts became connected to the rest of the world through broadband Internet access . Bhutan became the first country to become a nation to be connected to broadband Internet .
 Prime Minister Thinley visited Japan in September in an effort to attract foreign aid and investment . Thinley's visit was part of a push for foreign investment in Japan .
 Bhutan also liberalized its foreign-direct-investment laws to attract Indian investors . Bhutan has also opened up its foreign direct investment laws in the past .
 Evo Morales was reelected to a five-year term in December 2009 . His party made major gains in legislative elections, capping a year of major reform .
 The stage for Morales’s victory had been set in January when Bolivians approved a new constitution . Bolivian voters approved the new constitution in January . Morales is the first president of the country to win a presidential election .
 The charter, drafted with the help of Spanish legal scholars, gave sweeping rights to BoAizar Raldes . Leopoldo Fernandez was being held on charges of having orchestrated the killings of several supporters of Bolivian Pres.
 Evo Morales has guaranteed political representation, recognition of communal forms of property, and the right to employ indigenous justice systems . Morales is the leader of Bolivia's indigenous majority .
 The charter won 62% voter approval in a nationwide referendum, but four provinces in the eastern lowlands rejected it . It underscored the division between the economically rich eastern region and the impoverished Indian-dominated highlands .
 The referendum result reaffirmed Morales's popularity and strengthened his hand in Bolivia’s internal political battles . Morales’ popularity has been boosted by the result of the referendum result .
 In April police burst into a hotel in Santa Cruz, shot three men dead, and arrested two others . Police claimed they had thwarted a plot by allies of powerful separatist businessmen in the eastern region to kill Morales .
 The businessmen denied the allegation, saying that Morales was trying to boost his chances of reelection . Morales has been accused of using the affair to help him win re-election .
 One of those killed was a Bolivian Hungarian who had fought in the Balkan wars of the 1990s . The victim had told an interviewer that he was returning to Bolivia to fight for a breakaway state .
 Leopoldo Fernandez, former governor of Pando province, remains in jail . Fernandez is accused of having been involved in the killings of several Morales supporters during opposition protests in 2008 . Fernandez remains behind bars .
 The United States maintained its suspension of tariff exemptions, saying that Bolivia had failed to cooperate sufficiently with antinarcotics efforts . The U.S. says Bolivia has not cooperated sufficiently with anti-biodiodia efforts .
 The last of some 38 agents of the Drug Enforcement Agency who had been ordered out of Bolivia left in January . A U.S. diplomat was expelled in March, the second in six months . Some 38 agents from the DEA were ordered out in January, and a United States diplomat was
 President Morales drew a sharp distinction between the growing of coca leaf and the illegal production of cocaine . President Morales says coca is a legal crop traditionally chewed to ward off hunger and altitude sickness . Morales: Coca leaf is legal crop but illegal production is illegal .
 Annual cocaine seizures had doubled between 2006 and 2008, police said . Police raided several clandestine drug laboratories, which they said were among the largest ever discovered .
 Morales strengthened Bolivia’s ties with Russia by signing agreements on drug eradication and military cooperation, including the acquisition of a presidential jet and of helicopters . Morales also signed agreements with Russia on the eradication of drug and military ties .
 Rising temperatures wipe out the Chacaltaya glacier near La Paz, which threatened the city’s water supply . Rising temperatures wiped out the glacier near the city's water supply, which was threatened .
 The most exciting development in natural resources concerned lithium, which is used in the batteries that power electric cars . Lithium is used to make electric cars and is a key component of the electric industry .
 About half of the world’s known lithium deposits were located in the Salar de Uyuni, a salt desert in southwestern Bolivia .
 The government has held talks with French, Japanese, and South Korean firms on development . The government continued construction of a pilot plant to process the mineral .
 Threats of secession and political infighting between the three main ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina renewed speculation among observers in 2009 about a fresh round of violence .
 The Muslim-Croat Federation was criticized for having lacked a consensus, and the Republika Srpska (RS) criticized for not having a consensus . Bosnian Serb Republic was criticized as having lacked consensus .
 Paddy Ashdown, who served in the UN-appointed post of high representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, stated that he had seen a dramatic reversal of progress in the entities . Ashdown said he has seen a drastic reversal in progress .
 Bosnian Muslim woman from Srebrenica watches a television broadcast of the genocide trial of former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic . On October 1 the RS parliament voted to withdraw from participation in all state institutions .
 Unless the OHR reversed a decision concerning control of the national electric company, it will not be able to take over the power company .
 Bosnian Serbs wanted to keep energy grid operational under powersharing agreement . High Representative Valentin Inzko, who replaced Miroslav Lajcak in March, wants to keep electric power distribution locally controlled .
 Worsening economic conditions unleashed an unprecedented wave of labour and social discontent . Worsened economic conditions have unleashed a wave of social discontent.
 During the first 10 months of 2009, more than 50,000 Bosnians lost their jobs . Remittances sent from workers abroad declined because of the downturn in the global economy .
 The arrangement called for a 10% cut to the Federation and RS budgets . The budget was €207 million (about $292 million) and €73 million ( about $103 million) respectively .
 Muslim-Croat Federation Prime Minister Mustafa Mujezinovic faced public protests as the budget cuts called for the lowering of public-sector salaries and wages by 10% .
 IMF approved 36month stand-by arrangement in July . Nearly all unions and veterans' associations staged daily two-hour strikes over a two-week period . IMF approved the 36month agreement last month .
 IMF data: Bosnia and Herzegovina’s GDP was expected to drop 3% in 2009 . IMF data shows that Bosnia's GDP is expected to fall 3% this year .
 Bosnia and Herzegovina submitted an official application for NATO Membership Action Plan in October . The plan prepares candidates for full NATO membership . In October, Bosnia submitted a formal application for the NATO Membership Plan .
 NATO foreign ministers did not offer Bosnia a formal plan in December to join the alliance . The country still expected to join NATO by 2015 . Bosnia is expected to be the first member of the alliance in 2015 .
 The government responded to the recession by making drastic cuts in its recurrent expenditures while boosting capital spending on infrastructure projects . The cuts led to an unprecedented budget deficit covered by a $1.1 billion loan from the African Development Bank .
 Ian Khama came under fire from privately owned media outlets for his alleged authoritarianism and ""militarization"" of the state . Khama has been accused of authoritarianism in the past .
 He presented himself, however, in a more flattering light in consulting rural masses over urban elites . He also issued directives to negligent government officials .
 The issue that generated the most controversy was the killing by state security agents of reputed master-crook John Kalafatis . He was shot eight times while sitting unarmed in his limousine .
 The political debate stimulated high voter registration and a 74% turnout . Young people aged 18 to 29 voted in notably high numbers . Young voters aged 18-29 voted in notable high numbers.
 BDP gained one more seat in the National Assembly over its 2004 total of 44 . The BDP was returned to power again in 2004 . The party gained 44 seats in the 2004 election .
 Botswana pledged $75 million toward that country’s economic reconstruction, starting with the restoration of the Bulawayo city power station . The power station was restored by Botswana in 2008 .
 Several other senators and more than two dozen federal deputies also changed political parties during the year . The move was meant to improve their chances of holding on to office .
 Members of Lula’s cabinet were expected to resign their posts by April 2010, a mandatory step for cabinet ministers who wished to run in the elections .
 New oil discoveries continued to be made by the Brazilian state oil company, Petrobras, and its partners in the ultradeepwater subsalt areas of the Santos basin .
 Multiple discoveries over the previous three years of multibillion-barrel reserves raised Brazil’s profile as a top future oil producer . The discoveries gave impetus to increased investment in ports, shipyards, naval construction, refineries and oil and gas exploration .
 On August 31 Lula unveiled the federal government’s plan for a new regulatory regime to manage this new oil wealth . Lula: "On August 31, Lula unveils the plan for the federal . government”
 He proposed the creation of a new government enterprise, called Petrosal, to manage and oversee the contracts for subsalt exploration and production . The proposal would create a government enterprise to oversee contracts .
 Under this regime Petrobras would be the only operator with a guaranteed stake of 30% in each concession . Under this new regime Petrobasas would have a guaranteed 30% stake of each concession.
 Current royalty distributions would be changed . Social and environmental fund would be created to spread oil revenues to other states outside production areas .
 Producer regions stood to lose revenues from royalties, as well as those who viewed the new regulatory body as a redundant bureaucracy . These provisions caused fiery debate from producer regions, which stood to stand to lose revenue .
 The Growth Acceleration Program aimed to boost the country’s economic growth to 5% annually . The federal government continued its funding of social and educational projects, rural-electrification efforts and housing initiatives .
 The Brazilian Congress was prevented from advancing on any meaningful reforms by a corruption scandal . A corruption scandal that embroiled the Senate for much of the year also prevented progress on reforms .
 Agaciel Maia resigned his post in early March after allegations emerged that he had hidden ownership of a mansion in Brasilia from federal tax authorities . Maia had served as the director general of the Senate since 1995 .
 Maia is linked to the awarding of lucrative patronage jobs and pay raises via hundreds of secret acts passed by the Senate during Maia's tenure as director general .
 Also implicated in the scandal was the president of the Senate, Jose Sarney, accused of having approved the secret acts . Sarney is accused of securing jobs for his family members and political allies .
 Many in Congress called for Sarney's ouster after mounting evidence of corruption . Sarney and others faced mounting evidence .
 On August 19, the Senate Ethics Committee absolved Sarney of all accusations against him . Sarney was cleared of all charges by the committee on August 19 .
 Sarney’s son, Fernando, faced allegations of money laundering, won an injunction from a judge in August . O Estado de Sao Paulo newspaper prohibited any reporting of accusations against him by a judge .
 Brazil's Supreme Court ruled against newspaper's appeal of Vieira’s decision . The newspaper sought to overturn this injunction, but the court ruled against it on December 10 . Vieira's decision was overturned by the court .
 By a vote of 10 to 1, the Supreme Court in March ruled in favour of a continuous demarcation of the Raposa Serra do Sol Indian reservation . The reservation is located in northern Roraima state near the Venezuelan and Guyanese borders .
 Brazil also moved forward with infrastructure investments in the country’s Amazon region . Brazil is investing in infrastructure projects in the Amazon region.
 Three major hydroelectric power plants were planned for the region . These included the Santo Antonio and Jirau projects in Rondonia state and the Belo Monte project in Para state .
 The Brazilian Environmental Institute approved an economic-impact study for the Jirau project on June 3 . The study clears the way for construction on the project to begin .
 Brunei would become the first city in South America to host an Olympics . Brunei's capital would be the only city in the region to host the Olympics .
 IOC decision comes months after selection of 12 Brazilian cities to host World Cup matches in 2014 . IOC decision came just months after the May 31 selection by the Federation Internationale de Football Association of 12 cities .
 Violence in Rio de Janeiro between drug gangs and police left at least 26 people dead in October . Brazil was reminded of the major public safety challenge it faced ahead of these events .
 A nationwide blackout occurred on November 10 as transmission problems at the Itaipu hydroelectric power plant spurred a prolonged power outage . This was underscored by a nationwide blackout that occurred November 10 .
 The year saw Brazil emerge relatively unscathed by the global economic crisis . The year was marked by the rise of Brazil's economy .
 The central banks Open Market Committee reduced the benchmark discount interest rate from 13.75% to 8.75%. The move affords Brazil an opportunity to cut barriers to credit and help stimulate domestic consumer spending .
 The Lula administration also extended and granted tax breaks on consumer purchases of automobiles, motorcycles, and appliances . The tax breaks were also extended on purchases of cars, motorcycles and motorcycles .
 Accumulated inflation as measured by the National Consumer Price Index was 3.93% through November . Inflation as measured as 3.94% in the past year .
 GDP fell by 1.9%, owing largely to the decline in the oil and gas sector’s performance based on constant prices . This represented a slight improvement over 2008, when GDP fell 1.3% .
 The country’s oil and gas sector had declined by 6.3% in 2008 . In January 2009 the worst floods and landslides in memory were witnessed in Brunei .
 The overflow from drains caused temporary havoc in some parts of Bandar Ser Seri Begawan, the capital . As a result of the cutting off of electricity and water supplies, the overflow caused temporary chaos .
 In March 2009 outgoing Malaysian prime minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi announced that his country and Brunei had reached a landmark agreement in resolving their border disputes . A settlement could clear the way for exploration in potentially oil and gas-rich waters shared by both countries .
 The long-standing border dispute over Limbang, Malay remained unresolved . Nevertheless, one of the main and contentious issues remains unresolved .
 Malaysia's national oil company, Petronas, will have a role in a joint oil-extraction venture with Brunei . The Malaysia-Brunei Letters of Exchange was signed in March .
 In 2009 it was disclosed that the much-touted ""Visit Brunei” campaign in 2008—designed to attract visitors from abroad, especially from neighbouring Southeast Asian countries— had met with little success .
 Brunei would play host to the ASEAN Tourism Forum in 2010 . Brunei has been hosting the world's largest tourism event in recent years .
 During January, thousands of Bulgarians did not have electricity or heat, and production was halted in major enterprises across the country .
 The crisis highlighted the weakness of Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev’s Socialist-led government, which was already struggling to deal with the effects of the global recession . The government also faced mounting allegations of corruption and the misappropriation of EU funds .
 Stanishev requested that European diplomats be involved in the implementation of legal and structural changes in the country . In March, the government failed to fulfill the European Commission’s corruptionand crime-reduction requirements for unfreezing of Special Accession Programme for Agricultural and Rural Development
 The European Commission rejected a proposal by Socialist Party to give the party credibility . The proposal was rejected by the European Commission .
 Centre-right Citizens for European Development of Bulgaria emerged as the undisputed winner . Former Sofia mayor Boiko Borisov led the party to victory in the parliamentary elections .
 In September the country’s new minister of justice Margarita Popova presented the European Commission with a comprehensive plan for reforming the judicial system and for dealing with corruption .
 The European Commission unblocked a portion of the SAPARD funds for Bulgaria that it had frozen a year earlier . In response, the European Commission reblocked some of the funds . The funds had been frozen in Bulgaria a year ago .
 Bulgaria dropped two spots, to 44th, on the World Bank’s ranking of countries based on their attractiveness to foreign investment . Bulgaria's long-term economic outlook improved over the year, but its economic outlook worsened over the past year .
 Projected inflation for 2009 was 1.8%, owing in part to lower oil and raw-material prices . In 2009 inflation was projected to be 1.2% higher than in 2008 .
 The country's current account deficit was estimated at $4. billion, compared with $7. billion a year earlier . The country’s current account deficits were estimated at . $4 billion, down from $7 billion in 2013 .
 Tourism revenues, which contributed 14% of GDP, have declined 25% from 2008 . Tourism revenues have declined by 25% since 2008 .
 Bulgarian archaeologist Nikolay Ovcharov unearthed the remains of the original St. St. Peter the Apostle . The discovery was made during the year of 2012 .
 Excavations offer evidence that the Bulgarian aristocracy was not destroyed by the Ottoman invasion in the 14th century . Excavation offers evidence that Bulgarian aristocrats were not destroyed in the invasion .
 Under a new government initiative, more than 5 million Burkina Faso citizens would be issued birth certificates free of charge . The initiative was announced in May 2009 . The country has a population of 15,757,000 .
 This program was expected to be completed before the scheduled 2010 presidential elections . This program is expected to complete before the 2010 presidential election .
 A population growth rate of 3.1% threatened to offset strong increases in economic growth . The country's economic growth rate was just 3% higher than the rate of 2.7% in 2008 .
 In February the UN World Food Programme launched a food-voucher scheme . The scheme was designed to benefit 20,000 Ouagadougou households . The food-payment scheme was launched in February .
 The WFP called for expansion of the emergency program, calling attention to the continued high prices and empty shelves in their warehouses . On August 10, the agency called for an extension of its emergency program .
 At least 30,000 more families in the capital alone were estimated to be in dire need of help . At least more families are estimated to have been affected by the crisis .
 September floods left more than 150,000 residents homeless, most of them in Ouagadougou's suburbs . Floods left many of the country's poorest residents homeless .
 In February the United States had given Burkina Faso military equipment worth $17 million in preparation for the deployment to that troubled region . The U.S. had also given Burkine Faso $17million in military equipment .
 Ouagadougou PanAfrican Film and Television Festival was held in late February and early March . The festival was the 40th annual PanAfrican film and television festival held in Ouagdougou . It was the first time the festival had been held in Africa .
 FESPACO proved a great success with both participants and the public in general . Despite some organizational and funding problems, the event proved to be a success with participants .
 The Ethiopian film Teza was awarded the Golden Stallion of Yennenga, the festival’s grand prize . Teza is the first Ethiopian film to win a major prize at the festival in Ethiopia since 2003 .
 Nearly 3,500 former FNL soldiers were demobilized in April and May . They were integrated into the national army and police force . FNL was formed from the National National Liberation Party .
 By the end of 2008, most refugee camps in Tanzania had closed . About 63,000 Burundians had returned home in that year alone . Most refugee camps had closed and most Burundian returned home .
 In 2009 nearly 36,000 refugees continued to live in the one remaining camp . In 2009, nearly 40 per cent of refugees still lived in the camp .
 More than 470,000 refugees have returned to Burundi, U.N. refugee agency estimates . The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimates 470,500 refugees have been repatriated .
 In addition, about 165,000 refugees sought citizenship in Tanzania, under a special agreement between the two countries . In addition to the agreement, the refugees also sought citizenship .
 Burundian Senate passed draft legislation that abolished the death penalty and rejected a proposed amendment that would have outlawed homosexuality . In April the lower house voted for the abolition of the death sentence and pushed for the latter amendment .
 The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank canceled 92% of the country’s debt, which totaled more than $1.2 billion . The IMF and World Bank also canceled the country's debt . The debt was worth $1 billion .
 The move freed up more than $40 million annually over the next 20 years . The funds would be earmarked for social and development programs .
 In March the Paris Club of creditor nations canceled the entire $134 million debt owed by Burundi . Burundian debt was canceled by the club in March . The debt was worth $134million .
 Diplomatic negotiations early in the year broke down, and a brief clash in April resulted in the death of at least one Thai soldier .
 Tensions surged again in July, with further reported troop buildup around the date of the one-year anniversary of UNESCO's declaration of Preah Vihear as a World Heritage site .
 UNESCO ignored Thailand’s petition that the declaration be reconsidered or that both countries jointly administer the site . Cambodian authorities proclaimed this a major victory .
 As in Thailand, the standoff figured in Cambodian nationalist discourse and was used politically . As in Cambodia, it figured in Cambodia's national discourse and politics .
 Iconography of Preah Vihear became widespread, appearing on T-shirts and in music videos and pictures in hotel lobbies . Iconography became widespread .
 Schools and temples were asked to ring bells to celebrate the anniversary . A massive concert was broadcast live to mark the anniversary of the 9/11 .
 Further talks led some troop withdrawals in August and optimism for a settlement . Further talks in August led to some troop withdrawal in August .
 Kaing Guek Eav (better known as Duch) headed the notorious S21 prison during the 1975-79 Pol Pot regime . A verdict was not expected until 2010, but a verdict was expected until next year .
 Witnesses include scholars, S-21 prison staff, and the few surviving victims . Witnesses included scholars, prison staff and the surviving victims of the attack . Witnesses were from scholars, prisoners, and a prison staff .
 Early in the trial Duch dramatically confessed his responsibility for the crimes . He dramatically confessed to the crimes in a dramatic trial .
 Proceedings were broadcast on television . Observers complained of only moderate public interest in the trial .
 The four remaining defendants in ECCC custody were to be tried jointly . The remaining defendants will be tried in a joint trial .
 ECCC was considered a “hybrid"" court in that it was within the Cambodian legal system but included international jurists . ECCC considered a "hybrid" court in Cambodia .
 A call by the international jurists for indicting more Khmer Rouge leaders was initially resisted by the courts Cambodian judges . Prime Minister Hun Sen said that such a move would cause unrest .
 In September, the court formally opened up the possibility of more indictments, and the prosecution submitted five names . The prosecution submitted 5 names .
 The tribunal continued to be plagued, however, by a lack of funding and charges of corruption .
 Human rights organizations complained about the increasing number of lawsuits being brought against the political opposition . Human rights groups complained that the lawsuits were brought against political opponents .
 Hun Sen allegedly attacked parliamentarian Mu Sochua, using phrases with sexual innuendo . One notable case involved a speech made by Hun Sen in April .
 Hun Sen countersued both Mu Sochua and her lawyer, who eventually abandoned the defamation suit . Hun Sen counter-sued both the lawyer and her client, who later abandoned the suit .
 Mu Sochua was fined 16. million riels for defamation in August . He was stripped of parliamentary immunity after being stripped of immunity . Mu sochua has since been fined for defamation .
 Lawyer Philemon Yang, a member of the ruling Democratic Rally of the Cameroon People, named as prime minister . He named lawyer Yang as the new PM .
 Corruption in the public sector remains widespread, despite the government’s efforts to eradicate it . Corruption is still widespread in public sector, despite efforts to curb it, the government says .
 Concerns over Cameroon’s human rights record continued to make headlines . Concerns continued to be raised over the country's human rights abuses .
 Reporters Without Borders protested the three-year prison sentence given to Lewis Medjo . Medjo was managing editor of an opposition weekly journal . Reporters without Borders strongly protested the sentence .
 Amnesty International published a report on January 29 accusing the government of having committed severe human rights violations, especially in its efforts to crush political dissent . Amnesty International says the government has committed severe violations . The report was published by Amnesty International, a human rights watchdog .
 On August 12, the government’s own human rights commission published a damning report on prison conditions . The report was published by the commission .
 More than 23,000 prisoners, many of them awaiting trial, were in facilities designed for a maximum occupancy of 16,000 . Many of the prisoners are in facilities that were designed for maximum occupancy .
 Pope Benedict XVI celebrated mass before some 60,000 people in Yaounde’s football stadium on March 19 . On March 19, on his first stop of a weeklong African trip, he celebrated mass in the stadium .
 A charity football match between Cameroon and Cote d’Ivoire was held on June 13 in Abidjan . 19 people were crushed to death in a stampede during a World Cup qualifying match in March 29, when 19 people died .
 Canada entered 2009 still reeling from a constitutional crisis that had threatened the months-old Conservative minority government .
 Prime Minister Stephen Harper’s newly reelected centre-right government had introduced a much-maligned economic update on Nov., 2008, that projected a series of small budget surpluses in spite of the worldwide economic downturn . The update was introduced on Nov. 2008 .
 The budget update also contained new policies, including the suspension of programs to achieve pay equity between women and men . The temporary suspension of the federal public sector’s right to strike was also included .
 The new coalition would have had guaranteed support from the separatist Bloc Quebecois for 18 months . The new government would have been guaranteed support on confidence matters from the Bloc .
 Michaelle Jean prorogue Parliament on Dec. 2008, only weeks after the new session had begun, in an attempt to find time to introduce a revised budget that would win support from at least one of the opposition parties .
 A new session of Parliament was scheduled to begin in late January 2009 . Jean Jean acceded to his request, and a new session was scheduled for late 2009 .
 Parliament resumed on January 26 with a short new speech from the throne . The government briefly presented a six-point economic plan to stimulate the economy . Parliament resumes on January 27 with short speech from throne .
 The following day Finance Minister Jim Flaherty introduced the revised federal budget, which projected the first deficit since the 1997-98 fiscal year . The budget is the first since that fiscal year 1997 .
 Budget document predicts federal government will remain in deficit for at least four years before returning to balanced budgets . Budget document also predicted that the federal government would remain in a deficit for four years .
 A massive stimulus plan aimed at helping the country weather the global recession accounted for the bulk of the red ink . Falling corporate and personal tax revenue contributed to some of the shortfall .
 New spending initiatives included public and private investment, infrastructure program, enhanced benefits for low-income and unemployed Canadians, worker-retraining programs, and support for the ailing forestry and auto sectors .
 Personal income tax cuts worth approximately Can$4 billion over two years were also introduced . An individual home-renovation tax credit of up to Can$ 1,350 was introduced as a part of the budget .
 Reports would be confidence matters before the House of Commons and an opportunity to bring down the government if progress was not seen .
 Flaherty revised his forecast deficit for the 2009-10 fiscal year upward to an estimated Can$55. billion . During a fiscal update held on September 11, Flaherty said the deficit will be Can$57 billion .
 He suggested that budget deficits could be eliminated without future tax increases . He suggested, however, that future tax hikes could be avoided without future increases .
 Dion said he would be a caretaker prime minister until leadership was decided . With Parliament prorogued and the possibility of a new election if the government’s new budget was defeated, Dion sought to have a more permanent leader in place immediately .
 His leadership was confirmed by 97% of the delegates at a party convention on May 2, 2009 . He has been in office since 2009 .
 Two other expected candidates, Bob Rae and Dominic LeBlanc, had announced earlier that they were withdrawing from the leadership race . Ignatieff, a former academic, is expected to be the presumptive winner .
 The party also voted to adopt a one-member, one-vote policy for future leadership conventions . The party votes to adopt the policy, which will be adopted at future conventions .
 The Liberals had been the last national party to use a delegate system at leadership conventions . The Liberals were the last party in Canada to use such a system .
 Liberals demanded the establishment of a bipartisan six-member panel to review the employment insurance program . Liberals want to establish the panel after the release of the second scheduled budget report .
 The Liberals wanted to implement a national standard of eligibility in place of the existing complex system of regional considerations . The Liberal Party wanted to replace the existing system with national standards .
 Ignatieff announced during a national caucus meeting (August 31-September 2) that his party would put forth a vote of no confidence at the earliest possible date . The panel failed to reach agreement on such a reform to the program to the party .
 A seemingly imminent election was averted when the Bloc Quebecois and the NDP agreed to support the government temporarily in exchange for some modest concessions . The government was temporarily suspended from power after a series of concessions were made .
 On December 30, Parliament was again prorogued at Harper's request and was to remain shut down until early March 2010, following the Olympic Winter Games in Vancouver . Parliament was set to remain closed until March 2010 .
 In the provinces the governing centreright Liberals in British Columbia were reelected on May 12 to a third consecutive majority government under Premier Gordon Campbell . In British Columbia the governing party was reelected in May 12 .
 On June 9 Nova Scotia elected the province's first New Democratic government . The centre-left NDP won 31 of 52 seats as the incumbent Progressive Conservatives fell to third place .
 Manitoba’s Gary Doer announced on August 27 that he would leave office once his centre-left New Democrats had selected a new leader . Former Manitoba finance minister Gary Selinger was selected as the new NDP leader and premier-designate .
 The unexpected shutdown of the nuclear reactor at Chalk River, Ont., on May 14 precipitated a crisis in the medical community, as well as political repercussions . The unexpected shutdown of the reactor at the site precipitates a crisis .
 Canada's 52-year-old nuclear reactor at Chalk River, Ont., experienced a sudden and unexpected shutdown on May 14, 2009, owing to a local power outage . In the early morning of May 15 a leak of heavy water was detected .
 The reactor was originally forecast to be offline for one month . By August officials had revealed that the reactor would not resume production of medicalquality isotopes until the spring of 2010 at the earliest .
 The shutdown resulted in the delay or cancellation of numerous diagnostic appointments as well as other medical imaging procedures that utilize isotopes . The shutdown delayed or canceled many diagnostic appointments .
 Members of the medical community suggested that the temporary loss of the reactor's production was a ""catastrophe,"" as the reactor supplied one-third of the world's supply of medical isotopes .
 Prime Minister Stephen Harper announced on June 10 that the federal government would pull out of the medical-isotope-production industry .
 Lisa Raitt, minister of natural resources, came under fire on June 3 for her handling of the isotope case . It was revealed that she or a member of her staff had left classified briefing papers about the nuclear reactor at a television station following an interview .
 Although she offered her resignation to the prime minister, it was not accepted . She offered to resign but it was rejected .
 A journalist based in Halifax, N.S., reported on the contents of a private taped conversation between the minister and her former director of communications, Jasmine MacDonnell . Raitt described the story about nuclear radiation leaks and cancer as ""sexy"" and questioned the political acumen of
 Raitt eventually offered a tearful apology to cancer survivors and their families for her remarks . She said she had lost her own father and brother to cancer . Raitt apologized for her comments .
 Federal government and all provincial and territorial governments had initially proposed balanced budgets for fiscal 2008-09 . Only one year earlier, the federal government had planned a balanced budget .
 In spite of growing deficits, surging personal bankruptcies, Canada remains in the best financial situation of the Group of Eight industrialized countries . Canada's loss of nearly 400,000 jobs from peak employment in October 2008 to August 2009 .
 The country's conservative riskaverse banking system was able to emerge from the 2008 credit crisis relatively unscathed . Other industrial sectors faced much more difficult conditions, however .
 Prime Minister Harper and Ontario Premier Dalton McGuinty announced on June 1 that the federal and Ontario provincial governments would buy a 12% stake in General Motors in exchange for Can$10. billion . The federal government announced the deal in June 1 .
 Up to 85,000 jobs would be lost, mostly in southern Ontario, if GM did not undergo restructuring . Government-backed restructuring would be government-backed . Up to 80,000 GM jobs could be lost if restructuring does not go ahead .
 The agreement precluded GM’s Canadian operations from entering court-approved bankruptcy protection . The agreement between the governments and the automaker precluded the company from entering bankruptcy protection.
 Canada's Immigration and Refugee Board granted a white man refugee status in Canada on the basis of racial prejudice and violence that he claimed to have experienced in South Africa from the black majority there . The decision prompted the federal Ministry of Immigration to announce on September 3 a plan to appeal that decision .
 South African officials condemned the original ruling, made by a quasi-judicial and independent board, as one that would serve to perpetuate racism . The original ruling was made by an independent board . South Africa officials condemned it as one of the original rulings .
 The refugee claimant had been living in Canada illegally since leaving South Africa . He had lived in South Africa since leaving the country in 1994 .
 The South African government has made efforts to fight violence and crime against all people, regardless of ethnicity or creed . The government noted that the government had made efforts .
 Trade negotiations between Canada and the European Union were launched at a leaders summit on May 6 in Prague . Trade negotiations began at the summit in Prague, Czech Republic .
 Topics up for discussion included facilitating the freer trade of agricultural goods, enhancing investment opportunities and government contract procurement . Also discussed: permitting temporary movement of workers between Canada and EU member countries .
 The talks could take up to two years to complete . The talks were hailed by Canadian free-trade proponents as a counterbalance to Canada's dependence on the U.S. market .
 The ban was lodged as a protest to an annual hunt of some 300,000 harp seals that some environmentalists and EU legislators had labeled as cruel and inhumane . The ban affected only products from Canada’s Atlantic region . It excluded seal products produced by the Canadian Arctic’
 Canada defended the hunt as being conducted in a humane manner and as essential to the livelihoods of people living in rural and isolated areas on Canada’s East Coast . Canada said the hunt was conducted in humane manner .
 The EU had imported Can$2.2. million worth of seal products from Canada in 2008 . The EU imported the seal products in 2008, which cost $2.5 million .
 Cape Verde is the only country in Africa where women make up more than half of the government’s cabinet ministers . Cape Veradians are making progress toward greater accountability and transparency, says the government .
 Cape Verde remains heavily dependent on remittances sent home by people who had left, 500,000 of whom lived in the U.S., and on donor money from the European Union and elsewhere . The island nation is dependent heavily on remittance money from people who live in the
 Cape Verde’s ties with China continued to grow, as did those with Angola . Pres. Pedro Pinto was the first president of the island nation to become president of Angola .
 Cape Verde was, with Angola, active in the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries . Relations between the ruling parties of the two countries were close .
 In February government troops were accused of carrying out violent reprisals in the Ndele region against civilians who were thought to be supporting rebels . Government troops accused of having carried out violence against civilians in February .
 UN peacekeepers took over responsibility for the troubled cross-border area on March 15, amid fears that Ugandan Lord’s Resistance Army was preparing to move across the CAR border from its bases in the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
 CAR rebels burned surrounding villages on June 6, they struck a military base in the northern town of Birao . CAR rebels have been fighting CAR rebels since June 6 .
 In late July, the LRA attacked towns in CAR, killing at least 10 people and causing hundreds to flee their homes . The LRA has been blamed for the deaths of at least 100 people .
 UN officials called for immediate and urgent humanitarian aid to be sent to the world’s second poorest country . UN officials have called for urgent and urgent assistance to the impoverished country .
 Fighting on April 12 between farmers and cattle traders killed an estimated 20 people in a livestock market near Bangui . Fighting was reported to have taken place in the livestock market . Fighting broke out between farmers, cattle traders .
 Dozens injured in clashes over ownership of cattle stolen a week earlier by bandits . Dozens injured when clashes erupted over the ownership of stolen cattle stolen from bandits .
 Two senior prelates resigned in May, triggering a one-day strike by priests . Under pressure from the Vatican, two senior priests resigned under pressure in May . The Vatican has been criticized by priests for their behavior .
 The departure of the archbishop of Bangui and the bishop of Bossangoa followed an investigation into charges of moral laxity among the capital's priests . The departure follows a probe into allegations that priests were lax in their duties .
 Chad's chronic instability persisted throughout 2009 . Chad’s chronic instability continued throughout 2009.
 The Sudan and Chad agreed not to provide support to each other’s rebel movements . This had little effect . The governments of the two countries again agreed to not provide each other support .
 One of the rebel movements in Darfur continued to launch operations from Chad . It was thought to receive much of its funding from Pres. Bush .
 Chadian rebels continued to operate from Darfur . Idriss Deby is still in charge of the Darfur region .
 Government forces in Chad were able to rebuff a rebel attack in May, and by mid-2009, some 250,000 refugees from the region remained in eastern Chad .
 President Deby’s highly authoritarian government refused to enter into dialogue with internal opponents . Deby's government has refused to accept dialogue with the president's internal opponents. Deby has been accused of corruption .
 Chad's oil revenues did not bring the social and economic benefits promised by the government to local communities, but instead the revenues were used to build up the military and to facilitate corruption . The oil revenues were not brought to the local communities .
 Chad’s main allies, France, Libya, the U.S., Libya, and China, did little to challenge the country's abuse of human rights . Chad's main allies—France, Libya and the United States—did little to push back .
 Barack Obama’s special envoy to The Sudan, retired air force general J Scott Gration, did meet with Chadian officials .
 Nicolas Sarkozy might abandon France's military bases in Chad, but the bases remained . The U.S. continued to train Chadian soldiers, allegedly to fight alQaeda-affiliated terrorists .
 Michelle Bachelet is the most popular president in Chile's political history . She has been in office for more than four years . She is currently the country's most popular female president .
 Since her election in January 2006, Bachelet had promised to bring an openness and accessibility to the presidency . She has promised to focus public policies on helping the poor and the marginalized .
 Sebastian Pihera won the first round of voting in Chile’s presidential election on December 14 . He is the only candidate to win in a set of constitutional reforms approved during the previous administration of Ricardo Lagos .
 Bachelet had to battle a growing sense of political exhaustion among Concertacion supporters . She was the fourth successive president to belong to the centre-left Concertacion coalition .
 The political contest to succeed Bachelet was lively, with four candidates vying for the presidency . Four candidates are vying to succeed the Chilean president .
 For the first time, the political centre-left fielded three presidential candidates, splitting that vote . Centre-left candidates split the vote, splitting the vote for first time .
 Concertacion’s official candidate was Eduardo Frei RuizTagle, who had previously served as president . The Concertacion's official candidate had previously been president .
 Frei’s inability to generate enthusiasm among Concertacion supporters led to the upstart candidacy of Marco EnriquezOminami, who ran as an independent .
 In contrast to Frei, Enriquez-Ominami was young and charismatic . He centred his campaign on a critique of Frei and his old-style politics .
 On the political right, Sebastian Pinera, who lost to Bachelet in the 2006 runoff election, was vying again for the presidency . On the left, he lost in a runoff election in 2006 . On Sunday, he will be the next president of Chile .
 Pinera had to best Joaquin Lavin to become the right’s candidate against Bachelet . Unlike in his first attempt, he was now the consensus candidate of the right-wing alliance . He waged a campaign that highlighted the need for greater governmental efficiency .
 Pinera has consistently been in first place among the four candidates for president . Polling consistently put him first place in the race among the candidates .
 No candidate gained an absolute majority of more than 50% in the December 13 election . A second round of voting was scheduled to take place on Jan 17, 2010 . As expected, no candidate gained a majority of over 50% .
 The combined vote total for the three centre-left candidates was 56% . It was unclear whether Frei could capture all those votes, especially those that went to Enriquez-Ominami .
 Chile weathered the global recession relatively well, in large part because Bachelet had not bowed to political pressure early in her administration to spend the unexpected financial windfall that had resulted from the high price of copper, one of the country's main exports .
 The value of Chilean exports dropped by 30% during the global downturn . The government saved this revenue and was able to draw on these reserves when the country’s export-driven economy slowed .
 The strong performance of China’s economy despite the global economic crisis gave the country unprecedented prominence on the world stage . At the same time, though, the strong performance gave China unprecedented prominence .
 Charter 08 issued in December 2008 after nearly a year of planning . Charter 08 was issued by prominent Chinese dissidents and intellectuals . It foreshadowed the year of dissent in China .
 This manifesto demanded that human rights, democracy, and constitutional government replace the Chinese government’s program of authoritarian modernization . It expressly linked its demands to the approaching 20th anniversary of the 1989 crackdown on Tiananmen Square pro-democracy demonstrators .
 Liu Xiaobo, a well-known writer, was detained around the time of the manifesto’s initial release . He remained in custody throughout 2009, though his formal arrest on charges of subversion was not approved until June . The charter was released in 2009 .
 He was found guilty on December 23 and sentenced to 11 years’ imprisonment . On December 25, he was sentenced to an 11-year sentence .
 Huang Qi attempted to investigate accusations that shoddy school construction had led to a disproportionate number of deaths . Huang Qi is a local activist in China's Sichuan province . The May 2008 earthquake in western China killed about 80,000 people, including 5,000 schoolchildren .
 Huang received a three-year prison sentence in November for possessing state secrets . Huang was arrested and sentenced to three years in prison in November . Huang received the sentence after being found guilty of possessing a state of secrets .
 Ai Weiwei, a prominent artist and activist, was severely beaten by police in August before he could testify at the trial of Tan Zuoren, another activist who had been arrested after having attempted to investigate the student deaths in Sichuan .
 China’s first public gay pride week took place in Shanghai in June . China Imaginechina/AP Entertainers perform a dance routine during the week . China's first public pride week was held in Shanghai .
 More than 2,000 children whose schools were in close proximity to smelting facilities were found to have elevated levels of lead in their blood . In August rioters in central China clashed with public security officials after the discovery of lead .
 The Chinese government cracked down on lawyers who defended dissidents . In addition to demonstrating decreased tolerance for dissent, the Chinese government has also cracked down .
 Gao’s whereabouts remained unknown in November . Gao was seen by Barack Obama as he paid a state visit to China in November 2013 .
 Beijing city government revoked licenses of 53 lawyers who had taken on various cases against the state . Another blow was dealt to the emerging legal profession in July . 53 lawyers had their licenses revoked in July after taking on cases against state .
 In early June the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square incident passed largely uneventfully . A massive police presence patrolled the site of the student demonstrations and popular Internet services such as Twitter were blocked .
 Wu’er Kaixi, a student leader during the Tiananmen protests, attempted to return to China for the anniversary . He eventually resettled in Taiwan, but his effort was unsuccessful .
 On October 1 Chinas leadership celebrated the 60th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China with a mass celebration .
 Despite this display of power, the CPC suffered a number of challenges to the legitimacy of its rule . The CPC suffered from a series of challenges over the years . Despite this, the party has been accused of corruption .
 In May the memoirs of former premier and CPC general secretary Zhao Ziyang were published posthumously in Hong Kong . Zhao's memoirs were published after his death .
 Zhao spent years under house arrest after Tiananmen Square incident . Zhao called for China to become a parliamentary democracy . Zhao was a party insider who nonetheless spent years in house arrest .
 The report concluded that Chinese government policies disrupted the Tibetan economy, culture, and religion . The report concludes that the deadly riots that occurred in Tibet in March 2008 were caused by China's policies .
 The unrest was sparked by the ethnically motivated killings of two migrant Uighur workers in late June at a factory in southern Guangdong province .
 Uighurs rioting in the streets of Urumqi, the capital of the Uygur Autonomous Region of Xinjiang in western China . Dissatisfied over the investigations in Guangdong, Uighur rioters rioted in the street . Rioting began in the
 Li Zhi was removed from office in early September for his failure to protect the provincial capital’s citizens . Authorities moved quickly to restore order, but the secretary of the CPC Urumqi City Committee was taken from office . Li was removed for failing to protect his citizens .
 Exiled Uighur activist Rebiya Kadeer was accused by authorities of having stoked the unrest . She is accused of inciting violence in the region .
 Nine men who took part in the Urumqi rioting were executed in Xinjiang in November . In November nine men were executed for their role in the riots in Urumq .
 On December 3, death sentences were handed down by the Intermediate People’s Court of Urumqi to five other individuals involved in the violence . Five other individuals were also sentenced to death .
 Xinjiang party secretary Wang Lequan was replaced by Meng Jianzhu, China’s minister of public security . Meng had distinguished himself with his management of security at the Beijing Olympics .
 Chinese politics during 2009 was even more carefully scripted than usual . In deference to the sensitive anniversaries of Tiananmen and the founding of the republic, Chinese politics was especially carefully scripted .
 China's political system does not and should not adopt separation of powers between the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government . Wu Bangguo, the country's top-ranking legislator, said that the NPC’s core value was to uphold the leadership of the party . Wu
 Chinese society continues its remarkable opening . In areas other than politics, Chinese society continued to open up .
 Under new rules some couples in Shanghai would be allowed to have two children . The one-child policy that had been in place in China since the late 1970s was loosened .
 All new PCs would need to be loaded with filtering software, known as Green Dam, that would block certain types of objectionable content, such as pornography . Internet censorship appeared to advance with the announcement .
 Public outrage forced a delay in universal implementation of the policy . Nonetheless, public outrage forced the government to delay implementation of it .
 The Internet was blocked throughout China’s vast western frontier after disturbances in Xinjiang . The Internet remained largely so through the end of the year .
 The strength of China’s economy was credited with helping stave off a worldwide economic collapse . China is one of the world's most powerful economies .
 Tens of thousands of factories closed in 2008 in the Pearl River Delta . Colombia's 20 million migrant workers found themselves unemployed after factories closed . Colombia has a long history of unemployment .
 By the end of 2009, 10 million new urban jobs had been created in urban areas . 10 million jobs were created .
 Much of the economic growth and job creation was driven by a massive $586 billion stimulus package . The stimulus package and the extension of easily available credit, especially to state-owned or state-affiliated enterprises .
 Despite Chinas accelerating economic growth as the year progressed, cumulative annual exports were just $113. billion . Private sector exports were $20 billion less than in 2008, despite economic growth .
 China's efforts to secure more access to vital mineral resources in developed countries did not fare well . China has been criticized for trying to secure access to mineral mineral resources .
 Chinalco attempted to buy the Australian-based mining conglomerate Rio Tinto for $19. billion in February . The deal collapsed under political pressure from the Australian public not to sell control of strategic minerals .
 Chinese authorities arrested and detained four Rio Tinto employees on charges of espionage and theft of Chinese state secrets in July . Australian officials maintained that the arrests were in retaliation for the aborted deal . In July four employees were detained on charges related to espionage and stealing state secrets . The arrests were made
 Four employees remained in custody at year’s end and were awaiting trial . The four employees were arrested in December .
 Chinese concerns successfully acquired stakes in two Australian mining companies . In the spring, they invested $438 million in Fortescue Metals Group and $1. billion in Oz Minerals .
 In December President Hu helped open a pipeline that would transport natural gas some 1,835 km from Turkmenistan to China . President Hu celebrated another remarkable Chinese engineering feat when he helped open the pipeline .
 On December 26, the $17 billion Wuhan-Guangzhou railway opened to create a high-speed link through 20 cities . On December 25, the railway opened in China's capital, Beijing .
 China’s relations with the United States got off to an inauspicious start in 2009 . The United States lodged a protest with Beijing in March about what it claimed was harassment of a U.S. naval intelligence vessel by five Chinese ships .
 China argued that the vessel was within its territorial waters and had no right to be there . China said the ship was in its territory and was in violation of its sovereignty .
 The U.S. cautiously pressed China to allow its currency, the renminbi, to appreciate . The United States cautiously pressed the Chinese government to allow it to do so . China's economy has suffered a sharp decline in recent years .
 The United States has placed higher tariffs on Chinese tires and steel pipes . The U.S. announced higher tariffs in September on tires, steel pipes and tires .
 President Obama carefully avoided the kinds of open conflicts that had characterized his two predecessors’ early months in office . At the same time, the administration avoided the same kind of conflicts that characterized his predecessors' early months .
 Obama and Hillary Clinton have not publicly rebuked China on human rights . Neither Obama nor Clinton have publicly publicly criticized China's human rights record .
 China's president stepped off his plane in Shanghai holding his own umbrella . Many ordinary Chinese citizens were used to the practice of having aides carry their umbrellas .
 Obama's speech was carried over the Internet but not on Chinese television . Obama’s speech was broadcast on the Internet, but not Chinese television.
 Critics say Obama failed to extract commitments from China on issues of importance to Washington . Obama's visit was largely unsuccessful because of sanctions against Iran and North Korea, critics say .
 The failure to achieve consensus on global warming became evident in December at the UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen .
 Chinas representatives argued that the U.S. and other developed countries should subsidize less-developed countries such as China in the effort to reduce carbon dioxide emissions . Chinas said the United States and other . other developed . countries should . subsidize countries such .developed countries in the
 The United States maintained that China was in a special category among less-developed countries and had the resources to pay for cuts itself . The U.S. maintains that China has the resources of the country to fund its own cuts .
 Xi Jinping visited Japan in December and met with the new prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama, and Emperor Akihito . Xi Jinping also met with new Prime Minister Yukio Hoyama .
 China joined the other permanent members of the UN Security Council in imposing sanctions on North Korea . North Korea’s long-range ballistic missile test in April and its nuclear test in May, led to sanctions .
 China's defense minister, Li Guangjie, also visited Pyongyang in November to promote defense exchanges between the two countries . China's China and North Korea are longtime allies .
 China joined Russia in continuing to urge that no sanctions be placed on Iran for its nuclear activities . China did agree to the International Atomic Energy Agency’s censure of Iran in November .
 Iran was the leading exporter of oil to China in the first half of 2009 . Iran sent 700,000 bbl of oil a day in May alone in the month of May alone .
 Tensions increased between China and India over India’s Himalayan province of Arunachal Pradesh, which China claimed as part of Tibet . China claimed the region of Tibet in Tibet, but India said it was Tibet .
 In June India increased its troop levels along the Chinese border in Arunachal Pradesh . The Indian government in November permitted the Dalai Lama to make a visit to the province . The move prompted diplomatic protests by China .
 China’s relations with France recovered slightly after diplomatic tensions over Tibet in 2008 . Relations with France have improved slightly since diplomatic tensions between China and France broke out in 2008 over Tibet .
 Nicolas Sarkozy met with President Hu Hu twice at international summits in 2009 . Sarkozy and Hu Hu met in 2009 at the first of three summits .
 Wen visited the U.K. in February where he signed three economic agreements with the government of Prime Minister Gordon Brown . Wen signed three agreements with Brown's government in February .
 China and the EU held an inconclusive summit in Nanjing in November at which the EU pressed China to appreciate its currency . Wen asked the EU to remove trade barriers and to appreciate China's currency, Wen said .
 The constitution had been revised once to allow him to run for a second term . A movement was under way to permit him to stand for a third term in 2010 .
 Before the referendum could be held, it had to be approved by Congress and reviewed by the Constitutional Court . The referendum was held before Congress approved it, but Congress then approved it .
 The referendum received congressional approval in September and was passed to the Constitutional Court . The referendum was approved by Congress in September .
 If the court took the maximum time allowed to make a decision, Uribe would be prevented from running . Uribe is a former Colombian president, who has been in office since 2001 .
 The delay put Uribe’s allies in limbo as they refused to declare their candidacies until his status was decided . Uribe's allies have been waiting for his status to be decided .
 Uribe’s popularity appeared generally impervious to a number of government scandals . Uribe's popularity has been largely unaffected by a series of scandals .
 In the so-called parapolitics scandal, more than 70 members of Congress were placed under investigation for alleged connections to right-wing paramilitary groups . Most of them were supporters of the president .
 A second scandal involved allegations that soldiers had killed innocent citizens and recorded those killed as guerrillas or drug traffickers . The soldiers were accused of killing innocent citizens to boost promotion chances .
 The Department of Administrative Security was accused of tapping the phones of human rights workers, journalists, judges, and opposition politicians . In yet another scandal, the secret police unit was accused .
 Uribe responded to the scandal by proposing to liquidate the DAS and replace it with a new intelligence unit .
 The president and the Supreme Court were in conflict on several fronts . The Supreme Court was in conflict with the president and Supreme Court .
 It was the court’s duty to investigate charges that the legislators who supported the referendum to allow Uribe's reelection bid had acted illegally . The proposal did not have the prior approval of the National Electoral Council, the court said .
 In July, the Supreme Court rejected as unfit all three of the candidates put forward by Uribe for consideration for the office of attorney general . In an unprecedented move, the court rejected all three candidates as unfit .
 The government's close relations with the United States continued to cause trouble for it in the region . The U.S. relationship with the region has caused trouble for the government .
 The announcement that the U.S. military would be allowed to use seven Colombian military bases met with varying levels of opposition from other governments in the region . The decision to allow the United States military to use the bases was met with opposition from various governments .
 Venezuela borrowed $2.2 billion from Russia to buy arms, including tanks and antiaircraft missiles . Venezuela borrowed the money to buy tanks and missiles, Colombia says . Colombia is worried that Venezuela will not be able to defend itself .
 Brazil also announced major arms purchases from France, including jet fighters and attack submarines . Brazil also plans to buy jet fighters, attack submarines and submarines from France .
 The Centre for Human Rights and the Displaced estimated that 4. million Colombians had been displaced since 1985 by the armed conflict between the government and guerrillas .
 The violence pushed more than 380,000 Colombians from their homes in 2008 alone . The violence in Colombia has displaced more than 300,000 people since then .
 In 2009 the government began compensation payments to 220,000 victims of the violence . Families were offered about $9,500 each by the government .
 Two quarters of negative growth put the economy, technically, into recession . The economy, however, is technically in recession .
 As many as four million people in Colombia lost their savings when such firms closed or collapsed in late 2008 . Four million people were affected by such firms closing or collapsing in Colombia .
 Curfews were imposed in several cities in an effort to control protesters seeking the return of their money . Curfew was imposed in many cities in a bid to control the protesters . Protesters are demanding the money returned .
 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo in August . Clinton was in the eastern city of Goma during her visit .
 Comorans voted in a controversial referendum to modify the framework of the power-sharing government that had been in place since 2001 . The vote was part of a controversial plan to modify a power-share government that was in place in 2001 .
 Federal presidents became governors of the semiautonomous Grande Comore, Anjouan, and Moheli islands . The term of the union presidency was extended (from four) to five years .
 More than 95% of Mayotte balloters taking part in a referendum held on March 29, 2009, on Mayotte (the only one of the four Comoros islands that remained a dependency of France) approved a change of status with France from that of a departmental collectivity to
 Both the African Union and Comoros reject the outcome of the vote . Comoros, which viewed Mayotte as occupied by France, rejected the outcome . The African Union also rejected the decision .
 In the worst air disaster in Comoros’s history, a lone survivor was rescued from wreckage in the Indian Ocean . The Comoros air disaster was the worst of Comoros's history .
 Despite vast mineral wealth, mining production severely declined owing to mismanagement, corruption, endemic civil unrest, the global recession, and lack of new investment .
 IMF lowered its projection of GDP growth in the DRC for the year to 2.5% from 6% in 2008 . IMF lowered GDP growth projection of DRC in 2009 from 6%. DRC is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Desire Kamanzi led a faction of the National Congress for the Defense of the People to break away from its ruthless leader, Gen. Gen. Kamanz . She led the breakaway from the party's leadership . She was the first female leader of the party to defect .
 Laurent Nkunda is trying to transform the militia movement into a political party . He says he wants to take control of militia movement and become a politician . The militia movement will be transformed into a party, he says .
 The government forged an unexpected alliance with Rwanda to conduct a joint military operation in the DRC’s North Kivu province to eliminate the influence of the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda . The FDLR had been a major factor in destabilizing the area for 12 years
 The five-week campaign (January 20-February 25) forced Nkunda to flee into Rwanda, where he was arrested and faced possible charges for war crimes . Though the campaign had limited success, it forced him to flee .
 On March 23 the government signed separate peace agreements with the CNDP, the North Kivu armed groups, and the South Kivi armed groups . As part of the pact, each group committed to converting its organizations into political movements in return for integration of rebel soldiers and officials into
 In March the FARDC, supported by UN peacekeeping forces, launched Operation Kimia II, which, like the January-February operation, failed . FDLR rebellion in Kivu is a major source of instability in the region .
 In a joint operation with the Ugandan government, the DRC forces engaged Lord’s Resistance Army insurgents near the border . That mission also met with limited success, but that mission also failed .
 The national army, which incorporated former rebels, did little to reduce antigovernment rebel activity or improve the situation . Unfortunately, the national army incorporated former rebel groups .
 In North and South Kivu, 800,000 civilians were displaced by internecine fighting in the first half of the year . The conflict has displaced thousands of people in the past year .
 The UN estimated that the number of internal refugees reached two million . The UN estimates that the UN estimated two million internally displaced people .
 By 2009 the use of rape as a war tactic against women, children, and men by all armed forces had doubled or tripled in nine eastern conflict zones . Use of rape has doubled or triple in nine east conflict zones since 2009 .
 According to Human Rights Watch, 65% of known rape cases in North Kivu were committed by the FARDC soldiers . According to the rights group, the majority of cases are committed by soldiers in the region .
 Congolese gynecologist Denis Mukwege was awarded several international prizes in 2008 . He treated thousands of victims of sexual abuse in the Congo .
 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited the DRC in August as part of her African tour .
 She urged the government to do more to protect civilians and to bring military offenders to justice . She announced a $17 million plan to help achieve these efforts . The plan includes a plan to bring in more military offenders .
 President Denis Sassou-Nguesso, assisted until September 15 by Prime Minister Isidore Mvouba . The Republic of the Congo is the largest country in the world .
 Denis Sassou-Nguesso in the July 12, 2009, presidential poll took place amid considerable controversy . The July 12 presidential poll was held in the capital capital Ou Ou Ou Douba .
 SassouNguesso, who had ruled for much of the past 30 years, took 78% of the vote . SassouGuesso had ruled the country for more than 30 years .
 The government claimed that 66% of the 2. million eligible voters cast ballots, but many international observers considered that figure to be grossly exaggerated . The major opposition parties boycotted the election and many people entitled to vote had not been issued voting cards .
 In September, Sassou-Nguesso named a new government and abolished the post of prime minister . He had created the post in 2005 in violation of the constitution, he had created in 2005 . The post was abolished in September .
 On February 10 the government launched a program to purchase and destroy weapons from the former rebels known as “Ninjas” in the southern Pool region . The government launched the program on February 10 .
 Officials burned nearly 3,000 guns turned in by former Ninja fighters . The operation was considered a success when officials in the city of Kinkala burned the guns .
 Those still possessing illegal arms were given another week to sell their guns to the government for as much as $200 . Those who have illegal arms can now sell them for as little as $100 .
 A vaccination campaign began in February to inoculate children and pregnant women in the northern Enyelle district against such diseases as diphtheria, tetanus, polio, meningitis, and whooping cough . The campaign is aimed at inoculating children, pregnant women and children against
 2,000 treated mosquito nets were to be distributed as part of efforts to control malaria . Malaria was the primary cause of death of children under age five in Haiti .
 Ground broken for a water purification plant, financed by China, in Brazzaville . Ground was broken for the plant on March 7 . Ground broke for the project in March 2013 .
 A food and nutrition security program was initiated in February, designed to provide new incentives for farmers to increase production for the market . On a positive note, the program is designed to help farmers increase production .
 Only 5% of the country’s arable land was currently under cultivation .
 Negotiations with South African farmers to lease some 200,000 ha (about 494,200 ac) of Congolese farmland were successfully concluded in October .
 On January 8 a major earthquake struck the country, with its epicentre 6. km east of the Poas Volcano in Alajuela province . The quake was centered 6.km east of Poas volcano in the province of Alajuna province .
 The shock waves were felt throughout the country, and 23 persons were killed, with another 13 missing . Another 13 people are still missing .
 International assistance and special government funding were quickly appropriated to deal with the aftereffects of the disaster . International emergency assistance was quickly appropriated .
 National elections were set for Feb., 2010, and the political parties spent 2009 in nominating conventions . National elections are set for February .
 Laura Chinchilla Miranda had served in the incumbent government as vice president and minister of justice . She defeated Johnny Araya, former mayor of San Jose, in the election .
 Costa Rica's economy contracted sharply in line with worldwide economic downturn . Manufacturing, construction, exports, and imports were especially affected by the downturn .
 Oscar Arias turned his negotiating talents to the political crisis in neighbouring Honduras . Arias is now in charge of the Honduran political crisis .
 Denis Sassou-Nguesso was elected president of the Republic of Congo on July 10 . He is currently campaigning for the second term in the country .
 He destroyed in Cinchona, Costa Rica, after a major earthquake in early January triggered deadly landslides in the area . He was ousted in June by the Honduran military and exiled to Costa Rica . He returned to Honduras in September .
 On October 5 former Costa Rican president Rafael Calderon was sentenced to five years in prison for having embezzled $520,000 in 2004 . Calderon is serving a five-year sentence for embezling $520k .
 Prime Minister Guillaume Soro announced on May 14 that the poll would be held on November 29 . Soro's government announced in May that the election would take place in November .
 Laurent Gbagbo and his ruling Ivorian Popular Front accused of having conspired to delay the electoral process . Laurent Gbabbo accused of delaying the election process . The Ivorian president has been accused of being a dictator .
 On May 18, Gbagbo met with leaders of the major opposition parties to discuss the voterregistration program and to seek confirmation that no boycott would take place . The opposition party says no boycott will take place in the presidential election .
 When registration process was completed on June 30, more than six million names were on the lists . More than 6 million people were registered with the names of those on the list .
 On August 8, Gbagbo appointed his associate Paul Yao N’dre as head of the Constitutional Council . The council would have primary responsibility for conducting and validating the election .
 On October 30, however, Gbagbo announced that the vote would be postponed . The vote was supposed to be held on October 31 .
 A wall collapsed during a World Cup qualifying match between Cote d'Ivoire and Malawi at a stadium in Abidjan . The wall collapsed on March 29, just prior to the start of the World Cup qualifier .
 An official inquiry concluded that poor security efforts and the provision of many more tickets were the major factors in the tragedy .
 Four people, including the organizer of the match, were charged with involuntary manslaughter . Four people were charged in the case .
 Ivorian team beat Cameroon in a charity match designed to raise funds for the victims' families . The Ivorian national team beat the Cameroon team in the June 13 charity match .
 Sotra, the state-owned engineering branch of the country’s transport corporation, placed the first three commuter buses into service in Abidjan .
 IMF cancels one-quarter of the country's $12. billion national debt . Paris Club restructured the country’s foreign debt and wrote off some of its scheduled repayments .
 French journalist Jean-Paul Ney, imprisoned in Abidjan for 16 months, was released on May 6 . He was released from prison 16 months ago .
 Ney was accused of having been involved in an attempted coup planned for Christmas 2007 . Ney was never tried but was arrested following the appearance on the YouTube Web site of his video that appeared to support a rebel .
 Slovenia blocked Croatia’s bid in December 2008 after an ongoing dispute over the countries’ shared border . In December 2008 Slovenia had begun blocking Croatia's bid owing to an ongoing border dispute . The dispute is over the maritime boundary in the bay of Piran .
 Croatia submitted to the EU accession documents that Slovenia charged were prejudicial to the settlement of the border issue . Croatia had submitted the documents to the Slovenian government . Slovenia says the documents are prejudicial in settling the issue .
 Slovenia was particularly concerned about losing direct access to the high seas . As an EU member it was entitled to veto Croatia’s accession talks . Slovenia was concerned that it would lose access to high seas access to Croatia .
 Croatia was accused of failing to hand over documents needed in the trial of a Croatian general indicted for war crimes . Croatia accused of not handing over documents in trial of Croatian general accused of war crimes allegedly committed in Croatia . Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor installed in July .
 Cuba mitted during Operation Storm, a 1995 battle in which Croatia reclaimed land occupied by Serb rebels . Cuba was involved in Operation Storm in Croatia, Croatia and Serbia .
 Croatian government claims documents were stolen and that it had sent all the relevant papers it had . Croatian government says it has sent all documents it has had to send to Croatia . Croatian officials say documents have been stolen and they have sent them back .
 The government in June set out its program for restructuring and privatizing the six state-owned shipyards . The government is looking to privatize the six shipyards in the country .
 The EU accepted the plan and thereby allowed Croatia to open accession talks on competition policy . Croatia is seeking to join the EU's competition policy framework . Croatia has been in talks with the EU for more than a decade .
 The government received only two bids, both from Croatian companies, in its first international tender . The privatization of the shipyards got off to a bad start, however, when the government received just two bids .
 Ivo Sanader announced his resignation as prime minister and retirement from politics in July . July brought an unexpected political shake-up when Sanader resigned as PM . Sanader's resignation was announced as a result of his resignation .
 He had garnered support from 83 parliamentarians for his chosen successor, Jadranka Kosor . Kosor's nomination was approved on July 6, and her nomination is approved .
 The change of leadership kick-started the stalled EU accession process . Change of leadership kicked-started by the change of leader .
 Kosor agreed to Slovenian demands that Croatia treat documents submitted to the EU as irrelevant to the border dispute . Ljubljana lifted its veto in mid-September . Kosor had agreed to Slovenia's demands that the documents it submitted to Croatia were irrelevant .
 The European Commission announced in October that Croatia could complete its accession talks in 2010 . Croatia's accession to the EU is expected to be complete in 2010, the Commission said in October .
 Croatia and Slovenia signed an agreement to send the border dispute to international arbitration . Croatia, Slovenia signed a deal in November to send it to the international border dispute . Croatia has been in dispute with Slovenia for more than two decades .
 Exports declined in Croatia, as they did elsewhere in Europe, owing to the global recession . Croatia's critical tourism sector did not suffer as badly as expected .
 Facing a major drop in revenues, the government revised the budget three times . The government also increased the value-added tax, introduced a “crisis tax"" on higher earners, and levied a luxury tax .
 Planned spending on infrastructure was also postponed, a measure that was expected to increase unemployment . Planned spending is also postponed .
 The government’s fiscal package was criticized for purportedly making it harder for businesses to operate . The package also criticized for not addressing the long-term burden on the budget posed by the public administration .
 Greater political courage was unlikely from Kosor’s fragile minority government . Kosor is a member of the Kosor-led coalition government .
 Political parties are increasingly in campaign mode owing to the approach of presidential elections in January 2010 . Political parties were also increasingly in . political parties are also in . campaign mode .
 Raul Castro visited Santiago to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Cuban Revolution of 1959 . Castro visited the eastern city of Santiago .
 Fidel Castro issued a brief note to ""congratulate our heroic people” but he was otherwise absent from the anniversary celebrations . Fidel Castro was absent from celebrations .
 During the course of the year, however, he appeared to be recuperating from the serious stomach illness that forced him to relinquish power in 2006 . He appeared in photographs and video clips looking healthier and rested .
 The Cuban economy slid into a period of dire crisis that halted the process of tentative reform that Raul Castro had initiated upon assuming the presidency . The Cuban government has been in a state of crisis since 2008 .
 The global economic slowdown, triggered by the collapse of the U.S. real-estate and financial markets, dimmed the island’s future growth prospects . Cuba struggled to recover from damaging hurricanes that struck the island in 2008 .
 Official predictions that Cuba would achieve 6% growth in 2009 were later slashed to 2% growth . Several academic economists predicted that growth could turn negative .
 The Cuban government began distributing land grants to workers seeking to harvest agricultural lands, but other key aspects of the reform agenda stalled . The government began to distribute land grants in 2010 .
 In the summer the Cuban government rolled out emergency measures to conserve energy in an effort to prevent electricity blackouts . The problem had been the scourge of the Cuban population in the 1990s .
 Air conditioning was rationed to five hours a day; amusement parks and office buildings scaled back their hours of operation . Electric baking ovens and cold storage units were required to be given mandatory power time-outs .
 Cuba’s heavy dependence on imports led to a shortage of foreign exchange, forcing layoffs across many state enterprises . Many state enterprises closed outright, while others closed outright .
 Cuba's economic downturn contributed to simmering tensions within the government . Cuba has been hit hard by an economic downturn in recent years .
 Carlos Lage and Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque were dismissed . The dismissals came amid the most dramatic cabinet shake-up in years . Lage was the first minister to be dismissed from the Cabinet .
 In all, at least 10 cabinet officials were replaced . Ministries of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment were merged .
 Colombian pop singer Juanes performs during the “Peace Without Borders” concert in Havana on September 20 . U.S.-Cuban relations began to experience a greater degree of openness after Colombian pop star Juanes performed .
 The Cuban Revolution that brought the regime of Fidel Castro to power marked its 50th anniversary in 2009 .
 Castro led a small band of rebels to triumph during the 1959 revolution that ousted the unpopular and corrupt regime of Fulgencio Batista . A half century had passed since Castro led the small band to triumph in Cuba .
 Castro's embrace of communism and his alliance with the Soviet Union soon provoked conflict with the United States . In response to Castro's actions, United States Pres. George W. Bush ordered the U.S. to arm Castro in Cuba .
 Dwight D Eisenhower imposed economic sanctions on Cuba in 1960 and broke off diplomatic relations with the country in January 1961 . Eisenhower imposed the economic sanctions in 1960 .
 John F Kennedy, backed the Cuban exile-led Bay of Pigs invasion, which backfired badly when Castro's forces easily repelled the assault . The invasion was backed by Castro's Cuban exile forces .
 Kennedy placed a wide-ranging United States embargo on the island in 1962 . The embargo remains the central element of U.S. policy toward Cuba . Kennedy placed the embargo in early 1962 .
 Kennedy learned that Castro had entered into a secret agreement with then Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev to install nuclear missiles in Cuba . That October the Cuban missile crisis was set in motion when Kennedy learned of the agreement .
 The incident brought the world to the brink of nuclear war before it was peacefully resolved . The incident was the first time the world was at risk of war .
 The dramatic events of the 1960s proved to be only the beginning of decades of tensions in U.S.-Cuban relations . Cuban President Camilo Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 In the years that followed, the Cuban Revolution reshaped U.S. priorities in Latin America . The Cuban revolution reshaped the United States priorities in the region .
 Castro government promoted wars of liberation in Latin America and Africa during much of the Cold War . Castro government established itself as significant global actor .
 Castro faced off against a succession of U.S. presidents, including Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, and Gerald Ford . Castro was assassinated in 1968 by the Soviet Union .
 Attempts to normalize relations with Cuba failed to bear fruit in the 1980s and 1990s . President Jimmy Carter tried to normalise relations with the island nation .
 Ronald Reagan forcefully embraced sanctions against Cuba as a means of containing communism in Latin America . Reagan embraced sanctions as a way to contain communism in the U.S.
 The collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War appeared to create a brief moment of opportunity in the early 1990s for the U.S. and Cuba to set their relationship on a new path . Cuba's relationship with the United States has been strained for decades .
 By 1992 the Cuban economy was reeling owing to the loss of nearly $4 billion in annual Soviet subsidies, and the country descended into a severe economic crisis . The loss of the Soviet subsidies led to the country's economic collapse .
 The U.S. passed legislation to ratchet up the sanctions against Cuba in 1992 and 1996 . The Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 and the Helms-Burton Act of 1996 were passed .
 George W Bush further tightened the embargo on Cuba, and most diplomatic contacts were frozen . Most diplomatic contacts with Cuba were frozen in Cuba .
 Cuba and the U.S. have a history of diplomatic failures . Despite the occasional opportunities to reconcile their estranged relationship, the United States and Cuba never seized on them and instead littered their history with failures .
 Fidel Castro fell ill with a serious stomach ailment in the summer of 2006 . There was ample speculation that his death would pave the way for a restoration of democracy and a rapprochement in U.S.-Cuban relations .
 Fidel Castro lived on, though he was forced to pass power to his brother, Raul Castro, on a provisional basis before formally resigning Cuba's presidency in February 2008 . Instead, Fidel lived on and passed power to Raul, who died in 2008 .
 Fidel's continued presence and his frequent writings on domestic and international topics, however, served to check Raul's power . Raul implemented a limited number of economic reforms and repeatedly stated his willingness to engage in dialogue with the United States . Fidel had served as Cuba's minister of defense for
 Cuba agreed to send tens of thousands of doctors to Venezuela's poor neighbourhoods in exchange for nearly 100,000 bbl of oil a day at discounted prices . In the early 21st century, Cuba strengthened its ties with other Latin American countries .
 Cuba also enjoyed warm relations with Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Bolivia, Bolivia and Ecuador . Each country is led by left-leaning politicians .
 In 2009, Costa Rica and El Salvador reversed Cold War-era policies and extended full diplomatic relations to Cuba . As a result, the island now boasted normal ties with every country in the Western Flemisphere except the United States .
 The United States and Cuba initiated lowlevel diplomatic discussions on issues related to migration and direct postal service . The Obama administration vowed to maintain the embargo . The Castro government rebuffed American requests to free political prisoners and hold competitive multiparty elections .
 Cuba's leaders have shown remarkable ability to survive and adapt during tumultuous decades since its inception . The Cuban Revolution is one of the greatest legacy of the Cuban Revolution .
 Obama was the 11th U.S. president to confront foreign policy challenges posed by the Cuban Revolution . He would not be the last president to tackle the challenge .
 In April the United States repealed all restrictions on the ability of Cuban Americans living in the U.S. to visit Cuba or send money to relatives living on the island . The United States also repealed restrictions on Cuba's ability to visit the island in April .
 In June the United States joined with the other countries in the Western Hemisphere to approve a path for Cuba’s entry into the Organization of American States, but the Castro administration rebuffed the measure . In June, the U.S. joined with other Western Hemisphere countries to approve the
 Diplomatic contacts between the United States and Cuba increased in recent years . Still, diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Cuba still remain strong .
 Bilateral migration talks that had broken down in 2003 were restarted in 2003 . Talks also restarted on the resumption of direct postal service between the two countries .
 The Obama administration’s outreach to Cuba was backed by a majority of Cuban Americans . Support for the embargo had waned, according to a number of opinion polls, polls show .
 The United States Congress debated several bills that would allow all Americans to travel to Cuba without restriction . Vehement anti-Castro voices remained prominent, however, and ensured that Obama would not move to overturn the embargo .
 The concert drew more than one million Cubans to Havana’s Plaza de la Revolution and was widely hailed as a landmark cultural event . Some exiles denounced the concert as a propaganda coup for the Cuban government .
 The two Cypriot presidents met during the year under the aegis of the UN to discuss a range of issues that included power sharing and governance, land tenure arrangements, security, and the future of the Turkish force in Northern Cyprus .
 The first round of meetings ended in August . The second round of talks scheduled for September was postponed for several days .
 Both leaders expressed disappointment that their meetings had not produced more concrete results . Although talks between the two leaders resumed, talks resumed .
 Opinion polls show Cypriots more concerned with economic matters than politics . Opinion polls on both sides of the dividing line showed Cypriot voters concerned about economic matters .
 Greek Cyprus had a slight increase in GDP, while all other EU members showed decreases . Greek Cyprus was the only member of the EU with a decrease in GDP .
 Turkish Cyprus experienced a drop in tourism, most notably a decline in the numbers of visitors from Turkey .
 Turkish Cyprus's five universities also experienced lower enrollment from Turkey . Turkish Cypriot's five colleges experienced lower enrollments .
 Turkish Cyprus has a negative trade balance with Greek Cyprus . Other economic problems are the large number of houses for sale, and a negative house trade balance .
 Turkish Cyprus planned to construct a pipeline from Turkey and a desalination plant . Both projects were expected to go on line in the following years .
 The cabinet’s dismissal was especially embarrassing, since it occurred during the Czech Republic's first-ever term holding the rotating presidency of the European Union . The Czech Republic is currently in the EU's first rotating presidency .
 On the economic front, the country performed relatively well, despite the global recession . However, automobile manufacturing, a key industry, suffered, and fiscal deficits increased .
 The dismissal of Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek’s cabinet was not surprising . The government had been on shaky ground ever since its appointment in January 2007 .
 The vote followed several unsuccessful attempts by the CSSD to bring down the cabinet . That vote was encouraged by Czech Pres. Josef Kraskovskova .
 After the government’s collapse, the ODS and CSSD rallied together to support a nonpartisan consensus candidate as interim PM .
 Jan Fischer, who had previously headed the Czech Statistical Office, was sworn in as prime minister on May 8 . Fischer had previously been head of statistical office .
 The ODS and CSSD had also called for early parliamentary elections (October) Several opinion polls gauged the contest as neck and neck .
 Constitutional Court declared parliamentary law and presidential decree on early elections invalid . In early September the country received a shock when the court declared the law invalid .
 An unaffiliated parliamentary deputy claimed that early polls violated his right to serve a full term in office . That decision was sparked by a complaint by an unaffiliated deputy, who claimed that the early polls violate his right .
 Deputies approved a constitutional amendment allowing the parliament to dissolve itself . Elections were planned for November, and elections were scheduled for November .
 CSSD suddenly changed its position in mid-September, arguing that the polls should be held in line with the original schedule, in May 2010 . CSSD changed position in September, however, saying polls should still be held on May 2010 date .
 The official justification for the shift was that the new constitutional amendment could be subjected to legal questions, causing further deadlock and delay . It was feared that the amendment could lead to further political deadlock .
 Denmark conservative Tradition Responsibility Prosperity 09 party, which split from the KDU-CSL shortly after the EP elections, rose unexpectedly in opinion polls . The party is the latest in a long line of conservative political parties in Denmark .
 The election delay gave Fischers interim government the responsibility to move forward with unpopular but necessary decisions . The 2010 budget deficit was projected to rise sharply if no action was taken .
 The parliament unexpectedly backed a package of austerity measures on September 25 and thereby strengthened the mandate of Fischer . Fischer had threatened to resign if the measures were not approved .
 Czech relations with Brussels damaged by political instability during its EU presidency . Czech delay in approving the Lisbon Treaty to reform EU institutions was also a problem . Czechs also delayed approval of Lisbon Treaty on reform of EU institutions .
 Klaus initially refused to sign the treaty, even after it was backed by the Czech lower and upper houses in February and May, respectively . Klaus initially rejected the idea of signing the treaty in May .
 He finally backed down in early November, however, allowing the treaty to take effect throughout the EU . The treaty will take effect on December 1, 2015 .
 Prague received a much-publicized visit from U.S. Pres. Barack Obama in 2011 . Prague has a long-standing relationship with the United States . Czech Republic is one of the largest economies in Europe .
 In September the Obama administration canceled the controversial missile defense shield that was to have been built in the Czech Republic and Poland . The U.S. canceled the missile defense system in September .
 Rasmussen's candidacy was largely opposed by Turkey largely over his handling of the Prophet Muhammad cartoon scandal in 2006 . Turkey had ini ini opposed Rasmussen, largely over the cartoon scandal .
 The objections were reportedly lifted after Turkey was promised top positions within the alliance . Turkey's objections were ultimately lifted, however, reportedly after Turkey's promise of top positions was reportedly lifted .
 Lars Lokke Rasmussen, finance minister in the centreright Liberal-Conservative minority government, took over as prime minister on April 5 . Rasmussen is a former finance minister who has been in charge of the government since 2007 . Rasmussen has been the prime minister of Denmark since 2008 .
 The new prime minister (who was not related to his predecessor) was intent on garnering public support in a country that had been hard hit by the recession .
 The unusually high turnout of 60% was attributed to the inclusion of women on the ballot of a referendum on granting women equal rights in the succession to the Danish throne .
 Danes voted 45% in favour of allowing the monarch’s firstborn child the rights of accession regardless of its gender . The measure passed; Danes vote 45% to allow the monarch's firstborn to accession .
 Danish troops killed in Afghanistan since 2001 have one of the highest per capita death tolls among coalition forces . In June the number of Danish troops died in Afghanistan in June reached 25 .
 Denmark was sharply criticized by both the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and Amnesty International for the government’s plan to forcibly repatriate rejected Iraqi asylum seekers . Denmark has been criticized for forcibly repatriating rejected Iraqi refugees .
 In August police ousted about 20 such Iraqis from the crypt of a Copenhagen church where they had been living for three months . In August 20 Iraqis were removed from a church crypt in the city .
 Violent clashes broke out between protesters and police as Iraqis were arrested and bused to asylum centre, where they faced deportation . Protesters and police clashed as the Iraqis were bused into asylum centre .
 U.S. President Barack Obama makes a rare visit to Copenhagen, Denmark . Obama is the first sitting president to visit Denmark since leaving office in 2009 .
 Barack Obama met in early October with Danish political leaders and the royal family . Obama met with Danish politicians and Danish royals in October .
 Obama was in Denmark during a hectic five-hour stopover while (unsuccessfully) lobbying the International Olympic Committee for Chicago to host the 2016 Games . Obama is in Denmark for five hours during a stopover from a flight .
 East Timor began in April 2008 when Eritrean troops occupied the Ras Doumeira area just over the border in Djibouti . The area was occupied by Eritreans in the area of the region .
 UN Security Council passed Resolution 1862, which ordered both countries to engage in negotiations . Resolution 1862 called for immediate withdrawal of Eritrean troops from Djibouti . Eritreans have been at odds with the UN for more than a decade .
 In late September, Djibouti petitioned the UN Security Council to enforce its earlier resolution . Meanwhile, Eritrea refused to acknowledge that it was encroaching on Djiboutsi land . Eritrea is also refusing to acknowledge the encroachment .
 Djibouti entered into separate agreements with the European Union and Japan to help stave off pirate attacks . The country has been hit hard by pirate attacks in recent years .
 The EU agreement, the Atalanta mission, was mandated by the UN World Food Programme to protect food-aid shipments into Somalia . EU forces would be based in Djibouti .
 Food prices on the continent had spiked, owing in large part to the increased number of pirate attacks on ships off the coast of Djibouti and Somalia . Food prices have also spiked due to an increase in pirate attacks in the region .
 The crisis deepened as a result of continuing drought as well as global increase in food prices . The crisis has deepened due to continuing drought and the global increase of food prices.
 By October more than 23 million people in the Horn of Africa were in need of food assistance, an increase of some 4 million since early in the year . The Horn of African region has seen an increase in food assistance since October .
 The government indicated that it would aim for a target of 3% of GDP, which was not an easy goal to achieve under current conditions . The government said it would be aiming for 3% GDP .
 Opposition parties protested in March in the capital, Roseau, demanding electoral reform . Opposition parties want what they call a "clean" voters list .
 On November 19, however, during Skerrit’s address to the country, he announced that the elections would be held on December 18 . The elections were originally scheduled for December 18, but they were set to be held in New Jersey .
 Dominica and other smaller Caribbean states voted alongside Japan to overturn the International Whaling Commission’s ban on commercial whale hunting . Critics had suggested that Japan was “buying” their vote with aid . Prime Minister Skerrit insisted that he was a convert to environmental preservation
 Dominica had abstained from the vote at the IWC's annual meeting in 2008 . Skerrit announced in March 2009 that Dominica would no longer support Japans efforts to reestablish commercial whaling . Dominica did not support the move in 2009 .
 Inflation closed out the year at 5%, and tourism numbers were resilient . Tourism figures were similar to those in 2007, with figures similar to 2007 .
 Leonel Fernandez was shaken, however, by his perceived failure to address debilitating social and infrastructure crises . Fernandez is shaken by the perceived failure of his government .
 Government commitments to tackle endemic corruption, the erosion of educational standards, increasing drug addiction, and lingering extreme poverty rang hollow .
 A low minimum daily wage of $2.52 in Nicaragua, the second poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, exacerbates labour tensions . Nicaragua's minimum wage is lower by 10 cents than that of Nicaragua, which is second poorest .
 A constitutional reform package negotiated by Fernandez and PRD leader Vargas Maldonado was passed that eliminated consecutive presidential reelection . The reform package was passed by the PRD and Fernandez's government .
 Also in the package was a provision that criminalized abortion, including therapeutic abortions . The measure was considered highly draconian . It included therapeutic abortions in cases of rape or incest or when a pregnancy threatened the life of a mother .
 Dominican Republic's chronically fragile relations with neighbouring Haiti were jarred by strong Haitian reaction to a new Dominican policy . The policy stipulated that children born to Haitian parents residing illegally in the Dominican Republic were not entitled to Dominican citizenship .
 Fernandez demonstrated exceptional skill when he brokered negotiations that cooled an incendiary dispute involving Ecuador, Venezuela, and Colombia . The dispute arose following an attack by the Colombian military on a rebel base located within Ecuador .
 East Timor has one of the lowest per capita crime rates in the world . Mario Carrascalao thanked the international community for creating peace in his country . East Timors have one of world's lowest crime rates .
 Indonesia left East Timor when it left the country . Roads are still in the same condition they were in when Indonesia left the island nation .
 Most of the roughly $8 billion donated to East Timor since independence had been spent on salaries of foreigners and on administration and imports . Only 10% of foreign aid ended up in the local economy, an organization says .
 President Ramos-Horta was equally concerned that too little aid money was going to the people of East Timor . He said too little money would be going to East Timors .
 A ceremony was held in Dili to celebrate the independence anniversary . Ceremony was attended by representatives of East Timor's most important neighbours, Australia and Indonesia .
 Indonesian Foreign Minister Hassan Wirajuda among those at the festivities . Australian Gov.-Gen. Andrew Abbott and Australian Governor-General Andrew MacKinnon were also there .
 President RamosHorta reassured Indonesia of his opposition to the establishment of an international tribunal to bring justice those said to be responsible for human rights abuses during the struggle for independence .
 Ramos-Horta called on the United Nations to disband its serious crimes unit . Ramos-horta calls on the U.N. to disband the unit .
 He also awarded retired Australian general Peter Cosgrove the Order of East Timor in recognition of his leadership of the multinational peacekeeping mission that had kept order in the country at the time of independence .
 Correa expanded programs aimed at improving life for the poor . He challenged foreign resource companies and investors to accept new terms of engagement with Ecuador . Correa has vowed to push ahead with his vision of “21st century socialism”
 A new mining law that imposed minimum royalty rates and limited the scope of exploration concessions was generally welcomed by foreign companies . Some Indian groups opposed it, but some Indian groups oppose it .
 A clash in late September between Shuar Indians and police seeking to break up an antimining road blockade left at least one Indian dead . The Shuar Indian tribe is believed to have been fighting an anti-mining blockade .
 In the petroleum sector, the government seized the assets of French firm Perenco in a dispute over taxes . The government pressed foreign firms to exchange joint production-sharing agreements for service contracts with state-owned Petroecuador .
 Ecuador's output of crude oil, Ecuador’s chief export, declined . As a result, some firms put investment plans on hold, and the output has declined .
 The judge hearing a $27 billion oil-pollution lawsuit against the U.S. multinational corporation Chevron was forced to step aside after the company produced evidence that he had discussed the eventual verdict with government officials . Meanwhile, the judge hearing the lawsuit against Chevron stepped down .
 Ecuador expected economic growth to slow to 2% in 2009, mainly because of weaker oil prices . Weak oil prices and a decline in remittances from Ecuadorans living abroad . Ecuador expected to grow 2% this year .
 To compensate, the government imposed new tariffs and import restrictions . It said it would double the tax on capital outflows, and negotiated advance payments .
 It also repurchased $3 billion in defaulted bonds that it said had been illegally issued under a former administration . The government repurchases at 35 cents on the dollar, at $35 cents .
 Relations with the United States and neighbouring Colombia continued to be strained in 2009 . Colombia's relations with the U.S. and Colombia were strained in the years before .
 Colombia maintained that Ecuador provided tacit support to Colombia . After meeting with Ecuadoran Pres. Guillaillailla, Colombia met with Ecuadorian Pres. Arguillailla . Colombia said that Ecuador had tacit support for the government .
 Indian leaders review draft of a proposed agreement that addressed many of their concerns over new water and mining laws in the country . Rafael Correa in Quito on October 5, India leaders review the draft of the proposed agreement .
 In July Colombian authorities released a video in which a senior FARC commander said that Correas reelection campaign had received funds from the rebel army . In July a video was released by Colombian authorities showing the FARC leader's FARC campaign .
 In September the last U.S. personnel left the military base at Manta on the Pacific coast . Ecuador declined to renew a lease allowing them to conduct antidrug operations . These were then shifted to Colombian bases .
 Two U.S. diplomats were expelled in February after the government said that they had threatened to suspend United States aid in an attempt to influence local police appointments . The government said the diplomats were trying to influence police appointments in the country .
 Despite irritants, the U.S. renewed a longstanding package of duty exemptions and other trade benefits for Ecuador . The United States renewed the longstanding trade benefits .
 The crises were exacerbated by local issues, including strikes, human rights concerns, and disagreement with the Nile River basin countries over the management of water resources .
 There were mass arrests of senior members of the banned Muslim Brotherhood organization . Mass arrests also took place of senior Muslim Brotherhood members in Egypt .
 The impact of the international financial crisis on the Egyptian economy was harshest during the first half of the 2008-09 fiscal year . Egypt's economy was hit hard by the global financial crisis in 2008-2009 .
 Panic struck as cases of H1N1 flu (a respiratory disease caused by an influenza virus) were reported in Egypt . Panic struck after cases of the virus were reported .
 Precautionary measures by the government included the slaughter of the country's estimated 350,000 pig population, a one-week delay in the start of the school year, and the installation of feverdetecting instruments at ports of arrival .
 Egyptian health authorities decided that pilgrims could proceed to Mecca and Medina for the hajj in late November as scheduled . Barring a major global outbreak, however, Egyptian health officials say pilgrims can proceed . The hajj is scheduled to take place in late December .
 By December 20 there were more than 7,300 reported cases of infection and 89 deaths . 89 people were killed by the virus, according to the CDC .
 The former chairman of al-Ghad party, Ayman Nour, was released from jail in June . He pledged to continue his political activism after his release from jail .
 In mid-February, pharmacists, truck drivers, public transport bus operators, real-estate-taxation employees, and other workers initiated strikes or sit-in protests over financial incentives and other grievances . In a wave of protests, drivers, bus operators and real estate workers took part
 In September the government-sponsored National Council for Human Rights delivered its five-year report on Egyptian human rights practices to the Geneva-based UN Human Rights Council .
 The Egyptian council called for reconsideration of the electoral system and its electoral supervisory mechanism in expectation of the 2010 parliamentary elections . The council pointed to irregularities in the past presidential and parliamentary elections that had put into question the integrity of the process .
 It also highlighted the rise in the rates of poverty and called for measures to ensure transparency, combat corruption and strengthen antitorture measures .
 Calls for guarantees to check interference by the executive with the judiciary . Calls for an end to the state of emergency and guarantees of checks on interference by executive .
 It noted improvements in the military justice system that tries civilians under the state of emergency law . The right to appeal was also noted in the report .
 In mid-August some 31 leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood were detained on charges of funding an international organization of the group . 26 Egyptians and other nationals went on trial in August for having organized a cell of Hezbollah to carry out subversive activities in the Suez Canal zone .
 In July ministers of irrigation and water resources of Nile River basin countries met in Alexandria to discuss a legal framework agreement regulating the distribution of water .
 Minister of Culture Farouk Hosni narrowly failed to secure required 30-member majority vote of UNESCO Executive Board . Egypt's candidate for the post of UNESCO director general failed to win required 30 member vote of the board .
 TV journalist Mauricio Funes of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front won the presidential election in El Salvador on March 15, 2009 . El Salvador Area: 21,041 sq km Population : 6,192,000 Capital: San Salvador .
 Funes defeated the National Republican Alliance candidate, Rodrigo Avila, by a margin of 51.3%-48.7%, ending ARENA's long control of the Salvadoran government . Funes was the first FMLN presidential candidate not to have participated in the guerrilla warfare of the
 Funes says he does not want ideological confrontation with the United States . Funes is sympathetic to other leftist governments in the hemisphere, especially that of Lula da Silva in Brazil .
 One of Funes’s first acts upon taking office was to restore relations with Cuba . One of his first acts on Cuba was restoring relations with the U.S.
 Salvadoran government also announced its support for Honduran Pres. Zelizer in July . Salvadoran President Ruben Navarrette is a former President of Honduras .
 In the realm of domestic policy, Funes began implementing dramatic improvements in education and children’s health benefits, especially for the poor . He provided not only free education, but also meals and uniforms for poor publicschool students .
 He also launched new aid programs for the elderly poor and moved against widespread corruption in the government .
 The global recession exacerbated already-serious economic difficulties for the new government . There are widespread unemployment and a sharp decline in exports and imports . The new government has been hit by the global recession .
 Remittances from Salvadorans in the U.S. dropped more than 10% during the first seven months of 2009 . Salvadorans remittances in the United States dropped 10% in the first 7 months .
 Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services in May lowered its credit ratings for El Salvador to BB, two levels below investment grade . El Salvador's credit ratings were lowered to BB in May .
 Residents of Verapaz, El Sal., survey the damage caused by deadly flooding and mud slides that occurred throughout El Salvador in early November . Funes promised to help victims of the flooding .
 French filmmaker Christian Poveda's 2008 film La Vida Loca reflected the lives of members of the Mara 18 street gang . The film was shot in La Campanera, a poor suburb of San Salvador, in September .
 In 2009 few outside Equatorial Guinea’s ruling circle celebrated the 30th anniversary of the coup d’etat that brought Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo to power in August 1979 .
 Equatorial Guinea was one of the largest oil producers in sub-Saharan Africa . The majority of the country’s population remained very poor and without access to any social services .
 While Obiang spent a fortune on cars and houses, infant and child mortality increased . Infant and child deaths increased as Obiang's wealth increased .
 A Human Rights Watch report released in July detailed the misappropriation of oil revenue by Obiang . A French judge agreed to launch a formal investigation into issues raised in a lawsuit filed by Transparency International . Transparency International accused Obiang and two other African presidents of misusing public funds, em
 Obiang was overwhelmingly reelected president on November 29 . Amid allegations of vote rigging, Obiang has been accused of rigging .
 Obiang pardoned British mercenary Simon Mann in 2008 . Mann had received a 34-year prison sentence for plotting a 2004 coup attempt against Obiang .
 Equatorial Guinea remained involved with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative . The country had joined the initiative in 2008, though transparency in the country's oil revenue was not immediately forthcoming .
 The maritime border dispute with Gabon over the island of Mbanie in the Gulf of Guinea, where oil had been discovered, remained unresolved . The border dispute remains unresolved .
 Ethiopia also earned the distinction of being one of the world's most militarized countries . Ethiopia is also known for being a highly militarized country .
 Isaias Afwerki continued to rule with the hard-line stance he had adopted upon the country’s independence in 1991 . Afwwerki ruled the country from 1991 to 1994 .
 He attracted scorn at home and abroad as his government detained without trial opposition figures and critics, including politicians and journalists .
 The Afwerki regime also stuck to a strict program of military conscription aimed at maintaining high troop levels at its disputed border with Ethiopia . The regime has also maintained high troop numbers at disputed border .
 Tensions remained high at the frontier, over which the country fought a two-year war with Ethiopia that ended with a shaky cease-fire in 2000 . The country had fought two-and-a-half years of war with neighboring Ethiopia .
 Kenya and Western countries accused Eritrea of having aided Islamist insurgents involved in a civil war in Somalia . Eritrea has been accused of aiding Islamist insurgents in Somalia's civil war .
 In May the African Union asked the U.N. to impose sanctions on Eritrea . The African Union said Eritrea was destabilizing the Horn of Africa .
 UN Security Council voted to impose sanctions on Eritrea in December . Eritrea has been hit with sanctions since it was imposed by the UN in 2012 .
 Nearly 30% of Eritrea's population are living below the international poverty line . Drought and high food prices abroad exacerbated the situation . Eritrea has been hit hard by drought and food prices .
 The dire economic and political situation forced many of its citizens to undertake perilous and sometimes fatal journeys to flee the country . Many of the country's citizens have been forced to flee their homeland .
 In August about 70 refugees perished at sea near the Italian coast when their small boat ran out of fuel and capsized . About 70 such refugees perished near the coast of Italy when their boat capsized in August .
 The European Commission in May allocated about $4.5 million to Eritrea . The European Union has also allocated $4 million to the country . Eritrea is one of the worst countries in Africa .
 The amount was part of about $71.6 million in humanitarian aid that the organization granted to five African countries . The aid is part of a $71 million donation to the African nations .
 In September the European Commission approved about $174 million in development funding for Eritrea for the 2010-13 fiscal years . Eritrea is the only African nation in the region to be granted the most development funding .
 That month the country also completed consultative talks with the International Monetary Fund . That month, the country had also completed consultations with the IMF .
 The organization concluded that the Eritrean economy would continue to be hampered by debt and inflation . Despite some gains from new mining industry construction, some gains were made in the mining industry .
 There was a massive decline in GDP and real-estate values, while unemployment rose to double digits during the first quarter of the year . Unemployment is double digits in the US .
 In addition to state revenue, wages, retail sales, and foreign direct investment all fell considerably . State revenue, wage and retail sales also fell significantly .
 The government sought to take advantage of the drop in inflation to move closer to adoption of the euro, making painful budget cuts . The budget deficit must be below 3% of GDP as required by the EU for euro adoption .
 Estonia continued to be an active participant among the NATO forces in Afghanistan . But its reputation in the alliance was blemished by the revelation that a senior Estonian defense official spied for Russia for more than a decade .
 Estonia remained critical of the Russian-German Nord Stream pipeline project . Despite the Simm case, relations with Russia thawed slightly, though for both environmental and political reasons .
 Fiji compared to the years of political turmoil that followed the disputed 2005 national and regional elections . Fiji compared with the . years of . political turmoil following the . disputed 2005 elections .
 One of the leaders of the main political opposition party, Birtukan Mideksa, was rearrested in December 2008 . He was one of the most prominent opposition leaders in the country .
 The government accused her of having violated the conditions of the 2007 political pardon, and her life sentence was reinstated . The government said she had violated the terms of the political pardon .
 In April, 32 military and former military leaders were arrested and accused of having planned illegal acts in the name of the party Ginbot 7 . The party is headed by opposition leader Berhanu Nega .
 The main legal opposition parties repeatedly accuse the government of harassment and intimidation . The main opposition parties have repeatedly accused government of intimidation .
 The Ethiopian economy was expected to grow at a rate of about 6.5% in 2009, down from 8% in 2008 . Most of its exports come from the agricultural sector, particularly coffee, tea, spices, and cereals .
 The decline in global demand for important exports had a negative impact on the Ethiopian economy, as did rising prices for fuel . The decline of global demand had also been a negative effect on Ethiopian economy .
 High inflation and rising food prices meant that urban citizens faced increasing economic hardships in 2009 . Stagnant wages and employment opportunities, decreases in remittances from the diaspora, and increasing internal migration to Ethiopian cities .
 More than 47% of the country’s rural population lived below the poverty line . Meanwhile, more than 47 per cent of the population in rural areas live below the line .
 Power rationing and critical supply shortages in items such as cement were persistent problems . Droughts and food insecurity were also persistent problems, as well as periodic droughts .
 At least 6. million Ethiopians were in urgent need of food assistance during the year . A total of 12. million people in need of some type of food aid .
 A highly controversial law that severely limited the actions of civil society organizations was passed in January . The law was passed by the U.S. Supreme Court in March .
 Foreign organizations prohibited from participating in activities such as conflict resolution and human rights-related work . Foreign organizations that received more than 10% of their funding from foreign sources banned from participating .
 It also empowered a government agency to closely monitor all organizations and impose extremely harsh penalties for violation of the law’s provisions . The law was passed by the U.S. Senate last week .
 Eritrea's border dispute with Eritrea largely remained at a stalemate in 2009 . The border dispute between Eritrea and Eritrea has largely been at stalemate since 2009 .
 Neither country had taken steps to demarcate the border in line with the 2002 ruling of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission, which Ethiopia rejected . Ethiopia had rejected the decision .
 In August the Haguebased Eritrea-Ethiopia Claims Commission ruled that compensation should be paid by each country to the other for damages inflicted during the 1998-2000 war .
 Ethiopia formally withdrew its armed forces from neighbouring Somalia in early 2009 . Ethiopian forces had been serving in support of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia since December 2006 .
 Ratu Josefa lloilovatu Uluivuda did not have the power to dismiss the previous government in 2007 or install the interim government that had seized power in 2006 . The latter move was therefore invalid, the court ruled .
 President Iloilo abrogated the 1997 constitution, dismissed the judges, and appointed himself head of state with power to rule by decree . The 1997 constitution was abolished in 1997 . Iloillo abrogates the constitution, dismisses the judges and appoints himself president of state .
 With backing of the military, he announced that he would install an interim government for a five-year period . Reforms contained in the People’s Charter for Peace, Change and Progress would be implemented, he said .
 The president reappointed the interim prime minister, Commodore Voreque Bainimarama, who in turn reappointed his interim ministers . The interim ministers were also reappointed by the president .
 The Pacific Islands Forum summit meeting was held in Cairns, Australia, in August . Fiji is one of the most important countries in the world to host the summit .
 Fiji’s membership in the Pacific Islands Forum and Commonwealth was suspended in May . Fiji also suspended from membership of the Commonwealth in September . Fiji's membership in Commonwealth was also suspended in September.
 On July 28, Bainimarama announced that the ailing 88-year-old Iloilo was retiring from office . He was succeeded as acting president by Vice Pres. Iloillo, who was succeeded by Vice President Iloano .
 Tourism, a mainstay of Fiji’s economy, was assisted by a 20% devaluation in the Fijian dollar . The country continued to open new hotels and to attract visitors from Australia and New Zealand .
 Fiji filed claim with the UN for recognition of an extended continental shelf in April . Fiji is hoping to secure rights to seabed minerals in the South Fiji Basin .
 The economy is heavily dependent on exports, which had accounted for 44% of GDP in 2008 . The economy was heavily dependent upon exports, with 44% GDP in 2009 .
 The value of exported goods dropped a historic 35% in the first quarter of 2009 from the same period a year earlier . Exporporations dropped 35% of export value of goods alone .
 Industrial production was at its lowest in 10 years, registering a 37.3% drop in August year-on-year . The drop was the biggest drop in industrial production in the last decade .
 GDP was 9.2% lower in July than it had been a year earlier . Unemployment rate grew to 8.8% in August; inflation dropped to -1% in September . Inflation in September was -1%, inflation was -2% .
 Finns elected five men and eight women to the European Parliament in June . Finns are the only Finns to hold seats in the European parliament .
 Timo Soini, chair of the True Finns, garnered the most votes and secured a seat for his party . Soini's party is sharply critical of immigration, which he says is illegal in Finland .
 The True Finns gained the most proportionately, capturing 9.8% of the vote, up from 0.5% in 2004 . Finns captured the most of Finland's vote in 2004, capturing just 0.6% of its vote .
 2008 scandal over unannounced campaign contributions unraveled further in 2009 . The 2008 scandal was the first of its kind in the country .
 Several stateowned or publicly funded entities chaired by politicians were found to have donated funds to the campaigns of said politicians . The funds were donated to the political candidates .
 The foundation had received funding from the state gambling monopoly RAY . RAY rules prohibit it from giving aid for political purposes .
 The downturn's impact was softened by the French state’s traditionally large role in the economy of spending and providing welfare . The French state has traditionally played a large part in the French economy .
 Many French took part in national street demonstrations to protest the government’s inability to do even more to protect jobs and wages . Yet with only a weak parliamentary opposition to air their complaints, many French take part in demonstrations .
 French model of regulated capitalism was hailed for steering the country clear of the excesses of Anglo-Saxon lending and borrowing . The French model was hailed by the French as a model of capitalism .
 Nicolas Sarkozy discarded the 43-year-old Gaullist model of semidetachment from NATO, however, and brought France fully back into the Atlantic alliance . Sarkozy scrapped the model of semi-separated separation from NATO .
 The popularity of Sarkozy had increased by the beginning of 2009, partly owing to the stabilization of his personal life through his marriage to singer and model Carla Bruni . Sarkozy was elected in 2007 to a five-year presidential term .
 His active governing style invited people to lay the blame for most problems at his door . His very active governing . style invites people to blame most problems on him rather than that of the government of his . Union for a Popular Movement .
 It was the first drop in France’s annual GDP since 1993 . Although this decline was smaller than that of many other countries, it was the biggest drop in the country's annual GDP .
 The government and workers began to adopt unorthodox tactics to stem the unemployment rate . The unemployment rate began to increase toward the 10% mark in 2009 .
 Sarkozy urged Peugeot to close its factories in the Czech Republic or Slovakia rather than in France . Days before authorizing loans to Renault and Peugeet-Citroen to sustain their car businesses, Sarkozy said .
 This caused a minor furor among his European Union partners and led the Czech Republic to convoke a special EU summit . The Czech Republic held the presidency of the EU in the first part of 2009 .
 Some French workers revived the practice of “bosses’s” protest in front of a Sony plant in the French village of Pontonx-sur-lAdour . Sony workers protested in April .
 Gabon detains bosses, usually just overnight, to try to get them to alter settlement deals . Gabon napping, or detaining their bosses, is a term for detaining them overnight .
 About 10 such boss-nappings occurred at plants owned by Molex of the United States and Sony of Japan . Molex plants in the U.S. and Japan are owned by both companies .
 The French economy improved in the second quarter, partly as a result of the French government's small but swift stimulus program of about $33 billion . This practice declined somewhat, however, as the economy improved .
 Sarkozy also planned a “national bond’s issue for investment of more than $50 billion in long-term research projects and the national infrastructure . Sarkozy planned a "national bond" issue .
 The financial issue of the year was the regulation of banks and bankers’ bonuses . Banks and bankers' bonuses were the top financial issues of 2013 .
 Sarkozy took a stand with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in EU and Group of 20 negotiations for tougher international controls on bonuses . Sarkozy has been in talks with Angela Merkel over the issue .
 At home he persuaded French bankers to agree to a code of practice linking bonuses to the longer-term performance of their banks .
 The French government did, however, provide banks with $56 billion in fresh capital and guaranteed $450 billion of their lending . French banks also received $500 billion in new loans .
 Sarkozy was elected on a promise to allow people to work more to earn more . After nearly two years of debate, he persuaded Parliament to pass legislation easing trading laws .
 The new law allowed all retail stores in certain areas to open for business on Sundays . The law was passed in 2010 .
 Lyon, the country's second largest urban area, objected to the plan . It was to take effect in 20 commercial zones around Paris, Lille, and Marseille and hundreds of smaller cities and towns that were often visited by tourists .
 Sarkozy also returned to the issue concerning the veiling of Muslim women . Sarkozy: "The veiling is not a problem. It is a problem for women in the Muslim world."
 In 2004 he had been instrumental in passing a measure forbidding students in French public schools to wear ostentatious religious symbols, such as Muslim head scarves .
 Sarkozy attacked the wearing of burkas by Muslim women as being a symbol of servitude unsuited to a republic dedicated to equal rights . In a June 2009 speech to Parliament, Sarkozy said burkas should not be worn in France .
 In June 7 European Parliament elections, the UMP became the first political party of a sitting French president to win since 1979 . The UMP is the first party to win under President Sark Sarkozy in the European Parliament .
 This result confirmed the splintering of the Socialists that began when Segolene Royal, their presidential candidate in 2007, lost the election to Sarkozy and then lost her bid to become the party’s leader to Martine Aubry, the mayor of Lille .
 Sarkozy continued to foster this splintering by giving cabinet jobs to Socialists, including in 2009 the nephew of Francois Mitterrand, the last Socialist president . Sarkozy's cabinet jobs have been filled with Socialists since 2009 .
 A few months after Frederic Mitterrand was appointed culture minister, a controversy erupted over his confession in a 2005 autobiography to having engaged in sex tourism in Asia . The former French culture minister was appointed in 2005 .
 Dominique de Villepin accused of having slandered Sarkozy in the so-called Clearstream affair . Sarkozy’s rival within the neo-Gaullist movement went on trial in September .
 Former President Jacques Chirac accused of embezzlement for allegedly using payroll to pay national political party operatives . Former mayor of Paris accused of using payroll for political operatives during his time as mayor .
 The trial of Chirac, who had enjoyed immunity from prosecution during his 12 years as president, was expected to take place in 2010 . The trial was due to begin in 2011 .
 Sarkozy started 2009 by attempting to mediate a cease-fire in Israel’s offensive in the Gaza Strip . Sarkozy had a very active EU presidency in 2008, following on the momentum of 2008 .
 France has the biggest Muslim and Jewish communities in Western Europe . In the past, Mideast tensions had reverberated in France .
 During the Gaza conflict, several synagogues and other Jewish sites in France were attacked or vandalized . During the Israel-Gaza conflict, many Jewish sites were vandalized or attacked .
 Sarkozy had no desire to displace the diplomatic role of the U.S., particularly under Pres. Barack Obama . Sarkozy wanted to avoid disinterpreting some of his predecessors' diplomatic posts .
 Charles de Gaulle's 1966 decision to leave NATO's integrated military command was made in 1966 . The French general led the French army to leave the integrated command in 1967 .
 France fully rejoined NATO at the April 2009 NATO summit in Strasbourg, France . France joined the alliance at the end of 2009 .
 France has always sent troops to NATO operations . The immediate military significance of this move was limited . France had always sent soldiers to NATO .
 French acceptance of NATO as a European institution . It ended the long-running ""European" versus ""Atlanticist” political tension in the alliance .
 Sarkozy was criticized from several quarters for purportedly throwing away France’s freedom of diplomatic maneuver . Nonetheless, Sarkozy has been criticized for allegedly throwing away freedom of diplomacy .
 Sarkozy was also criticized, however, by some in his own UMP ranks as “Sarko the American,” a charge that could pose him some difficulty, depending on events, in the presidential elections of 2012 . Sarkozy has been accused of being ‘S
 Omar Bongo died on June 8, 2009, after he suffered a fatal heart attack while abroad for cancer treatment . Bongo was in Africa for treatment of cancer .
 At the time of his death he was Africa’s longest-serving head of state . In power for 41 years, at the . time of . his death, he was the . longest serving head of the . African nation .
 His body was flown to Gabon on June 11, and the state funeral took place in Libreville on June 16 . The state funeral was held in Gabon .
 Nicholas Sarkozy, in attendance, jeered by crowds protesting a French government investigation into Bongo’s finances . Crowds jeered Sarkozy by crowds .
 On June 10 Rose Francine Rogombe, the speaker of the Senate, was sworn in as interim president . She was sworn into office June 10 .
 His nearest rivals, Andre Mba Obame and Pierre Mamboundou, each took approximately 25% of the poll . The former interior minister and longtime opposition leader each took about 25% .
 Protesters call the election fraudulent, calling it fraudulent . Violent protests ensued in Port-Gentil, Libreville, and other cities .
 In October the results of a recount requested by the opposition were released . The results upheld Bongo’s victory, and he was inaugurated on October 16 . In October, the results were upheld by the results .
 Gabonese activist Marc Ona Essangui was awarded a share of the 2009 Goldman Environmental Prize . Marc Essanguis was awarded the prize on April 19 . Gabonesi is a member of the Gabonese community in the Congo .
 He was honoured for his battle to save the rainforest of Ivindo National Park . The rainforest is one of the world's most biodifunded areas .
 The Gambia continued to receive bad publicity for suppressing freedom of expression and for arbitrary kidnappings and beatings of citizens by state agents . Yahya Jammeh continued to be President of Gambia in 2009 .
 The editor of The Point, a privately owned daily, was charged for reporting the arrest of a Gambian diplomat . The editor was charged with having reported the arrest . The Point is a privately-owned daily newspaper .
 The fate of Ebrima Manneh, a journalist who had been arrested in 2006, remained unknown . The African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, which was based in Banjul, urged the Gambian government to release him .
 Amnesty International reported that approximately 1,000 Gambians had been detained and tortured in statesanctioned witch hunts . In March, Amnesty International said 1,00 people had been tortured in the Gambia . Amnesty International: Gambians have been detained, tortured in witch hunts.
 The government did not condemn what had happened, however, and the prisoners were released . Though these were halted, the government still condemned the incident .
 Community Court of the Economic Community of West African States heard a case of torture brought by a Gambian journalist against operatives of The Gambia’s National Intelligence Agency . The journalist was tortured by operatives of the Gambia's National intelligence Agency .
 Several journalists were arrested in June and put on trial for having criticized President Jammeh’s smear campaign against Deyda Hydara . Journalists were arrested for having suggested that the government was responsible for the murder of the editor .
 They received two-year jail sentences in August, but after international criticism, they were given a presidential pardon in September . President Vladimir Putin pardoned the pair in September after international pressure .
 The Coalition for Human Rights in The Gambia was formed by Gambians living in Senegal with international connections . It is not clear whether the Coalition could exert any influence on the Gambian government .
 Mikheil Saakashvili appealed for free and fair preterm parliamentary and presidential elections . He appealed for the prime minister to resign and called for free pre-election elections . Saakashesvili has appealed for a free election .
 On April 9 the opposition launched a series of demonstrations, but Saakashvili still refused to step down . The opposition has called for his resignation since April 9 .
 On May 11 Saakashvili met with opposition representatives and offered to hold early local elections in May 2010 . As a compromise, he offered to form commissions tasked with electoral and constitutional reform . He also proposed to form a commission tasked with elections and constitutional reforms .
 On May 18 the opposition responded with further demands, which Saakashvili rejected . On May 19 the opposition demanded further demands from the president . The opposition has demanded that the president step down .
 On May 5 some 40 military personnel were arrested and charged with plotting a coup d’etat; their trial began on August 21 . The trial began August 21 and is expected to last two weeks .
 On January 30 Grigol Mgaloblishvili resigned as prime minister owing to health problems . After three months of service, on January 30 he resigned as Prime Minister .
 Several rounds of talks in Geneva failed to yield a breakthrough on the deployment of international observers in Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 In May opposition parties were barred from participating in South Ossetia’s parliamentary elections, and in August Russian businessman Vadim Brovtsev was banned from entering the country .
 Russia signed military cooperation pacts with Abkhazia and South Ossetia . In violation of the previous year’s armistice agreements, on September 15 Russia signed a military cooperation pact . Russia signed the pacts in violation of previous year's armistices .
 An international group tasked with evaluating the events that had culminated in the August 2008 war concluded that Georgia had begun the hostilities but condemned Russia’s disproportionate response and its failure to prevent ethnic cleansing by South Ossetian forces .
 Georgia and Russia struck a deal to reopen their main border crossing, which had been closed since 2006 . The border crossing was reopened in late December after a decade of tension .
 Joe Biden reaffirm Washington's support for Georgia’s territorial integrity . Biden visited Tbilisi to reaffirm U.S. support for the country's territorial integrity in Georgia .
 The German women's association football team won the European championships for the fifth time running . NATO summit was held jointly by Germany and France . German economic recovery was predicted, but all paled against backdrop of elections .
 The intense concentration on the battle between the parties was forcefully disrupted by such events as failing businesses, violence in schools, and political as well as religious scandals .
 These assaults are the latest in a series of six attacks at German schools over eight years . The assaults were the latest of six at schools in Germany .
 In 2000, violence in schools was virtually unheard of prior to 2000 . The incidents led to reconsideration of the role of guns in society and the pressures placed on teenage boys .
 The Winnenden shooter’s apparent targeting of females and the seemingly easy access that both teenagers had to weapons gave the discussion new fuel . The increase in violence by teenagers of both genders had been much lamented in recent years .
 Proposals to restrict types of guns that hunters could own, to limit young people's access to violent computer games and to reduce violence on television were debated .
 None of those measures were realized, though some gun-control laws were tightened . Gun-control measures were not realized .
 Year brought success in Germany’s fight against age discrimination in the workplace . On a more positive note, the year brought success for age discrimination .
 According to EU guidelines, all references to age had to be removed from job applications and advertisements . EU guidelines also had to remove references to the age of applicants and job advertisements .
 Reports in 2009 showed an increase in employment of those aged 50 and above . Employers and unemployment agencies reported a rise in employment .
 The slight increase in the fertility rate in 2007 and 2008 was attributed to a new measure that encouraged fathers as well as mothers to take time off from work to care for their newborns . The measure was introduced in 2007 .
 Statistics released in 2009 indicated that about 20% of new fathers were choosing to remain at home for a time so that the mothers could return to work sooner . Statistics show that 20% are choosing to stay at home .
 This trend was expected to have long-term impacts on the German economy . It was hoped it would increase the likelihood that working women would have children .
 A rise in the number of births would also require the expansion of the day-care system . Day-care is underdeveloped in many German regions, especially in Germany .
 The policy encouraging greater involvement of men in the upbringing of their children was the product of the minister for family matters, Ursula von der Leyen of the Christian Democratic Union .
 All these policies were historically atypical for the conservative CDU and symptomatic of the broad identity struggle that had been occurring within the party for a few years .
 CDU's identity crisis was visible in the election campaign and diminished the CDU’s lead over the other parties in opinion polls . The identity crisis has been visible in Germany's election campaign . The CDU is currently leading the polls in Germany .
 Prior to the general elections, elections were held for five state parliaments . Elections were also held for the state parliament .
 The state elections were staggered throughout the national legislative period . They were thought to be good indicators for the national election . State elections are thought to have been a good indicator for national elections .
 The first vote of the year took place in January in Hessen, where early elections had been called after coalitionbuilding negotiations collapsed . Hessen's first vote was held in January after coalition talks collapsed .
 The state’s 2008 election had created a situation in which only a grand coalition would have been viable . The state's 2008 election created a . situation . Only a grand . coalition would not have been possible, the governor said in a statement .
 This was inauspicious, since these parties were ruling together in a grand coalition at the national level . This is inausiicious, as these parties had been ruling together .
 The Social Democrats suffered a loss in the 2009 Hessen elections, which allowed the Christian Democrats to form a coalition with one of the smaller parties .
 Angela Merkel and her Christian Democrats began the election year anticipating a win . This seemed like good news for Chancellor Angela Merkel, who had hoped to win the election .
 This optimism was shaken on various occasions throughout the following nine months . This optimism continued to be shaken throughout the course of the year .
 Many of the CDU’s policies relating to the economic crisis and to gender and social politics seemed to be more in keeping with the traditional political philosophy of the Social Democrats .
 This led to the impression, among voters as well as parliamentarians, that the Christian Democratic political program was diffuse and undefined, even that close to the election . The Christian Democratic Party's political program is diffuse, undefined, according to the report .
 Additionally, the party had to weather strife and mishap in the months leading up to September 27, the day of the election .
 The CSU slipped farther toward the social conservative side of the spectrum . The Christian Democrats increasingly moved in the opposite direction .
 The CSU was more than vocal in its criticism of its sister party's sister party . The CDU did not appreciate in a year when it was standing for national reelection while the CSU didn't have to face any elections in Bavaria .
 Saarland, Saxony, and Thuringia did, however, hold state elections one month before the national election, which gave them national importance . The election was held in the three states one month earlier than the national elections .
 In two of the three states, Christian Democrats lost percentage points in the double digits . The ruling Christian Democrats were forced to consider forming grand coalitions .
 Opinion polls showed the Social Democrats gaining ground in recent polls . This seemed to throw into question the party's expected win in the national election . The Social Democrats are expected to win national elections in 2015 .
 Of all the election campaigns, the one in Thuringia proved to be the most turbulent . The election campaign was the most violent in Germany's history .
 Many doubted as late as May that he would be able to stand for election in August . The states minister president had suffered a serious skiing accident .
 Traditionally, the national election campaigns had almost always been carefully neutral and nonconfrontational until after the state elections . This held true in 2009, and this held true until after state elections in 2009 .
 Even the so-called ""TV duel"" between Chancellor Merkel and the SPD candidate, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, was not highly antagonistic . Even the 'TV duel' between Merkel and Steinmeier was not an antagonistic affair .
 Differences other than in rhetoric emerged mainly in relation to the minimum wage and nuclear energy . The SPD opposed vehemently and the CDU embraced as an intermediate measure .
 The CDU and CSU together captured 33.8% of the vote, and Merkel was reconfirmed in her role as chancellor . Merkel was confirmed as chancellor, while the SPD received 23% of vote .
 The success of the Christian Democrats could be partly attributed to the first signs in August that the German economy was improving . The Christian Democrats' success could be attributed to signs that the economy is improving .
 The election was again notable for the poor turnout, which at 71% was the lowest in the history of the Federal Republic of Germany . At 71% the lowest turnout was the highest in the country's history .
 Brandenburg and Schleswig-Holstein state elections were held on the same day as the national election . The state elections passed without notice without notice .
 Schleswig-Holstein had to undergo early elections because its grand coalition had failed in July . The state was forced to hold early elections after the coalition failed to reach a consensus .
 As a result of these elections, a government of the CDU and the FDP was formed, mirroring that of the national government . The CDU-FDP government was formed in 2009 .
 International affairs largely ignored in Germany because of the elections . International affairs were largely ignored by the election .
 2009 was marked by a withdrawal of attention to the domestic front, except in the few instances when the magnitude of global affairs forced the country to take heed . 2008 had been dominated by international climate change summits and economic accords .
 Atheists and the nonreligious accounted for about 30% of the population by 2009 . Percentage of adherents in the Roman Catholic and Protestant faiths each dropped from about 50% to only some 30% .
 This decline halted with the election in 2005 of a German pope, and the resulting short-lived euphoria even led to an increase in Catholic church attendance .
 The scandal surrounding the pope’s decision in January 2009 to withdraw the excommunication of a bishop who openly denied the Holocaust shattered this euphoria, however, and drove people from the churches again .
 The Constitutional Court's decision on the Lisbon Treaty did not come as a large surprise . The Lisbon Treaty was ratified by the European Union in 1998 .
 In the spring both houses of the German parliament voted to ratify the treaty, which would reform certain EU institutions . Both houses of Germany's parliament voted for the treaty in the spring .
 The court ruled in June that the ratification process could not proceed until the country passed new legislation . The new legislation gives the German parliament more oversight over and greater participation in the implementation of EU treaties in Germany .
 Maastricht ruled that EU treaties did not violate the country’s Basic Law . The court had ruled that as long as the fundamental makeup of the Federal Republic was not violated, the treaties were not violated .
 Germany’s democratically elected bodies did not have more oversight over and input into EU treaties, it had warned . It had warned that there could come a time when the treaties would become unconstitutional . Germany's democratically-elected bodies had more oversight, it said .
 The German parliament passed the new legislation required by the court in September . The country completed its ratification of the treaty . Ghana is the first African nation to ratify the treaty in Germany .
 Group of 20 summit held in April in London escaped the country’s attention almost entirely . NATO summit held that same month in Strasbourg, France, and Kehl, Ger., did intrude on German introspection .
 NATO summit turned 60 years old in 2009 . Protests against the alliance were smaller and generally less intense than expected . NATO summit was noticed mainly because of the protests .
 The economic crisis, preoccupation with domestic affairs, and widespread admiration of U.S. Pres. Barack Obama, the president of the United States, has been criticized for his policies .
 It was hard for most Europeans to protest against the man who had replaced U.S. Pres. Barack Obama .
 In February the German government approved a second economic stimulus package of more than $65 billion . In February, the government approved the second package of $65billion .
 Many parliamentarians criticized their government for this action, which they thought pushed Germany too far into debt and would be of dubious efficacy . Germany's parliamentarians criticize the move, saying it pushed Germany into too much debt .
 Later decreases in unemployment and reports from economic research institutes that the German economy was emerging from recession seemed to prove to be wrong .
 It could be argued, however, that it is too early to judge the matter, because the second round of governmental measures could not yet have had any real influence . It could also be argued that it could not be ruled out of influence .
 Opel requested financial aid from the government in 2009 because it was facing the possibility of plant closures . Opel was facing plant closures in 2009 when it requested the aid .
 The CDU had to address doubts about the coherence of its political philosophy . The government granted the aid, and the CDU then had to explain it .
 The loss of Opel would have cost thousands their jobs . Traditionally, the party was opposed to national subventions of failing businesses .
 The government’s decision to provide funding and to involve itself in the negotiations with GM was one instance in which traditional CDU voters did not recognize their party .
 Another such instance was the nationalization of the Hypo Real Estate bank . The bank was nationalized by the government in 2008 .
 In both cases the CDU argued that the companies were vital to the health of the economy . The CDU said they had to be supported for the greater financial good of the country .
 In the case of Hypo Real Estate, this might not have been the end of the debate . Hypo may not have ended the debate with the real estate giant .
 Its nationalization opened the door to a number of court cases relating to the legalities of the German government’s dispossession of the shareholders . Court battles would have to be fought over the following few years .
 John Agyekum Kufuor hand over power, marking the second time in the country's history that the presidency had been transferred to an opposition politician . The second time the presidency has been handed over to opposition politicians .
 The outgoing president had warded off potential violence by persuading his party to accept the electoral results . The outgoing President had been warding off possible violence by .
 This welcome sign of political stability and democracy in a region beset by armed conflict, political turmoil, and corruption underscored Ghana’s status as a model of democracy and civil society, says CNN.com .
 Barack Obama highlighted Ghana’s importance as an emergent democracy when he decided to make it the destination for his first official state visit to sub-Saharan Africa .
 President chose Ghana because it promoted democratic principles, transparency, and sustained prosperity . He bypassed other influential African states, notably Kenya and Nigeria, notably Nigeria .
 The International Monetary Fund approved a $600 million three-year loan in July to Ghana . The IMF is concerned about possible negative consequences of the world economic crisis on new democracies .
 The funds were designed to reduce its budget deficit and protect its currency . The funds are meant to reduce the deficit and the currency .
 Ghana’s two leading exports, cocoa and gold, maintained their value in world commerce . Cocoa and gold are Ghana's leading exports .
 A crowd gathers in Cape Coast, Ghana, on July 11 in anticipation of the arrival of U.S. Pres. Barack Obama .
 Barack Obama visited Ghana for his first official state visit to sub-Saharan Africa . Obama made the trip to Ghana the destination of his first state visit . Ghana is the first African nation to visit sub-slavery in the region .
 Greece struggled with eroding public trust due to a series of corruption scandals in 2009 . The effects of the global economic crisis and fallout from the riots in Athens in late 2008 led to the collapse of public trust .
 On January 7 Karamanlis reshuffled his cabinet . The most notable change was the removal of Georgios Alogoskoufis, who was replaced as finance and economy minister . Ioannis Papathanassiou was replaced by Ioannis Karamanalis .
 Former foreign minister Antonis Samaras returned to the government as culture minister . Former minister Samaras has been in charge of the Greek government since 2010 .
 The opposition failed to muster the required parliamentary majority to indict former Aegean minister Aristotelis Pavlidis . He is accused of soliciting bribes in return for granting subsidized shipping contracts . The opposition has failed to indict him .
 Coalition of the Radical Left and Ecologists Greens each claimed one seat . Coalition won 4.7% and 3.5% of the vote . Ecologists Green and Coalition of Radical Left each won 1 seat .
 Early parliamentary elections took place on October 4—only halfway through the Greek parliament’s term . Early elections were held in Greece's early parliamentary elections . Greece's parliament is only halfway through its current term .
 ND turned in its worst-ever performance in parliamentary elections . ND took 33.5% of the vote and 91 seats in parliament . The ND won 91 seats, the lowest level in the country's history .
 Karamanlis announced his resignation as ND president on election night . On election night he announced he would resign as president . He has since resigned from the post .
 PASOK president Georgios Papandreou was inaugurated as Greece’s new prime minister on October 6 . PASok president Georgio Papandreu was inaugurated as Greece's new prime minster .
 Environment, Energy, and Climate Change Ministry was created . Several ministries were merged or restructured, and the ministry was created in 2009 .
 Turkish military planes and warships repeatedly violated Greek airspace and territorial waters throughout the year . In foreign affairs Greek relations with Turkey remained cool as Turkish planes and ships violated airspace and waters .
 There was no breakthrough in the UN-mediated negotiations with Macedonia over that country's name . Several proposals by UN mediator Matthew Nimetz failed to secure the approval of both sides .
 In 2009 Greece held the rotating chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe . Greece is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 The global economic crisis seriously weakened the Greek economy, particularly two of its key sectors—tourism and shipping . Tourism and shipping are key sectors in Greece's economy .
 On the social front, the influx of illegal immigrants continued, but there was no consensus among the political parties on how to address the issue .
 The government announced tough measures to deal with the country’s high deficit in December . In December the government announced major cuts in government spending .
 Former senior PASOK official Theodoros Tsoukatos admitted to having received some $600,000 in 1999 on behalf of his party . Siemens AG apparently paid large bribes over an extended period of time to secure government contracts .
 Greek request to extradite former Siemens Hellas CEO Michalis Christoforakos was approved by several German courts . But Germany’s Federal Constitutional Court overturned such rulings on two occasions .
 A number of terrorist attacks occurred in early September on the Athens Stock Exchange . Urban guerrilla groups, including the so-called Revolutionary Struggle and the Conspiracy of the Cells of Fire, claimed responsibility .
 In late September four alleged members of the latter group were arrested, and warrants for another six suspects were issued . The warrants for more than six suspects have been issued .
 Georgios Papandreou is the leader of the Panhellenic Socialist Movement . His party won the Greek parliamentary elections on October 4, 2014 .
 In March the flight operations, technical base, and ground handling operations of the ailing state carrier Olympic Airlines were sold to the Greek financial conglomerate Marfin Investment Group .
 Olympic Air started flight operations on October 1 with a significantly reduced fleet and network . The new Olympic Air service is based in New York City, New Jersey .
 Offshore banking was suspended in 2002 after a massive fraud scheme led to the collapse of a major financial institution . Offshore banks have been suspended since 2002 after the collapse .
 As part of its efforts to reopen offshore banking, the government instituted a number of reforms aimed at increasing oversight of the sector . The creation of a new regulatory financial agency was part of the reforms .
 In March the World Bank's International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ruled in favour of the Grenadan government in a dispute with RSM Production Corp., a small U.S. oil company .
 RSM claims it was denied an offshore oil exploration license because it refused to bribe a government minister in 1996 . RSM claimed that it was refused an offshore exploration license .
 In June Grenadan Prime Minister Tillman Thomas defended a proposed union between Trinidad and Tobago and the nine members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States .
 The proposal calls for the establishment of an economic and political union by 2013 . The proposal called for the creation of the union by the end of 2013 .
 The government released Bernard Coard and the remaining 13 imprisoned leaders of the 1983 military coup that resulted in the death by a firing squad of then prime minister Maurice Bishop along with several cabinet ministers and supporters .
 Rosenberg claims knowledge of Colom's involvement in two other killings . Rosenberg also claims to have knowledge of money laundering and corruption . Rosenberg says Colom was involved in money laundering .
 Colom denied the accusations, refused to resign, and invited the UN and the United States to assist in the investigation of the murder . Colom has been accused of murder, but has refused to step down .
 In September seven arrests were made, including those of several police officers . Few details have been released to avoid compromising the ongoing investigation .
 A CID-Gallup Poll in June showed that only 8% of Guatemalans blamed President Colom for the murder . The poll also showed that 8% blamed Colom's death on the president .
 The Guatemalan quetzal lost value against the United States dollar . Tax revenue declined, and the Guatemalan dollar lost value .
 Guatemala urged the U.S. to slow the flow of deportations, President Obama said . President Obama urged Guatemala to slow down deportations .
 In May the Guatemalan government launched an austerity plan to cope with the recession; it received a $935 million loan from the IMF to help stabilize the country's finances . Barack Obama responded with a proposal for a new “temporary worker"" program for Central America that would provide
 With malnutrition already serious, famine caused by drought and crop diseases created additional suffering, especially in the eastern departments of Jutiapa, Zacapa, and Chiquimula . The highland departments of Huehuetenango, Quiche, and San Marcos also suffered .
 In September the government declared ""a state of public calamity” because of the shortage of com and beans and began a program of food packages for needy families . The government declared a state of public calamity because of the shortages .
 Guatemalan attorney Rodrigo Rosenberg, who was murdered in May, appears in the video in which he accuses Pres. Manuel Zelizer . Rosenberg was murdered by President Zelizer's government in May .
 President Colom in June launched a new campaign to reduce criminality and increase security in schools . The murder of bus drivers and kidnappings, especially in the capital, has prompted the president to launch the campaign .
 Violence in the country increased in part because of the Mexican crackdown on drug traffickers . Violence in Mexico has increased in recent years due to a crackdown on traffickers .
 As a result, heavily armed Mexican drug gangs moved south and began to operate in Guatemala, especially in the border area . Drug gangs began operating in Guatemala as a result of the crisis .
 "Los Zetas" are described as a hit squad for the Mexican drug cartels . President Colom was killed by a group known as Los Zeta, a group that made death threats .
 Within hours of Pres. Moussa Dadis Camara and, from December 5, Sekouba Konate, were succeeded by Prime Ministers Ahmed Tidiane Souare and Kabine Komara . Mr. Souare was succeeded by President Moussa Camara; Mr. Dadis
 The newly formed National Council for Democracy and Development officially took over all functions of the state in 2009 . The new council took over the role of the government in 2008 .
 Guinea was suspended from both the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States . Despite Camaras promise to hold elections within a year, Guinea has been suspended from the two organizations .
 On March 16 a coalition of political leaders met with the military rulers . They offered a plan for a return to civilian rule and a plea that both legislative and presidential elections be scheduled .
 On August 17 Camara announced that the presidential poll would be held on Jan. 31, 2010, and that members of the junta had agreed not to stand . The presidential election will take place in January 2010 .
 Rumours that Camara planned to run for president sparked a massive demonstration on September 28, when 50,000 opposition supporters took to the streets . Despite this, rumours of Camara's intentions sparked massive protests . Camara has been accused of corruption .
 Moussa Dadis Camara appears in Conakry on October 2 as Guinea marks its 51st anniversary of independence . The death toll at 57 is the highest in Guinea since independence .
 Camara warned that rioters would be severely punished . Camara also warned that further opposition meetings were banned .
 On January 22, CNDD called 14 former government ministers and business leaders to appear at televised hearings investigating corruption . The hearings will be televised .
 Three of the former ministers, including former prime minister Ahmed Tidiane Souare, were arrested on March 23 and charged with having embezzled $5.5 million of state funds .
 Camara was shot and wounded in Conakry on December 3 in an assassination attempt . The assassination attempt was blamed on one of his top aides, Lieut. Camara .
 Camara was reportedly taken to Morocco for medical treatment while authorities launched a search for Diakite . Camara is reportedly being treated for injuries in Morocco while authorities launch a search .
 Guinea’s vice president, Sekouba Konate, took over as acting president on December 5 . Guinea's vice president took over from the acting president last week .
 According to government officials, Camara's injuries were not life-threatening . Camara was taken to hospital with serious injuries, officials say .
 Pres. Batista Tagme Tagme Na Waie is the head of the armed forces and longtime rival of Pres. Mario Batista . He is a longtime rival to the longtime leader of the country's military .
 Joao Bernardo Vieira was shot dead on March 2 by renegade soldiers in an apparent revenge attack . Vieira himself was killed in a revenge attack on March 1 .
 No one was arrested for the assassination, but the expected political chaos did not follow . The military did not seize power, and the expected chaos didn't follow .
 Guyana's election took place on June 28, followed by a runoff on July 26 . One of the candidates running for president was shot dead by security forces . Guyana allow for voter registration to be completed .
 Malam Bacai Sanha of PAIGC was inaugurated as the new president of a country ranked third from last on the United Nations 2008 Human Development Index . The country remained a transit point in the cocaine trade for shipments from South America en route to Europe .
 Synergy missed its first-quarter deadline for starting work on the project . Synergy blamed the global financial crisis for its problems . The project was due to be completed in 2012 .
 In party elections held in August, Robert Corbin was reelected party leader . Party elections held by main opposition People’s National Congress Reform party .
 Khan had pleaded guilty to drug-related charges in a United States federal court in March . Khan was sentenced to life in prison after pleading guilty in March to drug charges . Khan is accused of using drugs to commit suicide in prison .
 Janet Jagan, the American-born former president of Guyana, died in March at the age of 88 . Jagan was the first president of the country .
 She was South America’s first elected female president . She was credited with helping PPP maintain its hold on power .
 This was a result of stability within Haiti, intensified international attention to the country, and hiatus from another year of devastating natural disasters . This year's Haiti earthquake was the first major earthquake to hit the country .
 Rene Preval and Michele Pierre-Louis effectively managed resources at their disposal toward recovery from storm devastation . Haiti's prime minister and prime minister led Haiti's recovery efforts .
 Transportation and communications networks were largely restored; disaster-mitigation planning increased . The number of those suffering from food insecurity diminished from roughly one-third to onefifth of the population .
 Elections to renew more than one-third of Haiti’s 30-member Senate were held in April . Only 11% voter turnout attended the elections . Fiscal-reform legislation enabling Haiti's eligibility for debt relief was passed this year .
 Legislation to raise Haiti’s daily 70 gourde minimum wage was problematic . More problematic was legislation to raise the minimum wage .
 Haiti’s parliament initiated steps toward constitutional reform, following recommendations of a nonpartisan presidential commission . Haiti's parliament has taken steps to reform the country's constitution following recommendations by a commission .
 Stability and recovery received a large boost from intensified international attention . The country's stability and recovery was boosted by increased international attention to the region .
 Donors pledged $353 million toward government-identified priority needs, enhancing significant bilateral and private aid flows .
 Bill Clinton, UN special envoy to Haiti, initiated efforts to coordinate donors, nongovernmental organizations, and the Haitian government . Former U.S. president Bill Clinton started efforts to attract international investment in Haiti .
 Priorities focused on energy, environmental rehabilitation, and increased food production and rural investment . Priorities also focused on the environment, energy and rural development .
 Social and economic conditions among Haitians did not improve significantly . 56% of Haitians survived on less than $1 a day, according to CNN.com .
 In late October, parliamentarians voted to remove PierreLouis from office, citing a lack of economic progress . PierreLouis was removed from office by parliamentarians in October .
 Her successor, Jean-Max Bellerive, promised greater foreign investment and job creation . Her successor has promised more foreign investment .
 Despite 9.7% inflation and declining remittances, the economy grew by 2.4% largely owing to disaster-recovery funding . The economy grew in spite of inflation and falling remittance rates, the country's economy grew 2.3% .
 Manuel Zelaya for raising the minimum wage during the global economic crisis . Zelaya has been criticized for not raising minimum wage in the past .
 Zelaya came in for further criticism when Congress accused the executive branch of having attempted to illegally influence its appointment of new Supreme Court justices . Zelaya also came under fire for allegedly trying to influence the appointment of justices to the court .
 Honduran president Manuel Zelaya was ousted in June 2009 . Zelaya's new court will take office until January 25, the day mandated .
 In March Zelaya publicly announced his desire to continue in office, which is not possible under the current constitution . Zelaya announced in March that he wanted to continue to be president .
 He issued an order to hold a referendum on June 28 to ask whether voters when casting ballots in the general elections in November also wanted to convoke a constituent assembly to reform the constitution .
 The Supreme Court, Congress, and the country’s electoral tribunal declared the referendum illegal . The referendum was declared illegal by the Supreme Court .
 Zelaya dismissed the head of the military for refusing to distribute the ballots, but the court overturned the dismissal . Zelaya's dismissal was overturned by the court, but Zelaya is still president .
 The election was ready to take place on June 28, but that morning military and police officers arrested Zelaya and transported him by plane to Costa Rica . Zelaya's election was set for June 28 .
 Honduras’s constitution lacked clear means for impeaching a president . Congress appointed its leader, Roberto Micheletti, to complete the term . The Supreme Court charged Zelaya with having violated the constitution .
 The Organization of American States suspended Honduras after Zelaya's ouster . The OAS suspended Zelaya after demanding that Zelaya be restored to office .
 Barack Obama resisted cutting off humanitarian aid to Honduras . Obama feared harm to Honduras's poor population, fearing harm to its poor population .
 United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton eventually persuaded Zelaya and Micheletti to accept Costa Rican Pres. Zelaya . Clinton eventually accepted the Costa Rican President .
 Arias proposed a plan that would return Zelaya to the presidency but also would require him to form a national unity government and abandon efforts to change the constitution . Arias' proposal failed to pass .
 Zelaya returned to Honduras on September 21, taking refuge in the Brazilian embassy in Tegucigalpa . Zelaya has been living in Brazil since September 21 .
 On December 2, Congress voted against restoring Zelaya to office for the final two months of his term . Zelaya was elected to office in March 2010 .
 Gyurcsany announced in March that he would stand aside as prime minister . Economy Minister Gordon Bajnai became prime minister in mid-April . Bajai is the current prime minister of Hungary .
 Bajnai accepted only a symbolic salary of 1 forint for taking on the crisis-management role . He said he would step down after the general elections in the spring of 2010 .
 Bajnai inherited an economy on the verge of collapse, public debt standing at 77% of GDP, and strict IMF conditions . Public debt is 77% and a set of strict IMF terms .
 The forint had lost 20% of its value against the euro, which made it difficult for the government to service its foreign-currency-denominated debt . The loss of the forint means it will be difficult for Hungary to service foreign-creditorial debt .
 The financial crisis also directly affected the 1.1 million citizens who had taken out foreign-currency mortgages and loans . More than a sixth of the population took out loans and mortgages . The crisis has also affected 1.6 million people .
 A nonparty technocrat himself, Bajnai created a government of experts, cut ministerial salaries by 15%, and announced an austerity program . The austerity program included radical cuts in all areas of public spending and reform of health care, pension, and education systems .
 He overhauled the tax system by cutting personal income tax rates and employers’ social security contributions . He also increased the valueadded tax and excise and business taxes .
 His government also introduced a new “wealth” tax on property and luxury items . His government has also introduced new ‘wealth’ tax on luxury items and property .
 Hungary’s credit ratings were downgraded in the spring, easing investors’ fears about the country’�s prospects for riding out the global financial crisis . Bajnai's achievements later eased investors' fears that the country would ride out the crisis .
 The opposition Fidesz-Hungarian Civic Alliance secured 56% of the vote in June European Parliament elections . The opposition was critical of the new government, but secured a large majority .
 The biggest election surprise was the success of the far-right fringe party Jobbik, which had campaigned on an anti-Jewish and anti-Roma platform . The far right party's success was the result of a wave of support for the far right .
 Jobbik won 15% of the vote and became the most popular extremist party in Hungary since the fall of communism in 1989 . No powerful politicians or public figures were associated with it, even though no powerful politicians were .
 A disconcerting shift toward extremism in Hungary was also indicated by a string of attacks on the country’s Roma community . Growing public support for the Jobbik-allied paramilitary organization known as the Hungarian Guard .
 The black-uniformed group was banned during the summer by a Budapest court . It was later reconstituted under a different name under different name . Budapest court banned the group in the summer .
 In the autumn bilateral relations between Slovakia and Hungary hit rock bottom . The Slovak parliament approved amendments to its state language law that criminalized the use of minority languages, including Hungarian, in public .
 Hungary's parliamentary parties condemned the law, and Bajnai’s government turned to Brussels for help . Hungary's Hungarian-speaking community made up some 10% of the population . The law was passed by Hungary's parliamentarians and the Slovak government .
 The Bajnai government spent more than 3% of GDP on bank bailouts and loan-guarantee programs . Though no banks collapsed, the Bajai government spent 3% GDP on bail-outs .
 Real GDP contracted by an estimated 8-10%, unemployment increased to more than 10%, and the country became heavily indebted abroad . The country is heavily indebted at home and abroad, according to experts .
 A $2.2 billion line of credit was extended to Iceland by the IMF and was supplemented by additional loans from the other Nordic states as well as from Poland and the Faroe Islands . The IMF extended the $2 billion loan to Iceland .
 Iceland announced plan to recapitalize country's three largest banks in July . Landsbanki, Glitnir, and Kaupthing were seized after failure of those institutions in October 2008 .
 Landsbanki's situation posed particular problems for Iceland, since more than $3 billion in deposits in the bank’s branches in the U.K. and The Netherlands could not be withdrawn following the bank's collapse . Landsbank's deposits in those branches can't be withdrawn after
 Iceland agreed to assume up to $5.5 billion of debt from Landsbanki and to repay the sum over the next 7-15 years . The U.K. and The Netherlands responded by compensating depositors for most of their losses . Iceland agreed in return to assume the
 Street demonstrations outside the Althingi took place that eventually led to the government’s downfall . The government was overthrown after a series of demonstrations .
 Iceland’s new government decided to apply for EU membership in July . Iceland filed its formal application for membership on July 17 . The new government has filed Iceland's formal application .
 Anxiety about the economy compounded by renewed concern about terrorism in the region, sparked by the vicious terrorist attacks in Mumbai in late November 2008 .
 The ruling coalition, the United Progressive Alliance, succeeded in returning to power in the general elections of May 2009 . Despite these problems, the coalition improved its seat tally in the Lok Sabha, the lower house of parliament .
 India's 15th general elections to the lower house of parliament, the Lok Sabha, were conducted over a fourweek period from April 16 to May 13,2009 . The Lok Sabha is India's parliament's lower house .
 No single party had been able since 1984 to secure a majority in the parliament . No single political party had ever secured a majority since 1984 .
 India's oldest and largest party, the Indian National Congress, had led a coalition known as the United Progressive Alliance to form governments since May 2004 . As a result, the country's oldest party had led the coalition since 2004 .
 Pranab Mukherjee continued as leader of the party in the Lok Sabha . Singh was elected to the parliament as a member of the Rajya Sabha, the upper house, the party's seniormost leader .
 Triumvirate of Sonia Gandhi, her son, Rahul, and Manmohan Singh ran the party . The government was headed by Gandhi, Singh, and Mukherjee .
 Mukherjee, a longtime cabinet member, became the finance minister in 2009 . He has remained the government's principal troubleshooter and problem solver .
 More political parties contested the election than in previous years . In most constituencies the battle was fought mainly between three or four major contenders . Some newly founded parties, such as Praja Rajyam registered their presence .
 Mayawati Kumari, Mulayam Singh Yadav and Chandrababu Naidu thought to be the main contenders for the prime ministership . The former Andhra Pradesh chief minister, Chandramadu, is the main contender for the post .
 The ideological platforms of Indian political parties were traditionally trifurcated into left, right, and centre . The ideological platform of Indian parties was traditionally left and right . The party's ideological platforms have traditionally been left or right .
 Parties often adopt diametrically opposite policy platforms while in opposition and in government . Such sharp distinctions based on Western political thought tend to break down in India .
 A growing number of regionaland caste-based parties also tend to adopt shifting platforms .
 In the 2009 elections as well, it was difficult to classify the election manifestos of the three major coalitions neatly along this left, right, and centre axis, however apparent the nature of the political divide .
 The left had a more traditional political platform, echoing its favourite political positions on domestic and global affairs . The left's platform echoed its favourite positions, including that of foreign policy .
 Most opinion polls and several exit polls had forecast a ""hung"" parliament, with no coalition capable of forming a stable government . Most polls and exit polls said no coalition could form a government .
 The BJP and the parties of the left were dealt a severe blow, with the left facing ignominious defeats in West Bengal and Kerala .
 The BJP found itself engaged in a prolonged fratricidal war, with party leader Advani facing severe criticism . Advani's position remained unchallenged, however, owing to internal divisions on the naming of his successor .
 Government failures lay at the root of many of India’s problems with law and order, civil strife, and insurgency . Government reform was not a key issue in the elections, but government failures are key to many of the country's problems .
 Indian economy slowed to a growth rate of 7.1% in 2008-09 and was expected to record an even lower rate of 6.3-6.5% in 2009-10 . After an unprecedented five-year run of a nearly 9% average annual rate of growth,
 An equally important factor was the poor monsoon rains in 2009, the weakest in more than 35 years, which had a negative impact on agricultural output . The poor monsoarsoon rains have also had an impact on agriculture output .
 The Indian banking and financial system had virtually no direct exposure to American subprime-mortgage assets or to the financial institutions in the U.S. that were at the heart of the crisis . The country's financial system has virtually no exposure to subprime mortgage assets .
 The early prudent and risk-averse regulation of the financial system helped to limit the impact of the trans-Atlantic financial crisis on the Indian financial sector . The financial crisis was the biggest financial crisis in the world in the 1980s .
 The economy was negatively affected, however, by various other channels . The economy has been negatively affected by various channels .
 Indian corporations’ access to foreign commercial loans was curtailed . This resulted in the cost of credit going up, since interest rates were higher in India . Second, Indian companies’ . interest rates in India are higher than in other countries .
 Reduced portfolio investment in Indian equities by international institutional investors pushed Indian stock market indexes down . India's stock market index index down .
 To counter the impact of the slowdown, the government unveiled fiscal stimulus packages in late 2008 and early 2009 .
 Additional public spending contributed to an increase in the governments fiscal and budgetary deficits . This additional public spending has contributed to a rise in public spending in the past .
 A liberal fiscal policy along with insufficient monsoon rains and an expected downturn in agricultural production contributed to inflationary pressures . Inflationary pressures are also expected to be seen as a factor in inflationary pressure .
 Managing relations with Pakistan in the aftermath of the 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai emerged as a major foreign-policy challenge in 2009 . Managing relations between Pakistan and the U.S. became a major issue in the wake of the Mumbai terror attacks .
 India’s relations with the United States, where a new administration took charge, and with China . Equal attention had to be paid to India's relations with U.S. and China, writes Andrew Hammond .
 India officially accused Pakistan’s chief spy agency of having conspired to stage the terror attacks in Mumbai . India has accused Pakistan of conspiring to carry out the Mumbai terror attacks .
 The Indian government provided information to Pakistan showing links between the terrorists who attacked Mumbai and militants based in Pakistan . Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence agency claimed the terrorists were “clients and creations’’
 Pakistan initially refused to accept any link to the Mumbai attacks . It later conceded that some “nonstate actors” based in Pakistan might have been involved in planning the attacks . Pakistan denied the charge, initially refusing to accept it .
 The action taken against those identified by India and the United States as coconspirators also became a contentious issue . India and U.S. have taken action against some of the alleged conspirators .
 Pakistan had charged India with having aided Baloch rebels, while India maintained that the Baloch nationalist movement was an entirely homegrown resistance movement . Pakistan had accused India of aiding the rebels .
 India and China on the border issue, especially regarding the status of the Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, caused some friction between the Asian giants . Pakistan dominated the headlines as Pakistan dominated headlines .
 India consistently rejects this claim, having held regular elections to the provincial government, including in October 2009 . India consistently rejected this claim .
 India’s plans to step up infrastructure development in the state met with strong Chinese disapproval on the board of the Asian Development Bank . India had approached the bank for a loan to fund this investment .
 China emerged as India’s biggest trade partner, despite allegations of dumping and nontransparent pricing of Chinese goods . India-China trade and business relations continued to flourish nonetheless .
 India and China continued to work together in international forums, such as the World Trade Organization, the World Bank, and the IMF . They tried to coordinate their positions in negotiations on climate change .
 The summit of the Group of 20, of which India was a member, emerged as a major global decision-making body in 2009 . This was a high point of Indian diplomacy during the year . The summit was a highlight of the year for India .
 India remains concerned about the slowing of the pace of its interaction with the United States under the administration of Pres. Obama .
 Prime Minister Singh enjoyed a cordial meeting with Obama during his state visit to the United States in late November . Obama’s preoccupations with domestic economic issues and U.S. relations with China and the Muslim world reduced India's salience in United States foreign policy, compared
 India concluded free-trade agreements with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and South Korea . India also concluded free trade agreements with South Korea and Southeast Asia nations .
 Simultaneous elections were held in April for the national, provincial, and district legislatures . Those were followed by direct presidential elections in July .
 The elections were largely peaceful and, in the opinion of most observers, reasonably fair, despite some administrative bungles by the Election Commission . The election was largely peaceful, but some observers say it was not fair .
 Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono (commonly known as SBY) dominated with 21% of the vote . SBY won the election with a total of 21% .
 Indonesia's Islamic parties together gathered just 29% of the vote, down from the roughly 37% that they had received in 1999 and 2004 elections . In their worst-ever election result, Indonesia’s Islamic parties gather just 29%, down from 37% .
 Two new political parties, Gerindra and Hanura, returned vote totals of less than 5%, despite expensive advertising and voter-mobilization campaigns . The parties were led by prominent former generals Prabowo Subianto and Wiranto .
 After trailing Megawati in opinion surveys in mid2008, the president was able to regain the ascendancy . Polls consistently showed him to be by far the most popular and trusted politician in Indonesia .
 SBY's revival was due in large measure to voter approval of his government’s economic policies, which were credited with offsetting the worst effects of the global financial crisis .
 Indonesia had one of the strongest-performing economies in the region, with an annual growth rate of 4.2% that ranked behind only China and India . Indonesia is one of only two countries with a higher growth rate than India and China .
 Robust domestic consumer demand and high export commodity prices were chief drivers of Indonesia’s economic expansion . Robust consumer demand was the key to Indonesia's economic growth in recent years .
 A range of direct government payments to lowerincome families to compensate for the effects of rising prices . What proved particularly popular with voters was a range of . government payments .
 The commencement of these payments coincided with the rally in the president’s support, the president's support .
 Corruption continued to command public and media attention during 2009 . Corruption in the United States continued to dominate the headlines .
 Numerous high-level officials were convicted and jailed for graft . Aulia Pohan, the father-in-law of SBY’s son and a deputy governor of Bank Indonesia, was jailed for corruption .
 In May, KPK chairman Antasari Azhar was arrested and charged with graft and with having ordered the murder of an executive at one of Indonesia’s state-owned enterprises .
 Prosecutors allege that Antasari wanted the executive killed because he had threatened to expose his affair with the executive’s wife and his protection of high-level officials involved in corruption . Prosecutors allege the executive was killed because of his threats to expose the alleged affair .
 The KPK was Indonesia's most respected institution, according to opinion surveys . His case has caused great harm to the standing of the KPK, Indonesia's respected institution .
 The commission suffered further damage to its reputation after another two of its five commissioners were forced to stand down after becoming the focus of corruption investigations . Another two of the five commissioners have been forced to step down from the commission .
 Critics used these events to argue for a reduction in the commission's powers . The KPK’s critics said these events should be reduced to a reduced power .
 Indonesia experienced its first terrorist attack in almost four years on July 17 . Two suicide bombers struck the luxury JW Marriott and Ritz-Carlton hotels in Jakarta . 9 people were killed and 50 others were injured .
 Responsibility for the bombing was claimed by Noordin Top, a former member of the Jemaah Islamiyah terrorist organization .
 A string of arrests followed, culminating in the shooting of Noordin and several of his top associates at their hideout in Central Java . The suspect was shot dead at his hideout .
 Noordin’s death was a heavy blow for violent jihadism in Indonesia . He had been a key figure in all of the major terrorist bombings in the country since 2003 .
 In late September and early October, several earthquakes struck western Indonesia, causing devastation and heavy loss of life . The Padang region of West Sumatra was hit by the quakes .
 The confirmed death toll exceeded 600, with estimates that more than 1,000 people may have perished . The confirmed deaths are thought to be the result of the earthquake .
 The collapse of many public buildings prompted calls for tighter construction standards . Scientists were warning of more severe quakes over the next two decades .
 Election officials dressed as wayang characters stand guard at a polling station in Solo, Java province, during Indonesia’s presidential elections in July .
 Supporters of Iranian opposition leader Mir Hossein Mousavi rally in front of the Azadi tower in Tehran to protest the outcome of the June presidential election .
 In the run-up to the election, a power struggle developed between key individuals critical of Pres. Barack Obama and others critical of him .
 Ahmadinejad aligned with the country’s Revolutionary Guards, was confronted by an array of reformists, clergy, conservatives, and progressive intellectuals . Reformists and clergy hope to ensure his defeat in June 12 election .
 As the election drew closer, Ahmadinejad’s opposition coalesced around one main challenger, Mir Hossein Mousavi . Mousavi was the main challenger to the Iranian president in the election .
 The hierarchy of the Islamic Republic was split in public on the course of future action . For the first time, the hierarchy of Iran's government was split on the future of the country .
 Ahmadinejad announced he had won outright on June 13 . The announcement was greeted with surprise by many with surprise . The Iranian president is expected to be sworn in as president .
 Official results indicated that the turnout was 85% but that only 34% of the vote was won by Mousavi . Mousavi demanded that the results be investigated . Official results indicate that Mousavi won 34% .
 The failure of Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei to respond to election irregularities led to a week of unrest among those frustrated by Ahmadinejad’s dubious success . The Supreme Leader is expected to lead the Iranian parliament in Tehran .
 Khamenei issued a public call for unity but also increased police and Basij militia antiriot action against demonstrators . On June 19 Khamenei called for unity . Khamenei also increased increased police, Basij militancy and increased police action .
 In July the riots gradually abated, but agitation for a new election remained . In July, the riots slowly abated but there was still agitation for an election .
 Ahmadinejad was sworn in as president on August 5 with Khamenei’s blessing . Nevertheless, the Iranian president is still in office .
 The rupture caused by the disputes damaged the cohesion of the ruling elite, says Iran's president . The rupture made Iran politically less stable in spite of declarations that no erosion had occurred in regard to the principles of the Islamic republic, he says .
 Political maneuvering continued after the mid-year unrest with neither side entirely dominant . Neither side was entirely dominant in the region .
 Ahmadinejad won control of most ministries in the new cabinet, although there were areas that were taken over by opponents . The new cabinet includes Iran's president, President Mahmoud Abbas, the prime minister of Iran .
 The judiciary is headed by Sadeq Larijani, the brother of Majles speaker Ali Larijan . The judiciary was headed by the brother-of-the-speaker of the Majles Speaker .
 Talks between Khamenei and former president Hashemi Rafsanjani in August brought relief from overt infighting within the regime . Khamenei has ruled Iran since the 1980s .
 The death of Grand Ayatollah Hossein Ali Montazeri, who had opposed the election results, was announced on December 19 . The unity of the regime was again severely tested when the death of Mr. Montazari was announced .
 The event sparked further uprisings in Tehran on December 27 in which five protesters were killed . The protests sparked further protests in Tehran following the death of five protesters .
 The government was much taken aback by this recurrence of violence and by the size of the opposition clustered around Mousavi . Mousavi's nephew was among those killed during the riots .
 There was no sign at any stage that the regime would change the decision concerning the legitimacy of the election .
 The political unrest in June and July interrupted a slight easing of relations with the United States . Although United States Pres. Barack Obama has been in office since 2001, the U.S. has not been involved in any of the unrest .
 Barack Obama had offered wide-ranging diplomatic dialogue with the Iranian people . Obama had sent a Noruz (New Year message) message to Iran .
 The United States also claimed a direct role in negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program . The U.S. also claimed to have taken part in the negotiations .
 Secretary of State Hillary Clinton responded to Iran's continuing failure to desist from developing nuclear capacity . Clinton promised U.S. protection to Arab states of the Persian Gulf against any Iranian threat .
 The UN General endorsed Obama's proposals for an end to the proliferation of nuclear weapons . The meeting of the UN General on September 24 endorsed the proposals .
 Iran plans to inaugurate Bushehr atomic power station and expand capacity at Natanz . Iran also plans to secretly create a new underground facility near Qom . Iran says it has no intention of stopping its nuclear program .
 Negotiations with the EU toward external monitoring of the nuclear program made little progress . The EU agreed to monitor Iran's nuclear program with Iran .
 Ahmedinejad’s government continued its support for militant groups such as Hamas and Hezbollah, adding to friction with the U.S., the EU, and Israel . The government continues to support militant groups like Hamas and Hamas .
 June rioting was partly caused partly by the Ahmadinejad government's poor economic performance . Discontent with the government contributed to the riots .
 GDP stood at $344. billion in March, with per capita income about $4,837 . GDP is based on GDP of $344 billion . GDP stands at $4.837.
 Oil sector’s earnings totaled $81. billion but were scheduled to decrease to about $30 billion-$36 billion in 2009-10 budget . Oil price dipped on international market as the oil price dipped .
 A key reform expected to be introduced in the 2010-11 budget was a contentious plan to gradually eliminate subsidies on fuel, food-stuffs, and medical equipment .
 Iraq IRAQ Area: 434,128 sq km Population : 30,747,000 (including about 2,000,000 Iraqi refugees) About 1,200,000 refugees are in Syria and about 450,000 are in Jordan .
 Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki’s State of Law coalition list emerged as the big election winner . Prime Minister al-Masharaki's list was the biggest election winner in Iraq .
 Arab Sunnis participated broadly for the first time since the national elections of 2005 . Arab Sunni voters took part in the first election since the Arab Spring in 2005 .
 The results revealed a turn by Iraqis away from sectarianism . The results indicated approval of Maliki’s tilt toward the political centre . Maliki has been in office since 2003 .
 The provincial elections did not include the three Kurdish provinces in the north or the disputed city and province of Kirkuk . The elections were held in Iraq's Kurdish provinces .
 All parties were quick to absorb the theme of the election results, the popular desire for reconciliation . The message was reflected in their campaign programs in preparation for the national parliamentary elections of 2010 .
 The Iraqi Council of Representatives adopted the long-awaited new election law on November 8 . After repeated delays, the law was adopted after repeated delays . Iraq's election law was passed by the Iraqi parliament in November 2013 .
 The law had been held up largely by the explosive dispute over the oil-rich province of Kirkuk . Arabs, Kurds, and Turkmen each claimed a majority in Kirkuk, where Arabs and Kurds claim a majority .
 The parliament agreed to use voter rolls from 2009 and not 2005 . Many displaced Kurds had not yet moved back into the region by that year . The parliament resolved the contention, temporarily, by agreeing to use voters rolls .
 The new election law provided for an open list, rather than a closed list, in which voters would not know the names of individual candidates . Voters could choose candidates by name rather than by name .
 He sought more seats in the parliament for some 2. million Iraqi refugees, most of whom were Sunni . Most of the refugees are Sunni, but most of them are Sunni .
 A new amendment, backed by Shi'ite and Kurdish members, shuffled the new distribution of seats by reverting to the 2005 voter rolls and adding seats for a 2.8% annual increase in the population . The amendment was backed by members of the Shi'ites and Kurds .
 On December 6 lawmakers reached a compromise on seat distribution, which gave a slight increase to Sunni provinces . Lawmakers pressured by the United States and the UN, agreed to the compromise .
 The date for the 2010 elections was rescheduled from January 16 to March 7 . The 2010 elections were originally scheduled for January 16 .
 Iraq still suffered from a lack of security in the country . However, the year saw an improvement in security compared with previous years .
 The reduction in violence helped the United States withdraw its troops from Iraqi urban areas by June 30 . U.S. troops were able to regroup in less-visible camps in the countryside .
 Iraqi army and police assume responsibility for manning checkpoints and patrolling city streets in Baghdad . Status of Forces Agreement between Iraq and the U.S. signed in 2008 .
 Some joint U.S.-Iraqi military operations continued against al-Qaeda and other insurgents . Joint operations continued in and around Baghdad and the northern province of Nineveh .
 Corruption remained very high, as did common crime—robbery, murder, and kidnapping for ransom . Corruption remained high, and crime remained common crime, as well as corruption .
 Social ills created a deep sense of discontent and unease among Iraqis . Many Iraqi emigrants from neighbouring Syria and Jordan have returned to Iraq . The social ills have prevented many from returning from neighbouring countries .
 Hakim had been the most powerful Shi'ite political figure in Iraq . Hakim was the leader of the ISCI, the main Shi’ite political party . He had been a powerful figure in the country .
 In the semiautonomous Kurdish region of northern Iraq, the Kurds continued to build their own institutions . The Kurds have built their own own institutions in their own region .
 On July 25 parliamentary and presidential elections were held in the three provinces that constituted the Kurdistan Regional Government . Al-Sulaymaniyyah, Arbil, and Dahuk are the provinces that formed the regional government .
 A new party, Change, which had split from the PUK, came in in Iraq . Change was formed after a party split from PUK .
 In the presidential elections Mas'ud Barzani, head of the KDP, won with 69.6% of the vote . In the past, he has been accused of corruption in the past .
 A coalition government, dominated by the KDP and the PUK, was formed by Barham Salih . The coalition government was headed by Salih and was dominated by KDP .
 Despite repeated delays by the parliament in approving a new oil law, the Iraqi government signed an important agreement on November 3 with a consortium of BP and China National Petroleum Corp. to develop the giant oil field of Al-Rumaylah in southern Iraq .
 BP had been expelled from Iraq in 1972 when the former Ba'th regime nationalized the oil industry . BP was expelled from the country in 1972 .
 The government worked with neighbouring countries Syria, Turkey, and Iran to increase the amount of water they allowed to flow into Iraqi rivers . The government increased water levels with the help of neighbouring countries .
 Water shortages are particularly felt in Basra and elsewhere in southern Iraq . Water shortages and water pollution were particularly felt by Basra residents . The city is home to the largest city in the country's history .
 On October 13 the Iraqi parliament approved an Iraqi-British security pact, despite the protest of some lawmakers . The Iraqi parliament has approved the agreement, despite some lawmakers' protest .
 Relations with Syria deteriorated when Iraq accused the Syrian government of tolerating al-Qaeda militants and former Ba'thists living in Syria . Iraqi officials blamed the former Ba'sists for major explosions in Baghdad .
 Two explosions on August 19 and October 25 killed hundreds of Iraqis and severely damaged several government buildings . Hundreds of Iraqis were killed in the explosions, which killed hundreds .
 Syria denied any involvement in the bombings, but Iraq insisted on a UN investigation . Iraq rejected any mediation by Arab or other countries . Syria has said it was not involved in the bombing .
 Iraq had been hoping for the cancellation of some $25 billion in UN-required reparations for Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait . Iraq had hoped to cancel $25billion in reparations in the 1990s .
 Those requests had been systematically rejected by Kuwait, which insisted on full payment . Those requests were systematically rejected .
 By fall 2009 Kuwait had become more inclined to accept a UN-sponsored solution suggesting that Kuwait invest those reparations in diverse development projects in Iraq . The solution was suggested by the UN in fall 2009 .
 Iraq had asked other Arab countries, including Saudi Arabia, to cancel its outstanding debts . Iraq had also asked Saudi Arabia and other Arab nations to cancel their debts .
 Settling the Kuwaiti reparations issue was essential to removing Iraq from obligations imposed under Chapter VII of the UN Charter after the country’s failed invasion of Kuwait . The issue was vital to Iraq's ability to trade freely with the rest of the world, which in turn was vital
 The scale of the damage caused by the crisis would previously have been unimaginable . It is now unimaginable for the first time to see how much damage has been caused .
 Ireland’s two major financial institutions, Allied Irish Banks and Bank of Ireland, were on the brink of default early in the year . Lending stopped, construction sites were boarded up, and job cuts occurred as businesses slashed expenses .
 In February the government agreed to provide Allied Irish Banks and the Bank of Ireland each approximately $5.25 billion in recapitalization funds . In September it proposed legislation to set up a “bad bank” to absorb nonperforming loans from a number of domestic commercial banks .
 A government advisory committee published a report in July that identified $7.7 billion in possible public spending cuts . The report suggested a 5% reduction in social welfare payments and the elimination of more than 17,000 public-sector jobs .
 McCarthy report includes measures that would be politically difficult to implement . McCarthy report: Measures would be 'politically difficult' to implement if they were implemented .
 Among the more controversial suggestions were cuts in health care spending, the closure of half of all police stations, and sharp reductions in payments to farmers .
 Prime Minister Brian Cowen had a torrid first 18 months in office, receiving blame for the country’s economic problems and for squandering the budget surplus . Cowen has been accused of squandering a budget surplus and of mismanagement .
 In Dublin, supporters of the EU’s Lisbon Treaty celebrate the overwhelming passage of the measure by Irish voters in a referendum held in October .
 European Parliament elections held in June gave no comfort to Israel's ruling coalition . European elections were held in Israel's European Parliament in June . Israel's governing body is expected to be in charge of the European Parliament .
 Sinn Fein was unable to capitalize on the economic travails, losing its sole EP seat and failing to make expected gains elsewhere . Sinn Fein failed to make gains elsewhere in the province .
 The recently formed Libertas party failed to win a single EP seat . The party had campaigned against the Lisbon Treaty on EU organization . The pan-European party also disappointed supporters .
 Irish voters passed the Lisbon Treaty by a margin of 67% to 33% in a new referendum held in October . The Lisbon Treaty was first rejected in a 2008 referendum in Ireland . Irish voters initially rejected the treaty in 2008 .
 The Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse published its final report in May . It was established in 2000 to investigate abuse of children in Catholic-run residential institutions in Ireland from the 1930s onward .
 The report concluded that beatings and neglect were routine and that sexual abuse was “endemic” in institutions . Church authorities were often aware of the abuse and made efforts to protect offenders from legal charges .
 A separate inquiry into child-abuse allegations against clergy members in Dublin ended in July . The inquiry focused on allegations made against 46 priests between 1975 and 2004 and on how those complaints were handled .
 The inquiry’s findings caused considerable public disquiet over the role of senior churchmen . Churchmen were criticized for not pursuing allegations of child sex abuse by clergy with sufficient vigour .
 In November the Consumer Price Index showed prices down 5.7% over a 12-month period . In November, prices dropped 5.3% over the same period .
 From January to November the seasonally adjusted rate was 12.5%—almost double that of a year earlier . Seasonally adjusted rates were almost double the rate of growth year-on-year .
 Net emigration resumed, with an estimated 65,100 people emigrating during the 12 months ended in April . The number of immigrants declined from 83,800 to 57,300, with the number of people leaving the country dropping from 83-800 .
 The number of births reached 74,500 during 2009, the largest figure attained since 1896 . The figure is the highest figure reached since 1896.
 Israel's 22-day military operation in the Gaza Strip from late December 2008 to mid-January all had potentially far-reaching consequences . The election of Benjamin Netanyahu to a second term as prime minister, a more vigorous U.S. Middle East peace policy, and the international fallout from
 After taking office on March 31, Netanyahu distanced himself from the internationally accepted two-state model for peace with the Palestinians . Under heavy pressure from Washington, Netanyahu soon backtracked, under heavy pressure .
 Palestinians had been offered far more by outgoing prime minister Ehud Olmert . They demanded that Netanyahu first freeze Jewish settlement construction in the West Bank as a sign of good faith .
 Barack Obama led a dynamic U.S. resolve to promote comprehensive Israeli-Arab peace . Obama saw this as the key to stability and the restoration of United States standing in the region . Obama: "The United States will continue to pursue peace"
 The mooted freeze-for-normalization deal failed to materialize after months of intensive shuttle diplomacy . Special U.S. Middle East envoy George Mitchell acknowledged little progress had been made .
 Promising peace negotiations under the previous Israeli government had broken down in December 2008 . Israel launched a major military operation against Hamas government in the Gaza Strip in 2008 .
 Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit has been held captive for more than two years . He was held captive by Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu .
 Shalit had been held prisoner by Hamas militants since June 2006 . Israeli Defense Forces struck with overwhelming power, sending in ground forces .
 Israel lost only 10 soldiers and 3 civilians during the operation . Hamas fighters launched hundreds of rocket attacks during the raid .
 The disparity between the death tolls and the widespread destruction in Gaza led to claims that the IDF's response had been disproportionate and indiscriminate . Israel's response to the deaths in Gaza was criticized as disproportionate .
 Israel argued that its soldiers had operated strictly within the laws of war and had made strenuous efforts to warn civilians to move out of harm’s way before impending attacks . Israel said its soldiers were fighting militants who were embedded in heavily populated urban areas .
 In early April the UN Human Rights Council established a fact-finding commission under South African judge Richard Goldstone to investigate violations of human rights and humanitarian law in the Gaza fighting .
 The commission heard testimony mainly from Palestinians, as Israel refused to cooperate . Israel said the commission's mandate was inherently biased . Israel also said that the commission was biased .
 Netanyahu accused the commission of having applied ""twisted standards" Netanyahu said the commission had played into the hands of radicals who wanted to defeat Israel .
 He warned that if Israel was denied the right to defend itself against future rocket attacks, it would not be able to take risks for peace . He said Israel was not willing to take a risk for peace if it was not protected from future attacks .
 The United States calls the Goldstone report biased and deeply flawed . But it urges Israel to conduct an independent investigation of its own . The U.S. wants Israel to remove the report from the international agenda .
 Although the Gaza operation hurt Israel’s international image, it also seemed to establish a strong deterrent balance, at least in the short term . The Gaza operation helped Israel's image, but hurt the international image of Israel .
 Nine months after the war, there has been virtually no rocket fire from Gaza . Nine months ago, there was virtually no fire from Hamas rockets .
 Behind the scenes Israel and Hamas negotiating a deal for the release of Gilad Shalit, the Israeli soldier held prisoner by Hamas militants since June 2006 . Shalit has been held in captivity since 2006 .
 Hamas and Hezbollah used the lull to build up huge rocket arsenals . But Israeli leaders were far more concerned by the strategic threat posed by Iran .
 Netanyahu urged the international community to prevent the ""tyrants of Tehran” from acquiring nuclear weapons . Addressing the UN General Assembly on September 24, Netanyahu said Iran should not be allowed to get nukes .
 In late October Barak expressed Israel’s concern that Iran would exploit talks with the Western powers to gain time while continuing to pursue a clandestine nuclear weapons drive .
 Despite differences over the efficacy of diplomacy with Iran, Israel and the U.S. continued to coordinate defensive measures in the event of a military showdown with Tehran .
 On the economic front, 2009 saw Israel emerging from the global economic crisis relatively unscathed . 2009 saw the country emerge from the economic crisis largely unscathed from the crisis .
 The government passed a two-year budget with increased spending to counteract growing unemployment . The Bank of Israel lowered interest rates to encourage business activity .
 By the beginning of the fourth quarter, Israel seemed to have turned the corner . Israel's victory over the U.S. seemed to be a turning point .
 Tel Aviv Stock Exchange had gained more than 60% over the lows of December 2008 . Bank of Israel was optimistically forecasting growth of 3% for 2010 . The Composite State-ofthe-Economy Index had risen for a fourth consecutive month .
 A devastating earthquake and allegations of sexual impropriety leveled against the country’s billionaire prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, riveted Italians in 2009 . The earthquake and sexual allegations against the former prime minister were leveled against him .
 On April 6 an earthquake with a magnitude of 6.6 devastated a mountainous stretch of the Abruzzi region . The quake was the largest quake in Italy's history . The region was hit by a 6.2 magnitude earthquake in April .
 Aftershocks from the country’s worst earthquake in 30 years rippled through central Italy for more than a month, fraying both public and political nerves . The quake was the worst earthquake for 30 years and shook Italy for over a month .
 Prime Minister Berlusconi seized the media limelight by visiting homeless victims and promising a swift and thorough reconstruction of the affected areas .
 At Berlusconi's insistence, the Group of Eight summit was moved to L’Aquila . The summit had been scheduled to take place on Maddalena Island, off the coast of Sardinia, Sardinia .
 The summit was held there in July under makeshift conditions to focus global attention on the catastrophe . It was held in July in makeshift conditions . The summit is held in a bid to highlight global attention .
 Barack Obama toured the city's rubble-strewn neighbourhoods, shaking hands and rallying local residents . Barack Obama, visiting Italy in an official capacity for the first time, shook hands and rallied locals .
 By September vigorous assistance efforts had succeeded in moving some of the dispossessed into new homes, though thousands remained housed in temporary facilities . By September some had been moved out of temporary housing facilities .
 Scientists remain concerned about the high potential for future seismic activity along Italy's geologically vulnerable eastern spine, the Apennine Mountains, where the quake had occurred .
 Seismologists reiterated the need for stricter adherence to building codes . But there was little immediate evidence that their counsel was being heeded .
 Italy had thousands of centuries-old structures that were difficult to modify . Many of the structures were built in the 1800s and are still difficult to maintain .
 The 72-year-old Berlusconi, a longtime business and media tycoon, suddenly found himself embroiled in corrosive sex scandals . Subject to numerous corruption and conflict-of-interest probes over the years, he has been embroiled in several scandals .
 He allegedly had given Letizia a gold and diamond necklace as a birthday gift . He allegedly gave her a diamond and gold necklace .
 Letizia responded by saying that Berlusconi was merely a friend and benefactor whom she knew as ""Papi," a version of which was corroborated by an unapologetic Berluscon .
 He insisted that he had attended Letizia’s celebrations as a favour to her father, a businessman friend .
 42-year-old escort Patrizia D’Addario publicly announced that she had been recruited by a middleman to spend the night with Berlusconi .
 She also alleged that the prime minister had promised that she could stand for election to the European Parliament as one of his party’s candidates .
 Berlusconi blamed unnamed political enemies for spreading malicious rumours and invading his privacy . D'Addario's account was dismissed as defamatory gossip by Berlusconconi . D’Addario was the first Italian politician to publicly accuse him of invasion of privacy .
 Berlusconi also declared that, while he was ""no saint,"" he was still ""the best prime minister” Italy had ever had . Most Italians sought to emulate him, though dips in public opinion polls suggested otherwise . In a remarkable series of rebuttals, he also declared
 These tawdry scandals damaged Berlusconi’s already shaky reputation among Roman Catholic leaders . The scandals produced a rare public skirmish between the government and the Vatican .
 Dino Boffo, editor of Avvenire, was once embroiled in a sexual harassment case . Berlusconi’s brother, II Giomale, a daily owned by Berluscon's brother, attacked the editor of the paper .
 The embittered Boffo eventually resigned, and Berlusconi met with Pope Benedict XVI in an effort to mend the growing rift . The pope eventually resigned from the Italian government after the scandal broke out .
 Berlusconi experienced a major setback in October when the Constitutional Court ruled that a 2008 law granting the prime minister and other leading officials immunity from prosecution while in office was unconstitutional . The court ruled that the 2008 law was unconstitutional and that immunity was granted to Berlusconconi and other officials
 Berlusconi had threatened to resign if the law was overturned . He pledged instead to continue as prime minister and to defend himself in court . He was expected to face trial in a few outstanding corruption and tax-fraud cases .
 A September suicide bombing that killed six Italian paratroopers in Afghanistan intensified the debate over Italy’s participation in NATO-led efforts to pacify that country . The September bombing killed six Italians stationed in Afghanistan .
 In October Berlusconi angrily denied reports that Italy had paid Taliban leaders to keep the peace in areas of Afghanistan where Italian soldiers were deployed . In October he angrily denied claims that Italy paid Taliban warlords to keep peace in Afghanistan .
 A rift between Berlusconi allies became nearly unbreachable . Meanwhile, a rift between two key Berlusconconi allies was nearly unbreakable . The rift between the two is nearly unbecoming .
 Northern League leader Umberto Bossi rejects proposal to make legal immigrants eligible for Italian citizenship . Northern League had been outspoken in its resentment of immigrants .
 The ongoing government debate over immigration policy came as Italian naval patrols continued to turn away new waves of would-be arrivals on Italian shores . The ongoing debate came as the Italian government debated immigration policy .
 Jamaica away, despite protests from the European Union and humanitarian officials . Jamaica away from the region, despite efforts to save the island nation .
 In March, Berlusconi traveled to Tripoli to mark Libyan ratification of a 2008 cooperation deal . The deal had called for the widening of business ties between the two countries in exchange for Libya's promising to help reign in Italy-bound migrants .
 Muammar alQaddafi paid his first visit to Rome, where the two nations agreed on further measures to police immigration . The two nations also agreed on measures to deal with immigration .
 The immigration controversy was fueled by the poor performance of Italy’s economy . The economy was in recession partly because of the global economic crisis .
 In September the European Commission dampened hopes of an immediate recovery by announcing that it expected a 5% drop in Italy’s 2009 GDP rather than the 4.4% decrease forecast earlier this year .
 The IMF’s assessment was similar; it predicted a 5.1% drop in GDP in 2009, followed by a marginal recovery in 2010 . The IMF also predicted a marginal 0.1 percent recovery in 2009 .
 Rome-based Institute for Studies and Economic Analyses recorded a level of 59. for Italy, the lowest for the country since the institute was founded in 1986 . Italy's business-confidence index for April was 59.5 percent .
 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development predicted that Italy's jobless figures would reach into the double digits if the economy failed to regain momentum .
 Unemployment among 15-to 24-year-olds increased by 5% in 2008 to 26.3% . More than a quarter of the country’s youth were out of work .
 Some social critics suggested that Letizia’s alleged affair with Berlusconi represented a revival of a trend for young women to seek dalliances with successful men in the political, sports, and entertainment worlds .
 Despite the precarious economy, Italian politics appeared all but bereft of a functional opposition . Italy's economy is in a precarious state, but it has a long history of political instability .
 His successor, Dario Franceschini, made little immediate impact and was soon replaced by political veteran Pier Luigi Bersani . Bersani was replaced by Italian political veteran and political veteran .
 Melancholy was echoed even in the sports world, where rabid soccer fans were forced to reckon with a national team whose performances were generally lacklustre .
 Fans also watched the exodus of some of the top soccer league’s best players . Some of the best players in the league have left the game .
 Inter Milan star Zlatan Ibrahimovic explains his defection from Barcelona to Barcelona . Ibrahimovic is the star of Serie A titleholder Inter Milan . Inter Milan beat Barcelona 1-0 at the Nou Camp on Saturday .
 Kaka of Brazil, AC Milan’s hallmark midfielder, said much the same, though more diplomatically, as he packed his bags for Real Madrid . AC Milan's hallmark midfielder Kaka said much of the same as Real Madrid's Kaka . Kaka: "Kaka
 Owners also acknowledged that they had reduced spending as a result of the poor economy . No Italian team made it past the quarterfinals in the European championships . Owners also admitted that they have reduced spending .
 Ferrari was repeatedly humbled by teams with far less know-how and cash . Ferrari was Italy’s bestknown international brand, Ferrari, was humbled .
 OUR hoped that at least 15% of the total power required by 2020 could be derived from renewable energy sources . The OUR hoped to be 15% renewable energy .
 Jamaica reaffirmed in June that it was not averse to going against the grain of international opinion by retaining the death penalty as part of the country’s judicial system .
 In late 2008 both houses of Parliament voted in favour of hanging as the method of execution . Both houses voted in late 2008 to use hanging as a method of death .
 Jamaican government has made a formal application to the IMF to borrow $1.2 billion under a stand-by agreement . In July, the government confirmed that it had made an application for the IMF . The government has said it has applied for a $1 billion loan from the IMF
 IMF and Jamaica agreed on ‘key elements’ of a $1.1 billion loan in December . IMF and Jamaican government agreed on key elements of the loan deal last month . Jamaica has been hit by a series of economic woes since the fall .
 Hatoyama took office as Japan’s prime minister in September . After leading the DPJ to a landslide victory on August 30, he became the prime minister .
 The global financial crisis hit Japan hard, causing a sharp contraction of economic activity . GDP shrank by 8.4% year-on-year in the first quarter of 2009 .
 Aso's government responded to the crisis with three stimulus packages amounting to roughly $275 billion . This stimulus failed to reverse the unemployment rate, which crept upward from 4% in mid-2008 to 5.7% in July 2009 .
 Aso postponed plans for the election while waiting for an economic turnaround to commence . Aso said he was waiting for a turnaround to begin in the economy .
 Prosecutors are investigating a violation of the Political Funds Control Law involving DPJ leader Ichiro Ozawa . Aso hopes opposition might be distracted by scandal that it could not take advantage of weak economic situation .
 DPJ approval rating dropped to 18% in April as Ozawa considered how to respond . Ozawa's approval rating was 18% when he made the decision to take action .
 His chief secretary, Takanori Okubo, had been arrested and then prosecuted for having directed a donor, Nishimatsu Construction, to circumvent the ban on corporate donations to individual politicians by funneling money to Ozawa’s fund-raising organization via a pair of political
 Ozawa claimed ignorance and refused for two months to resign, even as his party continued to slip in the polls . Ozawa said he was ignorant and refused to resign even though his party slipped in polls .
 Ozawa resigned as party leader two days before he was scheduled to debate Aso in the Diet . Ozawa himself was never charged, but on May 11 he announced his resignation as leader of the party .
 This turned out to be the nadir in the DPJ's poll standings . Party quickly began to recover once it had put the scandal behind it .
 Just five days after Ozawas resignation, the DPJ held a leadership vote . Hatoyama bested Katsuya Okada in the vote .
 Both men had served as party leaders before, with Okada presiding over the DPJ’s defeat in the previous lower house election in 2005 . Hatoyama served as leader from 1999 to 2002 .
 Hatoyama was able to prevail in part because the party’s rank-and-file members realized that they still needed Ozawa, who continued to lead the DPJ's efforts to plot election strategy . Ozawa was a key figure in the party's election strategy, but
 DPJ defeated the combined forces of the LDP and the New Komeito party in the Tokyo assembly elections on July 12 . The DPJ defeats the combined force of the two main parties in the city assembly elections .
 Tokyo voters have demonstrated that they were willing to elect little-known DPJ candidates over veteran LDP assemblymen . The LDP would be facing an uphill battle in the city .
 DPJ's appeal for a ""change of government” attracted many more supporters than expected . DPJ’s appeal for ""Change of government" attracted more support than expected, according to the party .
 DPJ proposed to pay for these measures by slashing what it characterized as pork-barrel spending by the LDP on public-works projects . DPJ: The LDP proposed to cut pork barrel spending by cutting public-work projects . LDP proposes to cut spending by slashing pork
 The LDP had been pushed out of office once before in 1993-94 . That brief interlude had been brought about by a split in the party . The party had been in office for 54 years .
 Almost all LDP incumbents held onto their seats in the 1993 election . Almost all incumbents had held onto seats in 1993 election.
 He named Okada as foreign minister and found places in his new cabinet for representatives of all of the various groups that made up the DPJ . The DPJ includes former Socialists who had helped form the party in 1996 .
 Ozawa was not offered a portfolio but instead named DPJ secretarygeneral . Ozawa not offered portfolio but was instead named secretarygeneral of DPJ . He was not given a portfolio, but was given the role of secretarygeneral instead .
 Hatoyama chose to do so even though those parties’ votes were not needed to pass legislation in the lower house . Their votes were, however, needed in the upper house, where the two parties held nine seats, where they held nine .
 If the DPJ did well in the upper-house elections scheduled for July 2010, Hatoyama would have the leeway to form a new DPJ-only cabinet . The DPJ is expected to win a majority of the upper house elections .
 Minister Seiji Maehara announced he was suspending construction already under way on the $5.5 billion Yamba Dam in Gunma prefecture . The dam will cost $5 billion .
 The announcement was viewed as a direct assault on the LDP’s old patronage system . The LDP had many backers in the construction industry and in rural areas .
 The ministry later suspended work on another 47 centralgovernment-funded dams . The ministry also suspended work for another 47 dams .
 Japan similar commitment to restraint as it turned to fiscal 2010 budget process . Japan similar to commitment to restrain as it turns to fiscal year 2010 .
 In October, Health, Labour, and Welfare Minister Akira Nagatsuma announced that he would be increasing the child-allowance budget from $11. billion to $30. billion . The move would enable monthly payments to be raised to $141.5 billion .
 The government maintained it would take additional steps in 2010 to boost the allowance payments to the sum promised by the DJP during the campaign .
 Of the world's major economies, Japan’s was most deeply affected by the global recession . Japan's economy was the most deeply hit by the recession .
 By the second quarter of 2009, the economy had begun to show some signs of life, posting a positive growth figure of 0.7% that raised hopes .
 Unemployment rate drops from a record 5.7% in July to 5.5% in August . Jobless rate falls from record-high to record-lowest in July . Unemployment rate now stands at 5.6%, down from 5.8% in June .
 Most economists worry about the ability of the Japanese economy to return to robust growth . Nevertheless, most economists continued to worry .
 Japan’s public debt already totaling 170% of GDP . The DPJ government faced pressure to move toward greater fiscal restraint .
 The decision to trim the third fiscal stimulus package and put a limit on bond issuance in the 2010 budget suggested that the government was responding to that pressure . The government is responding to pressure on austerity measures .
 Also working against a resumption of robust growth was the steady strengthening of the yen . The yen is a key factor in slowing growth in Japan .
 The currency’s value went from ¥105 to the dollar for most of 2008 to ¥90 to $90 by November 2009 . The value of the Japanese currency fell to ¥105 in 2008 .
 With the Chinese renminbi pegged to the dollar throughout most of this period, the strengthening of the yen against the dollar meant that the Japanese currency was also strengthening against the renminbian .
 Japan exports fell by 26% in the first quarter of 2009 . The combination of the economic crisis and adverse currency movements severely weakened Japanese exports . Japan's exports were down 26% from 2008 to 2009 .
 Japan was able to recoup some of that decline in the second quarter . But the currency environment gave little reason to expect exports to become the engine of sustained growth for Japan .
 Japanese monetary policy remained unchanged in 2009 after the Bank of Japan lowered the uncollateralized overnight call rate to 0.1% in late 2008 to deal with the onset of the economic crisis .
 Toyota Motor Corp. reported multibillion-dollar losses in the early part of the year . The company is projecting at one point that it would lose $5 billion for the year. Toyota has lost $1 billion this year .
 By the third quarter, Toyota reported that it was earning profits again and reduced its projected losses for the year to $2.2 billion . By the end of the year, Toyota had been projecting losses of $2 billion to $3 billion .
 Foreign policy developments continued to revolve around Japan’s relations with the United States . The Japanese adjusted to the transition in the U.S. from the administration of Pres. Barack Obama .
 The U.S. was forced to accommodate the priorities of a new party in power in Japan . Barack Obama was elected president of the United States in 2012 .
 Prime Minister Taro Aso remained frustrated with the U.S. decision to remove North Korea from its list of state sponsors of terrorism . Aso remains frustrated with progress on the fate of Japanese citizens abducted by North Korean agents in the 1970s and '80s .
 Japan made efforts early in the year to ensure that the new administration understood its worries over North Korea . Obama announced his intention to move U.S. foreign policy away from a confrontational approach .
 During her visit Clinton met with families of the Japanese abductees . Clinton pledged to push North Korea “to be more forthcoming with information” regarding the kidnappings . Clinton also met with the families of those abducted .
 Japan and the U.S. agreed to work together to pressure North Korea to change its behaviour . North Korea launched a long-range missile in April and conducted a second nuclear test on May 25 . Japan and U.K. agree to work more closely together .
 The UN Security Council passed a resolution on June 12 that imposed additional sanctions on North Korea . The two countries pushed for a new UN resolution following the missile launch but faced opposition from Russia and China . North Korea launched a second nuclear test in the wake of the second test in June .
 North Korea in April announced its withdrawal from the six-party talks on denuclearization . North Korea has been criticized for its actions by the UN and other countries .
 Amano expressed his hope that the six-party talks would be revived and that North Korea would allow IAEA inspectors to return to the country . Amano said he hopes that the North Korean government would allow inspectors back into the country. Amano also expressed hope that North Korean talks
 DPJ victory posed other challenges for the U.S.-Japan alliance . The DPJ's victory on August 30 poses other challenges to the American alliance .
 Hatoyama's administration declared its intention to end Japan’s naval refueling mission in the Indian Ocean . The DPJ had campaigned on a platform that called for improved relations with China and a more equal partnership with the United States .
 The new administration also indicated its desire to renegotiate a deal on relocating a U.S. military base in Okinawa . The two governments had reached a deal earlier in the year to relocate the base .
 The Okinawa base relocation dispute proved too difficult to resolve, so the two leaders announced that they would set up a “high-level working group" to reconcile their differences . The two leaders agreed to set up the working group .
 King 'Abdullah II voiced concern over the future of the Palestinians in January . He spoke of a ""conspiracy” against the Palestinian people .
 His statements were interpreted as a warning against an earlier Israeli scenario . It entailed passing administrative control of the Gaza Strip to Egypt and forcibly transferring Palestinians in the West Bank to Jordan .
 Concern over this prospect was triggered anew by the victory of the right-wing Likud party leader Benjamin Netanyahu in Israel’s February elections . Netanyahu won the election in February .
 An estimated 60% of Jordan's population was of Palestinian origin . Transfer of the West Bank's 2. million Palestinians to Jordan by force posed a daunting prospect . An estimated 2.2 million Palestinians were born in Jordan .
 In May members of the Knesset (Israeli parliament) presented a draft law proposing Jordan as the alternative homeland for Palestinians .
 This sparked protest demonstrations in Amman, while the Israeli government summoned the Israeli ambassador to convey its rejection of the proposal . The proposal sparked protests in the Jordanian capital, Amman .
 Tension continued as rumours circulated that the Jordanian government had approved a secret U.S. plan to rescind the rights of Palestinian refugees to return to their homeland .
 This coincided with the Jordanian government’s adoption of a decentralization plan to divide the kingdom into three administrative regions, a plan that was associated with a political scheme to create an alternative Palestinian state .
 King ‘Abdullah denied rumours and warned unnamed parties against their 'private and suspicious agendas' King 'Abdullah emphasized Jordan’s commitment to and support of Palestinian rights, and denied .
 Jordan's economy continues to suffer the effects of the global financial crisis . Budget deficit climbs to $534. million, compared with $103. million budget surplus in first eight months of 2008 .
 In September Jordan signed grant agreements with the United States Agency for International Development . U.S. economic assistance to Jordan for 2009 to $513 million .
 King 'Abdullah dissolved parliament midway through its term and called for new elections . He replaced the country’s prime minister, Nader Dahabi, with a former palace aide, Samir al-Rifai .
 Pope Benedict XVI visited Jordan in May in an effort to improve ties with the Muslim world . In May he was boycotted by Islamists in Jordan for refusing to apologize for previously quoting a text criticizing Islam .
 Jordan plans to build a canal that would replenish the dwindling Dead Sea with water from the Red Sea . Jordan announced plans to embark on an ambitious $2 billion project to build the canal in September .
 Nursultan Nazarbayev called for acceleration of the two-year anti-crisis program . The program emphasized support for the country’s financial sector, including mortgage restructuring, and higher priority for the construction industry .
 In late August the former CEO of the Alyans Bank was arrested on a charge of having embezzled $1.2 billion . The former chief of another major bank had fled the country in February to avoid prosecution on a similar charge .
 Political observers suggested a link between the actions against the bankers and the financial crisis . Some political observers suggested that the actions were linked to the financial collapse .
 In 2009 Kazakhstan’s government prepared to assume the annual chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe in 2010 . Kazakhstan's economy weakened by the economic downturn, in addition to coping with an economy .
 Kazakhstan would be the first Commonwealth of Independent States member—and the first Asian state—to assume the position . Kazakhstan would become the first member of the CISI to assume the post .
 Kazakhstan promised to strictly adhere to its OSCE commitments, but questions arose during 2009 about specific actions taken by Kazakh authorities . Keny: A spite of Kazakhstan’s promise to adhere to the OSCE, questions arose in 2009 .
 In June the OSCE representative on freedom of the media called on Nazarbayev to veto a bill that would restrict Internet freedom . The bill would expand the list of justifications for suspending the operations or distribution of any media outlet .
 Nazarbayev signed the law in spite of the protest and recommendations for revisions that would have brought the draft law in line with international standards . In spite of a protest, the law was signed despite the protests .
 A survey published by an international group monitoring freedom of religion found that Kazakhstan continued to violate its human rights commitments . Kazakhstan placed legal restrictions on freedom of belief, expression, and association, the survey found .
 Leading human rights activist Yevgeny Zhovtis was sentenced to four years of detention in a resettlement colony . He had been convicted for vehicular manslaughter as a result of a July traffic accident .
 The sentence caused an outcry in domestic and international human rights communities . Even the former head of the national traffic police asserted that the sentence was too harsh .
 Prime Minister Raila Odinga had only limited success in pushing forward his reform agenda . In April he accused Pres. Raila Oinga of failing to push forward his reforms agenda .
 Drought-stricken cows in a paddock at a slaughterhouse east of Nairobi, Kenya, in September . ODM claim that cabinet ministers belonging to the ODM were being left out of decision making .
 Odinga announced a boycott of cabinet meetings . He announced that he would not attend cabinet meetings in Kenya .
 Women’s Development Organisation launched a weeklong boycott on sex . It was backed by the prime minister's wife, Ida Odinga, to protest the political deadlock . Two weeks later the Women's Development Organisation declared a boycott .
 There were signs of rapprochement between the factions when Kibaki toured Nyanza province, Odinga’s political stronghold, in July .
 In November the Kenyan government published a new draft constitution that would curtail presidential powers and allow the prime minister to oversee routine government business . The draft constitution was to be subjected to a referendum, which was expected to take place in March 2010 . The referendum was due to be scheduled for March 2010
 Calls for judicial and electoral reform were largely ignored, despite strong prodding by the UN and other international agencies . U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited Kenya in early August to push for reforms .
 Corruption scandals mounted, with numerous government officials facing accusations of graft . Government officials accused of graft in connection with grain, oil, and tourism industries .
 Alston also called on Kibaki to dismiss Kenya’s police commissioner, Mohammed Hussein Ali, for permitting systematic police violence . Alston urged the resignation of Attorney General Amos Wako, whose 18 years in office had yielded few prosecutions of suspects in extrajudicial killings .
 Efforts to investigate and prosecute cases stemming from violence that followed Kenya's disputed 2007 presidential election were halfhearted . Some perpetrators occupied key positions in the government .
 In February the parliament voted against a special tribunal composed of Kenyan and international judges . In February, Kenya voted against the special tribunal .
 In July, the cabinet also decided against a special tribunal, opting to use local courts instead .
 National and international civil rights organizations campaigned for the International Criminal Court to intervene . The International Criminal Tribunal for Human Rights Organization has been called to intervene in the case .
 Kofi Annan submitted to the ICC a list of names of persons suspected of having instigated the postelection violence . The former UN secretary-general submitted the names of those suspected of instigating the violence .
 The global recession impeded export growth and reduced tourism receipts . Tourism receipts, remittances, and private capital flows were also reduced .
 The UN World Food Programme estimated that nearly four million Kenyans—some 10% of the population—required emergency assistance, which was slow to materialize . The UN estimates that nearly 4 million people in Kenya need emergency assistance .
 Massive cattle deaths caused widespread hunger and spawned interethnic hostilities . In the northern pastoral districts, massive cattle deaths killed cattle . The region's cattle deaths have spawned inter-ethnic tensions .
 Rising prices of food and water have bred antigovernment sentiments in drought-stricken areas . Observers fear the possible resurgence of armed militias .
 The worsening situation led to large drawdowns from the Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund to finance budget deficits . It led to huge drawdowns on the fund to finance deficits .
 Kiribati's fund was already shrinking; its investments in offshore financial markets posted negative returns . This led to warnings that government expenditures would need to be cut to ensure that the fund could continue to finance development .
 Kiribati Shipping Services Ltd. signed an agreement to provide regular regular shipping services for its small neighbours, including Tuvalu, Nauru, and the French collectivity of Wallis and Futuna .
 The Phoenix Islands Protected Area covered more than 400,000 sq km and was the largest marine reserve in the world . Anote Tong signed into law an act creating the Phoenix Islands protected area .
 The PIPA was largely uninhabited, and its remote location ensured that the unique marine wilderness had one of the most unspoiled coral reefs in the world .
 The government was hoping to secure a United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization World Heritage site listing for the pristine area .
 Kiribati’s waste-recycling program eliminated large amounts of garbage along roads around the capital . It reached the point at which it was to be spun off as a sustainable private business . The program was funded by nongovernmental organizations .
 The government appointed a four-person committee to review a series of immigration permit decisions . The decisions had resulted in rapid growth of the immigrant business community and had begun to create some political tension .
 Chang Song-Taek, Kim Jong Il’s brother-in-law, appeared poised to serve as a caretaker if the younger Kim was not ready to rule . He also seemed to be grooming his third son Kim Jong-Un (believed to be about 27),
 Kim Jong II celebrated his renewed vigour with a long-range missile test and satellite launch in April . The North Korean leader's effort to launch a satellite launch failed .
 The following month North Korea appeared to conduct its second underground nuclear test, which seemed to have been more successful than its first test, in 2006 . North Korea appears to have conducted a second underground test in April .
 Most analysts believed it would be at least a decade before the country could marry its missile and nuclear programs . Most analysts said it would take a decade to marry the two programs .
 North Korea also began rebuilding a nuclear reactor that it had partially dismantled as part of a 2005 nuclear accord . North Korea has resumed plutonium production and resumed nuclear reactor activity .
 In December a United States envoy visited the country bearing a letter from the U.S. Pres. Barack Obama .
 Barack Obama in an attempt to revive the moribund nuclear talks with North Korea . North Korea appeared to be in no hurry to return to the negotiating table . Barack Obama has been trying to revive talks, but North Korea has not responded .
 Thai authorities interdicted a 35-ton North Korean arms shipment believed to have been bound for the Middle East . The arms shipment was believed to be bound for a Middle East region .
 Under UN Security Council Resolution 1874, North Korea was prohibited from exporting heavy weapons . North Korea has been banned from exporting weapons since the resolution was passed .
 The total amount of the old currency that each person could exchange for the new was severely restricted . Not only did the denominations mostly stay the same and the designs look somewhat similar, but the designs are somewhat similar .
 Despite promises of a “strong and prosperous nation"" by 2012, haphazard reforms and a recent sharp decline in humanitarian assistance suggested the real possibility of renewed famine .
 North Korea appeared before the UN Human Rights Council for its first “universal periodic review” on December 7 . North Korea has been accused of a series of human rights violations since 2008 .
 Relations with the United States continued to warm, while ties with North Korea remained frosty . North Korea's relations with the U.S. continue to warm . Relations between North Korea and North Korea remain frosty, though .
 Two South Korean athletes made their mark on the world stage . Meanwhile, two of the world's most famous athletes are in South Korea .
 South Korean economy came back to life in the second half of the year . After three straight quarters of yearon-year decline, the economy is back on track . South Korea's economy has recovered from three quarters of decline .
 Hyundai-Kia Automotive Group expanded global market share from 6.5% to 7.8% in the first nine months of 2009 . Hyundai and Kia's global share of global car market grew to 8.7% in nine months .
 Hyundai-Kia and South Korea’s three other biggest conglomerates—Samsung, LG, and SK—also made preparations for power to be passed to the next generations of their founding families . Samsung, LG and SK also made preparations to pass on power to next generations .
 North Korean leader Kim Jong II is flanked by Hyundai Group chairwoman Hyun Jeong-Eun and her daughter, Chung Ji-Yi . North Korea's leader was flanked by Hyun Joone and her family .
 The two women met with Kim in August in what was anticipated to be Korea’s first mother-daughter corporate succession . Kim and Kim met in August to discuss succession plans .
 The two met with North Korean leader Kim Jong 11 in August to discuss North-South cooperative projects . North Korea's president and South Korean president visited South Korea in August .
 Koreans mourn the passing of two former presidents within three months of each other . Koreans mourned the deaths of both former presidents .
 Roh Moo-Hyun jumped from a cliff to his death in May, despondent over the widening corruption investigation that targeted his family members . Roh's family members were targeted by a widening corruption probe . Roh jumped from the cliff in May after a corruption investigation was revealed .
 Roh’s predecessor in office, Kim Dae-Jung, succumbed to multiple organ failure in August . Roh's predecessor in charge died in August after suffering organ failure .
 Both politicians were longtime democracy activists . They also tried to promote reconciliation and cooperation with North Korea . Both politicians died in 2008 .
 South Korea will host the November 2010 Group of 20 summit . South Korea has been chosen to host the G20 summit in November .
 Lee MyungBak to redeploy several hundred troops and reconstruction personnel to Afghanistan . South Korean prime minister to deploy troops, reconstruction personnel in Afghanistan .
 Pyongyang gave Seoul the cold shoulder for much of the year, but rumours swirled that a North-South summit could take place in 2010 .
 In July opposition blocked GNP members from the legislative chamber to prevent a controversial media-reform bill from coming to a vote . The bill was passed only after members sneaked into the chamber through a side door . In July the opposition blocked the bill from a vote, and the bill
 Lawmakers clashed over plans to relocate the central government from Seoul to the countryside . Lawmakers also clashed over the plans to revive four of Korea’s major rivers in a hydroengineering project .
 The GNP passed the annual budget in a last-minute vote on December 31, over opposition protests . Opposition protests prevented the GNP passing the budget in the last minute .
 Han Myung-Sook was the first woman to have served as South Korea’s prime minister . She was indicted for having received a $50,000 bribe from a job seeker .
 Kim Yu-Na became the first South Korean to win a world figure skating title in March . In March, she won a world title for the first time in her career .
 Yang Yong-Eun pulled off one of the year’s greatest upsets, beating Tiger Woods at the Professional Golfers’ Association championship in August . Tiger Woods won the PGA championship by two shots .
 Yang became the first Asian-born male golfer to win a major tournament . Yang won the tournament for the first time in his career . Yang is the first Chinese-born golfer who has won a major golf tournament .
 The report noted that freedom of expression was not fully guaranteed in Albania . It said efforts to provide an institutional framework for reconciliation between the majority Albanians and minority communities were lacking . The report also noted that the country's democracy was lacking .
 Progress was reported in education; the first attempts were made to tone down nationalism and hate mongering in history schoolbooks . The first attempts are now being made at the hands of the first .
 Kosovo held its first elections since it declared independence from Serbia in February 2008 . Kosovo declared its first election since declaring independence in 2008 .
 Some 45% of the 1.million registered voters cast ballots, electing mayors and members of city councils in 36 municipalities . The results will be announced on Friday .
 In December the ICJ heard testimony by Serbia, Kosovo, and 27 UN member states that either supported or opposed Kosovo's independence . In December, Serbia and Kosovo were heard by Serbia and 27 other countries .
 The country's trade deficit from January to July was about $1.25 billion . The country’s trade deficit between January and July is about $2.6 billion .
 Remittances from Kosovo’s diaspora fell 8%; these sums constituted 14.1% of Kosovo's GDP, 2.7% more than exports . Remittance from Kosovo's diasporporters constituted 14% of the country's GDP .
 Al-Awadhi was one of the first four women ever elected to the 50-member legislative body . She was also one of two women who did not wear a Muslim head scarf . Al Awadhi is the first woman to be elected to a legislative body in Pakistan .
 On March 18, 2009, continued tensions in Kuwait between the parliament and the cabinet led the emir to dissolve the National Assembly . Sheikh Sabah al-Ahmad al-Jabir alSabah called for new elections in Kuwait .
 Four highly educated women won election to the National Assembly in spite of objections from conservative Islamists . The elections, which were held on May 16, resulted in a historic outcome .
 Kuwaiti women were given the right to vote and to run for office in 2005 . None had previously been able to win a National Assembly seat .
 Sunni Islamists saw their representation in the National Assembly decline significantly, from 21 seats to 11 . Representatives from the Shi'ite community rose from five to nine; by contrast, Sunni Islamists had 21 seats .
 The emir reappointed his nephew as prime minister for the sixth time since 2006 . Sheikh Nasir al-Muhammad al-Ahmad al-Jabir Al-Sabah was prime minister in 2006 . He reappointed nephew as Prime Minister .
 During 2009 some leading Kuwaitis were advocating for the appointment of a prime minister from outside the ruling family as a means of providing more stability . Some leading Kuwaiti leaders were advocating the appointment as a way to provide stability .
 Since 1992 the role of the National Assembly had been slowly changing from a consultative body to a genuine legislature . Since 1992, the role has been slowly changed to a real legislature .
 A critical issue was the total accountability of the entire cabinet to the National Assembly . The prime minister had always been a member of the al-Sabah family, which, as the ruling family, was not held accountable .
 The government was obliged to shore up Gulf Bank, the country’s second largest bank, and fully guarantee all bank deposits . The government has been forced to shore-up Gulf Bank .
 The Kuwait stock exchange and real-estate prices tumbled, but by the beginning of the third quarter of 2009, the Kuwaiti economy was showing signs of recovery . The country's economy is now in the midst of a recovery .
 Tense relations between Kuwait and Iraq continued over border issues, shared oil fields, and war reparations owed by Iraq to Kuwait .
 Iraq sought the cancellation of about $25 billion of the UNmandated reparations for destruction wrought by Saddam Hussein’s 1990 invasion of Kuwait . Kuwait insisted upon fulfillment of Iraq's international obligations, including payment of reparations .
 Efforts were made by the UN to help find a solution to the impasse . Among the most promising plans was the proposal to let Kuwait invest the money owed to it within the Iraqi infrastructure .
 Kurmanbek Bakiyev won an overwhelming majority (official figures awarded him 86% of the vote) in spite of opposition efforts to unseat him . The opposition rallied behind a single candidate, Almazbek Atambayev .
 Bakiyev’s victory was followed by opposition charges of massive electoral fraud, including claims that Atambayev had actually received 60% of the vote . The opposition has accused Bakiyeva of electoral fraud .
 At his inauguration Bakiyev appealed for tolerance and civil accord . He promised broad political reform, starting with public administration . Bakiyem promised broad reforms, including broad political reforms .
 The reform process included the appointment of a new cabinet of ministers and prime minister in late October . A number of presidential advisers have been dismissed by the government .
 Dmitry Medvedev, Bakiyev announced that the agreement that permitted U.S. and NATO forces fighting in Afghanistan to use Kyrgyzstan’s Manas airfield would be terminated . The agreement that allowed the use of the airfield was terminated .
 Kyrgyz parliament voted to end U.S. and NATO use of the base . The promised Russian aid was slow to materialize . The U.N. base has been used by NATO and Russia .
 On June 22 an agreement was signed under which the United States would continue to use Manas as a transit shipment centre for nonmilitary deliveries to forces in Afghanistan .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry commented that such an agreement was Kyrgyzstan’s sovereign right . The Russian foreign ministry said that such a deal was the sovereign right of Kyrgyzhstan .
 Negotiations between Kyrgyzstan and Russia over the basing of a Russian battalion remained inconclusive . Russia has been involved in a dispute over the baseing of the Russian battalion in southern Kyrgykstan .
 Kyrgyzstan was one of the few countries in the Commonwealth of Independent States to maintain a positive growth rate in 2009 . The country was affected by the global financial crisis, but maintained its growth rate .
 IMF mission: Kyrgyz government likely to face greater difficulties in 2010 . IMF mission warns that the country will face greater problems in 2010 due to the crisis . IMF says the government is countering the effects of the crisis by devoting essential funds to supporting the national budget .
 Prime Minister Igor Chudinov noted in March that the country’s capital inflow was down, along with the import of goods and the level of demand . The country's capital infflow was also down, according to the PM .
 With no mortgage lending system, the main impact of the crisis was generated by the effects of neighbouring countries . Kyrgyzstan’s main trading partners, Kazakhstan and Russia, were also affected by the crisis .
 The Northern Plan called for the development by 2020 of ‘backbone industries"" in northern Laos . These industries included mining, energy, agriculture, agriculture and tourism .
 The plan was drafted by the Northern Laos Industrial Economic Development and Cooperation Planning Preparation Group in cooperation with authorities in China’s Yunnan province and received substantial financial support from the Chinese government .
 Chinese private and state companies will play a leading role in implementing many of the plan’s proposals . It appeared likely that Chinese state and private companies would play a key role in implementation .
 China continued to invest heavily in several of Laos’s key economic sectors . China invested heavily in the country's key sectors .
 Chinese investments in the country were valued at about $3.3 billion by late 2008 . Chinese investment in the Philippines was valued at around $3 billion .
 The fast-growing Chinese presence in China has raised concerns among local residents and international organizations .
 In recent years the Lao government had granted a large number of land and mining concessions to Chinese companies . Lao's government has granted a number of concessions to the Chinese .
 Many observers worried about the social, economic, and environmental impacts of these companies' activities on Laos's rural areas . They urged the government to explore the implications of its policies first and foremost .
 Sepon copper and gold mine laid off hundreds of workers in December 2008 . The mine’s heavily indebted owner, the Australian company OZ Minerals, Ltd., sold the mine in April 2009 to the Chinese state company China Minmetals Corp.
 The economic slowdown also affected the tens of thousands of Lao migrant workers in Thailand . The Lao Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare estimated that approximately 14,000 of these workers were at risk of losing their jobs .
 Laos hosted the 2009 Southeast Asian Games, which were held in Vientiane on December 9-18 . Laos was the first country to host the games in the region .
 This event reflected the country's further integration into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations . The event reflected a further integration of the country into the region .
 There are signs that the decline was leveling off during the second half of the year . The Ministry of Finance estimated that GDP could fall by about 18% for the year and unemployment climbed to nearly 20%.
 The principal source of political discord and popular discontent was balancing the budget so as to avoid bankruptcy and to meet the preconditions for borrowing $10 billion from the IMF, the EU, the World Bank, and other sources . The main source of social discontent was the budget balancing so as
 This required restructuring the economy, including raising taxes, curtailing spending, cutting welfare payments and public workers’ salaries . Meeting the requirements for the adoption of the euro by 2014 by 2014 would be crucial for Greece .
 The coalition government of Prime Minister Ivars Godmanis fell on February 20 . Unable to cope effectively with mounting public dissatisfaction and political intrigues, the coalition government fell . The government was unable to cope with growing public dissatisfaction .
 Valdis Zatlers entrusted Valdis Dombrovskis of New Era, heretofore a vocal opposition party, to form the new government . New Era is the party that has been in opposition for more than a decade .
 Dombrovskis opted for a coalition cabinet with members of some of the parties represented in the previous two governments . Needing parliamentary support for unpopular decisions that would have to be made, he opted for coalition cabinet .
 On June 18 fighting breaks out between women at a union-organized rally in Riga, Latvia, where demonstrators protested against government budget cuts . The result was an inharmonious government whose stability was tested not only by the opposition but by opposition .
 After the 2010 budget was adopted on December 1, the chances that the government would last until the parliamentary elections in autumn 2010 seemed to improve . The chances of the government staying in power seemed to have improved .
 On June 6, voters elected representatives to the European Parliament and members of the newly created regional governments . Voters will also elect representatives to European Parliament .
 Latvia continued to fulfill its international obligations despite belt-tightening at home . Latvia's economy has been hit hard by austerity measures in recent years . Latvia joined the Eurozone in a bid to boost its international profile . Latvia has been criticized for not fulfilling international obligations .
 It completed its peacekeeping mission in the Balkans in October and beefed up its forces in Afghanistan . The U.S. completed its mission in October .
 Latvia successfully fielded Andris Piebalgs, a respected EU energy commissioner, for another term in the European Commission . In autumn he was re-elected as energy commissioner .
 Amal movement leader Nabih Berri was again chosen as speaker of parliament . Amal's Amal party leader was chosen again to be speaker of the parliament .
 In late June, Saad al-Hariri was nominated by a majority of deputies-elect to form a new cabinet . He is the son of former prime minister Rafiq al-hariri, who was prime minister in 2007 .
 In mid-September, Hariri declared his inability to form a national unity government and stepped down as prime minister-designate . Hariri blamed Hezbollah and its Christian allies for this failure .
 Hariri was able to form a longawaited national unity government on November 9 . Hariri's government was formed after he was forced to form his own government .
 Druze leader Walid Jumblatt withdrew from March 14 bloc and declared independence from both major blocs . In early August, he withdrew from both blocs and declared his independence . Druze leaders have been involved in the conflict with the March 14-March 14 bloc .
 Analysts reasoned that the American opening toward the Syrian regime and Britain’s dialogue with Hezbollah had reshuffled the local agenda and changed the orientation of some political actors . He stated that he regretted his previous animosity toward Syria .
 Lebanon’s external debt and fiscal deficits remained high at above $50 billion . But the country reduced the debtto-GDP ratio from 180% to 154% by the end of 2009 .
 Industrial exports decreased by 25% in July because of the global financial crisis . Industrial exports decrease by 25 percent in July .
 Revenues in the first half of 2009 reached $4.27 billion, up 23.4% from the same period in 2008 . In spite of increased spending on electricity, electricity revenues were $1.2 billion .
 The main sources of revenue were customs duties, income taxes, and telecom services .
 Lebanon’s defense and security spending was expected to increase by 22% in 2009 . Lebanon's defense spending is expected to rise by 22 percent in the next year .
 Defense spending is expected to drop from 15.7% of government spending in 2008 to 13.5% in 2009 . Defense spending accounted for 42% of total expenditures in 2008 .
 The banking sector continued to show significant resilience to the ongoing global financial crisis . The banks showed significant resilience in the ongoing financial crisis, according to experts .
 Primary liquidity stood at 51.5% at the end of 2008, against 28% in the Middle East and 30% globally . Primary liquidity was at the highest level in 2008, according to the latest figures .
 IMF report says Lebanon averted a fullblown crisis because banks could resort to their large liquidity buffers to hold on to government debt . IMF report said that Lebanon avoided a full-blown crisis as banks could use large liquidity buffer to hold government debt on their hands .
 IMF warns that “the wrong set of circumstances could easily translate into severe financial troubles” IMF urges the government to reduce the public debt and impose fiscal discipline .
 The World Bank put Lebanon's per capita income in 2008 at $10,880, which made Lebanon ranked 94th among world countries . Lebanon ranked 6th among Middle Eastern and North African countries .
 At least three assailants were killed by the police, and a South African and a Mozambican were arrested .
 Government officials accused the main opposition party, the All Basotho Convention, of having having been behind the attack . But that remains unproved .
 The Southern African Development Community was asked to review the system . The community's mediation did not solve the problem .
 The South Africa-Lesotho Joint Bilateral Commission announced in April that the South African government had approved 7. billion rand (about $950 million) for the second phase of the massive Lesotho Highlands Water Project . The economic downturn in South Africa put this at risk, while
 Lesotho’s Child Grants Programme was launched to supplement the income ($48 quarterly) of households with orphaned children . It was launched in October .
 The year 2009 began inauspiciously with a massive plague of Achaea catocaloides rena caterpillars . Liberia has a population of 3,955,000 .
 The plague caused widespread panic among villagers in northern and central Liberia, many of whom fled their homes . Described as the worst pest infestation in the country in 30 years, the plague caused panic among residents .
 Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf declared a national emergency and invited assistance from international agencies . Ellen Johnson Sirleaf declared the emergency in a bid to save the country from starvation .
 Experts concluded that while Dahoma trees suffered severe damage, food crops such as com and millet had survived mostly intact .
 The slow disbursement of relief funds to the affected areas raised questions of corruption in government . The slow response to the crisis led to the resignation of the agriculture minister in April .
 Liberia’s economy grew; public services noticeably improved . Progress was made in the regulation of the rubber, timber, and diamond trades . Liberia's economy grew .
 The World Bank named Liberia best global and regional reformer in its annual “Doing Business” survey . Liberia is a model for how other postconflict countries should use the private sector to rebuild markets .
 More than 10,000 UN peacekeepers remain in the country, a constant reminder of the fragile political situation .
 In February, Johnson-Sirleaf apologized to the Tmth and Reconciliation Commission ""for being fooled” into providing financial support to now-imprisoned former president Charles Taylor at the beginning of the country’s 14-year civil war .
 The TRC later recommended that she, along with influential former warlords and their supporters, be banned from holding elective office for 30 years .
 Immediate local and international response, however, demonstrated widespread support for the president . Immediate response to the death of President Barack Obama has been met with widespread support .
 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton praised Johnson-Sirleaf's achievements in economic reconstruction . Clinton's visit to Monrovia was the second to last stop on her sevencountry African tour .
 Libyan Col. Col. Al-Baghdadi 'AM al-Mahmudi is the Secretary of the General People's Committee . Only a ruler such a ruler like Libya's Col. Gaddafi would be able to rule Libya, he says .
 The nationally celebrated anniversary was the subject of international media scrutiny, as it was also an occasion to mark the abortion of the reform narrative previously advocated by Qaddafi and his son Sayf alIslam .
 Sayf al-Islam is viewed by the West as a possible heir-in-waiting or a catalyst for change . He had previously campaigned for a Libyan constitution, which he said would pave the way for the country’s first general elections .
 These promises soon faded following his decision to withdraw from politics in 2008 .
 While Qaddafi remained in power, he appeared to have abandoned his anticorruption, reform-driven discourse, including his promise to share the country’s oil revenues with the Libyan population . Qaddafi remains in power .
 Al-Libiya was nationalized after one of its shows criticized Egypt . Sayf al-Islam later moved the channel to London, later moved it to the UK .
 Scottish officials said Megrahi’s release was arranged on compassionate grounds, as he suffered from terminal cancer . Scottish officials have said that he suffered a terminal cancer and was not allowed to be released .
 Sayf al-Islam, who appeared to be instrumental in Megrahi’s release, told the Libyan media that Liberia in early 2009 faced a massive infestation of Achaea catocaloides caterpillars .
 The government declared a state of emergency to fight the devastating outbreak . The damage to food crops proved to be less severe than initially feared .
 The release and possible “deal” triggered speculations regarding the U.K.’s oil and gas interests in Libya . British officials denied this, but speculations have been rife with speculation about a possible deal .
 In 2009 Libya produced 1. million bbl of oil daily, compared with 1.million bbl in 2003, the year before the U.S. lifted its sanctions on Libya . Libya produced more than 1.2 billion bbl daily in 2009 .
 Qaddafi tore a copy of the UN charter, criticized the UN Security Council's veto-power system, and called for a one-state solution for Israelis and Palestinians . During his speech, which greatly exceeded the 15 minutes allotted to him, Qaddafi called for one state solution .
 Klaus Tschiitscher was sworn in as prime minister on March 25 . The VU’s Klaus Tschitscher is the current prime minister of the Czech Republic .
 Prince Alois set tone of moderation in offering to cooperate with other countries to combat tax evasion and fraud . In 2004, he had assumed the day-to-day governing duties of his father, Prince Hans Adam II .
 Liechtenstein agreed to follow the rules of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and suggested a partial amnesty in which people holding funds in the country’s banks could repatriate the money .
 He signed agreements easing bank secrecy with Germany and Britain in July and August . He signed separate agreements with Germany, Britain and Germany in August .
 Hans Adam set off a furor on August 15, Liechtenstein’s National Day, when he claimed that during World War II bank secrecy laws in Switzerland had saved the lives of German Jews who bought their safety with money .
 Lithuania celebrated the 1,000th year of its first mention in historical records, the annals of a Benedictine abbey at Quedlinburg, Ger. Stephan Kramer, secre .
 Festivities marking the 13th-century coronation of King Mindaugas were held on July 6 in Vilnius’s newly rebuilt Palace .
 Among the dignitaries in attendance were the papal legate Angelo Cardinal Sodano, Denmark’s Queen Margrethe, Norway’�s King Harald, Sweden’S King Carl Gustaf, the presidents of Poland, Ukraine, Georgia, Latvia, Finland
 Daiia Grybauskaite won 69.1% of the vote in an election with a 51.8% turnout . Former member of the European Commission, former member of EU Commission, was elected president in May .
 Homeland Union (Conservatives of Lithuania) won four seats (with 26.9% of the vote) in the European Parliament election held on June 7 . Vytautas Landsbergis, former president of Lithuania, re-elected to European Parliament seat .
 Lithuania’s economy was severely affected by the global banking crisis, particularly by the significant reduction in local businesses’ access to credit . Lithuanian businesses were also severely hit by the reduction in their access to banking credit .
 The output of the construction industry declined by about 48% in the second quarter compared with the corresponding period of 2008 . Construction output in the construction sector declined by 48% compared with 2008 .
 The economy registered overall growth in the third quarter, however, with a gain of 13% over the second quarter . Overall, the economy registered a 13% increase over the previous quarter .
 Lithuania's economic crisis may soon be over in Lithuania, experts say . Lithuanian economy has been hit hard by a decade-long recession . Lithuania's economy is in recessionary recessionary territory .
 The results of the elections ensured that Juncker would retain his position as head of government for another five years . Juncker was elected to a five-year term .
 Former British prime minister Tony Blair has decided to make a bid for the job . This followed news that former British PM Tony Blair had decided to run for the post .
 Juncker's announcement elicited criticism from some observers, particularly in Britain . Some argued that the leader of such a tiny country as Luxembourg would not wield enough influence to serve effectively as president .
 Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy was ultimately selected for the post in November .
 Luxembourg’s GDP per capita was the third highest in the world, trailing only that of Qatar and Liechtenstein . Luxembourg's GDP was the highest per capita, according to the World Economic Forum .
 In the municipal elections VMRODPMNE won 55 of the 85 mayoral positions, including that of the capital, Skopje . In the election, the party won 55 out of 85 mayor positions .
 Ethnic-Albanian party won 14 mayoral races, and the SDSM won 9 mayoral races . The Democratic Union for Integration won 14 mayor races .
 Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski reshuffled his government following resignations of Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Ivica Bocevski, Education Minister Pero Stojanovski, and Agriculture Minister Aleksandar Spasenovski . Finance Minister Trajko
 Bocevski was succeeded by Vasko Naumovski . Bocevski was succeeded as education minister . Deputy Prime Minister Zoran Stavrevski also took over as finance minister .
 UN-mediated talks between Macedonia and Greece over the former country’s name continued in 2009 . The UN- mediated talks between the two countries over the name continued last year .
 Several proposals by UN mediator Matthew Nimetz failed to secure the approval of both sides . Several proposals were not enough for both sides to agree to accept .
 The impact of the name dispute on Macedonia’s EuroAtlantic integration led to dissatisfaction among ethnic-Albanian politicians . The name dispute has led to a growing number of dissatisfaction among Albanians .
 DUI/BDI members threatened that the party might leave the government if the dispute was not settled . Senior DUI members threatened to quit the government in the wake of the dispute .
 On November 30 the EU announced that citizens of three Balkan countries would be allowed to travel without a visa within the EU’s Schengen zone . Citizens of three countries, including Serbia, Macedonia, Serbia, and Montenegro, will be able to travel in those countries without
 Ethnic Albanians considered its portrayal of their community to be provocative and insulting . Interethnic relations were strained following the publication of the Macedonian Encyclopedia .
 Gruevski called for a dialogue about the controversial text, while the MANU withdrew the publication in order to amend it . The MANU has also withdrawn the publication .
 Macedonia's GDP was expected to shrink by up to 1% in 2009 . Owing to the global economic crisis, Macedonia’s GDP will shrink by 1% . Macedonia is expected to be hit by the recession .
 Significant drops are probable in industrial output and foreign trade . Significant drops in industrial and foreign exports are also possible .
 He had misappropriated nearly $3 million of a Taiwanese grant in 1999 . He had been convicted for misappropriating nearly $2 million of Taiwanese grant .
 On September 5 a tour boat sank on Lake Ohrid, resulting in the deaths of 22 people, including 15 Bulgarian tourists . The accident occurred on the same day 22 people were killed in a boat accident .
 Transport and Communications Minister Mile Janakievski's resignation later that day on “moral grounds” was rejected by Gruevski on September 9 . Transport and communications Minister Mile. Janakevski’s resignation on ‘moral grounds"" was rejected .
 Marc Ravalomanana was accused of having ruled in an authoritarian way and having misspent public money . He was also accused of misusing public money and having misspent public funds .
 The protests culminated in what was widely regarded as a coup in March . Soldiers pledged their support to Andry Rajoelina, a former mayor of Antananarivo who had led the opposition to Ravalomanana .
 Ravalomanana resigned and handed power to the military; he then fled to the African mainland . He then fled .
 The military transferred power in a matter of hours to a new president . The new president was quickly sworn in as president of Honduras .
 Madagascar was suspended from both the African Union and the Southern African Development Community . The international community refused to accept the new government because it had come to power illegitimately . Madagascar's government was forced to step down as a result .
 In August international mediators led by former Mozambican president Joaquim Chissano met with Rajoelina and Ravalomanana in Maputo .
 An agreement was reached on a power-sharing government for a transitional period of 15 months . Lawmakers and presidential elections would be held during the transitional period .
 Ravalomanana was convicted of abuse of power in a judgment handed down in Madagascar in June . He would be given amnesty from prosecution from prosecution . Madagascar's president has been accused of abusing power .
 The four meet again to allocate positions in the new government but were unable to agree . The four met again to find out how to work together in the next government .
 President Rajoelina unilaterally appointed what he claimed was a national unity government, with himself remaining president . But his actions were widely criticized .
 Agreement reached on positions in the new government on October 6 . Additional talks were held in October .
 An agreement was signed on November 7, under which Rajoelina was to remain as president but rule with two co-presidents . He formally abandoned the powersharing deal altogether on December 20 .
 Bingu wa Mutharika was reelected to a second five-year term in office . He won nearly 66% of the vote, winning nearly 66 percent .
 The political participation of women was by far the most significant ever ever . Women's political participation in the U.S. has been by far more significant than in previous generations .
 Mutharika's running mate, Joyce Banda, is the first woman in Malawi to hold the office of vice president . Banda is a former foreign affairs minister who has been Malawi's vice president since 2003 .
 The Ministry of Women and Child Development ran the 50/50 Campaign with the goal of attaining 50% female representation in the parliament .
 Under Mutharika, Malawi had become one of the world’s fastest-growing economies . Malawi is one of Africa's fastest growing economies .
 Agricultural Police loyal to Madagascan Pres. Manuel Manuel Vascascan led the country . The Agricultural Police are loyal to the government .
 A month later the military ousted Ravalomanana and installed Andry Rajoelina as president . A month after the coup, the military overthrew the president . Ravalomana was ousted from power a month later .
 Joyce Banda is the running mate of Malawian Pres. Malaysia . Banda will be the country's vice-president .
 On May 22 Banda was sworn in as vice president, the first woman to hold that office . Mutharika was reelected, and Banda became the first female vice president in the country .
 Input Subsidy Program, which benefited two million small-scale producers of corn, tobacco, coffee, and tea, was launched in 2010 . Program was launched to help farmers grow their crops .
 In June the government announced a record corn harvest that was expected to more than meet internal consumption needs . In June, the government said it was expecting a record harvest .
 Abdullah selected Najib to succeed him after unprecedented electoral losses in 2008 led to severe pressure within his own party, the dominant United Malays National Organization, for Abdullah to resign . Najib had served as deputy prime minister from 2004 to succeed Abdullah .
 The new prime minister quickly addressed several issues rending Malaysia’s ethnically and religiously diverse population . The new Prime Minister quickly addressed the issues in his first speech .
 One of his first actions was to free 13 prisoners held under the country’s controversial Internal Security Act . Two ethnic Indians who had led mass protests against the government in 2007 were freed .
 Abdullah disallowed public discussion of ""sensitive” social and religious matters . Najib emphasized the necessity of such discussion to Malaysia’s future peace and prosperity . In contrast to Abdullah, Najib said such discussion was necessary for Malaysia's future .
 Muslims protesting the construction of a Hindu temple in Shah Alam, Selangor state, paraded a severed cow’s head through the city, offending many Hindus . Hindus, to whom cows are sacred, are sacred . Muslims protesting construction of the temple in the state of Selang
 Najib undertook to reform the New Economic Policy introduced by former prime minister Abdul Razak, Najib’s father, in 1971 . Najib's father was prime minister of Malaysia from 1971 to 1971 .
 The NEP had long been criticized as discriminatory and obstructive to foreign investment, but UMNO-led governments had eschewed reform of the policy . The policy had been criticized by critics as discriminatory .
 In June Najib announced that public companies were no longer required to set aside a third of their equity for indigenous partners . Najib: Public companies are not required to . set aside third of equity for Indigenous partners . Public companies no longer . need to .set aside a . third of
 Foreign firms allowed to hold major stakes in securities and fund management companies . Foreign firms were permitted to hold stakes in major investment companies . In addition to foreign firms, foreign firms were also allowed to have major stakes .
 In parliamentary and state by-elections held during the year, the governing coalition mostly held its ground at the polls . Not without resorting to such familiar tactics as political patronage and the muzzling of opposition newspapers .
 Opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim awaited trial on sodomy charge that observers suggested may have been trumped up as a means of slowing the opposition’s advance .
 GDP shrank at a rate of 5% between January and June— a far slide from the 6.7% growth during the same period in 2008 . GDP shrinks at a far lower rate than in 2008, when GDP grew at 6% in the same time .
 In May the value of Malaysian exports posted a year-on-year decline of almost 30% . The drop was reflected in higher-than-average unemployment in manufacturing .
 Of the roughly two million foreign workers in Malaysia, the government planned to return 400,000 of them to their home countries by 2010 . The government planned the return of 400,00 of the foreign workers to Malaysia .
 Malaysia's central bank predicted that the economy would strengthen in the second half of the year . More stable global conditions and two economic stimulus packages amounting to more than $18 billion are expected to boost the economy .
 Muslims in Shah Alam, Malay., protest against the construction of a Hindu temple in a Muslim neighbourhood . Muslims march through the streets carrying the severed head of a cow, which is held sacred in Hinduism . Muslims in protest against construction of temple in Muslim neighbourhood by marching .
 President Nasheed faced parliamentary hurdles for implementing his policies and programs . In the absence of a majority for his MDP, he faced legislative hurdles for implementation of his policies .
 The first three-month-long session of the Majlis ended in September without a single bill’s being passed .
 Nasheed said that his government would not defend human rights abuses . Reiterated his commitment to uphold the people’s right to dissent .
 Privatization and decentralization dominated the government’s agenda . Bills aimed at these objectives were introduced in the Majlis . The Majlis also introduced bills aimed at decentralization and privatization .
 As part of administrative restructuring, the government proposed merging 20 atoll units into seven provinces . Some parties opposed the measure .
 The privatization program sought to bring about $500 million in foreign investment and technology for developing utility services and other infrastructure . The program was launched in 2009 .
 The government inherited a budget deficit of about $170 million . Negative growth was recorded for two consecutive quarters . The government was unable to fund such projects .
 The low-lying island country held the meeting underwater to draw attention to the risks of global warming . Low-lying, island nation held the event underwater to raise awareness of the risks .
 Political appointees are reducing their overseas and local travels . They are also reducing their travels .
 Nasheed canceled many overseas trips, including one to a conference in Copenhagen on climate change . Nasheed himself canceled many of his overseas trips in the past year .
 President Nasheed used international forums to highlight the grave threat facing Maldives as a result of sea level rise . The Maldives is one of the world's most vulnerable countries .
 He considered climate change to be a human rights issue, because peoples’ right to life was threatened, he said . Climate change is a human right issue, according to the UN .
 Maldives declared its intention to become the first carbon-neutral country in the world in March . Maldives said it planned to achieve within a decade to become a carbon neutral country .
 Nasheed and his cabinet members donned wet suits and scuba gear and held a meeting underwater . The meeting was held in an effort to draw the attention of the world to the need to reduce global warming .
 On January 21, the army claimed that it had destroyed the main base of a dissident Tuareg group led by Ibrahim Ag Bahanga in Tinsalak, near the Niger frontier . The army says it destroyed the base of the dissident group, but says it was destroyed
 Spokesmen for the rebel group challenged the report, stating that they had left the base six months earlier . The rebel group says they had been there for six months . The rebels deny the report and say they have been there six months ago .
 There was also reason to believe that many of Bahanga’s men had, in fact, already joined other Tuareg bands who returned to the negotiating table February 17 .
 Amadou Toumani Toure called for regional cooperation in the fight against insurgents allied with al-Qaeda . Toure: Regional cooperation is needed in fight against al-Qaida-linked insurgents .
 Algeria sent the first of several shipments of military equipment to be used in joint operations against insurgents . Algeria and Algeria have been involved in the fight against insurgents in recent years .
 On May 31 a Malian al-Qaeda group executed British hostage Edwin Dyer . Dyer had been kidnapped in Niger four months earlier . He had been held hostage in Niger .
 The Malian army captured an al-Qaeda base on June 16 in an attack that killed more than a dozen militants and five soldiers . Malian soldiers captured the base in a raid that killed five soldiers and more than 12 militants .
 On July 20 the main Tuareg former rebel group, Alliance for Democracy and Change, announced that it would join with Mali’s army to fight al-Qaeda . The group announced it would be joining forces with the government to fight the al Qaeda .
 President Toure refused to sign the country's new family law bill after strong opposition to some of its provisions dealing with women’s rights angered conservative Islamic leaders .
 The City Gate project was entrusted to the world-renowned Italian architect Renzo Piano . Renzo's City Gate was entrusted with the world's most famous architect .
 His designs, which included a new parliament building, were unveiled on June 27 . His designs were unveiled in June .
 On April 1 the parliament unanimously elected George Abela, a lawyer, as the eighth president of Malta . Abela is a lawyer who has been in charge of the Maltese parliament since 2007 .
 Elections were held on June 7 for representation in the European Parliament . Elections are held for representation of European Parliament members .
 The Italian and Maltese governments engaged in a ""war of words" in the summer after the few surviving migrants from a dinghy that had run out of fuel were rescued in Italian waters . The Italian government engaged in the 'war' of words after the rescue .
 The Italians insist Malta should give up some of its search and rescue region . Malta had earlier intercepted the dinghy . The Italians insisted that Malta, which had intercepted the vessel, should not give up its search .
 Charles Camilleri, the internationally renowned Maltese composer, died at age 77 in January . In other news, in January, in . January Charles Camillai, in March, died aged 77 .
 The fund was established by the U.S. Congress in 1983 as part of the Compact of Free Association . It underestimated the magnitude of claims that would be made .
 $23 million in personal injury awards and $2.2 billion in landdamage and nuclear-cleanup awards remain unpaid . Public advocate: $23M in personal injuries, $2B in land damage and nuclear cleanup awards still unpaid .
 Compact trust fund, which provided 60% of the country’s budget, lost 25% in the global financial crisis . The trust fund lost 60% in 2008 .
 The U.S. and Marshall Islands governments have been at odds over compensation for missile-testing site at Kwajalein atoll . Another area of tension is the amount of compensation provided to the Marshall Islands .
 The U.S. agreed to provide to the Marshalls in return for the use of land, some $70 million annually until 2023 . Landowners were demanding a rise to $19 million when the current agreement ended in 2016 .
 After having survived a no-confidence vote in October 2008 and another in April 2009, Pres. Barack Obama survived a similar vote in 2009 .
 Tomeing was criticized for his handling of the dispute with the United States . Another traditional chief, Nitijela Speaker Jurelang Zedkaia, was named to succeed him on November 2 .
 The African Union refused to lift sanctions imposed on the leaders of the August 2008 coup that overthrew Sidi Mohamed Ould Cheikh Abdallahi, Mauritania’s first democratically elected president, until late June .
 On June 4, 2009, opposition leaders signed an agreement with the government that called for an interim unity government until the July 18 presidential elections . Opposition leaders signed a deal that calls for the interim government until July 18 .
 Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz was declared the winner with an absolute majority of 52%, with 16% for his closest rival, Messaoud Ould Boulkheir . Mohamed was declared a winner with a total of 52% of votes .
 Sid’Ahmed Ould Deye, chairman of the Electoral Commission, resigned on July 23 owing to serious doubts about the validity of the vote . Deye was chairman of Electoral Commission . Sid'Ahmed Deye resigned as chairman of electoral commission .
 In February the government pledged to speed up the process of providing new identity cards for the thousands of Mauritanian refugees repatriated from Senegal . Mauritanians have been forced to return home from Senegal after being repatriated .
 Ould Abdel Aziz promised reparations to families of victims killed in the violence against black Mauritanians 20 years prior . Mauritanian president promised reparation to victims of the violence .
 Relations had cooled since Israel’s January offensive in the Gaza Strip . Relations between Israel and Gaza have cooled since that offensive .
 Mauritania was one of only three Arab League states to have formal diplomatic relations with Israel . Mauritania is one of the only three countries with formal diplomatic ties to Israel . The country is also one of three Arab Arab League countries with diplomatic relations .
 In 2009 Mauritius began enforcing the Equal Opportunities Act . The act was passed by the legislature in late 2008 and guaranteed universal protection under the law against all forms of discrimination based on gender, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, age, status and physical abilities .
 The EOA had been created in an effort to redress ongoing social inequalities faced by many ethnic and religious minorities . Creoles, Tamils, and Muslims, in the employment sector and other areas of the Mauritian private sector .
 A plan to preserve about 650,000 sq km of marine habitat surrounding the Chagos Archipelago was revealed in February . The plan was unveiled in February in a bid to preserve the marine habitat .
 The plan included the habitat of the archipelago's largest island, Diego Garcia, a British protectorate from which some 2,000 residents had been displaced 40 years earlier to clear the island for use as a military base .
 In 2008 British lawmakers argued that islanders and their descendents should be allowed to return . The reef conservation plan included the repatriation of Chagossians to serve as the nature reserve's wardens .
 Mauritius deepened ties with China amid ongoing economic downturn and increased job losses in the textiles and manufacturing sectors . Mauritius has been hit hard by the economic downturn .
 In February the two countries cemented development deals amounting to more than $270 million . In February, the two nations cemented $270million in development deals between them .
 The United States market was still the destination for approximately four-fifths of all Mexican exports . Mexico had in recent years somewhat reduced its heavy trade dependence on the U.S. market .
 The country's manufacturing sector was badly affected by the sharp decline in U.S. import demand during the year .
 The automobile and auto parts sector is Mexico’s most important source of manufactured exports . The sector suffered because of the broader crisis in the North American automotive industry . The automobile industry is Mexico's biggest source of exports .
 Mexican exports declined by approximately onethird between 2008 and 2009 . Overall, Mexican exports fell by approximately 10% between 2008-2009 .
 The Mexican economy also suffered from a substantial falloff in foreign direct investment flows . Lower prices for petroleum and other (mainly mining) commodity exports also hurt the economy .
 Mexican officials successfully hedged the price of oil and gas exports for the 2008-09 fiscal year at a premium over prevailing international petroleum prices . Lower international prices (though partially offset by a significant devaluation of the peso) had a negative fiscal impact .
 Mexican emigration to the United States slowed by tougher U.S. immigration controls and reduced demand for labour in sectors that typically employed large numbers of immigrant workers, such as construction .
 Flow of migrant remittances to Mexico fell by more than 10% between 2008 and 2009 . Remittances were the country’s largest source of legal export earnings, after petroleum .
 The number of households reporting the receipt of remittances declined by approximately one-fifth between 2005 (when 1.41 million households reported receiving) and 2009 . The decline is one-in-five between 2005 and 2009, according to the OECD .
 Mexico’s economic woes were exacerbated during the year by the outbreak of H1N1 flu in early April . The outbreak of the virus was also blamed for exacerbating the country's economic woes .
 The world’s first confirmed case of the H1N1 virus was reported in the state of Veracruz, Mexico . The virus was first confirmed in the country to be reported in October 2013 .
 In June the World Health Organization declared the H1N1 flu a global pandemic . By late December it had claimed the lives of at least 12,000 people worldwide .
 The Mexican government responded aggressively to the threat by closing schools and universities, sports arenas, cinemas, museums, and churches nationwide . The government also closed all public venues in Mexico City, as well as restaurants and restaurants .
 Some experts judged that public health agencies had been slow in genomically identifying the new virus . Government generally received positive evaluations for its efforts to contain the crisis .
 A woman in Mexico City protests the government's decision to disband one of Mexico’s state-run power companies . Luz y Fuerza del Centro is one of the largest in the country's power firms .
 Production and a vertiginous drop in tourist revenues further damaged an economy already deep in recession . Tourism revenues (the country's third largest source of foreign exchange) further damaged the economy .
 Mexico’s GDP shrank by 5.3% between October 2008 and October 2009, the worst performance in the Americas . For all these reasons, Mexico's GDP shrinks by 5 .3% .
 The decline in capital inflows sharply undercut the value of the peso, which fell by 25% between 2008 and April 2009 . The peso is worth $1.2 billion .
 In early 2009 the country’s central bank, Banco de Mexico, was forced to use some $15 billion in reserves to cushion the peso's drop . The central bank used the money in early 2009 to help ease the drop .
 The unemployment rate topped 6% and the underemployment rate jumped to 13% . It's the highest levels since Mexico’s severe 1994-95 financial crisis .
 Felipe Calderon took several steps to address the deteriorating economic conditions . Calderon has taken several steps in recent days to tackle the situation in Mexico .
 Second, it bolstered its existing international reserves by negotiating a $30 billion currency swap with the U.S. Federal Reserve and a flexible credit line of $47 billion with the IMF .
 Seguro Popular is a voluntary health insurance program designed in part to provide coverage for Mexico’s large number of informal-sector workers . Oportunidades, a conditional cash-transfer program benefiting poor families, is a government-sponsored program .
 Calderon administration proposed making substantial cuts in public-sector employment and emergency tax increases in order to protect social spending . Calderon administration proposes substantial cuts to public sector employment .
 Drug-related violence has claimed 3,247 victims between January and June . The violence is linked to the country's serious economic difficulties and continued high levels of drug violence .
 Calderon administration committed enormous financial and human resources (including approximately 45,000 army troops) to the battle against drugsmuggling cartels . Mexican public had grown increasingly weary of the protracted struggle and human rights violations that sometimes accompanied army actions .
 The administration retained broad support for its efforts, but only about half of respondents to public opinion surveys believed that the government would win the fight .
 Of Mexico’s three largest political parties, the centre-right PAN suffered the greatest reverse in the midterm elections . The PAN is the largest party in the country, with three of Mexico's three largest parties .
 The PRI (allied with the PVEM) gained a majority in the Chamber of Deputies and greatly enhanced its political momentum . PRI gained the majority of the chamber of deputies in a landslide .
 Emanuel Mori and the FSM Congress over the fiscal year 2010 budget, which commenced on Oct. 2009 . Emanuel Mori is the president of the State of the United States .
 Mori argued that Congress had the right to disburse only local funds . Figir argued that to deny Congress the . right to distribute all state funds was ‘undemocratic” and tantamount to selling sovereignty for money .
 Mori’s attempt to limit congressional oversight might have arisen from ineffective oversight of past external funding, Mori says . Mori's attempts to limit oversight may have arisen after ineffective oversight, Mori writes . Mori: "I’m not sure what I’ve done. I�
 FSM applied to the UN for recognition of its claim to an extended continental shelf boundary . The FSM has applied for recognition to the claim to a continental shelf .
 The FSM sought rights to this additional territory in the hope that it might contain valuable submarine mineral resources . The territory is believed to contain valuable sub-marine mineral resources, the FSM says .
 FSM took an active role in environmental politics . Faced with intensified environmental degradation from climate change, the FSM became an environmental leader .
 As lead entity in the Alliance of Small Island States, it was pushing for a 45% reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions by 2020 . Mauritius filed an application for an amendment to the Montreal Protocol to limit the use of hydrofluorocarbons .
 Riots occurred in the wake of the elections as protesters upset over votefraud allegations and police harassment of the opposition stormed the parliament building and presidential palace, causing major damage . Protesters upset over the allegations of voter fraud and harassment stormed parliament building .
 Voronin eventually dissolved the legislature and called for repeat elections to be held on July 29 . He dissolved the state legislature after a series of scandals .
 On September 25, the AIE’s nominee for prime minister, Vlad Filat, was approved by Parliament and sworn into office . Filat was sworn in as prime minister of the country on September 25 .
 The AIE had not won 61 seats, however, it was prevented from installing as president its preferred choice for the post, Lupu Lupu . Lupu was the AIE's preferred choice, but it was not allowed to take the post .
 Parliamentary speaker Mihai Ghimpu remained as acting president until deadlock could be resolved . After a second parliamentary vote on December 7 was boycotted by the PCRM, a second vote on the December 7 vote was boycot by the party .
 She appeared with him at charity galas, on vacation in Saint-Tropez, and at official functions .
 Despite reports in 2008 in the U.K.’s Daily Mail of plans for a royal wedding, by the end of 2009 no arrangements had been announced . No arrangements were announced in 2009 .
 The prince actively pursued his mission as an advocate for the environment . He actively pursued the mission as a . advocate for . the environment.
 In January he participated in a three-week expedition to visit several scientific bases in Antarctica . In January, he visited several Antarctic scientific bases .
 Chicago’s Field Museum of natural history announced that it had received a grant of nearly $600,000 from the Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation to preserve biodiversity and avoid deforestation in Amazonian Peru . In September he called for international action to protect the Arctic from climate change .
 Later that month he was honoured by the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, Calif., where he was awarded the Roger Revelle Prize . The award was given to him by the Institute of Oceanography .
 In late 2008 he called off plans to expand the territory of Monaco by reclaiming more land from the sea . Closer to home, in late 2008, he announced plans to reclaim more land .
 Enkhbayar’s defeat was an upset for the MPRP and its chairman, Prime Minister Sanjaagiin Bayar . Bayar had served as the PM's campaign manager . He had served in the election as a candidate for a parliamentary seat .
 General Election Commission released results from June 2008 election for three of the last four seats in the national assembly . Mongolian Great Khural .
 The winner of the remaining seat, a DP candidate who was imprisoned in January on fraud charges and later acquitted on appeal, took the oath in October . The remaining seat was won by DP candidate, who was jailed in January .
 In January President Enkhbayar met Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin in Davos, Switz., and in March Prime Minister Bayar met Putin in Moscow . In March, President Bayar also met Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 In July, the Great Khural authorized the government to conclude an agreement with the Ivanhoe Mines and Rio Tinto companies to exploit the rich gold and copper deposits at Oyuutolgoi . After five years of contention, the agreement was reached .
 Mongolia was unable to invest in the project without borrowing funds . Montenegro windfall taxes and what Mongolia’s stake in the mine should be, the country says . Mongolia is unable to afford to invest without borrowing .
 Prime Minister Bayar discussed industrial investment schemes, including nuclear power projects, on visits in March to France, Belgium, and Germany and April to Inner Mongolia .
 Bayar went to Japan to seek aid for Mongolia during the economic downturn . In July UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon visited Mongolia, and Bayar visited Mongolia .
 In the first half of 2009, there was a budget deficit of about $183 million, largely due to a 28.8% fall in tax revenue . In September President Elbegdorj visited India and the United States .
 The balance of trade in the first six months of the year was down nearly 40% compared with the same period in 2008 . The value of mineral exports having suffered from the downturn in world prices .
 Siikhbaataryn Batbold was named the new prime minister . Gombojavyn Zandanshatar was appointed to succeed him as external relations minister .
 Milo Djukanovic is the Montenegrin prime minister of Montenegro . He is the current leader of the Montenegro-based country .
 Montenegro had submitted its application for membership in the EU in December 2008 . Montenegro was expecting admission in 2012 . In December 2008, Montenegro submitted an application to join the EU .
 Several polls indicated that a majority of Montenegrins backed integration . Montenegrina is one of the most-populated countries in the world .
 IMF and World Bank predicted that the country’s GDP would contract by 2.7% in 2009 and that the economy would remain in recession through 2010 . The IMF and the World Bank said that the recession would continue through 2010.
 In June more than 11,000 businesses reported debts totaling a recordbreaking $188 million . The debt is a record-breaking record for businesses . In June, more than 10,000 companies reported debts totalling $188million .
 The country's largest employer, the aluminum plant Kombinat Aluminijuma Podgorica, owed more than $280 million to foreign and local banks . The plant owed about $50 million to the government and state companies .
 KAP was the republic’s largest exporter, accounting for 40% of industrial production . KAP is now the country's biggest exporter of industrial goods .
 In 2009 more than 70% of the labour force worked in tourism, construction, or trade . Service-sector employment continued to increase .
 A large portion of the nearly $560 million in foreign investment made during the first half of the year was in services . The majority of the investment was made in services, the government says .
 Montenegro has been ranked as a top tourism destination by the World Travel and Tourism Council . The government passed legislation making the country more attractive to private investors .
 Public-sector unions organized strikes in favour of a 20% wage increase in January and February . Unemployment at 10.5% and migrants returning from Europe, popular discontent led unions to organize strikes .
 In July pilots in Royal Air Maroc, the national airline, went on strike over working conditions . The airline's pilots are protesting over the conditions of their jobs .
 The government continued to encroach upon individual freedoms, with the sentences on those arrested for the 2003 bombings in Casablanca being increased on appeal .
 In August, copies of the political weeklies TelQuel and Nichane were seized and sales of the French newspaper Le Monde were banned after they reported the results of a public opinion poll .
 Morocco broke off diplomatic relations with Iran in February over Tehran’s threats to Bahrain . Hundreds of Shi'ites were arrested in April, and the Iraqi School in Rabat, which was suspected of encouraging Shi'ism, was closed . Morocco closed the school in February after Morocco broke
 The government also attacked those who did not comply with standards of public morality . As many as 20 homosexuals were arrested, the government also appeared to have arrested 20 .
 In September a 24-member network recruited militants recruited to fight U.S. forces in Iraq and Afghanistan was arrested . In September, a network that recruited militants was arrested in Afghanistan .
 In June the UN Security Council approved informal talks between Morocco and the Polisario Front . Four previous rounds of talks in 2007 and 2008 at Manhasset, New York, had been unsuccessful .
 Low levels of rainfall raised fears that there would be a drought in the provinces of Tete, Gaza, and Sofala . El Nino rains later alleviated the situation, alleviating the situation .
 Government agencies moved more quickly to implement relief measures and restore normalcy than they had during the flood and cyclone seasons in the previous two years . Government agencies implemented relief measures more quickly than in previous years .
 Mozambique has made the most progress among less-developed countries, having scored nearly 50% higher than in 1990 . The 2009 quality-of-life index was published by the U.N. Development Programme . Despite natural disasters and epidemic, the country had made progress .
 Attendance in primary schools had risen more than 33% from 2000 to 2006 . Gender disparities continued in rural areas, especially in northern and central rural areas .
 UNICEF reported a significant reduction in mortality rates among children under the age of five . The report said a significant number of children under five have been killed in the country .
 The government received three large-scale loans from the IMF, the World Bank, and the European Union, Denmark, and The Netherlands for railway, port, and communications projects .
 Transparency International and Ibrahim Index of African Governance agree that government corruption is more pervasive than it had been during the previous five years . On the negative side, Transparency International agreed that government . corruption was more pervasive in the last five years than in previous years .
 A team of environmental scientists and bird experts reported the results of its expedition to a hithertounmapped forest area on the peak of Mt. Fuji . Meanwhile, a note of serendipity was struck when a team of scientists reported the findings to the public .
 The team discovered three new species of butterfly, one new species snake, and seven species of globally threatened birds . The team also discovered seven of the world's most threatened species .
 Campaigning for the October 28 presidential and parliamentary election began in mid-September . Election is scheduled for October 28 . Campaign for the election is expected to last until October 31 .
 Bitter rivalry between Renamo and MDM leaders weakened their chances of electoral success . Renamo's Renamo was founded in the 1970s in the wake of the Zapatria war .
 With 75% of the votes, Guebuza won by a landslide, but the low turnout of only 44.6% indicated a lack of popular enthusiasm for the ruling party .
 Guebuza was reelected to a second term, and it was widely believed that his victory might be used as a mandate to amend the constitution to allow him to run for third term .
 The year 2009 was one of stasis for military-ruled Myanmar . Than Shwe, assisted by Prime Minister Thein Sein, was the country's first president .
 Than Shwe announced no legislative preparations ahead of scheduled elections in 2010 . More than 2,100 political dissidents remained in prison, more than two dozen political dissidents remain in prison .
 After a threemonth trial, Suu Kyi was found guilty and sentenced to three years’ hard labour in prison . Than Shwe immediately commuted the sentence to 18 months of additional home detention .
 In July UN Secretary-General Ban KiMoon visited Myanmar but was refused permission to meet with Suu Kyi or other imprisoned dissidents . In July he visited the country and was refused access to the UN secretary-general .
 Suu Kyi secured the release of Yettaw, who had been sentenced to seven years’ hard labour . Namibia Suukyi was also freed of seven years' hard labour by the former president .
 The U.S. government concluded a policy review of Myanmar in 2013 . It began high-level engagement talks, and discussed loosening of sanctions against the country .
 Fears of Myanmar’s close ties with North Korea were partly behind the thaw in U.S. policy . Concerns about possible nuclear proliferation led to fears of Myanmar's close ties to North Korea .
 In August the military attacked the ethnic Kokang enclave in northern Myanmar . 30,000 civilians fled into China, which lodged a formal protest . In August, Myanmar's military attacked an ethnic minority enclave in north Myanmar .
 Tensions with more than a dozen other armed groups increased as the SPDC called on the groups to disarm ahead of the elections . Tensions between the groups increased after the election .
 Myanmar’s economy continued to suffer as urgently needed reforms were postponed . The country's economy continues to suffer from a lack of reforms in recent years .
 Foreign exchange reserves grew to $3.3. million, largely owing to strong natural gas sales to Thailand . The country's foreign reserves rose to $4.3 million .
 Inflation eased from 27% to 14%, although this was dependent on continued foreign supplies of food aid . Inflation was eased by the aid of foreign food aid, but this is dependent on continuing aid from abroad .
 Food security worsened, especially in the Irrawaddy Delta and western and northern Myanmar, leading to fears of major food shortages . Food security in Myanmar has worsened in recent years, with food shortages in some areas .
 China announced plans to construct two energy pipelines to transport natural gas and crude oil from western Myanmar to China’s Yunnan province . The pipelines were to be completed by 2014 .
 SWAPO remained the dominant party, while the RDP appeared to have made little impact on voters . The RDP also appeared to be a major factor in the election .
 Hifikepunye Pohamba was confirmed as SWAPO's candidate for the presidential election . Some of his own party members were aligned with former president Sam Nujoma, who remained influential behind the scenes .
 The main opposition party, Congress of Democrats, remained divided into rival factions . Congress of Democratic Party remains divided by rival factions.
 SWAPO took 75.3% and 54 of the 72 seats in the National Assembly . The breakdown of the vote was similar in the vote for the N-Assembly . The RDP took 11.3 percent and 8 percent of the seats .
 In June a SWAPO-backed communications bill proposed in the parliament was fought by the opposition, which claimed that the government was introducing “Zimbabwe-type" powers of intercepting electronic communications . The opposition claimed that it was introducing "Zimbabwe type" powers .
 Robert Mugabe has refrained from criticizing continued human rights abuses in that country . He has been criticized for his treatment of Zimbabweans . Mugabe's government has been accused of human rights violations in Zimbabwe .
 There were many allegations of corruption and fraud leveled at Namibian government officials throughout the year . The most notable of the allegations involved a contract for Chinese-made scanning equipment intended for the Ministry of Finance .
 Marcus Stephen declared Sept. 9, 2009, a national holiday in Nauru to mark the commencement of a cellular phone service in the world’s smallest independent republic .
 Digicel became the island’s first provider of GSM (global system for mobile) telecommunications . Digiciel is now the island's first provider .
 The event was very significant for the remote community of Nauru . Stephen spoke for many residents when he said that it was a “truly exciting time” to have a mobile phone and Internet service in the remote island .
 The 12 member countries that supported the USP sent representatives to the graduation ceremony . The event took place at the university's main campus in Suva, Fiji .
 In December Nauru established formal relations with Abkhazia and South Ossetia, reportedly in exchange for some $50 million in aid from Moscow . The move reportedly took place in return for $50million in aid .
 Nauru joined Russia, Venezuela, and Nicaragua as the only governments to officially recognize the two breakaway Georgian republics . Russia and Venezuela are the only countries to recognize the breakaway Georgia republics in the past .
 Ram Baran Yadav reinstated the chief of Nepal's army . Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal had fired the army chief for having refused to integrate former Maoist fighters into the armed forces .
 Prachanda resigned, accusing the president of having flouted the constitution . The president of India's governing body has been accused of flouting the constitution. Prachandanda resigned as president .
 In July the tenure of the UN Mission in Nepal was extended to Jan., 2010 . The tenure was extended in July to January 2010 .
 The UN achieved a major breakthrough in July when Nepal began discharging the 4,008 former Maoist child soldiers and noncombatants who had been detained in military camps . The UN says the UN has been working with Nepal to release the children .
 Despite relative peace in most of the hill area, violence was increasing, along with the number of armed groups, in parts of the eastern hill area and in the southern plains . Violence was increasing along with an increase in armed groups .
 Although the government announced a special security plan in July, the situation had not improved by year’s end . Government announced special security plans in July but the situation has not improved .
 Natural disasters also caused heavy damages in Nepal . Along with political disasters, natural disasters caused heavy damage .
 The country experienced a rise in unemployment and a rapid increase in the number of bankruptcies . The rise in bankruptcies is also seen as a sign of economic decline .
 While the country had enjoyed a budget surplus of 1% of GDP in 2008, a deficit of more than 4% was anticipated for 2009 . The national debt rose significantly as the government faced substantial financial shortfalls .
 Government acted in fall of 2008 to protect individuals’ savings accounts and to secure commercial interests . Government continued its policy of economic intervention .
 Aiming to stimulate economic growth, it invested in education, the building of new homes, and the upkeep of schools and infrastructure . Also supported new energy-saving measures .
 The government instituted policies intended to make part-time work more widely available and to reduce unemployment among younger workers . In addition, the government also instituted policies to reduce youth unemployment .
 Violence marred the celebration on April 30 of the national holiday known as Queen’s Day . Violence marries the celebration of Queen's Day in Canada .
 The royal family was being driven along a parade route in the town of Apeldoorn . An individual in a small automobile drove toward the royal vehicle at high speed . The incident occurred during a parade in the small town .
 The automobile collided with traffic barriers and members of the public, causing the vehicle to veer off course and ultimately to crash into a monument .
 Eight people, including the assailant, were killed, and nine were seriously injured in the attack . Eight people were killed and nine people were seriously hurt .
 Dutch government found itself in the midst of controversy over treaties it had made with Belgium in 2005 . In the area of foreign relations, the Dutch government had made treaties with Belgium .
 One of the treaties’ provisions concerned the Western Schelde estuary, which lies within The Netherlands but gives the Belgian city of Antwerp access to the North Sea . The treaty’s provisions also concerned the Eastern Schelde, which is within the Netherlands .
 The 2005 agreement stipulated that the Dutch would deepen the estuary in order to accommodate the largest oceangoing vessels 24 hours a day .
 The Dutch Council of State blocked the start of the work, citing possible environmental consequences . While the Belgian government had agreed to a two-year delay, patience ran thin when the Dutch council of state blocked the work .
 The initial agreement had proposed to mitigate the negative environmental effects of dredging by returning polders along the estuary to their natural flooded state . This strategy, however, was opposed by many local residents .
 Unemployment reached 6% in June and was projected to peak at 7-8% in 2010 . Unemployment is now 6% and unemployment is 6% . Unemployment was predicted to peak in 2010 at 7/8% .
 The government offered subsidies to businesses that adopted an average workweek of four and a half days . It also funded infrastructure projects, and initiated the construction of a bikeway network intended eventually to span the country .
 Planned borrowing of about U.S.$25 billion from 2009 to 2013 would effectively double government debt . Planned borrowing from 2009-2013 would cost the government $25 billion . Government borrowing would be the largest in the country's history .
 Proposed tax cuts were deferred, and government contributions to a superannuation scheme initiated by the previous . Government contributions to the previous. government scheme were also deferred .
 Sir Anand Satyanand and the members of Parliament voluntarily declined pay raises . Members of Parliament chose not to raise their salaries . Sir Satyaand and members of parliament have declined pay rises .
 Helen Clark resigned from Parliament in April to lead the U.N. Development Programme . She had served as a member of Parliament for 27 years . Helen Clark is the former prime minister of New Zealand .
 Nicaragu: imprisonment on bribery and corruption charges arising from his exploitation of Thai workers whom he had assisted on immigration matters . Nicarague was jailed on bribery, corruption charges .
 David Bain was convicted of murdering his father, mother, sisters, and brother in 1994 . He was found guilty of the murders of his parents, sisters and brothers . The trial was held in Dunedin, New Zealand .
 Bain had served 12 years in prison before the London-based Privy Council overturned his conviction in 2007 . Bain's conviction was overturned in 2007 and he was released from prison . Bain was sentenced to life in prison for 12 years .
 New Zealand’s military commitment in Afghanistan was increased in 2009 . New Zealand's military commitment was increased to Afghanistan in 2010 .
 In the highest categories of the New Zealand Order of Merit, titular honours, which had been abolished in 2000, were reinstated . The highest categories were reinstated in the highest category .
 A nonbinding citizen-initiated referendum was held on whether parents should be legally allowed to slap their children . 87.6% voted against considering a ""smack” a criminal offense .
 Parliament approved a controversial measure reforming Auckland’s government by creating a ‘super city’ with a single mayor and council, effective in 2010 . Parliament approved the controversial measure .
 Wanganui banned the wearing of gang insignia in public . The use of handheld cell phones in motor vehicles was also banned . The city also banned the use of gang signs in public places .
 Maori singer Sir Howard Morrison (see Obituaries) died on September 24 at age 74 . Morrison died at 74 years old .
 In 1961 he toured Australia as a support act for the Everly Brothers, Shelley Berman, and the Kingston Trio . Although he had been a solo performer in later years, he had initially sung with a quartet .
 In October the Supreme Court ruled as unconstitutional the existing constitutional ban on consecutive presidential reelection, opening the way for President Barack Obama to run again .
 In the face of the global economic crisis, the government offset social expenditures with cuts to capital expenditures helped keep Nicaragua’s budget within IMF parameters . The government's decision to offset social spending with capital expenditures kept Nicaragua within IMF guidelines .
 Allegations of electoral fraud and corruption resulted in reduced foreign assistance from the U.S. and Europe . Allegations led to reduced foreign aid from the United States and Europe, however .
 Support for the Sandinistas' health, education, food, and housing initiatives had grown, particularly in the country's rural areas . Polls showed strong public discontent with the leaders of every major political party .
 Lower inflation allowed for a loosening of monetary policy and increased access to credit, analysts say . Lower inflation allows for loosening monetary policy, increased access of credit .
 In July the International Court of Justice at The Hague ruled in favour of Nicaraguan sovereignty over the disputed San Juan River border with Costa Rica . The court permitted Costa Rica continued commercial navigation on the river .
 Nicaraguans living along the Caribbean coast demonstrated growing disaffection toward politics . An unusually high rate of voter abstention in regional elections held in January . Nicaragueans living in the region demonstrated growing .
 In April the Miskito Council of Elders in the North Atlantic Autonomous Region claimed independence from Nicaragua .
 The Vatican had signaled an interest in the decriminalization of therapeutic abortion in Nicaragua . The Roman Catholic Church in Nicaragua remained adamantly opposed to such a move . The Vatican signaled interest in decriminalizing therapeutic abortion .
 On July 19, Sandinista supporters in Managua, Nic., celebrate the 30th anniversary of the revolution . The revolution toppled the government of Anastasio Somoza Debayle in July 1979 . The Sandinistas toppled his government in 1979 .
 The prevailing issue in Niger during 2009 was Pres. Mamadou Tandja . Niger is located in Niger .
 The National Assembly had rejected President Tandja’s request to hold a referendum on the issue, so he appealed to the Constitutional Court . The Constitutional Court ruled on May 26 that the referendum would be illegal without the approval of the National Assembly .
 A referendum on a new constitution will be held on August 4 . Within hours, the president dissolved the legislative body . A presidential decree was issued that called for the referendum .
 The new constitution would provide for a three-year extension of President Tandja’s rule . It would also eliminate presidential term limits . The constitution would also provide for an extension of the president's rule and eliminate presidential terms .
 President Tandja urged the court to rescind its ruling, but it was upheld on June 26 . On June 12, the Constitutional Court annulled the presidential decree; President Obama urged it to rescind the ruling .
 Later that day Tandja assumed emergency powers, and three days later he dissolved the Constitutional Court . The court was dissolved by the government .
 His actions were met with international condemnation and public demonstrations . His actions have been met with public demonstrations and international condemnation .
 Opposition parties called for a boycott of the referendum, which contributed to a massive win for the president . Opposition parties said they would not participate in the referendum . President Vladimir Putin is expected to win the vote .
 The legislative election to replace the National Assembly, held on October 20, was also boycotted by the opposition . The election resulted in victory for the ruling party . The opposition was boycotting the election .
 Niger was suspended from the Economic Community of West African States for having ignored the organization’s call to postpone the poll . Niger is still in the process of re-election to Nigerians .
 Tuareg rebels of the Movement of Nigerians for Justice agreed to end their guerrilla war on April 6 . On April 6, the rebels agreed to an end to their long-running guerrilla war .
 The Niger government indicated that it would begin negotiations with the MNJ over shares in the northern region’s mineral wealth . The government indicated it would start negotiations over shares of the mineral wealth in the region .
 In January the French mining company Areva was awarded the license to exploit Niger's uranium resources . Areva began work on the Imouraren mine in early May .
 Algeria, Niger, and Nigeria signed a pact to build a pipeline to deliver Nigerian gas across the Sahara to Europe . Algeria and Niger signed a deal on July 3 to build the pipeline . The pipeline will deliver gas from Niger, Algeria, Nigeria and Niger to Europe via the Sahara .
 Yar'Adua left Nigeria on November 23 to seek medical treatment in Saudi Arabia for a heart condition . He left Nigeria for Saudi Arabia to seek treatment in November 23 for a condition in the Middle Eastern country . Yar'
 A campaign was launched by influential politicians and lawyers calling for more transparency about his ability to govern . Yar’Adua remained secure in his post at the end of 2014 .
 Barack Obama’s choice of Ghana for his first African state visit as a pointed rebuff to Nigeria's failings in the realms of governance, transparency, and security . Barack Obama chose Ghana as his first state visit to Africa .
 UN data showed that the country's poverty rate had risen from 46% to 76% over the previous 13 years . Meanwhile, UN data also showed that poverty rates in the country had risen to 76%.
 Turbulence in the Niger delta remained a major stumbling block to internal peace . The Niger delta is a major source of tension in the country .
 In May the government launched a sweeping military offensive against rebel groups in the region . But it failed to subdue the militants, who later in the year were able to strike beyond the delta, setting fire to an oil depot and several tankers .
 On August 4, the government announced a 60-day amnesty for any militant who agreed to surrender his weapons in exchange for a daily stipend, education, and retraining . The government announced the amnesty on August 4 .
 Estimates of the number of militants who accepted the amnesty varied from 7,000 to 15,000 . Estimates of militants accepted amnesty range between 7,500-15,000 members of the Taliban .
 Yar’Adua held a highly publicized meeting with Okah in October . The closed-door meeting occurred after MEND had reportedly threatened to resume hostilities in the delta following the end of an amnesty .
 In February and again in December, Christians and Muslims clashed in the city of Bauchi . In December, the city was the scene of two deadly clashes between Christians and Muslim Muslims .
 The most serious conflict involved Muslim militants belonging to the group Boko Haram . Boko Haram, a fundamentalist sect opposed to Western education, is fighting in Nigeria .
 Authorities accuse militants of attacking police stations and other sites in the states of Bauchi and Yobe . Authorities accused the militants of having attacked police stations .
 The sect’s leader, Mohammad Yusuf, was taken into police custody but was later found shot to death . Yusuf was found shot dead by police after being arrested .
 Human rights activists point out that extrajudicial executions by the police occurred frequently in Nigeria . Yusuf’s killing demonstrated the urgent need for police reform, they said .
 Relying on the country’s $400 billion Government Pension Fund-Global (the former Petroleum Fund of Norway), the Norwegian government was able to guarantee commercial bank loans and implement an economic stimulus plan .
 The central bank raised its key interest rate to 1.5% in October . Citing higher inflation, the central bank cited higher inflation as the reason for the increase .
 The question of whether to allow oil drilling in the Arctic waters around Norway’s Lofoten and Vesteralen islands was hotly debated during the year .
 Large deposits of oil and gas are thought to be located under the seabed . Norwegian oil companies are eager to start drilling in the area .
 Seismic surveys to determine potential deposits were conducted in the summer, though the results were not to be released publicly until 2010 . The results of the surveys were released in 2010 .
 The surveys sparked strong protests from fishermen's organizations and environmentalists . They were adamantly opposed to opening the pristine region to exploration and drilling . They cited the disruption that would be caused to the cod-fishing industry .
 The oil companies argue that fisheries have thrived for decades in close proximity to drilling installations in the southern part of the North Sea . New technologies would help to minimize the ecological impact, they say .
 Environmentalists insisted that the risk was too great to take . Environmentalists said it was too dangerous for them to try .
 In the aftermath of the elections, Stoltenberg indicated that the coalition government would wait to make a final decision on drilling near Lofoten and Vesteralen until more scientific evidence was presented .
 Oman refrained from openly challenging or even criticizing Iran over its nuclear-development program or controversial foreign policies . Oman and other Gulf Cooperation Council countries have not publicly criticized Iran . Iran is one of the leading countries in the region to have a nuclear program .
 Oman continued its long-standing approach of seeking to engage Tehran diplomatically . The two countries entered into several memorandums of understanding in recent years .
 Oman agreed for the first time to purchase Iranian gas exports . The more important ones pertained to increased bilateral cooperation in energy affairs . Oman agreed to purchase Iran's gas exports in exchange for gas .
 Oman weathered the global economic slowdown better than most of its neighbours . Oman is one of the poorest countries in the Middle East . Oman's economy has been hit hard by the global slowdown .
 A new oil field was discovered off the Musandam Peninsula in an area straddling Oman’s maritime border with Iran . The field is located near the border of Oman and Iran . It is the first oil field to be discovered in Oman .
 Sultan Qaboos bin Said of Oman is formally welcomed to Tehran by Iranian Pres. Pakistan Behrouz Mehri . Omani President Ahmad Ahmad Ahmad Sayoudi is the prime minister of Iran .
 The sultan’s three-day visit to Iran was his first in 30 years and the first by any head of state since Ahmadinejad s controversial reelection in June . It was the first visit by an Iranian leader since the president's controversial reelection .
 The country’s booming tourism industry was developing a variety of new tourist destinations . The country is developing a number of new destinations .
 High-speed ferryboat service was inaugurated to transport vehicles and passengers to remote but scenic Musandam Peninsula and to hitherto little-explored coastal sites .
 CIA drones struck South Waziristan in January, killing two top al-Qaeda leaders . Usama al-Kini and Sheikh Ahmed Salim Swedan were on FBI’s most-wanted list in 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania .
 In February the Supreme Court upheld a ban prohibiting opposition leader Nawaz Sharif from holding elected office . The court also removed his brother as Punjab’s chief minister .
 Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry resumed duties as chief justice of the Supreme Court on March 22 . Asif Ali Zardari, fearing intensified street violence, reinstated judges, including Iftikkhar Muhammad .
 In May the Supreme Court overturned the electoral ban on Sharif . Zardari also restored the provincial government of Sharif’s brother in Punjab . In May, the supreme court overturned Sharif's electoral ban .
 A terrorist attack in Lahore in early March targeted Sri Lanka’s cricket team, killing six police officers and wounding several players . Six police officers were killed in the Lahore attack .
 Later in the month terrorists attacked a police centre in Manawan, near Lahore, killing eight . The attack was the first of the month in Lahore .
 In April the National Assembly approved the installation of Shari'ah (Islamic law) throughout the Swat valley of the North-West Frontier Province . The move had been negotiated in February in the hopes of securing a lasting truce with militants in the area .
 Swat-based Taliban forces moved into neighbouring Buner district, but Pakistani army units stemmed the advance . Pakistan army units stem the advance of Taliban forces in Buner .
 Troops also fought militants in nearby Dir district, and after peace efforts failed, a fullscale offensive was launched in Swat .
 Zardari visited Washington D.C. in May for trilateral meetings with U.S. Pres. Barack Obama . The Iranian president also visited the U.N. for talks .
 Hundreds of thousands of people fleeing the war zone required extraordinary assistance . Hundreds of millions of people fled the country's capital .
 In late May terrorists bombed the Lahore headquarters of the Inter-Services Intelligence agency, killing 35 . The Lahore HQ was attacked by terrorists in late May .
 The army declared victory in Swat, claiming to have killed 2,000 militants in the region, in June . Suicide bombers demolished Peshawar's Pearl Continental Hotel .
 United States drones, active over South Waziristan, reportedly killed Taliban operatives Qari Hussain and Maulvi Sangeen Zadran . U.S. drones reportedly killed two Taliban operatives .
 In July Islamabad arrested pro-Taliban cleric Sufi Muhammad in continuing Swat operations . The cleric was arrested in continuing operations .
 In September, Tehriki-i-Taliban publicized its intention to wreak havoc everywhere in Pakistan . The October bombing of the UN World Food Programme in Islamabad and a car bombing in Peshawar were traced to that threat .
 More brazen was the assault on army headquarters in Rawalpindi, in which 20 died . More brazenly was the attack on army HQ in Pakistan's capital, Islamabad . 20 people were killed in the attack .
 Still another suicide bombing in Shangla killed 41, and multiple, almost simultaneous mid-October assaults in Lahore, Peshawar, and Kohat targeted police and security installations . The attacks also targeted Lahore and Peshawar in October .
 The U.S. Congress in September approved a bill making available $7.7 billion over five years to rebuild Pakistan’s roads, schools, and democratic institutions . The bill was made available by the United States Congress .
 Pakistan’s higher military officials, however, registered alarm at the link of the funding to the war on terrorism . The political opposition claimed that accepting the aid would compromise Pakistan's sovereignty . Pakistan's political opposition said accepting aid to Pakistan would compromise its sovereignty .
 The United States transfer of F-16 aircraft to Pakistan proceeded without interruption . Concerns raised in the United States Congress over Pakistan's near completion of two additional nuclear weapons reactors .
 A long-awaited invasion of South Waziristan commenced on October 17 . 30,000 Pakistani soldiers invaded Taliban strongholds in the area . The invasion was a long awaited military operation .
 The assassination of an army brigadier and a suicide attack near the Kamra aeronautical complex in Attock, as well as repeated bombings (notably in Peshawar’s Meena Bazaar), demonstrated the vitality of the terrorist campaign .
 In November increasing weakness in the Zardari presidency added to Pakistan's instability . Pakistan's political instability was compounded by the instability of the country's government .
 The National Reconciliation Ordinance of 2007 provided amnesty from prosecution to high officials and politicians . The government was unable to placate its opposition .
 Counterterrorist units moved aggressively in southern Punjab and Karachi, but the effort did little to shore up Zardari’s fleeting popularity . Counterterrorism units move aggressively in Karachi and Punjab, but efforts did not shore up his popularity .
 In November gunmen assaulted two more ranking members of the army . Suicide bombers killed a mayor from the NWFP, blew up the ISI regional headquarters in Peshawar . The attacks targeted a police station in North Waziristan and killed more than 30 people at a Charsadda market
 A spate of seven bombings in a succeeding 10-day period killed numerous bystanders . The bombings occurred during a series of bombings in the past 10 days .
 The country’s earlier acknowledgement of the Pakistani origin of the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attacks resulted in the late-November indictment of seven members of Lashkar-e-Taiba in connection with the attacks .
 In December, Obamas decision to increase the number of U.S. troops in Afghanistan heightened debate in Pakistan .
 Intensification of the war in Afghanistan was rumoured to imply expanded drone attacks in Pakistan’s tribal areas and possibly Balochistan . Intensified of the Afghanistan war in the past has seen increased drone strikes in Pakistan .
 Assaults on naval headquarters in Islamabad and army headquarters in Rawalpindi killed at least 38 . At least 38 people, including a major general and a brigadier, were killed in the attacks .
 Militants also struck in Peshawar at a district and sessions court complex and a nongovernmental organization assisting the blind . Bombings destroyed much of Lahore’s Moon Market, including a district court complex, and a government aid group .
 The casualty toll rose still higher with the bombings of ISI headquarters in Multan, of the market in Punjab’s Dera Ghazi Khan, and of Shi'ite religious processions in Karachi and Pakistan-administered Kashmir .
 Obama's new strategy was demonstrated by the ratcheting up of drone attacks in Bajaur as well as in South and North Waziristan .
 Believed to have been among the casualties was senior al-Qaeda leader Saleh al-Somali . Al-Qaeda is believed to be behind the attack in Somalia .
 Obama’s national security adviser; Gen. Gen. James Jones, President Barack Obama, Gen. Barack Obama and Gen. Edward Snowden have been briefed on drone strikes in Pakistan . The attacks have been intensified in Pakistan since the attacks began .
 Mike Mullen, chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, visits Islamabad . Mullen visited Islamabad to try to ease strains in U.K. relations with Pakistan . Pakistan and the United States have been at odds for years .
 Palau’s recognition of the importance of its U.S. ties is a sign of respect for its ties to the United States . Palau has been awarded the title of Palau President Barack Obama .
 Johnson Toribiong agreed that several Chinese Uighurs detained at a U.S. military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, could be temporarily resettled on the islands . The islands will be home to several Uighur detainees .
 Palauans were also concerned that the Muslim Uighurs might face culture shock and that the country’s tourism might be harmed by the presence of former detainees on the islands . Palauanans are also concerned about the country's tourism .
 Palau is creating a sanctuary to protect great hammerheads, leopard sharks, and oceanic whitetip sharks . President Toribiong told the UN General Assembly in September that Palau was creating the sanctuary . Palau's president told the U.N. General Assembly that
 The country acknowledged the difficulty, however, of patrolling waters the size of Texas or France with a single boat .
 An animal rights group asked Palau to remove fruit bats from local restaurant menus . The consumption of fruit bats cooked in coconut milk became so popular with tourists that the species’ survival was said to be threatened .
 The elections, held on May 3, pitted Balbina Herrera, a former legislator and minister of housing, against Ricardo Martinelli, a wealthy businessman . The elections were held in the presidential race .
 Martinelli led a coalition of opposition parties headed by the Democratic Change party . Martinelli was a former leader of the country's largest opposition party .
 Herrera was accused of being a radical leftist who had received support from Venezuelan Pres. Juan Carlos del Toro . Herrera is accused of receiving support from Venezuela's President Hugo Chavez . Herrera has been accused of corruption in Venezuela .
 Martinelli exploited Herrera’s past links to former Panamanian strongman Manuel Noriega . Herrera's campaign emphasized the need for change after five years of PRD-led government .
 Herrera accused Martinelli of being mentally unstable and tried to use Martinelli's wealth and business practices against him . For her part, Herrera accused her of using her wealth against Martinelli .
 In the end the desire for change led to a landslide victory for Martinelli, who captured 60% of the votes . Despite the country’s strong economic performance during the previous three years, Martinelli won the election .
 Martinelli’s victory ran counter to the recent leftist political trend in Latin America . Martinelli was elected to the presidency in 2009 .
 Panama's economy was affected by the sharp decline in global trade . Economists predicted that the economy would still post modest growth in 2009 .
 The $5.5 billion canal-expansion project is well under way, with completion slated for 2014 . The canal is expected to be completed in 2014 .
 The government reported that GDP grew 2.4% during the first half of the year . The government said the growth was 2.2% in first half .
 Unemployment stood at 6.6% in August, up 1% from the same month a year earlier . Unemployment in August was 6.4% up from 6.5% in July .
 The U.S. free-trade agreement remained unratified by the United States Congress, despite support from the administration of Pres. Barack Obama .
 Some U.S. representatives insisted that Panama first tighten its banking laws to discourage tax evasion and money laundering . Panama's banking laws should be tightened to discourage money laundering and tax evasion, they say .
 Two proposals were put forth to construct pipelines from wells to liquefaction plants . Two proposals have been put forth for the project .
 The other, by energy giant ExxonMobil, would pipe gas from the Southern Highlands to a liquefaction plant in the capital region .
 The cabinet decided to adopt the scheme engineered by ExxonMobil, even though InterOil already operated an oil refinery at Port Moresby’s Fairfax Harbour and was preferred by Prime Minister Somare .
 The LNG was then to be shipped to Chinese, Japanese, and Taiwanese customers already signed up under a $15 billion deal . The deal was to be paid for by Chinese, Taiwanese and Japanese customers .
 Investigations continue into an airline crash in August in which a chartered Airlines PNG twin-engine plane crashed in the jungle near Kokoda . Investigations continued into the August crash .
 All 11 passengers and 2 crew members were killed in what was the worst civil air disaster in PNG history . The PNG plane was the first aircraft to fly over PNG .
 Many Australians helped remove wreckage and assisted with the investigation of the crash .
 This collaboration is seen as furthering the close relationship between PNG and Australia . The PNG-Australia collaboration is a collaboration between PNG, Australia . PNG is PNG's largest island nation, Papua New Guinea, and Australia's largest city .
 Lugo had sworn to tackle such intractable issues as land reform (1% of Paraguay’s population controlled 77% of the arable land) and poverty relief . Lugo also vowed to fight corruption and crime and improve access to health care .
 Two women filed paternity suits against him after he admitted to having fathered a child with a third woman while he was still a bishop . Two women said he fathered the child while still bishop .
 Allegations of nepotism on the part of his sister and Paraguay’s acting first lady, Mercedes Lugo, also emerged . Paraguay's reformist image has been undercut by allegations of corruption .
 Evo Morales signed an agreement ending a border dispute that dated from the 1932-35 Chaco War . Morales signed the agreement ending the border dispute . The agreement was signed by Morales and Morales' government officials .
 Brazil agreed to triple annual revenue it paid to Paraguay for energy from the Itaipu hydroelectric dam . 1973 treaty had obligated Paraguay to sell power to Brazil at fixed far-belowmarket rates .
 Lugo administration succeeded in significantly increasing financial and medical assistance to Paraguayans in poverty . Lugo also succeeded in overcoming efforts in Congress to deny funding to help those in need .
 In September, Lugo was forced to rescind a decree limiting pesticide use by the soybean industry . Lugo suffered a setback in September when he rescinded the decree .
 The expanding industry had displaced many of the country’s rural residents, which led to violent land disputes . The land disputes have led to violence in the past .
 Clashes had also occurred over pesticide contamination and pesticide-related illnesses . Clashes were also over pesticides contamination and illnesses related to pesticides .
 The era of former dictator Alfredo Stroessner, who ruled Paraguay from 1954 to 1989, continued to haunt the country . The former dictator ruled the country from 1954-1989 .
 Sabino Montanaro, who had served as Stroessner’s interior minister, was extradited from Honduras to face six trials for the disappearances and killings of government opponents in the 1970s and ’80s . In May, he served as the interior minister of
 In July the bodies of two victims from the 1970s were found buried outside a police barracks in Asuncion . In July, two bodies were found in the country's capital, capital city of Asuncio .
 The year 2009 proved to be one of the year's biggest challenges for Peru . Peru is located in Lima, Peru's capital city, Lima .
 The global recession had a marked impact on the country’s economy . The economy was heavily based on the export of mineral and agricultural products . The country's economy is heavily dependent on mineral exports .
 The economy slowed significantly during the final quarter of 2008 and the first half of 2009 . Foreign demand for these commodities slumped as the economy slowed .
 In an effort to counter the effects of the slowdown, the administration of Pres. Barack Obama's administration has taken steps to combat the slowdown .
 Alan Garcia worked to implement a financial stimulus package of up to $13. billion . Alan Garcia is a former President of the U.S. House of Representatives . Garcia was in charge of implementing a $13 billion stimulus package .
 Analysts say Peru weathered the financial crisis better than many other Latin American countries . Peru is positioned for a relatively rapid economic rebound, analysts say .
 Much of Peru's economy was affected by protests, many of them related to land use and indigenous rights . Many of the protests were related to the issues of land use, indigenous rights and land rights .
 The most notable of these was an indigenous uprising in the Peruvian Amazon region near Bagua Grande, some 1,400 km north of Lima . The uprising was the first in the Amazon region to take place in 18 years .
 Indigenous groups oppose two recently enacted laws allowing the country's rainforest to be opened to exploration and development . The laws were enacted in the first week of June . Indigenous groups blocked highways and became involved in deadly clashes with police .
 The fighting claimed the lives of at least 24 protesters and 10 policemen . The fighting also killed at least 10 policemen and 24 protesters .
 Garcia forced to admit that his government should have carried on consultations with indigenous groups before promulgating the laws . Garcia admitted that he should have had consultations with the indigenous groups .
 Congress rescinds laws that sparked the uprising . Yehude Simon, who had been appointed prime minister in October 2008, resigned as prime minister .
 Protests were also staged by the local populations in other parts of the Peruvian Amazon and in the Andean highlands . Many complained of government indifference regarding the destructive environmental impact of mining, logging, and other activities .
 Locals have increasingly turned to strikes and demonstrations as a way to force their concerns to be heard .
 On February 1 a freetrade agreement between Peru and the U.S. came into force . The agreement is the first in place of a free trade agreement between the two countries .
 Garcia had pushed vigorously for implementation of the agreement . The two countries had signed the agreement in 2006 . Garcia pushed for the agreement to be implemented .
 Peru was also pursuing free-trade agreements with several other countries . Peru was pursuing free trade agreements with the U.S. and several other nations .
 In September he pleaded guilty to the remaining bribery and wiretapping charges against him . He received an additional six years in prison for his part in the case .
 By pleading guilty Fujimori avoided a trial in which some 60 witnesses were expected to testify against him . The testimony could have proved politically damaging to his daughter, Keiko, in the upcoming 2011 presidential election .
 Keiko Fujimori, a member of Congress since 2006, had declared herself a candidate for president . She had stated publicly that she intended to pardon her father if she won the election .
 A local mayor, Andal Ampatuan, Jr., Jr., was charged with multiple counts of murder . The mayor is accused of killing multiple people in the deaths of several people .
 His father and brother were among 24 people charged with rebellion . His father was a former governor of the province and the leader of a clan that had long ruled Maguindanao . His brother was also among those charged .
 Peruvian Prime Minister Yehude Simon submitted a proposal to Congress to revoke two laws that had allowed the Peruvian Amazon region to be opened to development . Ampatuan, Jr., Peruvian prime minister Yehud Simon poses with Amazonian Indians .
 Residents of the town of San Pedro, south of Manila, were hit hard by a typhoon in late September . The town was hit by a wave of typhoons that swept across the country . The typhoon is believed to be the largest in the country's history .
 The victims were mutilated and buried in mass graves that had been dug in advance of the massacre . Mass graves were dug in the days before the massacre in which the victims were killed .
 Gloria Macapagal Arroyo declared a state of emergency and then martial law in the province . Martial law was not lifted until December 12 . The province was under martial law .
 Her political party expelled the Ampatuan clan, who had helped her in previous elections . Her party expelled her party from previous elections, and she was expelled from the country .
 Critics urged Arroyo to ban private political militias of the kind that dominated many parts of the Philippines . Critics urged the former president to ban the militias .
 In her state of the nation speech on July 27, Arroyo said that she had no desire to try to stay in power after her term ended in 2010 . In her speech, she said she would not try to keep power after 2010 .
 She touted the resilience of the country’s economy in the midst of the global financial crisis . She said the Philippines had enjoyed uninterrupted economic growth since she took office in 2001 . Moody's Investors Service had recently upgraded the country's credit rating .
 An estimated 30% of the country’s nearly 92 million people still live below the poverty line, however .
 Corazon Aquino, who served as president of the Philippines, died on August 1 . She was credited with restoring democratic institutions in the country after the dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos .
 More than 100,000 mourners marched in the rain during her funeral procession in Manila . Large crowds reminiscent of the ""people power” demonstrations that had helped oust Marcos from power three years after the assassination of Aquino’s husband, opposition leader Benigno Aquino,
 Fighting occurred sporadically throughout the year between government forces and two groups based in the southern Philippines . Government forces clashed with two groups in the south Philippines .
 The Moro Islamic Liberation Front had long sought independence for Muslim areas of the predominately Roman Catholic country . The other group was the al-Qaeda-affiliated Abu Sayyaf, which had been fighting for independence .
 MilF militants were also involved in the fighting, which claimed the lives of 23 government troops and 31 guerrillas . Militants were also fighting for control of the country .
 On September 21 government forces captured Abu Sayyaf’s main camp on the island of Jolo, killing some 19 militants . The camp was captured by government forces on September 21 .
 Manila experienced its heaviest rainfall in almost half a century—424. mm within 12 hours—on September 26 . The city was hit by a torrential rainstorm that lasted for 12 hours . Manila experienced the heaviest rain in almost 50 years .
 The downpour flooded 80% of the metropolitan area, displacing 380,000 people . Flooding displaced more than half of the city's population .
 This storm and two typhoons that hit the Philippines in October combined to kill more than 1,000 people . Two typhoons hit the country in October, killing more than 100 people .
 The coalition held a majority in the parliament with opposition split between the conservative Law and Justice party and the centre-left Democratic Left Alliance .
 The government had difficulties passing its legislative agenda owing to its lack of sufficient votes to override a presidential veto . In spite of this, the government had difficulty passing its agenda .
 The continuing power struggle between PM Donald Tusk, who led the PO, and Pres. Barack Obama, who was in charge of the European Union .
 Lech Kaczynski of the PiS had become a dominant feature of the Polish political scene . Lech was a dominant figure in the Polish politics .
 Tusk neglected to consult Waldemar Pawlak, the deputy prime minister and PSL leader, on government policy concerning the global economic crisis . In May some tensions emerged between Tusk and the coalition partners . Tusk said he did not consult the deputy PM, who held economic
 The PO unilaterally proposed legislation to eliminate government funding of political parties . The PO also proposed legislation that only legislation that the coalition partners jointly supported would be introduced in the parliament .
 Despite these conflicts, the coalition survived and was expected to govern until the end of its term in 2011 . The coalition survived despite these conflicts and is expected to last until 2011 .
 The PO attempted to broaden the base of its electoral support, particularly on the centre-left, by inviting politicians from other parties to run for EU seats as part of its slate .
 Poland's former prime minister Jerzy Buzek was elected president of the European Parliament for a two-and-a-half-year term . Former Polish prime minister Tusk was elected as president of European Parliament .
 In September, a scandal erupted that caused shock waves within the PO leadership . The scandal erupted in September .
 Three cabinet ministers, one deputy minister, and three other high-ranking government officials were dismissed from their posts . After allegations of corruption surfaced in connection with legislation pertaining to the country’s casino gaming industry, three others were dismissed .
 Poland finalized its ratification of the Lisbon Treaty on EU organization . Poland continued to rebuild its relations with Germany during the year . Poland also finalized its ratification of the treaty on EU organizations .
 The Polish parliament had approved the treaty in 2008, but President Kaczynski had refused to sign it until an Irish referendum on the treaty had passed . The Polish president had been expected to sign the treaty until after the Irish referendum passed .
 After Irish voters endorsed the treaty in October, Kaczynski finally initialed the document . The treaty was approved by Irish voters .
 PolishSwedish initiative was the first major EU proposal presented by Warsaw and accepted by all 27 EU member states . Poland is one of the most powerful countries in the EU, with Poland and Sweden .
 The goal of the project was to promote greater stability and security among countries on the EU’s eastern border . The EU's eastern border is the most important part of its eastern borders .
 Obama cancels plans for deployment of missile-defense system in Poland and Czech Republic . Obama announced plans for the deployment of the system had been canceled .
 The abrupt announcement was met with overwhelming criticism in Poland . It sparked an extensive debate on the state of current and future PolishUnited States relations .
 Joe Biden met with Tusk to discuss a new U.S. proposal . The proposal involves the possible stationing of a mobile antiballistic missile system known as the SM-3 .
 Consumer price inflation stood at 3.7% in August and was projected to stabilize at 3 .4% for the year . Inflation is projected to be stable for the rest of 2014 .
 The country’s unemployment rate during the second quarter was 10.8%—0.8 percent higher than during the same period the previous year . The unemployment rate is 0.8 per cent higher than in the previous quarter of 2013 .
 The government’s 2012 target date for joining the euro zone was canceled, and at least one official suggested 2014 or 2015 as a more realistic goal for adopting the euro .
 Despite the economic slowdown, Poland was still perceived as a relatively safe haven in terms of economic development . This view was supported by the decision of the IMF to grant Poland a flexible credit line .
 The PS secured 38% of the vote, giving it 97 seats in the 230seat parliament . PSD took 30% of vote, winning 81 seats, up from 75 . The PSD won 30% vote, taking 81 seats .
 Socrates would have to negotiate with at least one of the opposition parties to pass legislation . The move could complicate the annual budget procedure and other complex legislative initiatives .
 Many observers suggested that this fragility could lead to early elections . The fragility of Prime Minister Socrates and Pres. Socrates has been heightened by the heightened friction during the election campaign .
 The president had the power to both veto legislation and call for early elections . President Barack Obama had the option of calling for the early election .
 The international economic crisis continues to dominate the Portuguese political and business scenes . Portugal's economy continues to struggle to cope with the global crisis .
 GDP collapsed in the first two quarters of the year, dropping 3.7% compared with the same period in 2008 . But by late summer there were increasing signs that the worst of the storm had passed .
 Portugal is subject to a largely symbolic excessive-deficit procedure . The EU limits the budget gap to 3% of GDP . This prompted the EU to subject Portugal and several other EU countries to a similar procedure .
 Unemployment rate hit 9.1% in August . Fears of continued economic turmoil led consumers to put off purchase of durable goods and homes .
 The government continued to invest in alternative energy projects in areas such as electric automobiles, solar energy, and wave power .
 Socrates announced a pilot project to equip Portugal’s existing gas stations with a recharging system for electric vehicles . Socrates announced the project in a bid to equip the country's existing stations with recharging systems .
 The equipment would be installed nationwide by 2011, when electric cars were expected to be broadly available . Electric cars would be widely available by 2011 .
 In the solar sector a group of investors was reportedly mulling the construction of a gigantic field of photovoltaic panels in the sun-drenched Alentejo region that would be capable of generating 2,000 MW of electricity . Enough to be viable for sale to export markets,
 This monumental project would require an investment of up to about $8. billion . It would be funded with subsidies from the European Union and the Portuguese government, as well as private capital, but could take up to seven years to complete .
 Officials blamed recent earthquakes in the region, which may have loosened the rocks . Officials blamed the accident on recent earthquakes .
 In the wake of the tragedy, security measures were heightened at all of the country’s beaches with cliffs with cliffs . Security measures have been heightened in the aftermath .
 In 2009 Qatar continued its trajectory of economic growth . The country's capital is Doha .
 Qatar remained one of the world’s fastest-growing economies . Despite high inflation, Qatar ranked as one of its richest, as measured by income per capita .
 The country's enhanced material well-being was buttressed by the growth of the government’s sovereign wealth fund and ongoing fiscal surpluses . The government's wealth fund has grown in recent years .
 Qatar remained the world leader in natural gas exports, which for the first time exceeded its foreign sales of petroleum . In addition, Qatar's natural gas export sales exceeded its sales of the country's petroleum . Qatar remains the world .
 Qatar Airways was declared the World's Leading Airline-Business Class for the second consecutive year . In November, at the 16th annual World Travel Awards convention in London, Qatar Airways won the title . Qatar Airways is the world's leading airline in business class .
 The airline also received accolades for its role as a bridge between Qatar and the world’s leading hydrocarbon fuelimporting countries .
 Plans for the construction of the strategic Qatar-Bahrain Friendship Bridge continued throughout 2009 . The bridge will be built between Qatar and Bahrain .
 The causeway was expected to greatly reduce transit time between the two countries . Touted as certain to become the world’s largest transportation link over water, the causeway is expected to be world's largest . It is also expected to reduce transit times between the countries .
 Qatar hosted international conferences on issues such as democracy, free trade, and multifaith dialogue . Politically, Qatar maintained its efforts to serve as a bridge between the West and the Arab and Islamic worlds .
 It continued to serve as a mediator in intraregional conflicts involving Chad, Lebanon, Palestine, The Sudan, and Yemen . It entered into an agreement with Saudi Arabia that delineated the two countries’ shared boundaries .
 Qatar helped end a dispute between Chad and The Sudan . The results of Qatar’s mediatory efforts were mixed .
 In 2009 Qatar added branch campuses of Australian and Canadian institutions of higher learning in Education City, located on the outskirts of Doha . Qatar added branches of Australia and Canada institutions in 2009 .
 Qatar hosted what was touted internationally as the world’s first-ever education summit . Qatar hosted the summit in November . In November Qatar hosted an international education summit in Qatar .
 Twenty years after the 1989 revolution that saw communism replaced by a fragile democratic system, politics remains badly polarized . 20 years after that, politics remained badly polarized.
 Personal rivalries were reinforced by disputes over what should be the pace and extent of moving toward a fully pluralist system . The system would be able to check the influence of powerful economic groups .
 Prime Minister Emil Boc negotiated a $27 billion loan with the IMF and other lenders . Facing an impending revenue crisis, he negotiated the loan with IMF and others lenders .
 The aid, which was approved in May, was conditional on Romania’s making deep cuts in the public sector, which employed one-third of the labour force . The aid was agreed in May but the aid is conditional on deep cuts to public sector .
 IMF also demands that steps be taken to increase the efficiency of the bureaucracy . IMF also demanded that steps were taken to make the bureaucracy more efficient .
 These and other reforms, however, became a casualty of worsening infighting between the government partners . The government partners have been at odds with each other for years .
 In September, Boc dismissed the interior minister from the government over disagreements about the conduct of the presidential elections scheduled for November 22 . Boc also dismissed the PSD interior minister .
 After losing a vote of confidence in the parliament in October, Boc remained in the post of interim prime minister . The president failed to nominate a successor who was able to command a parliamentary majority . Boc has been in power since October .
 The bitterly fought presidential election campaign centred on the record and character of the incumbent, Traian Basescu . The bitterly-fought presidential election was held in Romania's capital, Romania, on Sunday .
 A powerful set of opponents, extending beyond politics to include big business and much of the media, saw him as an abrasive figure intent on broadening the powers of the presidency to secure a personal ascendancy .
 PSD leader Mircea Geoana said that the president should act as an arbiter between different interests within the political elite . Geoana's party rallied around the president, saying he should be arbiter of interest .
 Basescu and his supporters, chiefly to be found in the PDL, argued that the PSD wished to entrench the privileges of an unaccountable elite, many of whose members had been intercepting state funds over a long period .
 He campaigned on an agenda of reforming state institutions . Changes included strengthening the representative role of the parliament and relaunching efforts to depoliticize the justice system .
 Basescu’s campaign was damaged by the open hostility of the major televisions stations, including the main state broadcaster . The state broadcaster was critical of the campaign .
 Romanian Pres. Geoana was likely to have lost if Geoana had not turned out . Geoana turned out to celebrate his reelection in a landslide .
 Traian Basescu waves his country’s flag in front of a crowd of supporters on December 6 . The Romanian Prime Minister is expected to win the presidency in 2016 .
 Basescu trounced him in a television debate on December 3, 72 hours before the deciding second round of voting .
 The overwhelming backing of the Romanian diaspora, especially in Western Europe, he would have lost if he had lost . But for the overwhelming backing he would not have lost, especially for the Romanians, the vote was crucial .
 PSD claimed that there had been widespread vote fraud and appealed to the Constitutional Court to overturn the result . The state electoral commission confirmed the result, but PSD appealed to Constitutional Court members .
 The court found no grounds for taking this action, however, and Basescu began his second term on December 16 . The court finds no grounds to take this action .
 The proBasescu PDL formed a coalition government with an ethnic Hungarian party and several independent lawmakers . The parliament approved Basescu’s renomination of Boc as prime minister . Boc is the prime minister of Romania .
 IMF refused to release the third tranche of the rescue loan without firm evidence that the next government would agree to carry out necessary austerity measures . New government quickly approved a draft budget for 2010, but it still needed parliamentary approval . IMF refuses to release third loan without evidence that next government will
 The economic outlook appeared gloomy for many ordinary citizens unless politicians could put aside their deep-seated quarrels and turn their attention to the economy . Politicians must put aside deep-sated quabbies and focus on the economy.
 In 2008 Vladimir Putin relinquished presidential power to his handpicked successor, Dmitry Medvedev, and himself assumed the less-powerful role of prime minister . Putin had served the maximum of two consecutive presidential terms permitted by the constitution .
 Press reports made much of occasional signs of tension or disagreement between the president and the prime minister . But in general the tandem appeared to be working smoothly .
 Putin oversaw the government and the economy . Assisted by First Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov . He also retained the decisive voice in foreign and security affairs .
 Medvedev kept a high profile, but observers pointed to the fact that he remained surrounded by Putin appointees . Observers said he had virtually no team to call his own .
 Medvedev lacked the resources to sponsor any legislation that did not have Putin's blessing . In addition to the lack of resources, Medvedeva lacked the funds to sponsor legislation . Putin's approval of any legislation would have to be approved by him .
 The United Russia party, which dominated the State Duma, remained loyal to Putin . This was because of the United Russia Party, which was loyal to him .
 Medvedev did not yet have a deciding voice in either foreign or domestic politics, says Putin . Putin's position was taken as proof that he is not yet in a decision-making role .
 Medvedev issued a number of signals during the year suggesting that he might harbour hopes of steering Russia in a more liberal and reform-oriented direction . The Russian prime minister is expected to take office in 2015 .
 He spoke out repeatedly against corruption in public life, criticized bureaucratic mismanagement . He said the state had sharply increased its role in the economy in recent years, but this should be only a temporary phenomenon .
 He invited responses to his ideas from the general public, and he built on these in his annual address to Russian parliament in November .
 In that speech Medvedev repeated his call for comprehensive and ambitious modernization . He also called for comprehensive modernization of the country .
 Elections were held in October in 75 regions, and according to the official results, United Russia won an overwhelming victory . United Russia was elected in October .
 Popular support for both Putin and Medvedev remained high despite allegations of vote rigging . Three opposition parties briefly walked out of the State Duma in protest .
 Opinion polls indicated that while many members of the population were anxious about the fall in their living standards caused by the global financial crisis, they did not blame the tandem for their hardships . Polls indicated that many people were not anxious about their fall in living standards .
 The results of the October regional elections suggested that the ""social contract” that some believed had been struck by the Putin leadership could be broken with impunity by the political leadership . This, and the results of regional elections, suggest that the social contract’s 'social contract' could
 Kremlin continues to show signs of extreme nervousness about the possibility of political instability . Even so, the Kremlin continued to show .
 Putin showed signs of increasing confidence as the financial crisis receded . Putin has shown increasing confidence in Russia in recent months .
 There was already widespread speculation that he would return to the presidency in 2012 . Medvedev’s first term in office ended in December 2012 . He is expected to be re-elected to a second term .
 Putin declared in September that he and Medvedev would not run against one another in the 2012 election . Putin declared that he would come to an agreement beforehand to avoid a run against each other .
 Putin hints he might be considering returning to the Kremlin . This is the strongest hint Putin has given thus far given that he might return to Russia . Putin has not commented on the possibility of a return to Moscow .
 Medvedev appeared to concur, echoing Putin’s comments a few days later and speaking of the ""common vision"" uniting him and the prime minister . Medvedeva appeared to agree with Putin and spoke of the 'common vision' uniting them .
 Medvedev professed his readiness to establish a dialogue with civil society . On the one hand, he said he was willing to establish dialogue with the Russian public . Medvedeva has said he is willing to engage in dialogue with Russia's political opponents .
 He revived the Presidential Human Rights Council (which had been established by Putin in 2004 but later had fallen into abeyance) He appointed several outspoken critics to it .
 Threats and attacks against human rights activists and journalists increased in 2009 . Attacks against journalists and activists increased in number in 2009, says Amnesty International .
 Human rights lawyer Stanislav Markelov was murdered less than a kilometre from the Kremlin . He had defended people who had complained of being beaten and tortured by Russian special police forces .
 Also shot dead was Anastasiya Baburova, a young journalist who had been accompanying Markelov . She had tried to come to his assistance, but was shot dead .
 In March the well-known human rights campaigner Lev Ponomarev was beaten outside his home in Moscow . In March he was beaten by police in a bid to protect his rights .
 In July the courageous human rights defender Natalya Estemirova was abducted outside her home in Grozny, the capital of Chechnya, was abducted . In July she was abducted by the government in Chechnyans .
 Zarema Sadulayeva, head of a Chechen children’s charity, and her husband were abducted and murdered near Grozny . Less than a month later, Zarem Sadulayseva and her family were abducted .
 Russia remained a dangerous country for journalists; five were killed in 2009 . Five journalists died in Russia last year .
 Anna Politkovskaya, Russia's best-known opposition journalist and human rights defender, was murdered in 2006 . Four men accused of helping to organize her murder were acquitted in February . The man whom prosecutors accused of carrying out the assassination remained at large .
 Critics complained that the investigation and the trial had been botched . In June, the Supreme Court ordered a new judge and jury to hear the case .
 The November death in pretrial detention of Sergey Magnitsky provoked an outcry both in Russia and abroad . The lawyer had been working on behalf of a Western investment fund . He was arrested in Russia in November and died in prison .
 10 years after then president Putin sent troops into Chechnya, Medvedev officially ended the ""counterterrorism operation"" against insurgents in the breakaway republic . In April, 10 years later, then Russian president Putin formally ended the operation .
 The situation in the North Caucasus, however, showed little sign of normalizing . The situation is continuing to deteriorate .
 Ramzan Kadyrov was shot dead in Vienna; he had earlier accused him of torture . He had accused Ramzan of torture; he was killed in a car crash . Ramzan was shot by police in Vienna, Austria .
 In March, Sulim Yamadayev, one of Kadyrov’s bitter foes, was shot dead in Dubai . Sulim Yamsayev was one of his bitter foes .
 In neighbouring republics of Dagestan and Ingushetiya, the violence increased . Meanwhile, in neighbouring republic, Dagestans and Ingustan, violence continued .
 Suicide bombings once again became common . Shoot-outs were reported on an almost daily basis . Suicide bombings were common in the 1980s .
 In June the president of Ingushetiya, Yunus-Bek Yevkurov, was nearly killed by a suicide bomber . In June he was almost killed by the suicide bomber in Ingushiya . The country's capital, Ingushya, has been hit by
 In November a bomb derailed an express train traveling between Moscow and St. Petersburg, Russia . The train was traveling between Russia and the U.S.
 Russia recorded its first annual population expansion since 1995, with an increase to 141 million in 2009 . Russia's population has increased to 141.6 million in 2010 .
 This was the result of an increase in the birth rate, a decline in mortality rates, and an influx of immigrants . The birth rate has increased in the past decade .
 Russia was severely hit by the global financial crisis . Falling oil prices and the general economic slowdown both took their toll . Russia's economy has been hit hard by the fall in recent years .
 Russia entered the crisis with a strong budget, balance of payments, and reserves . The downturn followed a decade of rapid economic growth fueled by high and rising energy prices . Since this downturn followed the downturn, Russia entered this year's crisis .
 Policy makers were able to cover a budget deficit on the order of 8% of GDP, mainly by drawing down the reserve fund that had been built up from oil and gas revenues .
 The scale of the recession in Russia was greater than many had expected . Even so, many had been surprised by the extent of the impact on the economy .
 Many investors, both Russian and foreign, have reacted to the crisis by reducing their investment activity in Russia . They perceived underlying weaknesses in its economic institutions, such as the weak rule of law and the poor protection of property rights, they say .
 Corruption was endemic and, despite a number of high-profile initiatives, showed no sign of decreasing . Corruption is endemic and showed no signs of decreasing, says the BBC .
 There was much hopeful speculation by liberal intellectuals that the economic crisis would force the leadership to liberalize both economically and politically . The economic crisis led to the collapse of the United States .
 The most astute Russian analysts saw little prospect of radical reform that would introduce real competition into either the economy or the political system .
 Fears that the crisis would push leadership toward more interventionist policies proved unfounded . Authorities did not—as many had predicted they would—exploit the crisis to take control of large deeply indebted companies .
 Foreign creditors of cashstrapped Russian energy and metals companies had little appetite for taking assets offered as collateral into their own hands, and they restructured loans on a generous basis .
 This proved advantageous to tycoons such as Oleg Deripaska and Roman Abramovich, who, though relatively impoverished, were not as weakened as originally anticipated . This was not as much as originally thought, but it proved advantageous .
 In October Putin announced that as in previous years, there would be some privatization in 2010 and 2011, partly to pursue the reform agenda . Foreign investors would be able to take part .
 Unemployment rose from less than 6% in the summer of 2008 to 10% in March 2009 . Unemployment in the United States is now 10% . Unemployment is now at a record high .
 First, some workers who had lost their jobs (including a number of previously employed pensioners) dropped out of the workforce altogether . Second, some of those who had been employed in the UK have been found to have dropped out .
 Federal and regional governments pressured employers to halt sackings . Foreign firms operating in Russia, such as Renault, were also pressured to stop sacking . Renault: "It's a job for Russia, not for Russia"
 Regional unemployment data showed that the crisis was affecting the regions in very different ways . Regional unemployment figures show that unemployment rates are rising in some regions .
 Those hardest hit were the so-called metallurgical regions, where industry is dominated by steel and nonferrous-metals production .
 Least hard-hit were the poorest regions that had traditionally relied on the federal centres for financial subsidies, including many parts of the North Caucasus . Least-hard-hit areas were regions that relied heavily on federal centres .
 Many workers suffered wage arrears or shortened workweeks or were forced to take unpaid leave . Many workers were forced into unpaid leave or had to be taken off work weeks . Workers were also forced to go unpaid leave from their jobs .
 There were fears that ""monotowns” (industrial settlements created in the Soviet period around a single industry or factory) would become a locus of social unrest . There were also fears that industrial settlements created around a one industry would be a place of unrest .
 In fact, though there were protests in such towns, they remained small and isolated . The protests in these towns remained small, isolated, isolated .
 By the autumn there were signs that the Russian economy was emerging from recession . Russia's economy was seen to be recovering from the recession .
 Each month's output remained below the level of the corresponding month of 2008 . But the changes from one month to the next became positive in June and remained so in June . The third quarter's output in the third quarter was above that in the second quarter .
 Oil prices had fallen as low as $35 a barrel in December 2008 . By October 2009 oil prices had recovered to more than $80 a barrel a barrel .
 In August an accident at Russia’s largest hydroelectric power station, 75 people were killed . The accident was seen as a worrying sign of the erosion of basic infrastructure and the state's failure to tackle it .
 Putin surprised U.S. and EU negotiators by announcing that Russia was withdrawing its application to join the WTO only with its customs union partners Kazakhstan and Belarus . In June Putin announced that Russia would withdraw its application and would seek to join WTO only together with its Customs Union partners .
 The following month, however, Medvedev appeared to reverse this position, and Russia returned to the negotiating table . The next month, though, Russia appeared to reversed this position .
 The severity of the economic crisis brought wide—if not universal—acceptance within the elite that economic modernization was an urgent necessity . Economic modernization is an important part of the world's future .
 The elite was sharply divided, however, over what form the reforms should take . The elite is divided on what form of the reforms will take .
 According to a conservative wing, the financial crisis had been provoked by Western financial mismanagement . It would eventually blow over, and oil prices would rise again, the conservative wing of the party says .
 Russia should sit it out and then, when times are better, pursue modernization by investing in cutting-edge technology . Russia should also sit out of the crisis and pursue modernization, says the Russian minister .
 Representatives of this group were believed to include Deputy Prime Minister Igor Sechin and the director general of the Russian Technologies state corporation, Sergey Chemezov .
 As the crisis deepened, he began calling for greater social spending and intervening personally to ward off social unrest .
 Russia’s economic problems were structural and required systemic reform, experts say . Meanwhile, the so-called pessimist wing believed that it would not be enough to wait for oil prices to rise again . Russia's economic problems are structural and require systemic reform .
 Medvedev himself appeared to subscribe to this view, as did Finance Minister Aleksey Kudrin, presidential economic adviser Arkady Dvorkovich, and First Deputy PM Igor Shuvalov .
 The pessimists are divided over whether political and judicial reforms are needed as well as economic modernization . They are divided on whether political, judicial reforms need to be implemented .
 The revelation of Russia’s economic vulnerability did little to reduce the assertiveness with which the country approached the outside world . Russia's assertiveness towards the other former Soviet states on its borders has little to do with .
 Moscow halted gas deliveries to Ukraine, and supplies to southeastern Europe were disrupted for two weeks in the middle of winter . As a result, Moscow halved gas supplies to Ukraine and southeastern Europe .
 The main focus of attention throughout the year was on efforts to improve relations between Russia and the United States . Russia had been gratified by NATO’s decision, announced in December 2008, not to grant membership action plans to Ukraine and Georgia .
 After Presidents Obama and Medvedev met in London in April, the two countries began serious negotiations over renewing the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks I treaty . The two countries met in April in London to renew the treaty .
 Talks between Russia and the U.S. on a new accord continued beyond year’s end . The treaty expired on Dec. 31, 2009, but discussions continued beyond that .
 When Obama visited Moscow in July, he and Medvedev signed an agreement by which Moscow would allow the transit of supplies across Russian territory to U.S. troops in Afghanistan . The deal was reached in July .
 Russia also responded to Obama’s September decision to halt plans to establish ballistic missile defenses in Poland and the Czech Republic . Moscow also announced that Moscow would suspend its threat to deploy short-range nuclear missiles to its Kaliningrad exclave . Russia also suspended plans to deploy nuclear missiles
 In October Putin paid an official visit to China, during which Russia and China signed dozens of commercial deals . The two countries also concluded a major framework agreement on the delivery of Russian gas supplies to China .
 Russia's 2008 war with Georgia had brought serious problems to Russia's military . Russian President Vladimir Putin has declared victory in the war against Georgia . Russia has launched a program of military reform to tackle the problem .
 In May Medvedev approved a new national security strategy that recognizes that Russian security is threatened as much by internal problems as by external challenges . Russia's security was threatened by internal issues as much as external challenges, the Kremlin says .
 By 2009, 15 years after the 1994 genocide, Rwanda had become a model of post-conflict recovery . Paul Kagame, assisted by Prime Minister Bernard Makuza, was in charge of Rwanda .
 In November the restoration of diplomatic relations between Rwanda and France (severed three years earlier) settled a dispute about responsibility for the genocide . In November, the countries restored diplomatic relations .
 The following month Rwanda was declared free of land mines; it was the first country to realize this status . Rwanda was first country in the world to declare itself free from land mines .
 Rwanda’s economy grew at an estimated rate of 8-9% during the year . Growth was fueled mainly by an expanding industrial base and excellent crop harvests .
 Even though the country’s major exports dropped by nearly 20%, the tourist industry yielded regular foreign exchange . The tourist industry is a major source of foreign exchange in the Philippines .
 Rwandans abroad congratulated the government for its successful rebuilding efforts and for reducing corruption . Rwanda Diaspora Global Network congratulated Rwanda's government on its success .
 Rwanda is the second member of the Commonwealth with no formal historical ties to Britain . Saint Vincent and the Grenadines November 28 Rwanda was admitted to the Commonwealth .
 In September the World Bank ranked Rwanda as the top global business reformer for 2010 . Rwanda was ranked as the most successful country in the world for business reform .
 Improvements in coffee quality and production reflected the country’s socioeconomic recovery . Rwandan brands making significant inroads in overseas specialty markets .
 International and local courts continued hearings on crimes connected to the 1994 genocide . The UN extended the term of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to December 2010 .
 The Netherlands and Canada each handed down long prison sentences to Rwandans charged with war crimes . Great Britain, Switzerland, and several other European countries refused to extradite genocide suspects on grounds they would not receive a fair trial .
 The government carried out a five-week joint military operation with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, beginning in January . Meanwhile, the government was stung by international criticism that it had actively encouraged rebel militias involved in hostile operations in eastern Congo .
 Joseph Kabila met in Goma to restore diplomatic relations between the two countries . Diplomatic relations had been severed in 1996, but they were restored this week . Kabila and Kabila are the two leaders of Congo Congo .
 It was the first time that a geothermal source had been used to generate electricity in the Caribbean . It was also the first use of geothermal energy in the region .
 The power was to be sold initially to a local utility, NEVLEC, and eventually exported to Saint Kitts and farther afield in the region .
 In July, during a summit of the African Union held in Libya, Prime Minister Denzil Douglas announced Saint Kitts and Nevis had been proposed as the headquarters of a Libyan Development Bank .
 Saint Kitts and Nevis led the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States in signing the Treaty of Basseterre in 2009 . The Treaty provided for the establishment of an OECS economic union .
 A commission of inquiry established by Nevis Island Premier Joseph Parry to investigate the administration of former premier Vance Amory proceeded during the year, albeit with some hitches .
 On December 15, Prime Minister Douglas dissolved the National Assembly, paving the way for elections early in 2010 . On Dec. 15, prime minister Douglas dissolved parliament .
 The work stoppage was organized by the umbrella Trade Union Federation . The stoppage is part of a weeklong series of events .
 The workers returned to work in early June following the government’s agreement to a 4.1% pay boost . The government agreed to the deal in June after the strike .
 The program and its funds were designed to ease balance-of-payments pressures, shore up external reserves, and serve as a catalyst for further support from the international donor community . The program is intended to ease balances of payments pressures .
 In July the IMF said that it expected Saint Lucia’s GDP to contract by 2.5% in 2009 and unemployment to increase substantially . The IMF said in July that Saint Lucia's GDP would contract by about 3% .
 The local authorities appointed accounting firm KPMG to assume control of the bank’s affairs . Local authorities have appointed accounting agency KPMg to assume charge .
 SEC alleged money placed by depositors was funneled into a U.S. bank account that was used as a personal “piggy bank” by the American principals . SEC alleged that depositors placed money into a United States bank account .
 In April, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines was accepted as a member of Venezuelan Pres. Pres. Carpies . The country was accepted into the Venezuelan government in April .
 Samoa group, promoted by Chavez as a more “socialist” path to development than U.S.-led free trade based on market principles . Samoa group is a more 'socialist' path to . development than free trade .
 Fears expressed that the aims of the two bodies might be contradictory . Saint Vincent and the Grenadines had been a member of the Caribbean Community for decades .
 On November 25 voters strongly rejected a proposed new constitution that would have removed the British monarch as chief of state . Voters strongly rejected the proposal .
 Decline in imports, inflation rate of 13%, tourism and remittances from expatriate Samoans . Decline of American Samoan tuna canneries and closure of U.S. tuna cannerys .
 Producers of the reality television show Survivor filmed two seasons of the program in Samoa . Some relief occurred when producers of the show filmed the two seasons in the country .
 The tsunami generated a major aid initiative from regional neighbours and diasporic Samoans . The tsunami was a major disaster in the region .
 Broad-based opposition led to the formation of a new political coalition and to ongoing legal challenges to the government . Broad-backed opposition to the new government led to formation of new political parties .
 The final challenge was dismissed by courts in August, and the change occurred on September 7 . The change occurred without the predicted spike in road accidents .
 Nine independent members united to form Tautua Samoa, an opposition party . The speaker declared their seats vacant and scheduled byelections in their electorates .
 The dismissed members took the matter to the Supreme Court, which ordered the members to return to the parliament and canceled the by-elections . The Supreme Court also ordered the return of the dismissed members to parliament and cancels the elections .
 In a country heavily dependent on international trade, the decline in imports significantly hurt state revenues . Tax revenues fell as economic activities shrank, leaving state revenues falling .
 The government is eager to invest more in tourism, a critical if troubled sector . While banking and manufacturing remained important sectors of the economy, tourism was important .
 The number of tourists had dropped sharply in recent years to little more than two million annual visits . The decline was attributed in part to the republic’s tarnished image in some of the international press .
 Tourism decreased by only 1.1% in the first half of 2009, after having dropped 17% in first quarter . Tourism dropped by 17% during the first quarter of 2009 .
 In response to the drop in tourism, the government earmarked new investments for the transport infrastructure, hospitality resources, the creation of new cultural events, and the revitalization of the historic centre .
 The year was also important in normalization of the republic’s standing with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development .
 San Marino, long considered an international tax haven, was admitted to a ""gray list” of countries working to achieve full compliance with international financial and banking standards . San Marino is now working to become a fully compliant member of the world's financial world .
 San Marino reached that number by the end of the year . San Marino was required to sign 12 bilateral agreements for economic collaboration with as many foreign partners .
 Saudi Arabia success notwithstanding, the republic’s most important trading partner, Italy, still refused to sign an agreement of economic and fiscal collaboration . Italy is the country's most important trade partner .
 The government’s decision in May to postpone regional and municipal elections was much criticized, especially in Principe . The decision was probably delayed until 2010, when a legislative election was due .
 Nigeria remained Sao Tome and Principe’s leading oil-production partner in the joint Development Zone . Attempts were made to involve Angola, and the United States showed increasing interest in extracting oil .
 In March 2009 the IMF approved a new poverty-reduction and growth facility program . Though allegations of corruption continued, some of them relating to the misappropriation of donor funding .
 Portugal remained the largest donor, and donor funding was expected to meet 80% of the country’s budget . Portugal remained largest donor .
 The amount of oil and gas that could be obtained from the waters off the archipelago, however, remained unclear . Oil and gas could be found in the waters of the islands .
 Additional payments of signature bonuses by the oil companies were expected . There were disputes over the oil blocks that resulted in the delay of those payments .
 Local elections, begun in 2004, had been considered a step toward reform . Local elections in 2004 were considered a sign of reform .
 Efforts to make Saudi Arabia a hub for scientific learning and research continued in 2009 . Efforts by Saudi Arabia to make the country a hub to scientific learning continue in 2009.
 Some conservatives criticized the coed university . Men and women allowed men and women to take classes together .
 Relations between Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates faced several challenges in 2009 . Relations between the UAE and Saudi Arabia have been strained in recent years .
 In May the U.A.E. decided to pull out of the Gulf Cooperation Council monetary union . Saudi Arabia announced that Riyadh would be the centre of the GCC central bank .
 Riyadh also asked its neighbour to remove from its national identification card a map of the U.A.E. that included disputed territory linking Qatar with Qatar . Saudi Arabia also removed a map that included the disputed territory of Qatar .
 In late August Saudi Arabia required U.A.E. nationals to exclusively use passports in order to enter the kingdom . Saudi Arabia has been known to crack down on the use of passports in recent months .
 In early June, ahead of his Cairo speech, U.S. Pres. Obama addressed the Muslim world in Cairo .
 In October, King 'Abd Allah visited Syria, the first trip to that country by a Saudi ruler since the 2005 assassination of Saudi-backed Lebanese statesman Rafiq al-Hariri .
 In August, Deputy Interior Minister Prince Muhammad ibn Nayef survived an attempted assassination . The first time that a royal family member had been targeted, it was the first attempt to kill a royal .
 Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the Saudi arm of al-Qaeda, claimed responsibility for the attack . The Saudi-led group is known for its brutality .
 Some suggested the incident might end speculation that al-Qaeda was evading direct confrontation with the royal family . Some suggested that the incident may end speculation about the possibility of a confrontation .
 In 2009 the Shi'ite al-Houthi rebellion in northern Yemen spilled across Saudi borders . The rebellion was met with Saudi air strikes and shelling . In 2009, the rebellion spilled across the Saudi border .
 Saudi naval blockage along Yemeni shores was meant to stop the supposed delivery of Iranian supplies to the rebels . There were accusations that Iran was supporting the insurgents, and a Saudi blockage .
 The IMF ranked Saudi Arabia first among the Arab countries in economic position . The IMF said Saudi Arabia was the most important Arab country to be in economic terms .
 Shi'ite al-Houthi rebellion in northern Yemen has displaced thousands of refugees . In 2009 inflation subsided from around Yemen .
 In June, Saudi Aramco and France Total agreed to invest $9. billion to build the Jubayl oil refinery . The refinery is expected to produce 400,000 bbl daily . Aramco says it will be the first major refinery in Saudi Arabia to open .
 The refinery was one of four planned refineries meant to boost domestic capacity from 2. million to 3. million bbl daily . The refinery is one of the planned ref refineries to be built in a bid to boost capacity .
 Saudi Arabia sacrificed billions of dollars in revenue in 2009 by cutting output to prop up the price of crude oil . In 2009, Saudi Arabia cut output in a bid to keep oil prices stable .
 The PDS continued to dominate rural areas, but a coalition of opposition parties won control of councils in Dakar, Saint-Louis, and other large cities . Bennoo Siggil Senegaal took control of Dakar and other cities .
 Abdoulaye Wade’s son, Karim Wade, gain his first public position as a Dakar municipal councillor . Karim is a member of the Dakar city council .
 Many began to see him as a possible successor to his father's government . Shortly thereafter he was appointed to a ministry post in his father’s government .
 On June 2 Parliament voted to create the post of vice president, but President Wade did not sign it into law by year's end . President Wade has not signed the post into law .
 Air Senegal International ceased operations on April 24 . Dispute over control of airline between Senegalese government and airline's majority stockholder, Royal Air Maroc .
 The demise of Air Senegal was a blow to tourism in Senegal . Tourism had already been hard-pressed by the global economic downturn .
 The European Union announced in early August that it would give nearly $16 million to Senegal to assist the estimated 460,000 people unable to afford adequate food . The EU announced in August it would help the country's poorest people .
 The U.S. Millennium Challenge Corporation approved a five-year, $540 million grant to Senegal for improvements in agriculture and infrastructure . On September 7 the United States Millennium Challenge Corp. approved the grant . The grant will be used to improve Senegal's infrastructure and agriculture .
 Serbia had signed the Stabilization and Association Agreement in April 2008 . Serbia and Serbia signed the agreement in 2008 . In April 2008 Serbia signed an agreement to stabilize the country .
 Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic, former leader of Croatia's Krajina Serbija Serb, are former leaders of the Croatian Serbijijija . Ratko had been the leader of the Bosnian Serbians in the 1990s .
 The Dutch government lifted its opposition after a report by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia’s chief prosecutor, Serge Brammertz, stated that Serbia made “constant progress” in efforts to cooperate with the court .
 Serbia would be able to attract more foreign investment and expand trade with EU member states . The move would thus enable Serbia to attract investment and trade with the EU .
 In July the National Assembly passed the Act on Regional Development in an effort to equalize economic development . The Act aims to reduce differences between developed and undeveloped parts of the country . It aims to deal with regional imbalances due to an aging population .
 Government figures showed that average incomes in Belgrade were 19 times larger than those in the eastern part of the country .
 Some food prices in Serbia were among the highest in southeastern Europe . According to Eurostat, Serbia's food prices are among the most expensive in the region .
 The average family of three in Serbia spent more than 40% of its income on food . The average Serbian family spends 40 per cent of its earnings on food per year .
 Serbian Chamber of Commerce reported salaries were being paid 45 days late in the country's poorest areas . Fears of potential social unrest as salaries are being paid in the poorest areas of the country .
 The World Bank approved a $400 million loan to assist the Serbian budget for 2009 and 2010 . The loan was approved to assist Serbia's budget for 2010 and 2011 . Serbia is one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 Russia approved a loan package amounting to about $1 billion, of which $200 million was earmarked for Serbia’s budget . Russia approved the loan package, which includes $400 million for Serbia's budget .
 Serbia’s central bank reported a dramatic rise in the number of insolvent companies . Some 13,000 company accounts were blocked in 2009, bringing the total to 63,000 businesses that owed €3 billion .
 Companies were also indebted to the government for about €655 million in unpaid taxes . Companies also owed €655m in unpaid tax payments .
 Little progress was achieved in reforming the education system in light of the increasing demands for a highly trained and diversified labour force needed to compete in the global economy .
 Only 10% of the population had completed a postsecondary education . Only about 10% had completed an education .
 The EU reported that civil and political rights improved in Serbia . Rights of minority rights were largely respected in Serbia, the EU reported .
 Observers expressed concern over sporadic violence and divisions within Muslim communities in the region of Sandzak . The region's Muslim communities have deep divisions within the Muslim communities .
 Tensions were also on the rise in the northern autonomous province of Vojvodina and in the predominantly ethnic Albanian region of the Presevo Valley . Activists were demanding autonomy and possible unification with neighbouring Kosovo .
 Sierra Leone a statute giving the ethnically mixed region a new constitution . Sierra Leone's constitution was passed by Sierra Leone in 2007 .
 This would allow the province more legislative, diplomatic, and economic autonomy . The province would be given more legislative and diplomatic powers . This would give the province a greater autonomy .
 The move partially restored Vojvodina’s autonomy, which it had lost in the late 1980s . The move, which was approved by Serbia's parliament, had been approved by the Serbian parliament .
 The Coast Guard opened a monitoring and rescue centre in cooperation with the International Maritime Organization . The centre is in support of the international effort to stem the increase in Indian Ocean piracy .
 In November Seychelles agreed to allow EU forces to police against pirates in waters off Seycheles . In November EU forces were allowed to patrol waters off the island nation in waters of the Seeses .
 The country entered into a joint agreement with neighbouring Mauritius concerning the continental shelf both island countries share . Mauritius entered into the agreement with the country in 2007 . The agreement is based on the shared continental shelf .
 The agreement ensured that both countries would retain rights to deep-sea drilling, mining, and ocean-conservation efforts . The agreement was reached by both countries .
 Frederick Egonda-Ntende was sworn in as the chief justice of the Seychelles Supreme Court in August . He is a former Ugandan High Court judge and former judge of Uganda's High Court .
 He replaced Justice Andrew Ranjan Perera, who had retired from the post earlier in 2009 . He replaced Mr Perera in 2010 .
 The Seychellois government entered into an agreement with the U.N. Development Programme to improve the transparency, accountability, and efficiency of its judiciary . The Seyschellois govt. entered into a deal with the UN to improve transparency of the judiciary .
 The country's economic outlook began to improve in the third quarter, however, with a gradual recovery in mining and agricultural exports . The country’s economic outlook is expected to improve .
 IMF missions to Sierra Leone commended the government for staying on course with its monetary policies despite the challenging economic conditions worldwide . Sierra Leone is one of two countries in the world that has experienced a difficult economic climate .
 Ernest Bai Koroma opened Parliament on October 9 with an upbeat account of his government’s progress in implementing its Agenda for Change . The government has an ambitious strategy for achieving economic diversification, boosting agricultural productivity, developing tourism, expanding education and expanding education .
 The discovery of a deepwater oil field off the coast of Sierra Leone held the promise of relief from the country’s dependence on the diamond industry . Sierra Leone is dependent on its diamond industry, which has been heavily dependent on oil .
 Former British prime minister Tony Blair visited the country in April to promote the revival of its tourist industry .
 Sierra Leone had the world’s highest rate of maternal and child mortality . The government has increased the number of health facilities in the country by 22% as well as recruited some 60 doctors from Nigeria to meet a shortage of medical personnel .
 The government estimated that maternal mortality rates may have fallen by as much as a third in three years . Maternal mortality rates are thought to have dropped by as many as a quarter in three .
 Koroma’s intent to pursue an inclusive government was tested in March by outbreaks of violence in Pujehun district and in Freetown . Koroma has been in office since 2007 .
 Government and paramilitary forces moved quickly to quell the disturbances . Government forces move quickly to calm the situation in the city .
 Following mediation that involved key political leaders and UN officials, the two parties reached an accord to seek nonviolent conflict resolution . The two parties agreed to seek peaceful resolution of their conflict .
 The UN-backed Special Court for Sierra Leone concluded a trial in April with the sentencing of three leaders of the rebel Revolutionary United Front . Issa Hassan Sesay, Morris Kallon, and Augustine Gbao were sentenced to long prison terms for having committed atrocities ""upon a massive
 Sierra Leone had the world’s highest rate of maternal and child mortality . Sierra Leone was taking steps to improve health care in Sierra Leone .
 Singapore of four international peacekeepers and the sanctioning of mass rape . Singapore has been accused of rape by members of the U.N. Security Council .
 This was the first time that an international court had handed down sentences for attacks against international peacekeepers . The sentences were handed down for crimes of sexual violence against peacekeepers and senior leaders .
 The trial of former Liberian president Charles Taylor continued in The Hague . The trial is expected to be the court’s final trial .
 Government grants to subsidize the wage bills of employers managed to stave off some retrenchments . Unemployment under 5% for most of the year .
 The economic contraction in 2009 amounted to only one-third of the level that had been feared at the beginning of the year . Thanks partly to these stimulus measures and to a faster-thanexpected global recovery, economic contraction was only one third .
 The recession prompted a surge in the number of foreign workers applying for permanent residency in a bid to hang on to their jobs . Still, the recession has seen a surge among foreign workers seeking permanent residency .
 On the property front, prices defied gravity, climbing back to near 2007 peaks . Prices climbed back to 2007 peaks and even set new per-square-foot records in some districts .
 The price spiral was prompted by low interest rates, an influx of foreigners, and speculative buying, worried citizens . It contributed to their unhappiness about the very visible increase in the foreign population .
 More than one in three residents in the city-state were foreign-bom in 2009 . In 2009, more than one third of residents in Singapore were foreigners .
 The government pledged to slow down the intake of foreigners . It worked to raise labour productivity so that economic growth would not be overly compromised .
 Singapore witnessed a rare upheaval within its generally placid civil-society scene . A high-profile leadership tussle occurred at the Association of Women for Action and Research .
 A group of women, mostly hailing from the same church, united in their opposition to homosexuality . They apparently united in opposition to the group's "original" purpose of advocating gender rights .
 Government steps in to establish limits on civil-society activism . Following weeks of strident accusations and the mass mobilization of supporters on both sides of the issue for an electoral showdown .
 The government reiterated that an existing law that criminalizes sex between men would not be repealed, although gays would be allowed to lead their private lives . At the same time, the government said that existing laws that criminalize sex between gay men would also be repealed .
 In April, a team of doctors in Singapore became the first in Asia to perform a heartliver transplant . The operation lasted 12 hours at the Singapore General Hospital in April .
 A related issue involved the government’s efforts to address a rise in the number of kidney-failure patients . Measures to reimburse organ donors for their expenses and lost income .
 These steps are carefully calibrated to ease the burden on donors while also discouraging organ trading . These steps were carefully calibrated, says the government .
 Domestic industry was also hit by a halt in January in gas supplies during the Russian-Ukrainian price dispute . The dispute highlighted Slovakia’s need for energy diversification . Slovakian industry was hit by the halt in Russian gas supplies .
 Slovaks show off their euros after collecting the bills from an automated teller machine in Bratislava’s main square . Slovakia formally joined the euro zone on January 1, the day that Slovakia officially joined the EU .
 Slovakia's accession to the euro zone has boosted public support for Prime Minister Robert Fico . Public support for Fico and his Direction-Social Democracy party remained high, thanks partly to the accession .
 Slovakia was only the second Eastern European country to adopt the common currency . Slovakia was the second country in the region to adopt a common currency after Slovenia .
 Exporters welcomed the move, particularly because it helped to promote stability amid the worldwide financial crisis . The move was seen as a way to help the world's economy .
 Ivan Gasparovic reelected as president, comfortably beating opposition candidate Iveta Radicova in second-round runoff . With Smer-SD support, Ivan GasParovic was comfortably reelected in second round .
 In the EP elections, Smer-SD finished first, with 32% of the vote and 5 of the 13 seats . The EP elections were held in Slovenia, Slovenia and Norway .
 Slovak Democratic and Christian Union, SMK and SMK gain two seats . Opposition parties gained two seats in the Slovak parliament .
 Tensions between Slovaks and Hungarians reached a new high when on August 21 Bratislava banned Hungarian Pres. Viktor Szaryk banned from entering the country . The ban is a response to the Hungarian presidential election campaign .
 On that day Solyom was scheduled to travel to the Slovak border town of Komarno to attend the unveiling of a statue honouring a Hungarian king .
 Slovak authorities found the planned visit offensive for several reasons, not least because it coincided with the anniversary of the 1968 invasion by Warsaw Pact troops that included Hungarian soldiers .
 Banning the president of another EU country was considered to be a major provocation . Still, banning the ban has raised fears of further antagonism between the two countries .
 Slovenia once the fastest-growing member of the euro zone, Slovenia became the worst-performing country . Slovenia is now the worst performing country in euro zone . Slovenia was the fastest growing member of euro zone in 2008 .
 Slovenia's industrial production improved by August, which indicated that Slovenia was emerging from recession . Slovenia's economy is expected to recover from recession in the coming years .
 The European Commission initiated an excessive-deficit procedure for Slovenia and eight other EU countries . Slovenia is one of eight countries with budgetary shortfalls above 3% of GDP . The EU Commission initiated the procedure October 7 .
 Waning demand for Slovenian exports, lower tax income, and a government stimulus program swelled the deficit . Slovenia's exports made up two-thirds of the total GDP, and lower tax incomes .
 The government had awarded some $700 million in guarantees for bank loans to companies to improve liquidity . Government had awarded $700million in guarantees to companies .
 Slovenia feared documents submitted by Croatia prejudged the boundary between the two countries . Slovenia feared it could have restricted Slovenia’s access to international waters and affected Koper, its busy Adriatic port .
 Slovenia ended its veto on Croatia’s EU talks in September when an agreement on arbitration was announced . Slovenia ended the veto in September after an agreement was reached on arbitration arbitration .
 Croatian Parliament has approved sending dispute to international arbitration . Slovenia has set a condition for the dispute to be sent to arbitration . Croatian Parliament approved the move on November 2 . Slovenia says the dispute should be resolved in arbitration .
 Two days later, the countries’ prime ministers signed an arbitration accord . Two days after the accord, the prime ministers of the two countries signed a deal .
 Slovenia's priorities for its presidency included children’s rights, the protection and integration into society of Roma and other minorities, and the promotion of democracy, the rule of law, and human rights in Slovenia .
 On June 7, in an election with a record-low turnout , voters selected seven representatives to the European Parliament and gave a boost to the centre-right opposition .
 In Italy eight members of that country’s native Slovenian minority were elected mayors in the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region . In Italy, 8 members of the Slovenian community were elected Mayors .
 Slovenia confirmed its first diagnosis of HINI influenza in June and its first death from the virus on November 3 . Slovenia is the first country to have confirmed a diagnosis of the virus in June .
 Primoz Kozmus was gold medalist in the hammer throw at the 2008 Summer Olympics . Kozmus became the world champion in August after winning the world title in August .
 Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu helps launch a Truth and Reconciliation Commission in the Solomon Islands on April 29 . Tutu is the Archbishop of the South African Archbishop of Johannesburg, South Africa . The commission will take place in the country's Solomon Islands .
 The government granted a new gold mining license in central Guadalcanal, where significant reserves have been identified . The government grants the license to mine significant reserves .
 It also lodged claims with the UN for recognition of the Solomon Islands’ extended continental shelf, where massive seafloor sulphide reserves were thought to exist . The Solomon Islands are thought to have huge sulphur reserves thought to be in the region .
 The Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands continued to guarantee the country’s security . The mission has allowed the government of Prime Minister Derek Sikua to move forward with its reform program .
 A forestry bill was proposed to reduce the rate of logging to more sustainable levels . The bill would reduce the amount of logging in the country to a more sustainable level .
 The government released a report on the anti-Chinese riots of 2006 . In an attempt to confront parts of its recent past, the government released the report .
 A Truth and Reconciliation Commission was launched to heal some of the social divisions caused by the ethnic conflict that occurred between 1998 and 2003 . The commission was launched by the Ministry for National Unity, Reconciliation, and Peace .
 The Transitional Federal Government struggled to assert control over the country following the withdrawal of Ethiopian troops in January . The government had been shored up by support from the Ethiopian military .
 Many analysts said that their presence actually fueled support for hard-line Islamists . They remained to help Somalia’s TFG battle a fierce insurgency, but many analysts said it fueled support .
 The Ethiopians left a contingent of 5,250 African Union peacekeepers in Mogadishu, the capital, who looked increasingly unable to halt the fighting . The Ethiopian government has left a large contingent of peacekeepers .
 Many Somalis turned against the AU mission following an incident in February when a roadside bomb hit an AU truck and peacekeepers fired into the street, killing 39 civilians . Though most analysts agreed that the peacekeepers were critical to the TFG’s survival, many Somalis have turned
 Sheikh Sharif was a top leader in the ICU, which in late 2006 brought Somalia's only window of peace in nearly 20 years . Many Somalis greeted his election with optimism . Many greeted him with optimism.
 He was seen as a clear improvement over his predecessor, Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed . He had the support of some moderate militia leaders, including some moderate militias .
 Al-Shabaab is believed to be several thousand fighters strong and in control of much of southern Somalia . Yet al-Shabab is thought to have opposed Sheikh Sharif . Sheikh Sharif was killed in clashes in Somalia's capital, Mogadishu .
 Sheikh Sharif appealed for help from international donors . U.S. agreed to send 40 tons of weapons to Sheikh Sharif . The United States agreed to provide weapons .
 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met with Sheikh Sharif in Kenya in August . Clinton promised that additional support would be forthcoming . Sheikh Sharif is the prime minister of Kenya .
 In September a United States air strike was the latest in a series of targeted air strikes that had begun during the administration of Pres. Barack Obama .
 He was suspected of having had a role in the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania . He was also suspected of involvement in a 1998 bombing of the US embassies in both countries .
 U.S. officials claimed Nabhan was training al-Shabaab fighters in suicide bombing and served as a liaison to alQaeda in Pakistan . United States officials claimed that Nabhan had been a liaison with al Qaeda .
 alShabaab suicide bombers killed 21 people at an AU base in Mogadishu, including the deputy AU commander, and 16 other peacekeepers . Days later, al Shabaab also killed 21 others at the AU base, including an AU commander and 16 others .
 In December a suicide bomber killed at least 15 people at a college graduation ceremony, including three TFG ministers . In December, 15 people were killed in a suicide bombing at a graduation ceremony .
 The pirates were known to operate out of Puntland, in northeastern Somalia . The area has its own government thought to be complicit in piracy . The pirates operated out of the area, which has an own government .
 In the election campaign the ANC promised to retain its targets of halving poverty and unemployment by 2014 . The ANC maintained that creating employment would be the core mandate for economic policy .
 In February a framework agreement responding to the global economic crisis was reached between the government, labour, and business sectors . The agreement reaffirmed a commitment to infrastructural spending as a stimulus to growth and job creation .
 Zuma committed the government to creating 500,000 job opportunities before the end of the year . In his state of the nation address in June, Zuma said the government would create 500,00 jobs .
 Pravin Gordhan, previously head of the South African Revenue Service, appointed as finance minister . Trevor Manuel, who became head of new National Planning Commission, replaced Trevor Manuel .
 The Congress of South African Trade Unions has become critical of Manuel’s planning program . They accuse him of wanting to become a ‘prime minister’ and argue that former trade unionist Ebrahim Patel, appointed minister of economic development, should have responsibility .
 Gill Marcus, former chairperson of Absa bank and financial group, replaced Tito Mboweni as governor of the Reserve Bank in November . In November Gill Marcus was appointed as governor .
 The judgment that the National Prosecuting Authority was politically motivated in its prosecution of Zuma (which catalyzed the recall of Pres. Jacob Zuma) was based on the conviction that the NPA was political motivated . The judgment was the result of a court ruling that the prosecution was politically
 Charges of corruption, fraud, racketeering, and money laundering against Zuma were reinstated by the Supreme Court of Appeal in January . Zuma's 2008 conviction for corruption was overturned by the court of Appeal .
 Zuma’s supporters claimed that this vindicated their standpoint that Zuma was innocent of the charges . But the NPA made clear that the decision did not amount to an acquittal .
 The Judicial Service Commission decided not to proceed with the charges raised by judges of the Constitutional Court against Western Cape Judge President John Hlophe of improperly attempting to influence the Court . Western Cape judges raised the charges against Hlop .
 President Zuma appointed Sandile Ngcobo as chief justice to succeed Pius Langa, whose term had expired . Sandile Ncobo will succeed Langa's term .
 Jackie Selebi's contract not renewed when it expired in July . He was replaced by Bheki Cele, former minister for community safety in KwaZulu-Natal .
 In December 2008, Vusi Pikoli, suspended national director of public prosecutions, had been sacked for allegedly not paying enough attention to public security . Pikoli claimed that his dismissal was related to his having charged Selebi with corruption .
 In August 2009, the North Gauteng High Court ruled that his dismissal was invalid . The court ruled that he had been dismissed from his job .
 In November he was paid 7.6 million rand by the government to withdraw his court challenge contesting his dismissal . He was paid to withdraw the court challenge in November .
 Schabir Shaik was sentenced to 15 years in jail in 2005 after his conviction for fraud and corruption . He was accused of having a ‘generally corrupt” relationship with Zuma . Shaik released from jail early in the year on the grounds that he was terminally
 These included a protracted strike by doctors over wages and conditions in hospitals . A weeklong strike by construction workers involved in building stadiums for the association football World Cup games in 2010 . Other strikes by municipal workers over wages also included municipal workers .
 Having grown 0.2% in the third quarter of 2008, it shrank by 1.8% in fourth quarter, 7.4% in first quarter of 2009, and 2.8%. The economy has recovered to 0.9% growth in third quarter, recovering to 0
 Inflation fell during 2009 to 6.4% in August and was expected to average 5.9% through the year, inside the official target range . Inflation had peaked at 13.6% in 2008, but fell during the year to 6%.
 Reserve Bank had to make cuts of 5% in interest rates between December 2008 and August 2009 . Reserve Bank made cuts to interest rates from December 2008 to August 2009, which allowed the cuts .
 In 2008 the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments was 7.4% of GDP, a 36-year peak . In 2009 the deficit eased during 2009, but it eased in 2009 .
 The 2009-10 budget deficit was projected in February to increase to 3.9% from an estimated 1% in 2008-09 . Owing to the need for continued state spending in conditions of recession and lessened revenue, the deficit is projected to increase . The state's 2009-
 By September the National Treasury was estimating a higher budget deficit due to a decline in revenue . By September, the Treasury was expecting a higher deficit .
 The budget granted 13. billion rand in personal tax relief . 12 billion rand added over three years to social grants, expected to benefit two million more people .
 Some 4 billion rand was allocated to the expanded public works program, with a promise of more if necessary from a contingency fund . Public works program will be expanded in South Africa .
 President Zuma outlined a foreign policy in continuity with the Mbeki presidency . He emphasized the importance of dealing with climate change . Zuma spoke to the UN General Assembly in September .
 The South African government continued to monitor precarious situations in nearby countries, notably Zimbabwe . The government continued monitoring the situation in Zimbabwe .
 Spain officially entered into recession in the final quarter of 2008 . The Spanish economy nose-dived in 2009 . The capital city of Madrid is Madrid .
 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development predicted that Spain would experience another year of negative growth and that unemployment would top 20% in 2010 . Spain was one of the worst-hit EU economies and was expected to be one of last to recover .
 The UK spent 2.3% of GDP in measures to stimulate the economy and create jobs . New measures include subsidies for new car purchases and welfare provision for unemployed who had exhausted their entitlement to benefits .
 PSOE's 2010 budget included higher capital gains taxes, a 2% hike in the general value-added tax . PSOE forced to make a major U-turn on taxation .
 In November the government unveiled a wide-ranging package of measures intended to transform the Spanish economy into one based on research and development, gender equality, and environmentally friendly .
 The results provided a muchneeded boost to the PP, which was reeling from the impact of the Gurtel case, a corruption scandal . The case involved a network of companies that had obtained contracts amounting to more than $25 million from PP-controlled administrations .
 By the end of the year, more than 60 PP members were under investigation for money laundering, bribery, and tax fraud . The party’s former national treasurer was forced to resign in July .
 PP leader Mariano Rajoy’s indecisive response to the scandal undermined his influence and electoral credibility . Rajoy's inability to stamp his authority on regional party leaders undermined his authority .
 Another major corruption scandal was uncovered in Catalonia in October . Catalonia has been hit by a series of scandals in recent years .
 Opinion polls conducted that month showed that for the first time, corruption had overtaken terrorism in the ranking of citizens’ concerns . Corruption overtook terrorism as the top concern for citizens, polls showed .
 ETA remains active, causing small explosions in and beyond Basque Country . 65 people were injured in a bomb attack on a Civil Guard barracks in July . Three police officers were killed in two separate incidents in the summer .
 The French and Spanish continue to arrest dozens of suspected activists . In April, the suspected leader of the organization was captured in April .
 Elections held on March 1 led to a historic change of government in the region . Elections held in March 1 saw the country's first democratic elections .
 Many viewed this as a healthy sign of political normalcy in the divided region . Many viewed it as a good sign of normalcy .
 The year saw a marked improvement in Spanish relations with the United States . Zapatero’s unilateral decision to withdraw Spanish troops from Iraq in 2004 strained relations with U.S.
 Spain’s positive and symbolically important response to U.S. requests for help in Afghanistan and in its bid to close the Guantanamo prison in Cuba . This new spirit of cooperation was reflected in Spain's positive response to United States requests for assistance in Afghanistan, Spain says .
 Zapatero informed U.S. Pres. Obama in October of his first state visit to the United States since 2004 . In October, in October, he informed President Obama of his plans for a state visit .
 The government again reacted positively to U.S. requests for further reinforcements from its NATO allies . Polls show that most Spaniards oppose increased military engagement in Sudan .
 The Sri Lankan armed forces succeeded in capturing the final enclave of the rebel Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in May .
 The LTTE’s leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran, and other prominent figures died in the fighting . Surviving LTTE fighters were rounded up by the government .
 The armed victory and prospect of restored security throughout the country brought the United People’s Freedom Alliance government of Pres. Barack Obama to power . The United People's Freedom Alliance won the election .
 This was reflected in subsequent victories in several provincial and local elections . This was carried out in the aftermath of the election .
 Sarath Fonseka, former commander of the Sri Lankan military, faces election in 2010 . He is expected to be re-elected in January, 2010 .
 The war’s conclusion left on the table the issues of whether and how to accommodate demands from the Tamil minority . Sri Lankan government faces major future challenges for the government .
 There was a clear commitment to promote economic development in the north and east in the hope of lessening resentment within Tamil community .
 Masses of civilians fled the final stages of fighting, and 280,000 were interned in government-run camps . Masses fled the last stages of the fighting, with more than 300,000 being interned .
 Their treatment in the camps invoked criticism from international groups active in relief and resettlement as well as from governments and the press in the United States and Europe .
 U.S. aid from the EU and the EU may have affected trade preferences from the latter . But ties with China and India continued to strengthen, despite criticism .
 Economic growth had held up remarkably well during the long civil war . But it slumped in 2009 as the global recession had a serious impact on the island .
 After growing at 6% in 2008, GDP was expected to rise by only 3% in 2009, although faster growth was expected in 2010 . GDP expected to grow by 3% this year, but faster growth in 2010 is expected in 2011 .
 Sri Lanka’s garment and other industrial exports suffered badly as purchasing power in its principal markets dropped . The end of fighting engendered a national spirit of optimism .
 The important tourist industry began to revive as soon as the fighting ended, however, as soon after it ended . The key tourist industry is still recovering from the conflict .
 The government continued to run a large fiscal deficit and foreign exchange reserves . Foreign exchange reserves dropped to dangerously low levels . The government continues to run large fiscal deficits .
 A $2.2 billion loan from the International Monetary Fund that was agreed to in July helped to stabilize the country’s economic position . The IMF agreed to the loan in July .
 Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir's regime has been fighting against the Tamil Tiger rebels in Sri Lanka since May .
 International Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant for Sudanese Pres. Omar Gadana in 2009 . Sri Lankan government: Gadana's arrest warrant should be issued for Gadana .
 Omar alBashir on seven counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur . It is the first time that the tribunal had acted against a sitting head of state .
 Bashir expelled 13 international philanthropic organizations active in Darfur and throughout The Sudan, including Oxfam, Save the Children, and Doctors Without Borders . Bashir also expelled 13 organizations from the Sudan .
 The Sudanization of humanitarian work caught the government's own Humanitarian Aid Commission ill-prepared to take on relief responsibilities for Darfur .
 The Sudanese government reversed its decision to allow the return of philanthropic organizations on condition that they change their names and logos . John Kerry’s intervention led to the Sudanese decision .
 Suriname limit Darfur fatalities while simultaneously curtailing further their already limited freedom of speech and action . Surinamesi also curtail further restrictions on the right to free speech .
 The African Union and the Arab League supported Bashir, arguing that the ICC’s decision impeded peaceful settlement to the Sudanese crisis . The Arab League and the African Union backed Bashir . Bashir has been accused of corruption in the past by the ICC .
 Both organizations requested that the UN Security Council suspend the warrant, but no avail . Both organizations asked that the warrant be suspended, but it was refused .
 Bashir continued to defy the ICC by frequent travels to friendly African and Arab countries, including Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Libya, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and Saudi Arabia .
 Conflict, displacement, and insecurity persisted throughout the country . Conflict, displacements and insecurity continued throughout the region .
 In Darfur, hostilities continued between armed opposition factions, government armed forces, militias, and ethnic groups . The Sudanese conflict is the largest in the world and worst in Sudan .
 The UN estimated that another 250,000 southern Sudanese had been displaced by interethnic fighting . The total of internally displaced persons across the country now stands at 4 million .
 UN and local officials expressed apprehension that ongoing conflict could impede preparations for national elections . The elections were originally scheduled for July 2009 but postponed until April 2010 . UN officials expressed concern that the conflict may impede preparations .
 The elections were a crucial part of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement that ended more than two decades of civil war between the north and the south . Several hurdles would need to be overcome before polling day, including controversial results of the 2008 census .
 The 10 states of southern Sudan now have only about 21% of The Sudan’s total population . According to the director general of the Central Bureau of Statistics, the 10 states now had only about about 21%.
 These figures were rejected by leading Darfur movements and a number of political parties . Darfur movement rejected the figures .
 With a record 68 political parties vying for positions, political dissension would surely escalate . A record 68 parties are vying to be elected in the United States .
 Some southern officials claim that their northern political rivals deliberately incited interethnic violence to obstruct national elections and represent the southern government as ineffectual . The southern government has been accused of incitement to incite violence in the region .
 In November calls for the southern states to secede from The Sudan intensified as national First Vice Pres. The Sudanese President called for the breakaway .
 Salva Kiir, the leader of southern Sudan, urged the south to split from the government . The leader of the southern Sudanese government has urged the region to split .
 In February, The Sudan's most acclaimed author, Tayeb Salih, died in London . The Sudanese author died in February .
 The bauxite industry, a pillar of the economy and a major source of tax revenue, was especially hard-hit . Bauxite is a key industry in the U.S. economy .
 Bauxite multinational corporation BHP Billiton's announcement in 2008 that it was proposing to pull out of Suriname further added to the gloom .
 President Venetiaan was nearing the end of his third term, and the nonappearance of an appealing successor depressed the government’s support .
 At the close of 2009, some observers saw the political horizon darkening . At the end of this year, President Barack Obama's presidency was considered a presidential candidate .
 Bouterse’s prospects were complicated by a long-pending indictment for the murder of 15 political opponents in the 1980s . The charges date back to the late 1980s, when he was accused of killing 15 people .
 If Bouterse’s candidacy were to be blocked, former president Jules Wijdenbosch was almost as unattractive because of his past destabilizing management of the country . The same observers grumbled that if Bousterse was blocked, the probable alternative was former president
 Suriname continued to suffer from the corrosive impact of organized crime and revenue losses resulting from illegal gold mining .
 The recent shrinking of Southern African Customs Union benefits for the country had worsened the situation . The recent shrink of the country's benefits has worsened it .
 Two major constitutional provisions were realized . Free primary education was to be introduced gradually beginning in 2010 . Commission on Human Rights and Public Administration was appointed in September .
 The commission’s fundamental role was to protect human rights and freedoms, the commission said . The commission's fundamental role in protecting human rights is to protect freedoms, it said .
 It also constituted the Integrity Commission, to which politicians and top civil servants were required to declare their assets upon assumption of public office . The Integrity Commission also constituted .
 Mduduzi Gina was elected as secretary-general of Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions . Jan Sithole had led the federation since the mid-1980s . He stepped down in October after leading the federation for decades .
 Mario Masuku, president of banned People's United Democratic Movement, was released from prison on September 22 on grounds of paucity of evidence . Masuku had been arrested under the Suppression of Terrorism Act soon after it was promulgated in November 2008 .
 King Mswati played a prominent role in the attempt to facilitate dialogue between Madagascar’s ousted president, Marc Ravalomanana, and his successor, Andry Rajoelina . As chairman of the . Southern African Development Community’‘Politics, defense, and
 New antigraft legislation is being prepared because corruption continued to be a problem in both government and private sector . New anti-corruption legislation was being prepared by the government .
 Sweden suffered greatly from the global economic downturn in 2009 . As a small, open, and export-oriented economy, Sweden suffered much from the downturn .
 The Finance Ministry estimated that GDP contracted by 5.2%, after having been at a virtual standstill the year before . The finance ministry estimated that the country's GDP was at a standstill last year .
 The production of key Swedish exports, such as cars, trucks, specialty steel, has diminished rapidly . Sweden's key exports, including cars and trucks, have diminished rapidly.
 Many companies, such as truck-making giant Scania, have reduced work hours and salaries to offset falling demand from abroad .
 Employees and unions reluctantly accepted these cuts to avoid job losses . The employees and unions have reluctantly accepted the cuts .
 Unemployment in Sweden was the most alarming feature of the Swedish economic crisis . In Sweden, unemployment was the highest rate of unemployment in the country .
 The unemployment rate rose from 5.8% in July 2008 to more than 8% in the autumn of 2009 . Full employment had been the proud goal of all governments for decades .
 In its budget for 2010, the government projected that unemployment would reach more than 11% that year . In 2010, unemployment was projected to reach 11% for the first time .
 The government responded to the economic downturn by providing a massive fiscal stimulus package . The stimulus package was part of a massive government response .
 The budget bill for 2010 included tax cuts on ordinary incomes as well as subsidies for municipalities and for the education and training of the unemployed .
 The central bank also supported Swedish banks with generous lending facilities . By autumn none of the banks had needed any formal state aid .
 Three of the largest banks, Nordea, SEB, and Swedbank, approved capital increases . Shareholders in three of the biggest banks approve capital increases instead of capital hikes .
 Late in the year some indicators suggested that the worst of the Swedish economic crises was over . The government might even have been overly pessimistic in its assumptions in 2013 .
 Shares on Stockholm stock exchange rose by almost 40% from January to October . Shares on the Stockholm Stock Exchange rose by nearly 40% between January and October . Sweden's economy is the world's largest economy .
 The financial markets started to anticipate rising sales and profits in 2010 and beyond after the ""lost year” of 2009 . Financial markets anticipate rising profits and sales in 2010 .
 Many economists believed that Sweden would be in a favourable position to resume growth once the international economy started to pick up . Sweden's economy is expected to grow again in the coming years .
 Sweden is one of the few European economies to return to a growth of more than 1% in 2010 . IMF predicted that Sweden would be one of only few countries to grow more than a 1% . Sweden's deficit is below the EU average .
 Social Democratic leader Mona Sahlin as the candidate for prime minister . Centre-right coalition expected to face united red-green opposition with a united opposition .
 In autumn opinion polls, Sahlin and her coalition of the Social Democrats, Greens, and the Left had a small but definite lead . Sahlin's coalition received about 5% more supporters than the government alliance .
 Sweden's presidency of the EU in the second half of the year did not affect the government's position in the polls . Sweden put a lot of effort into finishing the long-drawn-out process for concluding the EU’s Lisbon Treaty, which was finally accepted by all EU member
 Sweden will celebrate a royal wedding in June 2010 . In the winter it was announced that Sweden would celebrate a wedding in 2010 .
 Crown Princess Victoria engaged to longtime boyfriend, Daniel Westling . The engagement was a major news item both nationally and internationally . Princess Victoria's engagement to Westling was an international affair .
 Victoria was first in line to succeed her father, King Carl XVI Gustaf, to the throne . She was born in Sweden and is the current queen of Sweden .
 Sweden failed to qualify for the 2010 World Cup in South Africa . The Swedish national football team failed to reach the World Cup finals in 2010 . Swedes were disappointed by the failure of their country to qualify .
 After this debacle the Swedish team received a new coach, Erik Hamren, and concentrated on qualifying for the 2012 European championships . The 2012 championships will be held in Poland and Ukraine .
 The small Alpine country was shocked to find itself on a ""gray list” of uncooperative tax havens published in April by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development . Small Alpine country protested that it had not been given prior warning .
 Switzerland scrambled to have its name be removed from the list by signing double-tax agreements in less than six months with the OECD’s stipulated minimum of 12 countries . Switzerland has offered to share previously confidential bank documents with OECD .
 The treaty with the United States stated that any request for administrative assistance had to clearly identify the person concerned . It ruled out so-called fishing expeditions to net a wider range of potential tax fugitives .
 The signing of the treaty followed an agreement in August for Switzerland's biggest bank, UBS AG, to turn over information on 4,450 accounts of Americans suspected of holding undeclared assets .
 Swiss Pres. Jean-Claude Monpezone: "It respects our legal order and our sovereignty" "At the same time, it respects our ... sovereignty," he says .
 Die-hard defenders of Swiss independence accuse the government of buckling under U.S. pressure . Swiss independence supporters say the government buckled under United States pressure . The government is accused of backing down on independence .
 Polanski was in Zurich to accept an award for his life’s work when he was detained . His arrest prompted fury in France, where he resided . Polanski's arrest prompted outrage in France .
 Merz came under pressure to resign over his handling of a diplomatic spat with Libya . Merz was forced to resign after a row with the Libyan government .
 Geneva police arrested Hannibal alQaddafi, son of the Libyan leader, on allegations he beat servants . Relations between the two countries had soured in July 2008 . Hannibal was arrested in Geneva on allegations that he and his wife had beaten two servants .
 Libya cut economic and diplomatic ties to Switzerland and detained two Swiss businessmen, allegedly for immigration violations . He was released several days later, but Libya cut ties with Switzerland and cut economic ties .
 The Swiss long resisted Libyan demands for an apology, but Merz traveled to Tripoli in August to apologize . He apologized to Muammar al-Qaddafi, apparently without having consulted his cabinet colleagues .
 He returned without the Swiss businessmen who were subsequently sentenced to 16 months’ imprisonment .
 The 57% majority in favour of the ban was seen as an embarrassment for the country that hosts the European headquarters of the United Nations . About 4% of the population was Muslim .
 Swiss parliament elected Economics Minister Doris Leuthard as president for 2010 . Economics Minister was elected president of the Swiss parliament on December 2 .
 A Swiss court ruled that the money had to be returned to Mobutu Sese Seko's family . The late president of Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) was assassinated in 1994 .
 Mobutu’s family refused to relinquish their claim to the assets, Switzerland said . Switzerland said this was due to the inaction of Congolese authorities to recover the funds through the courts .
 Switzerland was less affected by the economic recession than some other industrialized countries . Switzerland has been less affected than some of the world's most developed countries .
 A government expert group said that it expected GDP to shrink by 1.7% in 2009 and to recover slightly to 0.4% in 2010 . GDP expected to shrink slightly in 2010, according to experts .
 State officials responded by raising duties on cloth and thread imports and setting up a commission to encourage exports . State officials also set up an export commission to promote exports .
 In March a local stock market, the Damascus Securities Exchange, opened its doors . In March, the market was opened to the public for the first time .
 Six companies, four banks, a publishing and marketing group, and a transportation firm were listed on the exchange . Four brokerage houses were authorized to trade shares .
 Prime Minister Muhammad Naji al-Otari announced at the end of March that no state employees or public-sector workers would be laid off as a result of the economic slump . He said steps to expand agriculture along the Euphrates River were being planned .
 Growing unemployment sparked a jump in armed robberies and other violent crimes around Aleppo, Syria .
 The Muslim Brotherhood pulled out of the opposition National Salvation Front in April . In April the Muslim Brotherhood withdrew from the front-line .
 The Muslim Brotherhood’s London-based general supervisor, 'Ali Sadr al-Din al-Bayanuni, attributed the withdrawal to persistent criticism of the organization by liberals inside the NSF, as well as disagreements .
 Sheikh Mahmud Kaftaru, an influential religious figure with close ties to the regime, was arrested in early May . He was arrested on charges of having held unauthorized talks with Western diplomats .
 Islamic television station Mihrab al-Sham was ordered to cease broadcasting in January . It had links to influential state-affiliated religious scholars .
 Controversy erupted in June over a proposed personal status law that would have mandated greater uniformity across religious communities on matters of marriage, inheritance and child custody .
 Bashar al-Assad in October issued a decree banning smoking in restaurants, movie houses, schools, health centres, and other public places . Al-Assad also banned smoking in movie houses and schools .
 Relations with Saudi Arabia turned from icy to lukewarm as the year passed . Relations between Saudi Arabia and the U.S. have been strained for years .
 President Assad met with the head of the Saudi intelligence service in February . He then dispatched Foreign Minister Walid al-Mu'allim to Riyadh . President Assad then dispatched the foreign minister to Saudi Arabia .
 Saudi Foreign Minister Sa'ud al-Faisal returned to Saudi Arabia in early March . Saudi Arabia's foreign minister returned to the country in March .
 Taiwan capped the rapprochement by flying to Damascus in early October . Taiwan and Syria have been at odds for years over the years .
 Syria’s minister of finance told reporters that taxes on Saudi imports would be eliminated as a way to stimulate bilateral trade . Syria's finance minister said the move would be a boost to bilateral trade between Syria and Saudi Arabia .
 In April unprecedented joint military exercises took place, and an agreement was signed to augment cooperation between the Syrian and Turkish defense industries . The Syrian-Turkish military exercises were unprecedented .
 Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki discussed collaborative measures to improve border security with President Assad in August . The two leaders set up a council to oversee combined economic, cultural, and security projects .
 In early September, a cluster of bombings in Baghdad prompted Iraqi officials to accuse Syria of having provided safe haven for the militants responsible for the attacks . In September, however, Iraq accused Syria of providing safe haven .
 Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari infuriated Damascus by demanding that the United Nations look into the incident by forming a commission similar to the one that was investigating the assassination of former Lebanese prime minister Rafiq al-Hariri .
 China is expanding direct flights and trade between the two countries . After breakthroughs in 2008 that involved increasing Chinese tourism in Taiwan, the administration of Pres. Chen has expanded direct flights to China .
 The DPP insisted that the ECFA be ratified only by a national referendum, while the Ma administration promised to consult with Taiwan’s legislature .
 Chinese investors were also permitted to purchase real estate in Taiwan . Institutional investors (known as Chinese qualified domestic institutional investors) were allowed to invest in Taiwan’s stock market .
 Taiwan and China's financial regulators signed a memorandum of understanding on financial services in November . The agreement would allow Taiwanese securities firms, banks, and insurance companies to set up operations in China, and vice versa .
 The ruling Kuomintang suffered political attrition as three of its lawmakers were forced from office . Domestically, the ruling party was weakened by the loss of three lawmakers .
 Diane Lee resigned in 2009 after it became clear she had never renounced her U.S. citizenship . Lee was a long-time legislator in Washington, D.C. Lee was elected to Congress in 2009 .
 Two other KMT legislators stepped down after they were convicted of electoral fraud . Two other legislators also stepped down from the KMT .
 The KMT won the by-election to replace Lee in one of its Taipei strongholds, but it did so by an unexpectedly low margin .
 The KMT lost a by-election held in rural Yunlin county, where a DPP political newcomer achieved a landslide victory over a local factional candidate . Further signs of electoral weakness came when a political newcomer won a landslide win in the Yunlin election .
 Premier Liu Chao-shiuan was forced to resign in early September to take responsibility for the administration’s much-criticized response to a devastating typhoon in August . Meanwhile, premier Liu Chao Chao-shiuan resigned in September .
 Liu was replaced as premier by Wu Den-yih, a former mayor of Kaohsiung and a Nantou county legislator . Liu is replaced by a former governor and a county legislator. Liu is the first Chinese premier to take office in China's history .
 In the aftermath of Typhoon Morakot, the Dalai Lama was allowed to make a rare religious and humanitarian visit to Taiwan despite objections from China . The Dalai Lama is allowed to visit Taiwan despite China's objections .
 Uighur human rights activist Rebiya Kadeer was not granted a visa to visit Taiwan . A documentary about her life was shown across Taiwan on October 1, China's National Day .
 Chinese tourists boycotted Kaohsiung because its mayor, Chen Chu, invited the Dalai Lama to visit the city . Chen Chu had screened the Kadeer documentary at a city-sponsored film festival .
 The corruption trial of former president Chen Shui-bian was the subject of much international and domestic criticism . Chen's corruption trial began in March, and was subject to much criticism .
 Observers expressed concerns over the fairness of the trial, particularly after news emerged that prosecutors had performed a skit satirizing Chen at a Lunar New Year's party . Many also raised objections over Chen's being held in solitary confinement .
 Chen’s wife, Wu Shu-chen, was also found guilty of corruption and given a life sentence . Chen was sentenced to life in prison after being convicted of corruption .
 Taiwan was able to participate in deliberations of a UN body, albeit not as a formal member . The significance of this was that for the first time in decades, Taiwan participated in the deliberations of the UN body .
 Relations with the United States improved in November as Taipei agreed to permit expanded imports of U.S. beef . Taipei had widespread fears in Taiwan that such beef was unsafe . Taiwan agreed to allow expanded imports, despite widespread fears such beef is unsafe .
 Taiwan’s export-oriented economy contracted 4.9% in 2009 . The economy was severely affected by the ongoing global economic downturns .
 Consumers received some relief as the consumer price index declined by 1.84% and the Ma administration issued consumer vouchers amounting to more than $2 billion . Consumers also received more of a relief when the price index fell by 1% .
 Tajikistan's financial structure was largely protected from the direct effects of the global economic crisis because of its weak integration into the international financial system . In 2009 the country experienced very severe secondary effects from the global financial crisis .
 Tajikistan’s national economy was heavily dependent on remittances from labour migrants working abroad . These sharply declined as migrants lost their jobs owing to the spread of the economic downturn in Russia and Kazakhstan .
 By the end of March, remittances were down an estimated 30%, with a 40% reduction expected by year's end . Remittances are expected to be down by 40% by year’s end .
 Tajik government drafted a package of anticrisis measures, but most of them were designed for future needs . Tajik's government drafted the package of measures to combat the crisis . Most of the measures were designed to help the Tajik economy in the future .
 Among the long-term proposals was a revival of the vocational-technical education system . It could provide young people with much-needed technical skills, the government says .
 Tajikistan turned for help to the international community, using the country’s position on the front line with Afghanistan and the danger posed if the Afghan insurgency spread across the border . For immediate relief, Tajikstan turned to the world for immediate relief . The country's position on
 International Monetary Fund, World Bank, Asian Development Bank, and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development provided additional assistance . A number of major international financial institutions, including the World Bank and the European Bank, provided additional financial assistance .
 Imomalii Rakhmon told the UN General Assembly in September that wealthy and developed countries that caused the financial crisis should help less-developed countries overcome its effects .
 He asked that debts be partially written off that were accumulated as a result of the crisis . Specifically, he asked that debt be written off .
 IMF official visiting Tajikistan at the time retorted that it was the responsibility of the government of every country to manage its own economy . IMF official said it was responsibility of government to manage economy .
 Effects of the crisis became increasingly apparent as the crime rate rose . The crime rate has increased in recent years .
 According to official law-enforcement sources, the crime rate increased 11.6% from January to August . The crime rate has increased from January-August 2013 to August 2014 .
 September saw a wave of attacks on currency exchanges, some resulting in the killing of employees . Some of the attacks resulted in the deaths of employees at currency exchanges .
 In July a shoot-out between security officers and what was officially described only as an ‘armed band” took place near Tavildara in north-central Tajikistan . The importance of this region to the Islamist opposition during the 1992-97 civil war led to speculation that
 Members of the militant extremist Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan believed to be crossing the border from Afghanistan into Tajikistan . Fears that the influence of extremists in a society shaken by the effects of the economic downturn might grow .
 In November the country hosted the 10th anniversary celebrations of the East African Community . The signing of the Common Market Protocol and the laying of the foundation stone for the new EAC headquarters in Arusha were laid .
 President Kikwete dismissed suggestions from the opposition that the elections were flawed . He dismissed suggestions that the election was flawed . The opposition has accused President Ken Kenyatta of being corrupt .
 Tanzania experienced weakened demand for exports of goods (cash crops) and services . Like other East African states suffering from the effects of the global economic downturn .
 The country still ranked in the lowest 10% of the world’s economies in terms of annual per capita income . The country is still ranked as the lowest country in the world's economies . The South Korean economy is still in the bottom 10% in the global economy .
 The government’s povertyreduction strategy prioritized the agricultural sector . Agricultural sector accounted for more than 40% of GDP, 85% of exports, and 80% of the workforce .
 Tanzania became Africa’s third largest gold producer . In the industrial sector, gold mining was increasingly important . Tanzania is now Africa's third largest producer of gold .
 In June the World Bank approved a $50 million loan for a mineral-resources project . The project aims to improve the socioeconomic impact of mining and to enhance local and foreign investment .
 Leading officials examined the difficulties in curtailing financial malfeasance . While the government paid lip service to its war on corruption, leading officials examine the difficulties .
 Prime Minister Mizengo Pinda conceded that corruption was a difficult problem to overcome . Prime Minister Pinda said corruption was difficult to overcome.
 Low incomes of many Tanzanians made it necessary for them to steal from the workplace to meet their basic survival needs . One analyst argued that the low incomes of some Tanzanian people make it necessary .
 In his view, the most effective remedy would be to provide better economic incentives . He says the best solution would be providing better incentives for the economy .
 President Kikwete blamed foreign countries for the persistence of corruption in Tanzania . He singled out the United Kingdom for failing to respond to his government’s request for assistance in corruption cases involving U.K.-based companies .
 Two former ministers, Basil Mramba and Daniel Yona, were tried on charges of abuse of office . Nevertheless, government registered some success in pursuing graft cases .
 The government sought to mitigate the harm done to the country’s image by the spate of murders of albinos . Albinos' body parts were used in traditional medicine to make goodluck charms and potions .
 In January the government banned traditional healers, but this overlooked the fact that healers purportedly treated 30% of Tanzania’s population . In January, the government also banned traditional healing .
 More than 90 people, including four police officers, were charged with killing albinos or trading in their body parts . Four police officers were among those charged in the case .
 Abhisit, however, was unable to restore muchneeded political stability to Thailand . His assumption of power as a nonelected prime minister made Thailand all the more polarized between anti-Thaksin royalists and red shirts .
 Abhisit contested the choice of Kasit Piromya, a strong supporter of the yellow shirts, as foreign minister . The latter group disputed the political independence of the Constitutional Court, which had dissolved the TRT in a 2007 ruling .
 The rising tensions erupted in March when the red shirts staged a massive protest in Bangkok . The red shirts formed a populist movement called the United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship .
 In April the protesters moved to Pattaya, south of Bangkok, where they forced the cancellation of a summit meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations . In April they forced a cancellation of the summit meeting in Pattaya .
 Abhisit declared a state of emergency and used military force to quell the demonstrations . At least two people were killed during the crackdown .
 An assassination attempt on yellow-shirt leader Sondhi Limthongkul exacerbated the crisis . The Thai government has been in the grip of an anti-government movement .
 On September 19, which marked the third-year anniversary of the military coup that drove Thaksin from power, the UDD staged another large-scale demonstration in Bangkok and called on Abhisit to resign . troops were again deployed, but the protest ended peacefully .
 In September Thailand’s 81 -year-old King Bhumibol was hospitalized, reportedly with pneumonia . In September he was hospitalized in Thailand .
 He was released the following month and declared to be in “satisfactory health’s” health . He was later declared in ‘satisfaction’ and declared in good health .
 Thailand faced international criticism in January following reports that its military had mistreated Muslim refugees from Myanmar and Bangladesh . Thailand's military has been accused of mistreating refugees .
 In April, Thai and Cambodian troops clashed near the Temple of Prear Vihear . The temple is a source of long-standing land disputes between the two countries . The skirmish left two Thai soldiers dead .
 In November Thaksin was made an economic adviser to Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen . In November, he was made a political adviser to the prime minister .
 At the end of the year, Thailand forcibly repatriated 4,000 Hmong refugees to Laos . Thailand again raised international ire when it forcibly returned the refugees . Thailand raised international outrage when it returned the Hmong to Laos last year .
 The bill was passed by the National Assembly and signed into law by the president on June 30 . The bill, however, was not passed by Congress .
 Deputies from all parties unanimously approved a bill defining eligibility requirements for the election . It stipulates that all presidential candidates were to be in good standing with tax authorities and were to have renounced any nationality other than Togolese .
 Faure Gnassingbe was arrested on April 15 while he was attempting to seek refuge at the U.S. embassy . He was arrested while trying to flee the country to the United States embassy . Faure was arrested in April .
 He was accused of having plotted a coup with several senior military officers . He was also accused of plotting a coup against senior officers .
 On April 17 police invited the public to see weapons allegedly found at Kpatcha’s house . Police say weapons were found at the house .
 Police announced on May 1 that they had detained 10 civilians, as well as another Gnassingbe brother, Essolizam, for complicity in the alleged plot . Police announced the arrests of 10 civilians and another brother for complicity .
 Demonstrators demand the resignation of Thai Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva . They stage a protest outside the venue for the ASEAN summit held in Pattaya in April .
 Weapons allegedly found at the house of Kpatcha Gnassingbe, who was arrested for having plotted a coup against his brother, Pres. Pres. Togo . Police in Lome, Togo, arrest him for allegedly plotting a coup .
 A truth, justice, and reconciliation commission will be created to investigate the violence that gripped the country following the death of Pres. Faure Gnassingbe . The president announced that the commission would be created on Nov. 28 .
 Aid funding was offset by falls in revenue from overseas remittances, which typically totaled $96 million annually but had dropped by 10% owing to the global recession . Aid funding has been offset by falling in remittance revenue .
 Government tax revenues are expected to plummet by 8% as a result of lower levels of spending and a decline in imports . In addition, government tax revenues were expected to fall by 8%.
 Nautilus Minerals experienced difficulty raising funds for seabed mining of 10 massive sulfides systems . Hopes of seabing mining were dashed when Nautilius Minerals had difficulty raising money for the project . The company hopes to raise funds for the seabes mining
 Commission on Constitutional and Electoral Reform produced its comprehensive and radical constitutional reform recommendations in mid-November . Pro-democratic forces are delighted by the recommendations .
 Under the proposals, Tonga would remain a constitutional monarchy . The king and Privy Council would no longer be part of the executive . Elections would occur under a new single transferable voting system .
 A Royal Commission appointed to consider the ferry’s loss revealed that the ferry was not designed to operate in open seas . The ferry was known to be in very poor structural condition when it was sent on its interisland journey .
 CL Financial Group is the largest conglomerate in Trinidad and Tobago . The government was forced to extend a bailout package to the group in January after the conglomerate fell into financial distress .
 CL Financial was involved in insurance, banking, real estate, and other businesses throughout the Caribbean and elsewhere .
 Colonial Life Insurance Co. is said to be billions of dollars in arrears on its statutory fund to protect policyholders . The group’s main problem concerned its insurance subsidiary, the Colonial Life insurance Co. , which was said to have been billions of . dollars in . ar
 Trinidad and Tobago was in the international spotlight in April when it hosted United States Pres. Barack Obama .
 Barack Obama and other heads of government at the Fifth Summit of the Americas, held in Port of Spain . Visit by Obama marked his first trip to the Caribbean as the United States head of state .
 Trinidad and Tobago again hosted a gathering of world leaders in November . In November, the country presided over the biennial Commonwealth Heads of Government Conference .
 Tunisian presidential and parliamentary elections were held in October 2009 . Mohamed Ghannouchi was the prime minister of the Tunisian government .
 Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali re-elected to a fifth term, as expected . His party confirmed its hold over the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of parliament . Ben Ali's party, the Democratic Constitutional Assembly, confirms its hold .
 There was speculation that the 73-year-old president's fifth term might be his last . The constitution’s upper limit of 75 years of age for prospective candidates is 75 years old .
 Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali's reelection campaign in October was eluded by amendments to the constitution passed in 2008 . The changes had ostensibly been made to ease the candidate registration requirement . Ben Ali is seeking his second term in office .
 Four of the recent suicide bombers in Iraq had been Tunisian, U.S. Central Command chief says . A network had been reactivated in Tunisia six months earlier to recruit militants for attacks in Iraq and Afghanistan, he says .
 Tunisia also sought repatriation of two Tunisian prisoners held in U.S. military facilities . The prisoners had been charged in absentia for terrorism offenses . Tunisia is seeking repatriation for the prisoners .
 European states have returned illegal migrants to Tunisia . Despite objections from the European Court of Human Rights, European states persisted in returning illegal migrants . Tunisia is one of the most successful countries in the world to send illegal migrants back home .
 Italy sent back five migrants during the year, and all of them were subsequently sentenced to prison . All of the migrants were sent back and all were subsequently jailed .
 Tunisia’s 2003 antiterrorism law continued to be used to imprison opponents, especially those who sympathized with Salafi jihadism . Despite minor amendments, Tunisia's 2003 anti-terror law was still used to jail opponents .
 By 2009 as many as 1,200 persons had been sent to prison under the law . The law was passed in 2009 under the rule .
 Sadok Chourou was sentenced to an additional year in prison for a new offense one month after his release from an 18-year sentence . He was sentenced in January to 18 years for his role in the banned Islamist party AlNahdah .
 Outspoken Muslim cleric Sheikh Yusuf al-Qaradawi visited Kairouan in May, despite his past criticisms of the Tunisian government . He has previously criticized the government .
 Tunisian journalists' union submitted to government a memorandum complaining of official harassment . In June the Tunisian journalist's union submitted a memorandum to government complaining of harassment . Journalists' union says Tunisian government has harassed journalists .
 Tunisia remained a member of the moderate Arab camp, standing with Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt, and Egypt in their confrontations with Iran . Tunisia has been a moderate Arab in the Middle East since the 1980s .
 Tunisia also retained good relations with France, obtaining support for a nuclear power station, to be completed by 2020 . Tunisia also obtained support for the nuclear power plant, which will be completed in 2020 .
 Turkey was also a member state of the Group of 20 . Turkey sent representatives to the G-20 summit meetings held in London and Pittsburgh . Turkey is a member member of the group of 20 and is a major member of NATO .
 The local government elections were followed by a government reshuffle on May 1 . The reshuffle was followed by the local government election in May .
 Ahmet Davutoglu, Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s foreign policy adviser, becomes foreign minister . Ali Babacan, who was appointed deputy prime minister in charge of the economy, is also new minister . Ahmet was replaced by the prime minister's foreign policy advisor .
 Relations between the government and the military were strained by an expanding investigation into an alleged military plot to overthrow the government .
 In October 2008, charges had been brought against 86 defendants, including a number of high-ranking officers .
 56 of the 86 defendants accused of instigating the so-called Ergenekon plot remained in prison as new charges were added to the original indictment . Most of the officers arrested were subsequently released .
 The National Security Council recommended in August that the government continue to implement its policy of strengthening the unity of the nation . The government continues to fulfill at least some Kurdish aspirations .
 Protesters march in Ankara following new arrests in an alleged plot to overthrow the government . Among the protesters were many university students and teachers, who were alarmed that a number of leading academics were charged with involvement in the plot .
 Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu joined his Armenian counterpart, Edward Nalbandian, in signing two protocols that called for the establishment of full diplomatic relations . The protocols call for the opening of the frontier between the two countries . Armenia and Turkey signed protocols on October 10 .
 Achieving those goals remained problematic, however, even if the protocols were ratified by both countries’ parliaments . Opposition to the protocols emerged on numerous fronts, including opposition to them .
 Visa-free travel between Turkey and Syria came into force in September . Turkey’s relations with Syria and Iraq were upgraded to 'strategic partnerships'
 On January 29, Erdogan quit a panel at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switz., complaining that he had not been allowed to respond to a speech by Israeli Pres. Netanyahu . Erdogan quit the panel at Davos complaining he was not allowed to speak .
 Shimon Peres rejects Turkish criticism of Israeli operation in Gaza . Israeli President Peres has been criticized for his actions in Gaza by Turkey .
 In October, Turkey withdrew at the last moment an invitation to the Israeli air force to take part in joint maneuvers in central Turkey . Turkey withdrew the invitation at the end of last month . Israel and Turkey have been involved in joint military exercises in Turkey .
 EU annual report on Turkey’s progress praised the governments Kurdish and Armenian initiatives . The report also highlighted shortcomings in human rights in Turkey .
 Turkey's minister for EU affairs outlined a program of legislation aimed at meeting some of the EU’s demands . In response to the report, Egemen Bagis, the minister for . EU affairs, he outlined a plan to meet the EU's demands .
 The effects of the global recession were felt in Turkey throughout 2009 . Turkey was hit hard by the recession throughout the year .
 GDP contracted by 7% year-on-year in the second quarter; the volume of foreign trade fell by 36% in the first nine months . The unemployment rate increased from 10% to 13% by the end of July .
 The index of the Istanbul Stock Exchange more than doubled from a low of 26,864 at the beginning of the year to 59,093 by November 5 . However, the index suggested that in Turkey the worst of the economic crisis was over .
 Gurbanguly Berdymukhammedov announced that the global financial crisis was affecting Turkmenistan (despite the country’s lack of integration into the world financial system) because the volume of exports had been reduced .
 The steps the government had already taken to mitigate the effects of the crisis included issuing redenominated banknotes, creating a stabilization fund, and seeking to make the Turkmen economy even less dependent on the outside world . The government has already taken steps to make Turkmen's economy less dependent
 Turkmenistan has no foreign debts, Berdymukhammedov says . This is being made easier because it is not a country with foreign debts .
 In June, the country received a $3 billion loan from China to develop the South Yolotan natural gas deposit . The deposit is from which gas would be exported to China through a new pipeline that opened in December .
 Turkmenistan expressed interest during the year in participating in the Nabucco pipeline project, an international scheme to export gas to Europe via Iran via Iran, bypassing Russia .
 Foreign observers suggest that Turkmen interest was at least partly intended to irritate the Russian state-owned energy giant Gazprom . Foreign observers suggested that Turkman interest was aimed at irritating the energy giant .
 In the first half of 2009, there were several disagreements between the two countries over gas deliveries from Turkmenistan to Russia, but by October the disputes had been resolved, and at the end of the year, deliveries were set to begin in January 2010 .
 In April Berdymukhammedov sought to defuse the dispute between Central Asian states over water use by offering gas and electricity to Turkmenistan's neighbours . The meeting of the International Fund to Save the Aral Sea was held in April .
 He angered Tajikistan by supporting Uzbekistan in insisting that construction of large hydropower projects in upstream states be subject to regional consent and approved by independent international experts . He also backed Uzbekistan, however, by insisting that such projects be subject .
 Berdymukhammedov signed a decree setting up an interdepartmental working group on energy diplomacy . The working group will analyze the situation in the international energy sphere, including energy security issues .
 Berdymukhammedov’s predecessor Saparmurat Niyazov—the self-styled Turkmenbashi the Great—continued in 2009 with the gradual disappearance of more visible trappings of his period in office . The gradual dismantling of the legacy of
 This included the pervasive influence of Niyazov’s book Ruhnama, which had been given the status of holy writ and had caused incalculable damage to the education process . This included . The pervasive influence was given the . status of the book, which
 Turkmen opposition in exile says little has actually improved since Niyazov’s death . The influence of the security services is still all-pervasive in Turkmenistan, opposition says .
 Investment returns from the Tuvalu Trust Fund shrank . Fund lost an estimated 12.5% of its value as global financial markets contracted .
 Tuvalu's minister for public utilities and industries announced the creation of a $20 million plan . The plan will generate all of the country’s energy from renewable sources by 2020 .
 Tuvalu’s atolls were only 4. m above sea level at the highest point . Climate change is causing sea level rises that were starting to salinate hard-won cropping soil and king tides .
 12 Tuvaluans on the German-registered ship Hansa Stavanger were among 24 taken hostage by Somali pirates on April 4 . The risks for the many who serve as crew on merchant ships were highlighted in April 4 incident .
 In August all were freed after the ship's owner paid a $2.75 million ransom . In August the owners of the ship were able to free the hostages .
 Regional drought initially led to increased Ugandan exports of food, which offset diminished external demand for established exports such as coffee . The regional drought that devastated large areas in neighbouring countries has led to reduced external demand .
 The drought also hit Uganda hard, however, and after food shortages became severe in parts of the country, the government temporarily halted the export of key food commodities to regional markets .
 Per capita GDP still ranked among the lowest in Africa . Government consolidated and expanded gains of poverty-reduction efforts of recent years .
 At the beginning of the year, two British oil companies announced ""world-class" discoveries in the Lake Albert region .
 Tullow Oil signed nondisclosure production and revenuesharing agreements that were rumoured to give 8 of every 10 bbl found to Ugandan government .
 The government was eager to avoid the mistakes of other African oil-producing countries in unplanned development and lack of transparency . Mindful of endemic political instability in the oil-bearing area, the government was keen to avoid a repeat of the mistakes made by other countries .
 Early discussions for future planning concerned the construction of a refinery and a pipeline to the coast to end the country’s dependence on Kenya .
 Uganda participated with the Democratic Republic of the Congo and southern Sudan in a joint military operation, supported by United States advisers, in the DRC against the Lord’s Resistance Army . A Ugandan rebel group .
 The operation's objectives were to capture or kill LRA leader Joseph Kony and destroy the organizations command structure . The operation was intended to destroy the command structure of the LRA .
 Kony escaped and was rumoured to be at large in the Darfur region of The Sudan under the protection of the Khartoum government . The LRA scattered throughout the northeastern DRC and into The Sudan and the Central African Republic .
 Wherever the rebels went, they continued their reign of terror, raping and killing civilians and forcibly recruiting child soldiers . The rebels continued to rape and kill civilians and recruit child soldiers, killing civilians .
 Museveni says he yielded to pressure from the elders in her constituency to allow her to enter politics . He says his wife's parliamentary performance had been impressive . The Ugandan president says she was impressive in parliament .
 In September ongoing tension between the government and the traditional Buganda monarchy erupted in violence . The police prevented the Bugandan kabaka from attending a function in a town near Kampala that the government claimed had seceded from his kingdom .
 The police used tear gas and live ammunition to quash the ensuing riots . Some 20 people died and 50 were wounded in the riots, some 20 people were killed .
 At the end of the month, inconclusive talks took place between the kabaka and President Museveni . The talks were inconclusive .
 The year began with a gas dispute with Russia after the breakdown of talks between Gazprom and Ukraine’s national oil and gas company, Naftohaz Ukrainy . The dispute began in December 2008 after talks broke out between Russia and Ukraine in 2008 .
 Russia has halted all gas transit through Ukraine on the main pipeline to Europe . By January 7, Russia had halted all transit of gas through Ukraine . The main pipeline is the main link between Ukraine and Europe .
 The dispute, over prices and back payments, ended after Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko met with her Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, on January 18 . Gas transit through Ukraine resumed shortly thereafter after .
 The economic crisis in Ukraine was sparked by the worldwide financial crisis that began in 2008, deepened in 2009 . Ukraine's economic crisis was triggered by the global financial crisis in 2008 . The crisis began in 2009 and deepened into 2009 .
 GDP still fell 15.9% in the third quarter of the year, compared with the same period in 2008 . Although the contraction of the economy had slowed by November, the contraction has not slowed . GDP fell in the same quarter of 2008 compared with 2008 .
 In the first nine months of the year the Ukrainian currency, the hryvnya, fell from 5 to 8 against the U.S. dollar . In the same period, the country's currency fell to eight against the United States dollar .
 The International Monetary Fund released $10. billion of its $16. billion loan to Ukraine after Tymoshenko agreed to keep the country’s budget deficit at less than 6% in 2009 and less than 4% in 2010 . The IMF released the $10 billion loan after T
 On March 18, as a cost-saving measure, she ordered a 50% cut in salary for all cabinet ministers . The move was effective from April 1 until Jan. 2010 .
 Despite warnings by the prime minister and her allies in the Tymoshenko Bloc that the bill ran counter to Ukraine’s agreement with the IMF, the president signed it into law .
 IMF suspends further disbursement of the country’s loan . IMF subsequently suspended further payments to the country . The IMF has also suspended the country's loan to Greece .
 The only permanent replacement was a close ally of President Yushchenko, Petro Poroshenko, who was appointed foreign minister on October 9 . Poroshenko was appointed by the Ukrainian president last month .
 The Tymoshenko Bloc responded to Svoboda’s victory by declaring the election results invalid . Svobododa's victory was the first in a series of defeats in Ukraine since 2006 .
 The Rada initially set the next presidential election for October 25, but after the Constitutional Court overturned that decision on May 17, the election was scheduled for Jan., 2010 . The election was originally set for October .
 Yushchenko’s popularity among Ukrainians had plummeted . Relations between the Ukrainian president and his Russian counterpart, Dmitry Medvedev, also deteriorated .
 On August 11, Medvedev wrote an open letter to Yushchenko, denouncing him as “anti-Russian” and claiming that he had deliberately disrupted the supply of Russian gas to Europe . On Aug. 11, he wrote a letter to the Ukrainian leader, calling him
 Joe Biden offered assurances that his country still supported Ukraine’s NATO membership bid, despite delays in the admission process . Biden visited Ukraine, offering assurances that the U.S. still supported his country's NATO bid .
 Russian Orthodox patriarch Kirill I visited Russia from July 27 to August 10 . Kirill's visit was perceived to be a political mission . The patriarch of Moscow and all Russia visited Russia in August .
 Dubai's Metro Dubai is the first rapid-transit line in any Arab Gulf country . It opened on schedule on September 10, though it was still incomplete and reportedly 80% over budget .
 Dubai’s stock exchange, real-estate values, and construction industry declined markedly . Thousands of residents and workers left the emirate in the past decade .
 In November world markets were shaken when Dubai asked to delay interest payments for six months, and Abu Dhabi was forced to extend bailout funds . Dubai asked for delay of interest payments and extended bailout funds in November .
 Dubai inaugurated an ultramodern subway line in September . The new line is the first of its kind .
 Tensions between the U.A. and Saudi Arabia rose over border issues and the selection of Riyadh by members of the Gulf Cooperation Council as the headquarters of its proposed central bank . Riyadh was chosen by the council as headquarters of the new central bank, which will be based in Riyadh .
 The U.A.E. considered the decision to relocate the bank to the emirates was both politically motivated and dismissive of the competitive advantages of locating the bank in the UAE .
 In May the U.A.E. decided to join Oman in withdrawing from the planned GCC monetary union . Subsequently, in May, the UAE decided to withdraw from the plan . Oman withdrew from the monetary union in May .
 The U.A.E. continued its efforts to build nuclear energy plants for peaceful purposes, to generate electricity . U.K.E.'s nuclear plants have been built in the U.S. and Europe .
 It entered into agreements with the U.S. and France to help develop its nuclear program . It has announced that it expected to have its first nuclear power plant operating in 2015 .
 In May France established a permanent military base in Abu Dhabi, a move that Iran strongly criticized as being directed against it . Iran has accused France of trying to undermine its influence in the Middle East .
 The U.A.E. and Iran continued their ongoing dispute over the ownership of three strategic islands located in the Persian Gulf . The islands were under Iranian sovereignty .
 In the United Kingdom, the government had a difficult year in 2009, partly because of the impact of the global recession . In the U.K. of the economy, politicians had a tough year, but not only .
 The party's poor showing resulted in part from the proportional voting system used to elect members of the European Parliament .
 Labour's poor showing reflected the unpopularity of Gordon Brown and his government ministers . Gordon Brown's government ministers are also unpopular .
 James Purnell, secretary of state for work and pensions, resigned from Brown’s cabinet . Criticism of his leadership came to a head on the evening of June 4, immediately after the end of voting .
 Brown's allies sought to ensure that no other ministers followed Purnell's example . Brown’s allies are now trying to ensure other ministers don’t follow the example .
 Brown paid a price for securing the loyalty of two senior ministers . None of them did, though, though Brown paid for his loyalty .
 He wished to switch Chancellor of the Exchequer Alistair Darling and Foreign Secretary David Miliband to new ministerial posts, but they refused to move . He wanted to switch Darling and Miliband to a new ministerial post .
 As Brown felt that he could not dismiss them, he left them where they were, and his authority was visibly weakened . Brown left them there, leaving his authority visibly weakened.
 The Sun, the U.K.’s biggest-selling daily newspaper, has switched from Labour to the Conservatives . The Sun had supported Labour in the previous three previous elections .
 The Sun announced its decision on September 29, just hours after Brown delivered his main speech to Labour’s annual party conference .
 Media coverage of The Sun's decision overshadowed that of Brown’s speech, to the consternation of government ministers . Media coverage overshadowed the speech to the government ministers, causing consternernation .
 Conservative members sought to represent a moderate and responsible party in October . Conservatives would neither return to free-market ideology of the 1980s nor take risks with public finances . Conservative members seek to represent moderate .
 George Osborne made it clear in a speech on October 6 that tough decisions would have to be made on both taxes and public spending . George Osborne (see Biographies), the party's shadow chancellor .
 Conservative strategy proved more popular than it might have been in a more clement economic climate . With growing public acceptance of the need for such measures, the Conservative strategy was more popular .
 Many members of both the House of Commons and the Lords had claimed expenses to which they were not entitled . United Kingdom . Members of the House and Lords claimed expenses not entitled to them .
 The Daily Telegraph newspaper bought a pirated copy of a computer disk containing previously secret information . The paper devoted much of its news coverage for some weeks to disclosing the details of MPs’ expense claims .
 This showed how many MPs had exploited the expenses system to use public money to make tax-free profits on property dealings . MPs had used public funds to fund spending that had nothing to do with their parliamentary duties .
 Examples included being reimbursed for building a duck house, maintaining a tennis court, and cleaning out a moat .
 The disclosures led to resignations both of government ministers and of Conservative “shadow’s ministers .
 MPs announced they would stand down at the next general election rather than risk the wrath of their local voters . A number of MPs have already announced they will stand down as MPs .
 The biggest casualty of the scandal was the speaker (or chairman) of the Commons, Michael Martin . Martin was the Speaker of the House of Commons .
 He was criticized by some for not fighting what appeared to be an entrenched cavalier attitude toward expenses . Others criticized him for not defending MPs vigorously enough .
 On May 19 he became the first speaker in three centuries to be forced to resign his post . He was succeeded on June 22 by Conservative MP John Bercow .
 Prime Minister Brown asked Sir Thomas Legg, a retired civil servant, to conduct an independent audit of all expense claims since 2004 . The audit has been carried out since 2004 and since 2004, Mr Brown said .
 Most MPs agreed to abide by Legg’s request, though some challenged his findings . They argued that he was effectively changing the rules retrospectively .
 Most voters thought most MPs were dishonestly claiming money to which they were not entitled . Public opinion polls, however, showed that most voters think most MPs dishonestly claimed money to be .
 New rules agreed on that both restricted what MPs could claim and required that all expense claims be published online . But these reforms did little to quell public suspicion of MPs' expense claims .
 Brown was also forced onto the defense by demands that Nepalese Gurkha soldiers who had fought for the British army be allowed to retire in Britain . Brown was forced to defend the decision to allow them to retire from the army .
 Government proposals to offer very limited immigration rights were rejected by the Commons on April 29 .
 Scotland's first minister, Alex Salmond, had to make concessions to other parties to secure the passage of the budget on February 4 . Salmond's budget was passed by a majority of Scottish parliament in March .
 Rhodri Morgan announced on October 1, two days after his 70th birthday, that he would step down after almost 10 years as the Welsh first minister . He will step down from his post as first minister of Wales in Wales .
 Previously the highest court in the land had been the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords . Panel of Law Lords would meet to decide cases referred by Court of Appeal .
 Following growing calls to keep the legislative and judicial institutions completely separate, the Supreme Court was formally established . The Supreme Court is formally established in the United States .
 Amid the global recession, the U.K.'s GDP fell by 2.5% in the first quarter of 2009 . The U.S. economy is in a deep recession .
 The recession was the longest since quarterly GDP data were first collected in 1955 . The declines were gentler after that, although the third-quarter slide of 0.2% was the sixth quarterly decline .
 By the end of the year, there were signs that the trough of the recession had been reached, with output 6% below its earlv-2008 peak, and a tentative recovery had begun .
 Unemployment reached 2. million, or 8% of the labour force, by the end of the year, compared with 1. million in 2008 . Despite signs of economic recovery, unemployment continued to rise .
 The Bank of England acted aggressively in the early months of the year to revive demand . The governor, Mervyn King, has been in charge of the central bank since 2010 .
 The BOE embarked on a program of “quantitative easing,"" to inject more money into the economy by buying bonds from companies and banks . In addition, the BOE also embarked on an “Quantitative easing"
 By the end of the year, the BOE had injected £200 billion into the money supply . The money supply was injected by the Bank of England in 2012 .
 One reason why monetary policy was loosened so dramatically was that there was little room for further fiscal expansion . One reason for the loosening of monetary policy is that there is little room to further expansion .
 Government measures announced in 2008 to support the economy, combined with rapidly falling tax revenues, led the chancellor of the Exchequer to forecast in his budget speech on April 22 that government borrowing in fiscal 2009-10 was likely to reach £175 billion (about $260 billion), or 12
 Darling could not stimulate economy further through tax cuts or higher spending . This meant he could not boost the economy further with higher spending or tax cuts . Darling's tax cuts and spending cuts were not enough to stimulate economy .
 President Obama gave advance warning of future tax increases, intended to take effect as the economy recovers . He also gave advance notice of tax increases to the public .
 The top rate of income tax would rise in 2010 to 50% for those earning more than £150,000 . Personal tax allowances for those who earn over £100,000 a year would also be withdrawn .
 Anti-war protesters demonstrate in London on October 24 . United Kingdom. discuss the global recession .
 Barack Obama has been leading the international response to the financial crisis since September 2008 . Obama has led the world's response to financial crisis in the wake of the global recession .
 At the summit the G-20 members agreed to inject $1.1 trillion into the global economy . An additional $500 billion for less-developed countries was agreed .
 The new bank remained vulnerable, however, like other major U.K. banks, which continued to require government support in the form of equity stakes and insurance of toxic loans .
 The banks’ plight was underlined by the Royal Bank of Scotland’s announcement on February 26 of an annual loss of £24. billion . The biggest loss in U.K. company history was the biggest in British company history .
 RBS and LBG will be required to sell off some of their mortgage, insurance, and retail banking subsidiaries to smaller banks or to companies new to banking . The European Commission ruled on the conditions under which state aid was permitted in the UK .
 Independent inquiry will be held into Britain’s involvement in Iraq to find out what lessons could be learned . Brown on June 15 announced that a full, independent inquiry would be held in Iraq .
 Brown said inquiry would be conducted in private, but he yielded to pressure from Sir John Chilcot to allow hearings to be held in public . The inquiry will be chaired by a retired civil servant and will take place in the UK .
 As U.K. forces were leaving Iraq, they were arriving in Afghanistan . By October they numbered 9,500 there, mainly in Helmand province . U.S. forces are leaving Iraq .
 U.K. casualties increased sharply during the year . British troops were accused of lacking equipment that they needed to operate effectively .
 On October 14 Brown said British troops needed to stay in Afghanistan ""to protect British streets” from al-Qaeda . Brown said on October 14 that British troops should stay in . Afghanistan needed to "protect British streets," Brown said .
 Public support for the war fell as the death toll among U.K. troops increased . More than 70% of the British public want the troops brought home within 12 months .
 Scotland’s justice minister ordered the release of ‘Abd al-Basit al-Megrahi from jail on compassionate grounds . On August 20 Kenny MacAskill, Scotland's justice minister, ordered the . release .
 At the time of his release, Megrahi, who had been diagnosed with terminal cancer, was appealing his conviction . He was appealing the conviction but was released in 2007 .
 Megrahi returned to a hero’s welcome in Libya, which had reportedly negotiated his release with the Scottish authorities . The Libyan leader was reportedly released by the Scottish government .
 The event led to some friction between the U.K. and U.S. which publicly condemned Megrahi’s release . The event has led to tensions between the two countries .
 In October, Brown and Miliband proposed that former PM Tony Blair be selected as the president of the European Council . The new post was established by the Lisbon Treaty, which came into effect on December 1 .
 The post eventually went to Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy . Baroness Ashton of the U.K. was named high representative for foreign affairs .
 The 11-year-old Good Friday Agreement remained in force in Northern Ireland despite occasional armed attacks by fringe military groups .
 On March 7 two British troops were shot dead by members of the Real Irish Republican Army outside a British army base in the province . The incident occurred on March 7 .
 One of the hard-line republican groups, the Irish National Liberation Army, announced on October 11 that it regarded the war as over and would henceforth use only peaceful means to pursue its goals .
 INLA declared a ceasefire in 1998 but was accused of having involvement in a number of serious crimes . The INLA had declared ceasefire but was subsequently accused of involvement in several serious crimes in 1998 .
 The main source of tension between the two men in 2009 was policing . The main issue of tension was the issue of policing .
 Under the Good Friday Agreement, ultimate control over policing in the province would be handed over to the Northern Ireland Executive . Under the agreement, police in Northern Ireland would have to take control of policing under Northern Ireland's Northern Ireland Agreement .
 McGuinness urged that the transfer take place as swiftly as possible in 2009 . Throughout 2009 McGuinness has called for the transfer to be completed .
 Robinson was more cautious, ostensibly because he feared that the U.K. would not provide enough funding for the police service . Robinson feared that his party would lose ground to rival Protestant parties if Sinn Fein was seen to have too much influence over the new service .
 Full agreement on a transfer of powers had not been achieved by the end of 2009 . Full agreement was not reached until end of last year .
 In 2009, after decades of international economic, military, and political leadership, the U.S. faced serious limits on its ability to control world affairs . President Barack Obama took office in January 2009 .
 Years of fiscal excess exacerbated the effects of a severe global recession, reducing U.S. influence abroad . Less-developed countries, including China, have assumed the role of economic growth in the United States . China is now taking over the role as the world's economic engine .
 Barack Obama started the year with high expectations and ended it with what appeared to be a significant legislative victory . But he also learned the limits of power in a politically divided country .
 The United States struggled through the year under the burden of its most severe economic downturn since the Great Depression . The U.S. suffered the worst year of economic downturn in decades .
 The United States adopted unprecedented stimulus measures aimed at saving jobs and restoring growth . The measures were joined by other major governments, including the United States .
 By year’s end the intervention appeared to have stopped the economic decline . But economists worried that recovery would be slow by historical standards and hindered by excessive government intervention and borrowing .
 The U.S. recession officially started in December 2007 . The slump accelerated as businesses reacted to major financial market turmoil the following year .
 GDP contracted 6.3% in late 2008 and early 2009, the most dismal two quarters for the U.S. economy in more than 60 years . GDP contracted 5.7% in early 2009 and 6.2% in 2008, the worst two quarters in 60 years for the
 In mid-February, Obama signed a $787 billion stimulus spending measure . The measure was signed by Obama in February .
 Financial markets reacted negatively, with stock prices sinking to 1997 levels by early March . Initially, financial markets reacted to financial markets reacting negatively . Stock prices sank by more than 20 per cent in March .
 As more cracks in the economy appeared, the federal government responded with increasing activism . The government responded to the cracks with increasing government activism .
 The Treasury Department was forced to extend a total of $80 billion to two ailing automobile manufacturers . The Treasury took 8% ownership of Chrysler and a 61% stake in General Motors, forcing both companies into temporary bankruptcy .
 Insurance giant AIG took $170 billion in government funds to remain solvent after staggering losses . Insurance giant reinsured numerous mortgage securities that went sour .
 By late spring, financial institutions had begun to stabilize, aided by loans authorized under the 2008 Troubled Assets Relief Program emergency legislation . Financial institutions were stabilized by late spring .
 Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner established “stress tests’s” to make certain remaining banks were adequately capitalized and accurately projecting their losses . The tests were established to make sure remaining banks had adequate capitalized .
 The United States central bank kept interest rates at historic lows to encourage borrowing and economic activity . The U.S. central bank keeps interest rates in historic low levels .
 The target rate for federal funds was pegged at zero to 0.25% for the entire year . That helped keep rates for business loans and mortgages down .
 The Federal Reserve pumped well over $1 trillion into the economy by purchasing Treasury bonds and mortgage instruments . It effectively printed new money to keep interest rates at minimal levels . The Fed has kept interest rates low .
 Unemployment hit 10.2% in October, the highest rate in more than a quarter of a century . Jobless rate eased slightly to 10% in December, but job losses continued in December .
 The upswing erased most of the stock market losses of 2008, which averaged some 40% . But it also produced major inequities in the financial sector .
 By year’s end, the seven largest banks that received TARP funding had repaid the government with dividends and interest . The seven biggest banks that had received the government's TARP funds had repaid it with dividends, interest .
 Financial industry executives were receiving outsized bonuses even as jobs continued to disappear across the country . This meant that some financial industry executives received outsized salaries . This was despite the fact that jobs were disappearing across the U.S.
 GDP finally turned positive in the third quarter, gaining 2.2% and raising hopes that the country was emerging from recession . GDP is expected to recover from recession in the coming months .
 Some economists say the economic growth was made possible only by temporary federal stimulus programs . The stimulus programs include a $3 billion “cash for clunkers” program designed to remove gas cars .
 For the first time in 35 years, Social Security and other pensioners received no inflation adjustment . Consumer price index for the fiscal year ended September 30 actually dropped . The consumer price index actually dropped for fiscal year .
 Energy and food prices began climbing again late in the year, signaling an imminent return to modest inflation of recent years . Even so, energy, food prices are climbing again, signaling a return of modest inflation .
 The recession erased most remaining traces of fiscal responsibility in Washington . The recession wiped most of the nation's fiscal responsibility out of control .
 Stimulative policies helped balloon the U.S. federal deficit to $1.42 trillion for the fiscal year . The deficit was three times the previous record set a year earlier . Stimulus policies helped boost the deficit to three times previous record .
 A similar deficit was forecast for fiscal year 2010, part of a deficit projection of $9 trillion for the next decade . The deficit is forecast for the fiscal year of 2010 . The U.S. is projected to have a deficit of nearly $10 trillion in 2010 .
 Fiscal imbalance helped depress the value of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies in 2013 . Low interest rates, low interest rates also contributed to the drop in the dollar value .
 Obama entered office vowing to reduce partisanship in Washington, but he made little progress in his first year . Like his predecessor, he entered office with a pledge of reducing partisanship .
 With Democrats holding majorities in both houses of Congress, Obama allowed Congress to shape legislation . Obama allowed congressional leaders to shape important legislation . Democrats hold substantial majorities in Congress .
 Republicans were largely excluded from substantive negotiations on key bills . Republicans were able to slow progress on several of Obama’s legislative priorities .
 In the president’s first month in office, Democrats pushed three major bills through Congress with minimal or no Republican support . In the first month of Obama's presidency, the president's first major bill was pushed through Congress without GOP support .
 The second bill was a reauthorization and expansion of the State Children's Health Insurance Program . The measure had been vetoed twice by former president George W Bush as fiscally irresponsible .
 The House of Representatives passed a third bill without any Republican votes . The $787 billion stimulus spending measure was passed without any GOP votes .
 The partisan actions helped solidify the Republican caucus, particularly in the Senate, where 60 votes are required for most legislative action .
 The president was able to accomplish numerous changes through executive order in early 2009 . The president's executive order was passed by executive order .
 In January Obama rescinded the “Mexico City policy”— which had been reinstated by Bush in 2001— to allow the resumption of U.S. foreign aid funding for international family planning groups .
 In March he removed restrictions on federal funding for stem cell research that had been established by Bush administration . The Bush administration had established the restrictions eight years earlier .
 Obama’s overall job-approval rating, as measured by public opinion polls, topped 65% in early 2009 but dropped steadily to around 50% in late December . The president's overall job approval rating is now 50% .
 His rating was weighed down by rising unemployment, perceived federal overreaching, and hard decisions that he had to make on his legislative and policy agendas .
 Obama renominated Ben Bemanke for a second term as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board . The nomination was quickly bogged down amid congressional demands for more transparency and added control over the Fed .
 In June, Obama proposed a sweeping increase in federal authority over the country’s financial institutions . Obama declared that the subprime mortgage crisis had been caused by ""insufficient regulation”
 By December the House had approved legislation that cracked down on hedge funds and credit-rating agencies . The legislation also increased congressional scrutiny of Fed monetary policy .
 Later in June the House approved a controversial Obama administration energy and environmental protection bill . The bill was approved on a largely party-line vote .
 The “capand-trade’s” legislation would establish a system of buying and selling pollution permits to meet emissions limits . The legislation aimed to slash greenhouse-gas emissions to 17% below 2005 levels by 2020 .
 Opponents say the legislation would hamstring American industry and cause major increases in taxes and the cost of American goods . Opponents said it would hamstring U.S. industry .
 The Senate failed to take up cap-and-trade legislation during 2009 as opposition mounted . Several analysts declared the cap and trade concept dead, and several analysts declared it dead .
 At year's end Obama obtained a major victory on his top domestic policy priority . Both chambers of Congress approved national health care reform bills after contentious legislative bargaining .
 Both bills would extend access to health insurance to an additional 30 million Americans . They would prohibit denial of coverage by insurers, require most Americans to obtain insurance or face financial penalties .
 The bills would pay for expanded care in part through tax increases on higher-income earners and reductions in payments to providers of Medicare and Medicaid services .
 Democrats were optimistic that Obama would eventually get a final bill to sign, but serious problems remained . Democrats are optimistic that the bill will eventually be signed, but there are still many problems .
 Critics complained that the legislation would raise revenues quickly but delay benefits . Critics called into question its estimated $900 billion price tag over 10 years . Critics say it would raise revenue quickly, delay benefits and raise costs .
 No GOP member voted for either health care reform bill or a government takeover of health care . It's hot good enough for U.S.
 The Senate dropped a provision setting up a government-run insurance option to compete with private firms, angering liberal Democrats . The Senate also watered down a strict House measure prohibiting public funds from being spent on abortion services .
 At year's end, support for the legislation dropped markedly amid allegations that some Senate votes had been effectively bought via special-interest provisions . The legislation was passed in the Senate in December .
 The apparent breakthrough on health care provided an upbeat ending to a difficult first year for the new administration . Even so, the apparent breakthrough provides an upbeat end to a tough first year .
 President Obama moved quickly in departing from Bush administration efforts to combat Islamist terrorism and extremism . President Obama left the Bush administration behind efforts to fight Islamist terrorism .
 Obama signed executive orders that banned the use of harsh interrogation techniques on captured terrorist suspects . He also called for closing the United States military detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba .
 The Guantanamo deadline was especially controversial and proved overly ambitious . It was especially ambitious and proved over ambitious .
 Few countries were interested in taking high-risk prisoners . Federal trials of detainees posed some enormous procedural and security problems . Terrorism recidivism was high among released prisoners .
 In May the administration altered its course and announced that it would retain the use of military tribunals, albeit with new procedures that would provide additional defendant rights . In May, the administration announced that the administration would retain use of the military tribunal .
 The defendants, all of whom had been captured abroad, will receive most of the constitutional protections and process rights afforded U.S. citizens . This decision meant that the defendants had all of the . defendants had most of . the constitutional . rights afforded United States citizens, the judge said .
 Holder defended the venue as appropriate because most September 11 victims were civilians and the attacks occurred on U.S. soil . Holder said the venue was appropriate because of the fact that most victims were civilian .
 The one-year deadline for closing the Guantanamo facility was abandoned . The Guantanamo facility has been closed since 2009 .
 Administration officials explored the possibility of confining most of the inmates at an unused state prison in rural Illinois . Federal acquisition of the prison was under way at year’s end .
 Another idea: Transferring prisoners to Yemen was widely discredited after concerns raised over al-Qaeda activity in that country . Another idea was to transfer prisoners to the U.S. to Yemen, but concerns were raised .
 Yemeni extremists were linked to the perpetrator of an attempted bombing of an airliner bound for Detroit on Christmas Day . Yemeni extremists have been linked to an attempt to bomb a Detroit-bound airliner .
 Hood, Texas, in November was also linked to a radical Islamist cleric in Yemen . The incident in Texas was linked to the cleric's radical beliefs .
 In his presidential campaign, Obama had criticized U.S. involvement in Iraq and suggested Afghanistan pacification efforts were wrongly shortchanged as a result .
 As security conditions in Iraq continued to improve, the new administration began slowly removing U.S. military personnel . The goal of ending combat operations by mid-2010 and exiting the country entirely by late 2011 was announced in January .
 The military outlook in Afghanistan deteriorated rapidly, however, as Taliban insurgents regrouped and stepped up attacks on U.S. and NATO forces . The Taliban insurgents have stepped up their attacks on United States and NATO troops .
 In February Obama announced plans to send 17,000 additional U.S. troops to Afghanistan, bringing the total troop commitment to 68,000 . The total commitment to Afghanistan currently stands at 68,500 .
 President Obama has ordered a comprehensive review of the United States mission in Afghanistan . He has also ordered a review into the U.S. mission in the country .
 His military appointees concluded their review in August and asked for the deployment of up to 40,000 more troops . The review was part of a review by the US government .
 The request comes as evidence of fraud nearly overturned the Afghan national election . The request came as evidence nearly overturned an election nearly overturned .
 U.S. troop fatalities doubled in 2009 compared with the previous year . Antiwar activists were raising the spectre of another Vietnamlike disaster for the United States military .
 Obama announced he would send 30,000 fresh U.S. troops to Afghanistan in an attempt to blunt the insurgency . The decision was likely the most important decision of Obama's first year in office . Obama said he would use his best efforts to recruit another 10,000 troops from reluctant
 Obama also called for a drawdown of combat forces to begin after 18 months . Many conservatives have faulted the decision to send more troops .
 Obama had adopted and even escalated most war and national security policies of his predecessor . Left-wing critics complained that despite superficial changes, Obama had . adopted and . escalated most . war . policies of predecessor .
 Obama defended his path as he accepted the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo in December . Obama says his path was the right path for Obama .
 The new administration worked to project a more cooperative image of the U.S. abroad during 2009 . It acknowledged past errors and sought to repair strained relations in many parts of the world .
 In April Obama sought a ""fresh start” with Russia, telling Russian Pres. Vladimir Putin to get a "fresh start" with the U.S. President .
 This diplomatic outreach was well received internationally, but tangible results on specific major international controversies were almost nonexistent .
 Some world leaders applauded the approach as helpful toward restoring the vitality of U.S. diplomacy . Critics suggested that the United States was instead pandering, projecting weakness, and abandoning leadership .
 Joe Biden declared that Russia was a nation in decline, Russia allowed the U.S. to use its airspace to resupply allied military forces in Afghanistan . Russia also promised a new nuclear arms reduction agreement by year’s end . Joe Biden declares that Russia is in decline .
 In September, the United States dramatically abandoned elements of its long-standing European missile shield project . The U.S. abandoned elements in Poland and a radar site in the Czech Republic .
 The Strategic Arms Reduction Talks I treaty was allowed to expire in December without a replacement . Russia pressed for additional concessions by threatening to restart development of new offensive weaponry .
 Efforts to thwart the nuclear ambitions of North Korea and Iran again went nowhere in 2009 . Efforts in 2009 failed to thwart North Korea's nuclear ambitions .
 The U.S. offered several initiatives to entice North Korea into abandoning its nuclear weapons research . The North Korean regime continued to test missiles and nuclear weapons and staved off international pressure to shutter its facilities .
 Despite active U.S. diplomacy, Iran evaded proposals to reign in its nuclear development . Despite active United States diplomacy, both public and private, Iran has evaded a host of proposals .
 Obama drew widespread criticism from opponents who thought he issued only a mild condemnation of an Iranian government crackdown on prodemocracy dissidents following a disputed election in June .
 Obama downplays the belated discovery of a new Iranian fuel-reprocessing facility in Qom . Obama also downplayed the discovery of the new fuel-processing facility .
 In October Iranian negotiators in Geneva appeared to agree to a U.S.backed proposal to send most of Iran’s stockpile of low-enriched uranium to Russia for reprocessing . The plan would have delayed any Iranian nuclear weapon by at least a year .
 Obama's open hand to Latin America did not immediately produce results . Obama has been criticized for lack of progress in Latin America .
 At the meeting in Trinidad and Tobago, Obama was photographed warmly greeting Venezuelan Pres. Caracasso . Obama was pictured warmly welcoming Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez .
 Hugo Chavez stilled Chavez’s anti-American rhetoric only briefly . Chavez's anti-U.S. rhetoric stilled only briefly briefly briefly .
 Venezuela later announced that it was cooperating with Iran's nuclear development with Iran . Venezuela later said it would cooperate with Iran to develop nuclear weapons .
 The United States State Department sided with the Honduran Pres. Manuel Zelizer . The U.S. State Department has sided with Honduras' Chavez ally, Honduran President Zelizer.
 Manuel Zelaya was overthrown in June and deported to Costa Rica . Zelaya is a former president of Honduras . He was ousted from power in June .
 The United States pressured Honduras to restore Zelaya to power, suspending military and development aid to the country and canceling U.S. visas for Honduran officials . Zelaya was ousted from power in 2009 .
 The interim Honduran government refused to accede, however, and instead proceeded to new elections in November . New elections will take place in Honduras in November, the interim government says .
 The United States ultimately urged recognition of the balloting results, which removed Zelaya’s party from control . The development was widely viewed as a sign of declining United States influence in Latin America .
 Chinese economy grew rapidly out of its 2008 downturn and the United States economy struggled . U.S.-China relations sustained awkward moments between 2008 and 2009 . China's economy grew out of recession in 2008 and the U.K. economy in 2009 .
 China was a significant holder of United States Treasury bonds . Beijing officials repeatedly warned against excessive U.S. borrowing . China is a significant stake in the United States' bonds .
 An influential Chinese central banker published a paper in March that predicted that the U.S. dollar would eventually be replaced as the world’s reserve currency .
 Obama visited China in November and was given a decidedly mixed reception . The visit included a joint ""press conference” and a meeting with Chinese students .
 China and the U.S. are the world’s largest emitters of carbon dioxide . In December, they were central players at the UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen .
 Both countries made demands of each other while declining to make serious concessions . Both countries declined to give serious concessions.
 As a result, aspirational goals but no enforceable actions defined the outcome . As a . result, as a result of aspirational . goals, the . outcome will be defined by the outcome of the outcome, the author says .
 Chinese officials appeared to avoid serious discussions with their U.S. counterparts . Obama expressed chagrin when he appeared at a Chinese meeting with Indian, Brazilian, and South African officials .
 U.S. state governments faced tough economic times in 2009 . The economy dominated the priorities of state governments in the United States . The state's economic woes were the result of a long-running recession .
 Almost all states were constitutionally required to balance their budgets . Officials took drastic measures to reduce costs and increase revenue . Almost all of the nation's budgets were met with deficit projections .
 The fiscal crisis, termed the most severe for states since the Great Depression, discouraged creation of new legislative programs, prompted major tax increases during economic hard times . It also caused unusual tensions in the relationship between states and federal government .
 Several lower-tax states with energy-based economies were able to weather the downturn relatively easily . Several states used federal stimulus funds to avoid significant trims to state services . The stimulus funds will be used to offset significant cuts to services .
 While the economy showed signs of recovery by midyear, state finances were slow to stabilize . State finances are slow to stabilise after a year of recession .
 In the face of declining tax revenues and rising expenses from unemployment, Medicaid, and other soA protester chants during a demonstration staged in July by health care workers and others outside the gated entrance to the private residential community in Los Angeles .
 Several states ended the year facing the possibility of additional severe budget deficits in 2010 without the help of further federal assistance . United States cial payments, numerous states ended . the year .
 All 50 states held regular legislative sessions during the year . 15 staged one or more special sessions, often to deal with budget matters . 15 of the 50 states staged special sessions .
 Under fiscal pressure, some state governments reformed services and operations . Often by consolidating functions, reducing hours, and increasing efficiency . State governments often reduce hours, consolidate functions and reduce costs .
 Utah's 2008 enactment of a four-day workweek for some agencies was closely watched . Utah’s 2008 enactment of a 4-day week was closely followed by the state legislature .
 Maine’s governor issued a controversial economy measure to consolidate school districts . Voters later refused to overturn it, and the measure was overturned .
 The state chief justice criticized the California initiative and referendum process as having produced haphazard and counterproductive policies over the years . California faced the country’s most severe financial problems .
 Voters in Maine and Washington rejected 'taxpayer bill of rights' measures . Voters rejected measures designed to limit government growth . Voters in both states rejected the measures .
 In November, Republicans made gains in limited state elections in limited states . Republicans benefited from deteriorating public confidence in government officials .
 In New Jersey and Virginia the GOP wrested away governorships previously held by Democrats . GOP also took over as governor in Arizona after Pres. Obama took office in Arizona .
 Republicans picked up seats in legislative elections in Virginia and New Jersey and in a handful of special elections in four other states . Republicans won seats in Virginia, New Jersey, Virginia, and New Hampshire .
 26 governorships would be held by Democrats and 24 by Republicans in 2010 . For 2010, Democrats would hold 26 states, 24 Republicans would hold governorships .
 Democrats owned a more comfortable advantage in state legislatures, enjoying two-house control of 27 states . Republicans held a majority in both chambers of 14 states, while Democrats held both chambers in 14 states .
 In 8 states the legislatures were split or tied, and Nebraska had a nonpartisan unicameral legislature . Nebraska's legislature is a nonpartisan nonpartisan .
 U.S. Congress rushed billions of dollars in aid to state treasuries to maintain services and control deficits . State budgets deteriorated rapidly in the face of national economic conditions . The aid was rushed to states by Congress to control deficits and maintain services .
 In many cases, this aid came with strings attached, imposing federal policies on unenthusiastic state governments . In some instances, the aid was aimed at countering state efforts to reduce social services spending .
 One federal stimulus program required that part-time workers be covered . Republican governors in Texas, South Carolina, Alabama, Louisiana, Alaska, and Mississippi initially rejected those funds .
 Legislatures in South Carolina and Alaska overturned gubernatorial decisions and accepted almost all federal assistance offered . Legislatures overturned the governor's decision to accept federal assistance .
 Federal efforts to improve homeland security prompted another face-off over the 2005 Real ID Act . The act required states to tighten standards on the issuance of state driver's licenses as well as ID cards .
 Washington warned that residents of states unable to comply by the December 31 deadline could not use existing licenses as identification to board airplanes or enter federal buildings . The deadline expires on December 31 .
 With only a small minority of states on track to meet the deadline, the government granted an extension until May 2011 .
 The fiscal crisis preoccupied state governments throughout the year . It led to a second consecutive year of reduced general fund spending . State governments reduced their budgets in 2014 .
 Revenue from all major state tax sources diminished by more than 10% as the national economy languished . Required expenditures for unemployment, health care, and other programs rose dramatically . State revenue from state taxes diminished by 10% .
 Stimulus funds were used to shore up state expenditures for social services, infrastructure programs, public schools, and general economic stabilization . Stimulus money was used in the wake of the financial crisis .
 The aid also allowed a few, mostly smaller, states to balance their budgets without dramatic legislative adjustments . 13 states drained their rainy-day funds in order to resolve budget problems .
 22 states laid off government workers and 23 made acrossthe-board reductions in agency budgets . To reduce costs, 22 states made cuts to their budgets .
 In some cases interest groups were able to stop planned cuts via lawsuits . In others, they have been able to sue to stop the planned cuts .
 Colorado, Kansas, Michigan, North Carolina, and Washington were among states closing prisons . Washington state prisons will be closed in the fall .
 Arizona and California resorted to selling public buildings to raise funds and then leasing them back . The state has been forced to sell public buildings in order to raise money . The buildings are often leased back to the state .
 Idaho, Kansas, Utah, Nevada, and Washington trimmed spending on public schools . Florida, Kansas and Washington reduced higher-education support in higher education .
 The crisis overcame traditional reluctance to raise taxes during economic downturns . It overcame traditional legislative reluctance to do so during the downturn .
 29 states raised taxes or fees to generate $23. billion in new revenue, the largest increase on record . The largest increase in revenue was $23 billion, according to the Treasury .
 Twelve states raised sales taxes, producing $6.6 billion in additional net revenue . Twelve states increased sales taxes in 2012, producing more than $6 billion .
 17 states increased taxes on tobacco and alcohol . Three states boosted motor-fuel levies, while 17 increased tobacco taxes on alcohol and tobacco .
 Social service expenditures in most states continued to climb as state revenue lagged . At year’s end the economic downturn showed signs of easing, but social service expenditures remained high .
 Some state officials began lobbying Washington for another round of aid even while they prepared for a decline in overall state spending . Overall state spending for an unprecedented third consecutive year is down .
 Despite setbacks, legal recognition of same-sex marriage expanded significantly during the year . Same-sex marriages were legalized in the U.S. despite setbacks .
 Vermont, New Hampshire and D.C. first jurisdictions to sanction gay marriage through legislative process . Vermont, N.H. and District of Columbia became first states to sanction same-sex marriage .
 In November, Maine voters rescinded a gay-marriage law passed by the legislature earlier in the year . In November the law was rescinded by Maine voters .
 The Iowa Supreme Court declared that state's ban on samesex marriages to be unconstitutional . Iowa's ban was declared unconstitutional by the state's Supreme Court .
 Nevada authorized domestic partnerships, and the state of Washington strengthened its domestic partnership laws . Washington state also strengthened domestic partnerships laws .
 The California Supreme Court affirmed the validity of Proposition 8, a 2008 initiative that overturned the high court’s extension of full same-sex marriage rights . The ruling validated 18,000 gay marriages performed before the vote was taken .
 By year’s end 5 states and the District of Columbia fully sanctioned same-sex marriage . 7 more provided for domestic partnerships or civil unions . 30 states, including California, had constitutional provisions banning same-same-sex marriages .
 Arkansas became the 15th state to ban late-term ""partial-birth” abortions . Arkansas is 15th to ban the practice .
 Kansas, Ohio, and North Dakota required medical clinics to post notices advising women that they could not be coerced into having an abortion . North Dakota, Kansas and Ohio required clinics to put such notices on notice .
 Georgia became the first state to provide for adoption of human embryos . Critics said that the law was a back-door attempt to extend legal rights to embryos .
 United States tors to offer anesthesia for a fetus before abortions performed 20 or more weeks after conception . United States offers anesthesia for fetus before abortion performed 20-plus weeks . U.S. law requires abortion to be performed 20 to more than 20 weeks .
 Under recession-induced pressure to raise additional revenue, states continued to expand legalized gaming . State gaming laws have been expanded in recent years .
 In November, Ohio voters approved casinos in four cities after rejecting four similar ballot proposals . Ohio voters rejected four similar proposals in November .
 Kansas became the first jurisdiction to provide for state-owned casinos . Actual gambling operations at its initial Dodge City site were to be run by a private firm under a lease .
 The imposition of capital punishment ticked up during 2009 . Reversing a recent trend, capital punishment was increased in 2009 .
 Eleven states executed a total of 52 men; 24 of those were in a single state, Texas . 11 states executed 52 men in total .
 New Mexico is the second state in three years to repeal the death penalty . Maryland narrowed the criteria for its imposition in Maryland . New Mexico was the first state to repeal its death penalty in the last three years .
 Governor of Texas embroiled in controversy over execution of an innocent man in 2004 . Governor allowed innocent man to be executed for arson in 2004 for arson . Governor says he was wrong to execute man for arson conviction .
 Objections to the death penalty as cruel and unusual punishment continued . Objections continued to be raised against the capital's execution .
 Nebraska became the last among 35 death-penalty states to authorize lethal injection . Ohio became the first to authorize a slow-acting single-dose intravenous anesthetic to replace the three-injection method .
 The year produced unprecedented ethics drama involving ranking state officials . The year was marked by unprecedented ethics dramas involving ranking officials .
 Following his indictment on federal corruption charges, including an alleged attempt to sell Pres. Barack Obama . Obama was indicted on corruption charges .
 Rod Blagojevich was impeached and removed from office by the Illinois legislature . He was removed by the state legislature from office . Blagoevich is a former governor of Illinois .
 He was only the eighth governor in United States history to have been ousted after impeachment .
 Sarah Palin abruptly resigned her office at midyear, complaining of ""frivolous” ethics investigations by the state legislature . Sarah Palin, the 2008 Republican vice presidential candidate, abruptly resigned in midyear .
 Mark Sanford had confessed to using state funds to pursue an extramarital affair . Sanford had been under investigation after confessing to having an affair with a woman .
 Bill Richardson withdrew as the Obama administration's candidate to head the U.S. Commerce Department . Richardson withdrew owing to an ongoing investigation into New Mexico state contracting practices . Richardson was the subject of an investigation into state contracts practices .
 Three powerful speakers of state house chambers left office early under fire . State House speakers have been accused of sexual misconduct in the past .
 In Florida, Ray Sansom quit after accusations he funneled funds to a college that later hired him . Sansom was later indicted by a state grand jury .
 Salvatore DiMasi resigned amid allegations that he had helped solicit kickbacks from a state contractor . DiMasis resigned in Massachusetts amid allegations he had solicited kickbacks . In Massachusetts, he was accused of soliciting kickbacks for state contracts .
 Glenn Richardson attempted suicide and resigned amid rumours he had an affair with a lobbyist . In Georgia, Richardson resigned after an attempt to commit suicide . Richardson had an extramarital affair with lobbyist .
 The United States Congress debated a sweeping reform of national health care in late 2009 . The U.S. Congress is debating a sweeping overhaul of the health care system .
 Most congressional bills envisioned a major expansion of Medicaid, a health insurance program for low-income persons . Medicaid is jointly funded by federal and state governments and run by states .
 State officials feared they would be burdened with stepped-up obligations and no method of paying for them . State officials fear they would have to step up obligations and find a way to pay for them.
 Some Democratic proposals also included a ""public option”—that is, a government health plan that would compete with private insurers .
 To meet objections that the provision of a public option would lead to government takeover of health care . Bill writers explored turning over numerous details to individual states or allowing individual states to opt out .
 The House and the Senate passed their bills in early November and late December, respectively . The Senate passed the bills in December .
 The federal stimulus bill contained $87 billion in funds for a two-year period ending in 2011 . Medicaid expenditures soared . To help states defray added costs, the stimulus bill included $87billion in funds .
 The transfers came with stipulations that states had to retain the eligibility and application processes they had in place as of mid-2008 . The transfers, however, came with restrictions . States had to keep the eligibility process they had been in place since mid-08 .
 Arizona, California, Florida, Rhode Island, and South Carolina had to rescind stricter eligibility requirements they had enacted since mid-2008 . That meant that Arizona, . California, . Florida, and Rhode Island had to . rescind stricter . requirements they'd enacted .
 States were given responsibility for distributing flu vaccine even as health department employees were being furloughed during budget cutting . H1N1 flu threatened the U.S. in yet another federalism controversy . Health department employees are furloughing during budget cuts .
 The most severe predictions of a swine flu epidemic failed to materialize by year's end . One result was an ominous shortfall in vaccine distribution, but it didn't .
 Reversing a controversial policy of the George W Bush administration, the Obama administration announced it would no longer pursue criminal cases against users of medical marijuana .
 Fourteen states allowed the use of marijuana prescribed by medical personnel . Fourteen other states allow medical marijuana use .
 In November balloting, Maine voters approved an expansion of the state’s medical marijuana program . In November, voters approved a medical marijuana expansion .
 Cannabis Cafe in Portland served those who held Oregon medical marijuana cards . National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws . Madeline Martinez, executive director of the Oregon chapter, talks with a patron .
 In 2009, Uruguayans went to the polls to elect a president and the entire parliament . For the fifth time since the restoration of democratic rule in 1985, elections were held in 2009 . President Tabare Ramon Vazquez Rosas is the current president .
 As expected, Mujica won by a comfortable margin, earning 53% of the vote to 43% for Lacalle . Lacalle was elected by a narrow margin of votes .
 Mujica promised to run an administration similar to that of Brazilian Pres. Mariano Acosta . Mujican promised to be the first president of Colombia to take office .
 A leftist government would respect the rules of international finance and investment while striving to improve the plight of the less fortunate . Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva would be a leftist government that respects international finance .
 Former finance minister Danilo Astori was to serve as Mujica’s vice president . He was expected to have a large say in running the country's economy .
 Mujica’s rumpled persona and shoot-from-the-hip speaking style perhaps contributed to this concern . The former mayor of New York City has been in office since 1994 .
 Uruguay's democracy was clearly successfully consolidated . Nevertheless, Uruguay’s democracy was successfully consolidated. Nevertheless, it was clearly successful .
 Tabare Vazquez culminated with the successful implementation of a program to provide laptop computers to all primary schoolchildren in Uruguay . The program has been implemented by the government of Uruguay .
 The ability of same-sex couples to adopt children was legalized during the year . Same-sex marriage was legalized in 2012 . The ability to adopt is also legalized in 2013 .
 Jose Mujica campaigns for president of Uruguay in October . Health care was made more fully accessible to the poor through health care .
 He won in a runoff election on November 29 after a controversial increase in the personal income tax . The tax increase is part of a controversial tax increase .
 Uruguay was expected to see a modest positive gain in GDP for the year . Even with a slowdown in economic growth brought on by the worldwide financial crisis, Uruguay's economy is expected to grow modestly .
 Unemployment remained historically low, and foreign investment was especially strong . Foreign investment remained especially strong, and unemployment was historically low .
 A new container terminal at the port of Montevideo was opened late in the year . New container terminals have been opened in Montevideo .
 Karimov declared that the anticrisis measures adopted by the government had produced ""convincing" results . Karimov attributed Uzbekistan’s economic success to the country having followed its own development path, he said .
 The Navoi region was declared a free economic zone in 2009 . Uzbek leadership aspired to attract investment amounting to $900 million by year's end .
 Lee Myung-bak raised expectations for increased investment by Seoul in Uzbek industry . Lee's government has raised expectations of increased investment in the country .
 Uzbekistan's relations with its neighbours Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan worsened during the year . Uzbekistan’s relations with KyrgyZstan and its neighbours worsened in 2013 .
 Uzbekistan remains adamant in its opposition to the construction of large-scale hydroelectric projects in those two countries . In February Karimov persuaded his Turkmen counterpart to join him in opposing construction of two power dams, thereby infuriating the Tajiks .
 Uzbek-Tajik relations began to deteriorate at the very beginning of the year when Uzbekistan stopped transmission of power purchased by Tajikistan from Turkmenistan . Uzbek and Tajik relations deteriorated at the beginning of this year .
 Uzbek expert questions safety of large power plants built in Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan during Soviet era . Concerns raised by Uzbek Foreign Minister Vladimir Norov in the UN General Assembly .
 This event marked an escalation of the verbal feud between Uzbekistan and its upstream neighbours . Uzbekistan is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Relations between Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan strained by the occasionally high-handed behaviour of border guards . The border guards were involved in an armed attack in May on a police post in the town of Khonobod .
 The attack was initially attributed to the militant Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan . The Kyrgyz Border Service denied Uzbek assertions that the group had come from Kyrgygyzstan .
 Uzbek government troops fired on unarmed protesters in 2005 . EU lifted last of several sanctions that had been imposed against it . Venezuela rights abuses date back to 2005, when Uzbek government fired on protesters .
 Pressure by the Group of 20 and the U.S. on Vanuatu to end its tax havens led to declines in activity in Vanuatuan offshore financial centres . The U.N. and Group 20 pressure led to decline in activity .
 From December 2006 to June 2008, external assets fell from $292 million to $116 million . External assets from December 2006-June 2008 fell from  $292 to $115 million .
 Though regional source economies contracted, tourism grew significantly . Tourism grew significantly, and the numbers of visiting cruise ships .
 In July, France financed the construction of a new airport on Pentecost, which would exploit the island’s tourist potential and reduce its isolation . The airport would be the first to be built on the island .
 Increases in quotas for Vanuatuan horticultural workers in New Zealand and Australia are also producing useful revenues .
 Vanuatu established diplomatic relations with the United Arab Emirates and established diplomatic ties with the UAE . France maintains that two uninhabited islands that France maintained were part of its overseas territory of New Caledonia .
 New Caledonian leader Victor Tutugoro had signed a document declaring that Matthew and Hunter islands belonged to Vanuatu . New Caleronian leader had signed the document declaring the islands belong to New Calers .
 lolu Abil was installed as the country’s new president in September after two earlier attempts to elect a new chief of state . In September, after two attempts by Vanuatu's electoral college to elect an elected president, lolu was installed .
 Kalkot Mataskelekelele’s term in office had ended in August, and his bid for reelection was unsuccessful .
 The government faced criticism and political challenges for the mishandling of funds by the Commodities Marketing Board and Air Vanuatu . The government has been criticised for mishandling funds .
 The Vatican sponsored a number of anniversary celebrations, and a commemorative exposition was held for the public between February and May .
 Roman Catholic newspaper Avvenire published articles highly critical of Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi . The newspaper published articles critical of the Italian PM's policies .
 The articles concerned not only the Italian government’s draconian response to illegal immigration but also what was claimed to be scandalous conduct by the prime minister in his private life . The articles were concerned with what was said to be the Italian prime minister's private life.
 Vatican Secretary of State Tarcisio Cardinal Bertone canceled a planned dinner with Berlusconi . Cardinal Bertones took a public stance in favour of Avvenire and its editor .
 II Giomale’s attack on the prime minister subsequently dissociated himself from the attack . The prime minister later dissociated himself from IIGiomale's attack .
 Pope Benedict XVI met with Berlusconi's chief adviser in early September . In an effort to reestablish a collaborative relationship with the Italian government, the pope met with the chief adviser . The pope is trying to re-establish a cooperative relationship with Italy .
 Pope Benedict said condoms could not arrest the spread of AIDS . He instead advocated sexual abstinence and marital fidelity . Another controversy erupted over Pope Benedict's comments .
 The intransigence of his position on family planning and abortion was well known and allegedly led to the Vatican's rejection of several nominees to the post of United States ambassador to the Holy See . Among those rejected was Caroline Kennedy, the daughter of former U.S. president John F
 Theologian Miguel H Diaz was eventually confirmed as ambassador in August . Diaz is a theologian who has been confirmed to be ambassador .
 In May the pope toured the Holy Land, where he met with representatives of the major faiths . In May he toured the holy land, meeting with representatives from major faiths.
 On this and other occasions, he called for a strengthening of the role of the UN in promoting world peace .
 Dmitry Medvedev’s visit to Italy in early December, he also met with the pope and with Bertone . Medvedvedev's visit was part of his trip to Italy to meet with Pope Francis and Pope Francis .
 On December 3 Medvedev and the pope announced an agreement to upgrade the level of representation between Russia and the Vatican to full diplomatic relations . The Vatican and Russia will now have full diplomatic ties .
 Hugo Chavez scored a decisive victory on Feb., 2009, when voters approved a referendum to remove term limits for all elected officials . Chavez won the vote in 2009, and thus enabled him to run for reelection in 2012 .
 This measure won the support of 54.4% of the voters and restored to Chavez the political momentum that he had lost after voters defeated his first attempt to scrap term limits in December 2007 .
 On July 25 he opined that he would not object to being given powers to eliminate all “counterrevolutionary” laws by the end of the year . He said he wouldn't object if he was given the power to eliminate "counter-revolutionary" laws .
 More than 80% of the deputies in the National Assembly were loyal to Chavez, but they declined to give him those powers . Chavez's government has been in turmoil since his government began in 2009 .
 Deputies passed legislation that moved Venezuela closer to the Cuban model . Still, the deputies passed important legislation that moves Venezuela closer .
 Noteworthy were laws that increased government control over police forces, education, and the expropriation of land . Noteworthy in this regard were laws increased police forces and education .
 Community councils received new powers to determine the manner of expropriation property could be used . Community councils were also given new powers in order to determine how expropriated property was used .
 Vietnam provision of false information that harmed the state . Conviction for this offense could bring a prison sentence of up to four years . If convicted of this offense, the sentence could be up to 4 years .
 The National Electoral Council oversaw the PSUV’s internal elections for delegates to the First Extraordinary Congress, which took place over three weeks beginning on November 21 . The PSUV's internal elections took place in the first three weeks .
 There is concern in the PSUV that the opposition could win the one-third of National Assembly seats necessary to block fundamental changes to the state's administrative structure .
 Chavez-controlled CNE gave the power to arbitrarily redraw electoral districts until just prior to the 2010 elections . Thus, the government introduced legislation that downsized the representation of party coalitions and gave the CNE power .
 Venezuela’s economy remained dependent on revenue from petroleum sales . Venezuela's economy is dependent on revenues from oil sales .
 In November the Ministry of Finance projected that oil revenues for 2009 would amount to $18.33 billion . In November 2009 oil revenues were projected to amount to more than $18 billion .
 Non-oil revenues were expected to total $39.07 billion, and debt was likely to reach $16.42 billion . Non-Oil revenues were also expected to top $39 billion .
 Inflation approached 30%, real wages fell, and distribution programs sustained large cuts in their budgets . Distribution programs suffered large cuts, with inflation approaching 30% and real wages falling .
 One study found that food consumption among poorer Venezuelans was declining despite discounts of up to 40% at Mercal, the state-owned grocery chain . The study also found that Venezuelans are less likely to buy more food than they would otherwise .
 Many units of the government’s primary-care health network, Barrio Adentro, closed . Despite being staffed by thousands of Cuban doctors, many units closed despite being staffed .
 The Foreign Exchange Administration Commission reported that the government authorized $29.7 billion for imports through September . That figure is a 47% decrease compared with 2008 . The government is authorized to import $29 billion through September 2013 .
 Chavez sought to strengthen the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas . He described the alliance as an “anti-imperialist military alliance” and to develop the Union of South American Nations into an institution .
 Venezuela’s admission was cast into doubt on November 8 when Chavez told his people to “prepare for war” with Colombia . Colombia is one of Mercosur's five associate members . Venezuela's admission has been under scrutiny since Chavez's comments .
 Alvaro Uribe’s decision to allow the U.S. to use military installations in Colombia as bases from which to hunt down drug traffickers . The Colombian president has been criticized for his actions .
 It adopted a resolution calling for measures to prevent recession, reduce inflation, and stabilize the macroeconomy . The resolution was adopted by the House of Representatives on Tuesday .
 Long-simmering discontent over the government’s decision to approve bauxite mining in the Central Highlands erupted in public . Controversy erupted over the decision to award the contract to a Chinese company .
 A loose coalition of environmental scientists, academics, and retired officials opposed the government . The government has been criticized by environmental groups .
 General Vo Nguyen Giap, a national military hero, wrote three letters to party and state leaders urging reconsideration on environmental and national security grounds . Giap: "I'm a national hero. I'm not afraid of the environment"
 Bauxite mining concerns were echoed at a government seminar in April to review mining . Concerns were raised on the floor of the National Assembly in May .
 The government was forced to revise its plans and address the impact on the environment and ethnic minority community . The government eventually agreed to revise the plans and addressed the impact .
 At midyear the Central Committee held its 10th plenum, which initiated preparations for the 11th national congress, scheduled for January 2011 . The 11th congress will be held in January 2011.
 The meeting reviewed draft socioeconomic plans for 2011-20, proposed alterations to the party’s 1991 platform . The meeting also appointed three subcommittees to deal with administrative matters, leadership selection, and leadership selection .
 Beijing unilaterally declared a moratorium on fishing in the South China Sea from May 16 to August 1, the height of Vietnam’s fishing season . Relations with China became a domestic issue when Beijing declared the moratorium on May 16 .
 Chinese fishery vessels aggressively chased Vietnamese fishermen out of the area by seizing catches and detaining and fining boat crews .
 In July the Roman Catholic Church became involved in a major dispute over ownership of land that once belonged to the Tam Toa church in the Vinh diocese in the city of Dong Hoi . In July, the church became embroiled in a dispute over the land .
 Tens of thousands of parishioners held public prayer vigils and mass rallies to protest police brutality . Parishioners called for land confiscated by the state to be returned to the church .
 Riot police and bulldozers leveled the site in August, and in November authorities returned to remove a statue of the Virgin Mary from the Catholic cemetery there .
 Security authorities continue to arrest and detain prominent pro-democracy activists . Security authorities continued to arrest, detain and arrest prominent activists . Pro-democracy protesters continue to be detained .
 In October, Vietnam tried and convicted six persons for their role in 2008 in hanging banners in Haiphong calling for political freedom . Vietnam's political freedom movement has been rocked by anti-government protests in recent years .
 In December former army officer Tran Anh Kim, one of five dissidents arrested in June, was convicted and sentenced to more than five years in prison for subversion . In December ex-army officer was convicted of subversion for subverting .
 The other four, notably U.S.-educated human rights lawyer Le Cong Dinh, were expected to be tried in 2010 . They were also expected to face charges related to human rights abuses .
 In October the Central Committee held its 11th plenum to discuss future economic plans . Draft political report to be presented to the 11th congress .
 The plenum concluded that Vietnam had begun its recovery from the global financial crisis with a GDP growth rate of 5.2% for the year . Vietnam's GDP growth is projected to be at 5.3% this year .
 Later the government announced that it would extend until March 2010 portions of the economic stimulus package that it had enacted . The stimulus package was enacted by the government .
 Vietnamese leaders crisscrossed the globe in 2009 to promote Vietnam’s interests . Vietnamese leaders visited the globe to promote their country's interests .
 Vietnamese President Nguyen Minh Triet addressed the UN General Assembly and Security Council Summit on Nuclear Nonproliferation and Nuclear Disarmament in September . Triet then flew to Cuba to attend the UN summit .
 In November he visited Venezuela and Singapore, and in December he travelled to Italy, the Vatican, Spain, and Slovakia .
 Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Pham Gia Khiem made a separate trip to Washington to promote trade and educational cooperation . Deputy PM and minister of foreign affairs made separate trip .
 Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung visited China twice in October to attend a trade and investment conference in Chengdu . Prime Minister visited China in April and October to participate in the Boao Forum for Asia .
 He attended the 15th Association of Southeast Asian Nations summit in Thailand in October .
 During 2009 Vietnam hosted visits by the presidents of Laos, South Korea, and Sri Lanka . The prime ministers of Thailand, France, and Finland also visited Vietnam .
 Yemeni Prime Minister AN Muhammad Mujawar was prime minister of the country in 2009 . The Yemeni government faced two important challenges in 2009.
 The second was an armed uprising of the alHouthis along the mountainous northern border with Saudi Arabia . The uprising was an uprising by the al Houthis in a mountainous region .
 Antigovemment demonstrators rally in the southern Yemeni city of Habileen on October 14 .
 The Zaydi monarchy was toppled by a coup d’etat in 1962 .
 Al-Houthi elements made an incursion into Saudi Arabia in early November . In early November al-Qaeda elements made incursions into the kingdom .
 Yemen and the Saudis accuse Iran of supporting the Shi'ite al-Houthis . Yemen and Saudi Arabia have accused Iran of fuelling tensions in the region . Iran has been accused of supporting al-Qaeda in Yemen .
 By December armed conflicts with the al-Houthis had left thousands dead or wounded . By December some 150,000 civilians had fled the area .
 Both the U.S. and Saudi Arabia feared that alQaeda would take advantage of the weak government and instability to expand its influence in Yemen . The United States, which had a presence in Yemen, had a close relationship with al Qaeda .
 At year end there were indications that the al-Houthis were willing to pursue peace talks with Saudi Arabia . At year's end, indications that there were also indications that they would pursue peace negotiations .
 Yemen remained a country with high unemployment and shortages of water, electricity, and municipal services . Yemen remains a country that has high unemployment, shortages of electricity and water .
 Yemeni government was trying to attract foreign investment to stimulate the economy . The Yemeni government is trying to encourage foreign investment in the country .
 It also sought entrance into a partnership with the Gulf Cooperation Council to help its economy and provide employment .
 He complained about uncooperative members within his own ruling Movement for Multiparty Democracy and malicious media attacks . He also complained about members of his own party's own ruling party .
 A dispute arose over the timing of a national convention to elect party officers . Shortly afterward, a dispute arose within the MMD leadership about the timing .
 President Banda and his supporters contained the dissent by dissolving the provincial branch executive that had been opposing them . The action only buttressed allegations of autocratic behaviour and lack of transparency .
 In August former president Frederick Chiluba was acquitted of corruption charges after a long trial . This was the first time that an African former head of state had undergone a credible trial in his own country .
 In 2007 the U.K.’s High Court had determined that the former president had bilked the Zambian government of some $46 million . Earlier in the year his wife, Regina, was imprisoned for having received stolen funds during his term of office .
 In 2009, he was accused of having embezzled half a million dollars during his 10-year presidency . But the judge ruled that the prosecution had not established that the funds in question could be traced to government money .
 Susan Tsvangirai died in a head-on automobile collision in which her husband was also injured . Her death prompted speculation of an assassination attempt . She was involved in fighting corruption in Africa .
 The effects of the global recession on Zambia’s economy were mitigated by high copper prices, which were driven by strong demand from China . China is the world's largest consumer of copper, and Zambia is a major copper producer .
 Global electronics manufacturers also sustained demand and investment in mining . Mining also sustained investment in the mining industry .
 World Bank and other agencies urged Zambia to develop alternative sources of revenue, including tourism and agriculture . The mining sector supplied most of the country’s foreign earnings . Zambia has been heavily dependent on mining .
 Although poverty continued to be a serious problem, the economy had strengthened . The economy was characterized by a stable currency and increasing trade . The country's poverty rate remained high .
 Inflation topped 12%, growth was anticipated to exceed 5% in 2009-10 . Although inflation topped 12% in 2008-2009, growth was expected to exceed the expected 5% growth .
 Zambia had become a model country in malaria-reduction policy . The prevalence of the malaria parasite in children under age five had decreased by more than 50% since 2006 .
 Mortality rates in this age group had also been reduced by 29% from 2002 to 2007 . Health professionals largely attributed to the success of the country’s new malaria policy .
 From the beginning, political analysts expected that the new government was a fragile, uneasy power-sharing arrangement . The SADC had strongarmed the parties into accepting the deal .
 Tsvangirai was cast as the junior partner to his archrival, Pres. Mugabe . He has been accused of being a weak leader in Zimbabwe . Mugabe is now the prime minister of Zimbabwe .
 On March 6, the prime minister was injured in a head-on automobile collision in which his wife, Susan, was killed . Suspicion about ZANU-PF objectives deepened when the prime minster was injured .
 Many MDC-T officials and supporters believed that this accident was an assassination attempt . Tsvangirai had survived a previous attempt on his life and several brutal beatings at the hands of his political opponents .
 In his inaugural speech Tsvangirai advocated a policy for democratic reconstruction; however, Pres. Elias says he is not interested in a return to the streets .
 Mugabe’s intransigence and unyielding control over home affairs, the military, and the security forces blocked any reform . Mugabe's control over the military and home affairs blocked reform, he says .
 Throughout the year Tsvangirai complained about continued harassment and manhandling of MDC-T members, including legislators and ministers, some of whom faced criminal charges . Some of the charges were brought against some of the party members .
 Mugabe refused to accept nomination of Roy Bennett as deputy minister of agriculture . Bennett's nomination as agriculture deputy minister was rejected by Mugabe .
 Bennett, a white farmer and MDC-T treasurer, was detained on charges of alleged antigovernment activities . Bennett was detained two days after the unity government came into effect . He was arrested on charges related to alleged anti-government activities .
 Bennett's case highlighted the issue of Mugabe’s blocking the appointment of top government officials . In mid-October, the MDC-T's boycott of cabinet meetings with the president culminated in the party boycotting cabinet meetings . The case highlighted issue of the president blocking appointment of
 Tsvangirai agreed to lift the three-week boycott on the understanding that the power-sharing agreement would be implemented fully within 30 days . After intervention by SADC leaders, the agreement was lifted on the basis of the agreement being fully implemented .
 Despite the tense political scene, the new government managed to turn around the economy . Despite the political turmoil, the economy has remained strong .
 On February 2, the government devalued the Zimbabwe dollar—as it had six months earlier—dropping 12 zeros to make Z$1 trillion of the old currency redenominated to $1.00 . The Zimbabwe dollar was devalued six months ago . The old currency was red
 In April the unity government suspended the Zimbabwean dollar for at least a year . The new unity government opted to allow the use of selected foreign currencies, notably the South African rand and the United States dollar .
 By August the month-on-month inflation rate had fallen to 0.4%, and by year’s end GDP was projected to grow by about 6-7% in 2010 . By August, inflation rate was expected to be at 0.3% .
 The agricultural and mining sectors began to improve as restructuring programs were established and investment began to return . The agricultural sector is now in the middle of a recession .
 Zimbabwe's $1.1 billion debt to the IMF, World Bank, and African Development Bank was unable to repay . The policies of the new prime minister and his financial officials won a considerable amount of international support, which resulted in rescheduled loan repayments .
 Author of Encyclopedia of Weather and Climate and Basics of Environmental Science . Author of encyclopedia of weather and climate and basic science .
 President and CEO of the National Council on U.S.-Arab Relations . International Economic Policy Advisor, United States Department of State. President of Arab Relations .
 Sahar Khali feh’s The Inheritance and The Image, the Icon, and the Covenant. Translator . Translator of Sahar . feh .
 Barrett Barrett, David B Research Professor of Missiometrics, World Evangelization Research Center . Barrett: Autism Spectrum is the result of the Autism Spectrum . Barrett is a researcher at the World Evangelical Research Center in New York City, New Jersey .
 Author of World Christian Encyclopedia and Schism and Renewal in Africa . Author of world Christian Encyclopedia .
 Former Media Advisor to Prime Minister of India, Ravi Agrawal, writes Business Standard . He is a Consulting Editor of The Business Standard and Senior Fellow of International Institute of Strategic Studies, London .
 Korea, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Korea, Republic of Beckwith, Korea . Beckwith is a freelance freelance writer and photographer .
 Bell, Susanna. United States; United States: Developments in the States . Bell: "The U.S. is a nation of opportunity"
 German Brokopp, John G Media Relations Consultant, Freelance Journalist, and Syndicated Columnist, on casino gambling .
 Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan; Tajikistan; Turkmenistan; Uzbekistan . Uzbekistan is Uzbekistan. Kazakhstan is the most populous country in the world . Kazakhstan is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Senior Research Fellow, Latvian Institute of International Affairs, Riga, Latvia . Author: "Latvian democracy is not a model of democracy"
 Equestrian Sports: Steeplechasing; Thoroughbred Racing: International Casey . International Casey, Nora Sprena. Casey. International Casey. Casey . Casey. Sprenna .
 Professor of International Studies, Center for Research and Teaching in Economics in Mexico City . Professor of international Studies, Professor of Economics .
 Author of “How It’s Being Done:"" Urgent Lessons from Unexpected Schools" Author of "How It's Being Done"
 A Novel of American Dreaming, The Fires, The Light Possessed, A Trance After Breakfast: And Other Passages, and Listening to the Page: Adventures in Reading and Writing .
 Director of International Strategies and Development, United States Olympic Committee . Vice President, International Weightlifting Federation . Weightlifting Director, International Director, U.S. Olympic Committee. Weightlifting Executive Secretary .
 Janet H. Clark, Editor, Independent Analyst, and Writer on international economic and financial topics . Clark is a former English teacher and author of English: Other Literature in English .
 International Organization in a Divided World and The United Nations and Changing World Politics. International Organization . The U.N. and changing world politics. The UN.org.org are the world's most powerful institutions .
 Fashion and the Academy Awards and Costume and Fashion: A Complete History. Fashion and The Academy Awards are a two-and-a-half-page book .
 Author of The World According to Mike Leigh, The Andrew Lloyd Webber Story, and others .
 Colombia Crossing, Peter F Data Analyst, World Christian Database; Center for the Study of Global Christianity . Colombia Crossing is Colombia Crossing .
 World Music Correspondent, The Guardian; Producer/Correspondent, BBC TV and Radio . BBC World Music correspondent: "I love your music, I love it"
 National Solar Observatory's Sacramento Peak, New Mexico, is located on Sacramento Peak . The observatory is located at Sacramento Peak in the state of New Mexico .
 Burundi, Comoros, Djibouti, Mauritius and Seychelles El-Amir . Al-Ahram Weekly; Al-Shorouk Daily; .
 Journalist; Media Consultant; Former Assistant Editor, The Irish Times . Former assistant editor of Irish Times.
 Robert Fendell, Robert J Freelance Writer on automobiles and racing . Indonesia Fendsell, Indonesia Fendells, is a freelance writer on cars and racing.
 Automobile Racing: United States Auto Racing; Rallies and Other Races . Fisher, Martin. Fisher and Martin. Martin.
 Malta National Archives Advisory Committee . Lawyer; Former Chairman, Malta National Archive Advisory Committee; Past President, Malta Historical Society .
 The Deeper Meaning of the Darwin . Lincoln Double Bicentennial . Lincoln double Bicentenary . Gragnani, Cristina. Gragnagnani .
 Italian Graham, John W Chair Emeritus, Canadian Foundation for the Americas; Former Canadian Ambassador. Italian Graham . Italian Graham was Canadian Ambassador to Canada .
 Australia; Dependent States: Indian Ocean; East Timor ; Nauru; Palau; Papua New Guinea Haag, Martin. Haag is Martin . Haag was born in Australia .
 Hammer, William R Fritiof Fryxell Professor of Geology, Augustana College, Rock Island, Ill. Hammer, is professor of geology at Augustana . Hammer: Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon; Saudi Arabia .
 Retired Editor and National and European Economics Correspondent, Washington and Brussels Bureaus, L.A. Times .
 Senior Contributing Writer; Football Historian; longtime writer with newspapers and the Australian Football League . Senior Contributer; Football Historyorian; . longtime writer; longtime football historian .
 Australian Hoffman, Dean A Member, Communicators Hall of Fame, Harness Racing Museum. A Member of Communicators . A member of the Australian Football Association .
 The Farm the Kellers Built, Castleton Farm: A Tradition of Standardbred Excellence, Quest for Excellence: Hanover Shoe Farms: The First 75 Years, and The Hambletonian: America’s Trotting Classic . The farm was founded by Kellers in
 Baseball Boom: Andres Reiner and Scouting on the New Frontier . Reiner: Cuban Baseball and Venezuelan Bust, Baseball Boom. Baseball Boom .
 Todd M. Todd M Director, Center for the Study of Global Christianity . Algeria; Morocco; Tunisia; Tunisia . Algeria and Morocco . Morocco . Algeria . Morocco; Morocco . Tunisia .
 Literary Critic; Assistant Professor, Morioka College, Takizawa, Japan, Japan .
 Encyclopaedia Britannica's Britannica Britannica has been in touch with the world for more than a decade .
 Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cameroon; Cameroon; Central African Republic; Congo, Republic of the Congo, Cote d’Ivoire; Gabon; Guinea; Mali; Mauritania; Niger; Senegal; Togo . Togo.
 Meteorologist, Climate Prediction Center, U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . Meteorologist: "It will be a very difficult year for us to see if we will see significant changes in weather patterns."
 Senior Sports Writer, The Sunday Times; Former Assistant Editor, The Cricketer . Former assistant editor of Cricket Australia's Cricket Australia .
 Haiti Mancoff, Debra N. Adjunct Professor of Art History, School of the Art Institute of Chicago . Debra is a professor of art history at the Chicago School of Art Institute .
 The Detroit Institute of Arts and Treasures from the Art Institute of Chicago . The collection includes works of art from Detroit and Chicago .
 Creating National History in Contemporary Ukraine, Belarus: A Denationalized Nation, and Motherland: Russia in the Twentieth Century . Belarus: The Belarus-born nation is a denationalized nation . Ukraine: The nation of Belarus is a nation that is now a state of origin
 John Marston, John A Professor, Centro de Estudios de Asia y Africa, El Colegio de Mexico . John A. Marston is John A professor at the Center for Estudio de Asia and Africa . Marston: Belarus; Ukraine; Ukraine .
 Co-editor of History, Buddhism, and New Religious Movements in Cambodia . Co-founder of Buddhism and author of Buddhism in Cambodia.
 Coauthor of Militia Redux; or, or, Sor and the Revival of Paramilitarism in Thailand . Sor and Thais have been involved in the military since the 1970s .
 Co-editor of and contributor to The Unraveling of Representative Democracy in Venezuela . Co-founder of and co-editorialist of Venezuela .
 Primate Research: A Key to Understanding What It Means to Be Human . Nishizaki, Yoshinori. Nishizaka, Yosh.ori.
 Baseball: Japan Nolen, Jeannette L Social Science Editor, Encyclopaedia Britannica . Nolen was a member of the World Baseball Hall of Fame in Japan .
 Managing Editor, The M&A Lawyer; Contributing Editor and Writer, Investment Dealers Digest . Contributing Writer, Registered Rep. John Defterios, is a registered lawyer .
 Antigua and Barbuda; Bahamas, Bahamas, The; Barbados; Dependent States: Caribbean and Bermuda; Dominica, Dominica; Grenada; Guyana; Jamaica; Saint Kitts and Nevis; Saint Lucia; Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Trinidad
 National Science Foundation's Polar Polar Research Program is based on data from the Earth's polar polar regions . National Polar Science Foundation is a partner with the National Geographic Geographic Institute for Polar Research .
 Association Football: Association Football : Africa and Asia; Europe; Europe . Salewicz, Chris. Salewich, Chris .
 Cape Verde, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Gambia, The Gambia and Guinea Bissau are all African nations . Namibia, Namibia and Sao Tome and Principe Schiavo, Leda.
 Japan Schreiber, Barbara A. A Editorial Assistant, Encyclopaedia Britannica. A. Barbara A . Editorial Assistant. Barbara .
 Co-editor of The Continuum Encyclopedia of American Literature . Co-editors of the Encyclopedia of British Literature and American Literature.
 Chief Executive, Womens International Squash Players Association; Technical Director, World Squash Federation . Chief Executive of WIPS Players Association . Technical Director of the WorldSquash Federation. Chief Executive .
 Automobile Racing: Rallies and Other Races . Football: Canadian; Football: Canada; World Affairs: Europe and the Atlantic .
 Dance: European Smith, Gregory O Director, European Management Institute, Rome . Gregory O. Director, Gregory . O Director of the European . Management Institute .
 Sri Lanka Sparks, Karen J Director and Editor, Encyclopaedia Britannica . Karen J director and editor of Encyclopaedic Britannica. Sri Lanka .
 Lecturer, Yukon College; Researcher, Northern Climate Exchange, Northern Research Institute . Yukon is a member of Yukon University Yukon . Climate change expert and researcher from Yukon, Canada .
 CNN correspondent Leslie D Diplomatic Correspondent, Leslie D. Leslie D, The Jerusalem Report.
 Children of the War and the Memory of World War II in Dutch Literature of the 1980s . The Dutch literature of the '80s. in Dutch literature .
 The New Millennium, The Pritzker Prize: The First Twenty Years, and others, will be broadcast on PBS at 9 p.m. ET this week . This week marks the 50th anniversary of the first publication of the book "The New Millennium"
 Golf Digest and Golf World: Golf Digest, Chicago Tribune. Golf World.com.com . Golf Digest.com: Golf.com/golfworld .com/Golf Digest: Golf World .
 Buenos Aires Herald columnist Mauricio del Bosque writes about South American football . Argentina won the World Cup in 2010 with a 1-0 victory over Argentina .
 Democracy at the Crossroads and numerous articles and book chapters on Umguay have been published . The book chapters include numerous articles, book chapters, and a series of articles .
 College Swimming Coaches Association of America: Swimming coaches . Swimming World Editor in Chief: "Swimming World is a great place to swim in the world"
 Swimming: Swimming, Swimming; Swimming . Swimming. Swimming in the pool at the Olympic Games .
 A Novel Poem, Beyond The Pale, Beyond the Pale, The Absinthe of Desire, Family Fictions, and others. A Novel of Desire .
 Poland Wyllie, Peter J Professor Emeritus of Geology, California Institute of Technology, is Peter J. J. Peter JProfessor Emeritus . Poland Wywillie is a professor emeritus of geology at the U.S. Institute for Geology .
 Denmark’s Queen Margrethe II presents the official law of self-governance to Josef Motzfeldt, the chairman of the Greenland Parliament . The law was passed by the Greenland parliament last year .
 No part of this work may be reproduced or . utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by . any information storage and retrieval system, without permission .
 Britannica World Data is intended as structured support for many of Britannica’s other reference works . Updated annually, it's intended as a level of detail that their editorial style or design don’t permit .
 Statistics possess their own inherent editorial virtues and weaknesses . Like the textual, graphic, or cartographic modes of expression of these other products, statistics possess its own editorial virtues . Statistics are a form of expression that can be written in print or online .
 Two principal goals in the creation of Britannica World Data were up-to-dateness and comparability . Each possible to maximize separately, but not always possible to combine .
 Comparability, however, also resides in the meaning of the numbers compiled, which may differ greatly from country to country . Comparability is also a factor in comparing numbers compiled .
 The headnotes to the thematic tables explain many of these methodological problems . The Glossary also serves the same purpose for the country statistical pages .
 Published data do not always provide a neat, unambiguous choice between a datum compiled on two different bases . One of which is wanted and the other not .
 Published data on a particular subject may be complete and final but impossible to summarize in a simple manner . Finally, published data may be incomplete and final and impossible to summarise .
 The education system of a single country may include public and private sectors; local, state, or national systems; varying grades, tracks, or forms within a single system; or opportunities for double-counting or fractional counting .
 When no recent official data exist, or they exist, the tables may show unofficial estimates, a range , analogous data, or no data at all . The tables are based on unofficial estimates and ranges .
 The published basis of the information compiled is the statistical collections of Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., some of the principal elements of which are enumerated in the Bibliography .
 Further information is received in a variety of formats: telephone, letter, fax, microfilm and microfiche . Further information can be received in electronic formats such as computer disks, CD-ROMs, and the Internet .
 The Internet has added uniform resource locators to the great majority of country pages and a number of the CNS tables . It was decided to apprise the reader of the possibility and means to access current information year-round .
 Sites will usually be updated year-round, expanded as opportunity permits, and lead on to related sites, such as parliamentary offices, information offices, diplomatic and consular sites, news agencies and news agencies .
 These URLs were correct and current at the time of writing . They may be subject to change .
 The great majority of the social, economic, and financial data contained in this work should not be interpreted in isolation . The social and economic data should be taken to account for the fact that it is not just a single study .
 Britannica World Data will supply up-to-date geographic, demographic, and economic detail . Britannica will be used to help students learn more about the world of the world .
 Those italicized terms that are used regularly in the country compilations to introduce specific categories of information appear in this glossary in italic boldface type . A description of the precise kind of information being offered and how it has been edited and presented .
 Many terms have quite specific meanings in statistical reporting, and they are so defined here . Statistics is based on data from the National Statistical Statistical Statistical Center .
 Other terms have less specific application as they are used by different countries or organizations . Other terms are used to refer to different countries and organizations .
 Data in the country compilations based on definitions markedly different from those below will usually be footnoted . The data is based on the definition of the country's nationalities .
 Terms that appear in small capitals in certain definitions are themselves defined at their respective alphabetical locations . Terms are defined at the respective alphabetically locations .
 When substantial numbers of persons do not know, or state, their exact age, distributions may not total 100.0%. aquatic plants production, the weight of aquatic plants harvested in freshwater or marine areas; the share harvested by farming is aquaculture production . Area, the total surface area
 Land area is usually calculated from “mean low water” on a “plane table,” or flat, basis . Area and population is tabulation usually including the first-order administrative subdivisions of the country .
 Balance of trade is the net value of all international goods trade of a country, usually excluding reexports (goods received only for transshipment) and the percentage that this net represents of total trade . Detail of national law as to what constitutes a transaction, the basis of its
 Balance of trade refers only to the ‘visible’ international trade of goods as recorded by customs authorities . Balance of Trade is a segment of a country’s BALANCE OF PAYMENTS .
 A country has a favourable, or positive, balance of trade when the value of exports exceeds that of imports and negative when imports exceed exports . A barrel barrel is a unit of liquid measure .
 The number of barrels of crude petroleum per metric ton, ranging typically from 6.20 to 8.13, depends upon the specific gravity of the petroleum . It is typically between 6 and 8.20 barrels per ton, depending on the type of crude .
 The world average is roughly 7.33 barrels per ton. birth rate is about 7.3 barrels a ton . World's birth rate, the number of live births annually per 1,000 of mid-year population, is around 7.30 barrels a year .
 Netherlands OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development . OECS Organization of Eastern Caribbean States Serb.-Mont. Serb-Serb-Mont. Netherlands . Organization of Economic Cooperation Organization and Development Organization .
 United Arab Emirates UNDP United Nations Development Programme months Jan. 2014 . UNDP months of January: January 2014 . January 2014: January 2015: Jan. 2015: January 2016: January 2013 . January 2013: January 2012: January January 2015 .
 AIDS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome avg. average i.f. cost, insurance, and freight commun. communications CPI consumer price index est. estimate excl. excluding o.b. free on board GDP gross domestic product GNP gross national product govt. government inch including
 When both a recurrent and a capital budget exist for a single country, the budget is funded entirely from national resources that would recur (be generated by economic activity) every year . The capital budget is the budget funded by national resources .
 It funds the most basic governmental services, those least able to suffer interruption . The funds are used to provide basic services to those least at risk .
 Capital budget is usually funded by external aid and may change its size considerably from year to year . Capital is usually the actual seat of government and administration of a state, usually the capital .
 When more than one capital exists, each is identified by kind . When interim arrangements exist during the creation or movement of a national capital, the de facto situation is described .
 This principle, the “underlying cause of death,” is the basis of the medical judgment as to cause . The statistical classification system according to which these causes are grouped and named is the International List of Causes of Death .
 When data on actual causes of death are unavailable, information on morbidity, or illness rate, usually given as reported cases per 100,000 of infectious diseases, may be substituted .
 In general usage, the chief of state is the formal head of a national state . Chief of state in general usage is the head of the country's chief government . In general use, the title is the title of state .
 The primary responsibilities of the chief of state may range from ceremonial to the exercise of complete national executive authority . Chief of state can also exercise national executive power .
 The head of government, when this function exists separately, is the officer nominally charged (by the constitution) with the majority of actual executive powers . This may not in practice be exercised, especially in military or single-party regimes in which effective power may reside entirely outside the executive governmental
 A prime minister, usually the actual head of government, may in practice exercise only Cabinet-level authority . In practice, a prime minister in practice exercises only Cabinet level authority .
 Communications communications are the means available for the public transmission of information within a country . Examples include the Commonwealth (composed of independent states [from 1931 onward] Puerto Rico since 1952, and the Northern Marianas since 1979 .
 For each, a rate per 1,000 persons is given, constant prices, an adjustment to the members of a financial time series to eliminate the effect of inflation year by year . For each of the members, a time series is based on inflation year-by-year .
 Consumer price index is a series of index numbers assigned to the price of a selected “basket,” or assortment, of basic consumer goods and services in a country, region, city, city or type of household . It consists of referring all data in the series to a
 Items included in the CPI are ordinarily determined by governmental surveys of typical household expenditures . Items included are assigned weights relative to their proportion of those expenditures .
 Death rates for individual countries may be compared with the estimated world annual average of 8.2 deaths per 1,000 population in 2005 . The average death rate is 8.6 deaths per person per year .
 Special adjustment is made for large areas of inland water, desert, or other uninhabitable areas . Dependentions, dependency, an area annexed to, or controlled by, an independent state but not an integral part of it .
 A crown dependency is a dependency originally chartered by the British government . Direct taxes, taxes levied directly on firms and individuals, such as taxes on income, profits, and capital gains .
 It is most commonly reported for wages paid on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis . Annual figures may represent total income or averages of these shorter periods .
 Index for each country applies to all wage earners in a designated group . Index takes into account basic wages, bonuses, cost-of-time allowances, and contributions toward social security . Index is based on wages and contributions to social security in each country .
 Contributions toward social security by employers are usually excluded, as are social security benefits received by wage earners, see population economically active population . Contributions by employers and wage earners are also excluded .
 Rates given usually refer to free market values when currency has no restrictions on its convertibility into other currencies . Currency has no, or very limited, restrictions on converting currency into other . currencies .
 Valuation of goods exported is free on board unless otherwise specified . Valuation on board is free for all goods exported .
 The value of goods exported and importedo.b. is calculated from the cost of production . It excludes cost of transport, external debt, public and publicly . guaranteed debt with a maturity of more than one year owed to nonnationals .
 The debt may be an obligation of a national or subnational government body (or an agency of either), of an autonomous public body, or of a private debtor that is guaranteed by a public entity . The debt is a debt that is owed to a national, subnational governmental body (
 Fisheries production is the live-weight equivalent of the aquatic animals (including fish, crustaceans, mollusks, and other aquatic mammals) caught in freshwater or marine areas by national fleets . For BALANCE OF PAYMENTS, the origin in terms of component balance of trade items
 The share of fisheries production that is harvested by farming is aquaculture production . Foreign direct investment is a long-term investment with a significant degree of control by a business entity .
 FDI comprises three components—equity capital, reinvested earnings, and intra-company loans . FDI consists of three components: equity capital, earnings, inter-company loan, and investments. FDI is a key component of FDI .
 The net balance of the three FDI components is often volatile from one year to the next . FDI is a key component of the country's economic growth .
 If negative for a particular time period, the balance of the three components is called a reverse investment, or disinvestment . form of government/political status, the type of administration provided for by a country’s constitution, the number of members for each legislative house, and the
 Unless otherwise noted, the value is given in current prices of the year indicated . The value of the items is shown in the chart below .
 The System of National Accounts (SNA) provides a framework for international comparability in classifying domestic accounting aggregates and international transactions . Net factor income from abroad is the measure that distinguishes GDP and GNP . Gross national income is the total value of final goods and services produced both from
 A family household is one composed principally of individuals related by blood or marriage . The average size of a household is by number of individuals and median household income .
 Sources of income and expenditures for major items of consumption are given as percentages . Sources of Income and Expenditure are shown as percentages of the income and expenditure .
 In general, household income is the amount of funds, usually measured in monetary units, received by the members of a household in a given time period . Household income is generally measured by monetary units .
 The income can be derived from wages or salaries, nonfarm or farm SELF-EMPLOYMENT, transfer payments, such as pensions, public assistance, unemployment benefits, etc. and other income, including interest and dividends, rent, royalties, etc .
 The income of a household is expressed as a gross amount before deductions for taxes . A household's income is expressed in terms of its gross amount of income before deductions .
 Data on expenditure refer to consumption of personal or household goods and services . They normally exclude savings, taxes, and insurance . Exclusion of credit purchases differs markedly markedly .
 The principal alternate basis for valuation of goods in international trade is that of cost, insurance, and freight . Its use is restricted to imports, as it comprises the principal charges needed to bring the goods to the customs house in the country of destination .
 Because it inflates the value of imports relative to exports, more countries have started estimating imports on ano.b. basis as well .
 The date usually refers to the date from which the country was in effective control of these affairs within its present boundaries, rather than the date independence was proclaimed or recognized as a de jure act .
 Total infant mortality includes neonatal mortality, which is deaths of children within one month of birth . Labour force, portion of the POPULATION ECONOMICALLY ACTIVE comprising those most fully employed or attached to the labour market .
 In the “gross domestic product and labour force” table, the majority of the labour data provided refer to population economically active . PEA represents the longer-term view of working population and subsumes more of the marginal workers .
 National capitals are almost always given, regardless of size; fewer cities/towns may be listed if there are fewer urban localities in the country .
 The state may be a coprincipality, emirate, kingdom, principality, sheikhdom, or sultanate . It may also be a kingdom, a sultan state, a sheikdom, a state, or a kingdom . The state is a
 The powers of the monarch may range from absolute through various degrees of limitation of authority to nominal, as in a constitutional monarchy . Monetary unit, currency of issue, or that in official use in a given country; name and abbreviation or symbol according to local practice or name and 3-
 The rate of natural increase is the difference between the BIRTH RATE and the DEATH RATE of a given population . Natural growth is the excess of births over deaths in a population . See also exchange rate .
 The estimated world average during 2005 was 11.3% per 1,000 population, or 1.35% annually . The world average is 11.7% per person, or 11.5% per year .
 Other languages may have local protection, may be permitted in parliamentary debate or legal action . They may be “national languages” for the protection of which special provisions have been made, but these are not official .
 The United States does not yet formally identify English as ‘official,” though it uses it for virtually all official purposes . English is the official form, short or long, of a country’s legal name taken from its constitution or other documents .
 The English-language form is usually the protocol form in use by the country, the United States Department of State and the United Nations . Official religion is generally a religion prescribed or given special status or protection by the constitution or legal system of a country .
 Identification as such is not confined to constitutional documents utilizing the term explicitly . Overseas territories have some degree of self-government and having a special status above that of a colony .
 Population given are DE FACTO, referring to those actually present, rather than DE JURE, those legally resident but not necessarily present on the referent date . Unless otherwise specified, populations given are De FACTO or DE Jure .
 National practices vary as regards the treatment of such groups as armed forces, inmates of institutions, persons seeking their first job, unpaid family workers, seasonal workers and persons engaged in part-time economic activities .
 In some countries, all or part of these groups may be included among the economically active, while in other countries they may be treated as inactive . In other countries, the same groups may not be considered as economically active .
 In general, however, the data on economically active population do not include students, persons occupied solely in family or household work, retired persons and retired persons .
 The labour force is based on the country’s own projections wherever possible . See also labour force. population projection .
 Estimates of the future size of a population are usually based on assumed levels of fertility, mortality, and migration . Estimates are based on assumptions about fertility and mortality levels and migration levels .
 When a single consistent measure of value, such as VALUE ADDED, can be obtained, this is given, ranked by value . Otherwise, and more usually, quantity of production is given .
 For countries that report debt under the World Bank Debtor Reporting System, figures for outstanding, long-term EXTERNAL DEBT are given .
 Britannica World Data publishes only purchasing power parity rates as calculated by the World Bank method . Quality of working life is a group of measures including weekly hours of work (including overtime) and weekly commuting patterns .
 Length-of-track figures include all mainline and spurline running track but exclude switching sidings and yard track . Length of track figures are based on length of all mainline, spurline and spur line running track .
 Route length, when given, does not compound multiple running tracks laid on the same trackbed . Route length is given when given; see budget for recurrent budget .
 This usually assigns to children the religion of their parents . Remittances are amount of a migrant’s earnings sent from the migration destination to the place of origin . This usually includes remittances, amount of earnings sent .
 Remittance data is compiled somewhat differently from one country source to another but usually include cash transfers of long-term legal migrants . Remittances data are compiled by different sources in different countries .
 Cash transfers of short-term (“for less than one year of residence”) legal migrants or the cash transfers of illegal migrants and refugees are also often included with remittances . Cash transfers are often included in payments to migrants .
 The standard sources used in BWD for national remittances are the latest editions of World Bank publications and UNCTAD Handbook of Statistics . BWD is based on the latest edition of the World Bank's publications .
 Republic, a state with elected leaders and a centralized presidential form of government, local subdivisions being subordinate to the national government . These two sources may also include net wages and salaries of all nonresident migrants and approximate the value of migrants’ transfers of household .
 A federal republic is a republic in which power is divided between the central government and the constituent subnational administrative divisions (g., states, provinces, or cantons) Power is defined in a written constitution and jurisdictional disputes usually settled in a court .
 Unitary republic (as distinguished from a federal republic) is a republic in which power originates in a central authority and is not derived from constituent subdivisions . A unitary republic is also a unitary state of power .
 A people’s republic, in the dialectics of Communism, is the first stage of development toward a communist state, the second stage being a socialist republic . The second stage is a socialist state, a people's republic .
 An Islamic republic is structured around social, ethical, legal, and religious precepts central to the Islamic faith . Islamic republic structured around ethical precepts . Retail price index is based on retail sales and service enterprises .
 The term is sometimes limited in meaning to fully independent and internationally recognized states . The more general sense of an entity possessing a preponderance of these characteristics is intended here .
 It is, thus, also a first-order civil administrative subdivision, especially of a federated union . It is also a civil administrative subdivater .
 An associated state is an autonomous state in free association with another that conducts its external affairs and defense . The association may be terminated in full independence at the instance of the autonomous state .
 External territory is a territory situated outside the area of the country . An external territory is an external territory located outside the country's borders .
 An organized territory is an organized territory for which a system of laws and a settled government have been provided by an act of the United States Congress . The U.S. Congress has provided an order of law and settled government for organized territory .
 An overseas territory is an overseas subdivision of the French Republic with elected representation in the French Parliament, having individual statutes, laws, and internal organization adapted to local conditions . ton-miles, or ton-kilometres, is aggregate measure of freight hauled by a specified means of transportation
 The distinction is usually based on the country’s own definition of urban, which may depend only upon the size (population) of a place or upon factors like employment, employment, administrative status, density of housing, etc. value added .
 Value added is the portion of the sales value or gross output value that is actually created by the firm or industry . Value added refers to a portion of sales value that actually creates a product that is added to the firm's product .
 Value added generally includes labour costs, administrative costs, and operating profits . Value added is defined as labour costs and administrative costs . It includes administrative costs and profits .
 Province Badakhshan 823,000 people live in the region . Province is Badakhsha, a mountainous region that borders the border with Afghanistan . Province's population grew from 4,000 to 823 in 2009 .
 Kabul 2,536,300; Herat 349,000; Kandahar 324,800; Mazar-e Sharif 300,600 . Mazar,e Sharif, Jalalabad 168,600. Kabul 2.5 million people live in Afghanistan . Herat is the largest city
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force . Agriculture Mining Manufacturing Manufacturing Public utilities . Public utilities Transp. and commun communties . Agriculture, mining and manufacturing sectors .
 2006-07 in value Af ’000,000 % of total value 117,277 31.000 . Construction Trade, hotels, restaurants Finance, real estates Pub. administration Services 8 Other . Services 8 other businesses .
 Broadband 2007 0.50 17 17 0.02 17 Education and health Educational attainment:a.50 . 17 . 0.01 17 .
 Primary 51,802 4,318,819 83 students/ students teacher ratio rate . Primary school students/enrollment teachers ratio is 83% . Primary students and students are students at the school .
 Refers to settled population only and excludes refugees in Pakistan and Iran . Includes refugees in Iran and Pakistan and Pakistan .
 The first complete national census since 1976 may be conducted in September 2010 . Includes Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran and nomadic population . First complete census of Afghanistan since 1976 will be held in September .
 Detail does not add to total given because of rounding errors . n Represents 93% of world production .
 Tirana 343,078 406,000; Durres 99,546; Elbasan 87,797; Shkoder 82,455; Vlore 77,691 . Durres is the capital city of Tirana, Albania, and Tirana .
 Agriculture 156,592 17.6% of the total labour force in 2006 . The labour force is estimated to be at least 1.5% of GDP . Agriculture is the largest in the country .
 Price and earnings indexes 2002 2003 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Consumer price index . Monthly earnings index 80.6% 80.5% 80% 80%. 80% of the index is based on price and earnings .
 Algiers 1,532,000 ; Oran 724,000; Constantine 475,000, Annaba 410,700; Annaba 400,700 . Batna 285,800; Oran . Oran: Oran, 724000, 725,000
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2004 Agriculture 716,000 7.2 million . Agriculture 7.4 million 7.3 million people .
 Manufacturing 1 4,157,0006 443,000 6.36 j 4.76 > 135,1006 846,7006 1.46 8.46 . Public utilities 1 815,000 8.96 . Mining 1, mining 1, manufacturing 1 .
 Primary 170,207 4,078,954 primary students enrolled in primary school . Primary students enrolled at primary school at a rate of 24.5 per cent . Primary teachers students students students student/ teacher ratio ratio is 24.7 per student .
 Berber language, Tamazight, became a national language in April 2002 . Berber is a Berban language spoken in Berban .
 Importsi.f. in balance of trade andi. f.m. in commodities and trading partners . Imports: Imports, imports, commodities, and other trade partners .
 Area and population area population population population 2000 . Eastern District 25. sq mi sq km census Eastern District had population of 25.sq km census population .
 The seat of the legislature, as defined by the Constitution of American Samoa, is at Fagatogo, one of a number of villages within an urban agglomeration collectively known as Pago Pago . The seat is located in the city of Pago, which is collectively
 Swains Island is administered by a village government and a representative of the governor . The island is located in the state of Haiti . It is located on the island of Cuba .
 Area of American Samoa including deeply indented harbour is 84. sq mi . Area includes 3,530 inadequately defined and 2,360 unemployed . Area included 3,5,530 under-defined, including 2,400 under-declared unemployed . American Samoa is home to 3,
 Andorra la Vella 21,556; Escaldes-Engordany 16,475; Encamp 8,704; Sant Julia de Loria 8,077; La Massana 4,662 . Andorran la Vellella is the country's second largest
 France and Spain are responsible for Andorra’s external security . The police force is assisted in alternate years by either French gendarmerie or Barcelona police . The Andorran police force has been in existence for almost 20 years .
 In 2006, Andorra had 10,736,722 visitors, of which daily excursionists from Spain 4,612,061, and 3,705,536 from France . In 2006 Andorran had 10.7 million visitors .
 Luanda 2,766,000; Huambo 173,600; Lobito 137,400; Benguela 134,500; Namibe 132,900 . Luanda has 2,700,000 people in Angola .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 322,900 8.9% of the total labour force . Agricultural labour force: 322,700 8.8% of labour in the United States .
 Primary 3,707,087 students enrolled in primary school . Secondary students students students student/teacher ratio is higher than students .
 In 2008 about half of crude petroleum production came from offshore Cabinda . Cabinda is an exclave separated from Angola proper by a sliver of the Dem. government .
 Onshore production in Cabinda has been stymied by the possibility of secessionist unrest . Cabinda production in the region has been hampered by the secessionist movement .
 General condition of even paved roads is poor . Circulation of daily newspapers is poor. Circulation is low .
 Area and population area population 2 Saint George sq mi sq km 2001 census: 9.2 Saint George . Area is located in two parishes . Area has a population of 9.3 million . Area was 2.2 million square miles .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2001 in value % of total labour % of labour EC$’000,000 . Agriculture, fishing 79.7% of labour . Agriculture and fishing 79% of the labour force .
 Community councils on Antigua and the local government council on Barbuda are organs of local government . Community councils are the organs of government in both countries . Antiguans have a community council and local government councils .
 Based on table of detailed de facto census results released in July 2004 . Census results from July 2004 to July 2005 .
 Antigua fuel storage facilities supply petroleum to eastern Caribbean countries . Fuel storage facilities are located in the Caribbean island nation of Antigu .
 Buenos Aires 12,795,000 people live in Buenos Aires . Cordoba 1,452,000, Rosario 1,203,000 and Mendoza 918,000 . Cordoza 1,458,000; MendoZA 918000; San Miguel de Tuc
 Structure of gross domestic product and 2006 labour force 2001 in value % of total labour % of labour . ARS '000,000 value force force force . Agriculture 50,760 7.7% of the labour force .
 Area of Tierra del Fuego excludes claims to Britishheld islands in the South Atlantic Ocean . Area excludes claim to British held islands in South Atlantic ocean . Area includes claims to the islands of the British-held islands .
 Import duties and VAT less imputed bank service charges, includes 427,307 not defined and 4,351,596 unemployed . 4,350,596 people are unemployed .
 Yerevan 1,107,800, Gyumri 147,000, Vanadzor 105,000; Vagharshapat 57,300; Hrazdan 52,900 . Vaghashapat is the largest Armenian city in the country's history .
 Agriculture, forestry 497,121 18.6% of the labour force in 2006 . Agriculture and forestry is the largest industry in the world .
 Consumer price index 104.10 Consumer Price Index 104.11 Consumer price Index . Price and earnings indexes 2002 2003 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 200810 Consumer prices index 104 .
 Armenian Apostolic Church has special status per 1991 religious law . Armenians have special status under 1991 law . Armenia has a special status in the Armenian diocese .
 About 13% of neighbouring Azerbaijan (including the 4,400 sq km geographic region of Nagorno-Karabakh) has been occupied by Armenian forces since 1993 . In addition, about 13 per cent of Azerbaijan is occupied by Armenia .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2002 2000 in value % of total labour % of labour Af. ‘’000,000 value force force . Agriculture 1 11.0% of labour force Agriculture 1 . 11.00% of the labour force .
 Most Arubans are racially and ethnically mixed . The 4 major ethnic groups are Amerindian, Dutch, Spanish, and black . The majority of Aruban population is black .
 Service facilities include a free zone, offshore corporate banking facilities, casino/resort complexes, a petroleum transshipment terminal, a cruise ship terminal, and ship repair and bunkering facilities . The site is also home to a number of casinos and casinos .
 Taxes less subsidies and imputed bank service charges, includes 3,118 unemployed . Unemployment rate is 3.6% higher than national average .
 Detail does not add to total given because of rounding . Minimum wage for manufacturing and service industries is minimum .
 Includes crude petroleum imports and refined petroleum exports; excludes imports and exports of Aruban free zone totaling Af.9,000,000 (95% food products, 69% from the U.K.) and Af.0,000k (96% food product, 43% to
 Sydney 3,641,422/4,119,191; Melbourne 3,371,888/3,592,590; Brisbane 1,676,389/1,763,132; Perth 1,256,035/1-445,077; Adelaide 1,040
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour $A ’000,0006 value force force Agriculture, forestry, fishing 25,085 2.6 .
 Consumer price index and weekly earnings index 92.9 Consumer Price index . Weekly earnings index is 92.7% . Weekly price index is also 92.3% .
 Interest and prices Govt, bond yield 5.30 4.90 5.29 5.27 5.71 6.33 Industrial share prices 100.30 5.28 6.30 Industrial share price 100.71 .
 Imports,o.b. -70,527 -85,861 -105,230 -120,383 -134,509 -160,205 . Exports -5,514 -15,339 -18,064 -13,372 -9,372
 Vienna 1,677,867 ; Graz 250,653; Linz 189,069; Salzburg 149,201; Innsbruck 118,362 . Vienna 1.677,000 people live in Vienna, Austria, Austria .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour €’000,000 . Agriculture, forestry 4,350 1.2% of the labour force was agriculture, forestry .
 Baku 1,145,000 ; Ganca 307,500; Sumqayit 268,800; Minga^evir 95,500 . Minga*evir, Qaraquxur 74,700,000; Qaraqqur 74.700 .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour AZN ’000,000 value force force . Agriculture Petroleum and natural gas, 1,565 5.5% of labour .
 Nassau 231,500; Freeport 47,100; West End 12,900; Cooper’s Town (on Great Abaco) 8,600; Marsh Harbour 5,400 . Nassau is home to more than 250,000 Nassau residents .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force in 2006 was structure of economy . Agriculture, fishing, mining, public utilities, public sector, construction, public services, manufacturing, public transport, transport, electricity, transport and electricity were the main industries in 2006 .
 Trade, hotels, restaurants, restaurants and other services contribute to 24,400 jobs each year . Total of 24,000 jobs were created in 2013 .
 Statistically derived midpoint within range, includes public corporations . Statistically based on public corporations. Public corporations .
 Much of which is transshipped from the petroleum storage terminal near Freeport . Much of the oil is trans-transferred from petroleum storage .
 Manama 157,000; Muharraq 91,307; Ar-Rifa 79,550; Madlnat Hamad 52,718; AlC All 47,529; Madlat Tsa 36,833 . AlC AlC is AlC, AlC
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2001 value in % of total labour % of labour BD '000,000 . Agriculture, fishing 25.5% of labour force .
 Al-Muharraq includes the area of Hawar island and other nearby islets awarded to Bahrain by the International Court of Justice in 2001 . The area was awarded by the court of justice in 2001 to Bahrain .
 Includes 5,424 inadequately defined and 16,136 unemployed Bahrainis . Of which 59% non-Bahrainis were 59% of labour force in 2006 . Non-Bahraineis constituted 70% of Bahrainis in labour force .
 Dhaka 7,000,940/12,797,394; Chittagong 2,579,107/3,858,093; Khulna 855,650/1,388,425; Rajshahi 472,775/775,495
 Includes 45 indirectly elected seats reserved for women . Reinstated Jan., 2009; replaced interim caretaker government from October 2006 . includes 45 indirectly elect seats . Includes 45 indirect seats reserved to women . Includes an indirectly elected seat in the Senate .
 The Chittagong Hill Tracts is a semi-autonomous region for non-Bengali tribal people . The region was created by an accord signed in December 1997 . It was created in 1997 .
 Export processing zone manufactures (particularly ready-made garments) are of the greatest value . Export Processing Zone manufactures are particularly of the most value .
 Christ Church 22 57 49,497 St. Mary's Parish population is 2000 . Christ Church is one of two parishes with a population of 1 sq mi sq km .
 Bridgetown 98,700; Speightstown 3,600; Oistins 2,300; Bathsheba 1,800; Bath sheba 1.800; Holetown 1,400 .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture, fishing 175 per cent of the labour force . Agriculture and fishing 175. per person .
 Parishes and city of Bridgetown have no local administrative function . Includes most of the city of Bridgetown .
 The adjusted de jure census total including non-enumerated persons and institutionalized persons is 268,792 . This is the adjusted de facto census total for the first time since 2000 .
 Offshore banking and information services are important sources of revenue for the U.S. Bank of America .
 Minsk 1,741,000; Homyel 481,500; Mahilyow 367,700; Vitsyebsk 343,600; Hrodna 318,600 . Brest 301,400; Brest 1,700,000 people; Minsk
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2003 in value . Agriculture, forestry 7,110 7.110 7% of labour force . Agricultural sector 7% 7.5% Labour force .
 A 2003 concordat grants the Belarusian Orthodox Church privileged status . However, a 2003 agreement grants it privileged status to the church . Belarus's Orthodox Church is the largest in the world .
 Includes 136,000 registered unemployed and 799,000 undistributed selfemployed selfemployed and unregistered unemployed . n Detail does not add to total given because of rounding because of rounded rounding .
 Brussels 148,873/1,831,496; Antwerp 472,071/955,338; Liege 190,102/641,591; Gent 237,250/423,320; Charleroi 201,593/405,236 .
 Price and earnings indexes 2002 2003 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Consumer price index . Annual earnings index 93.0.0 0.9.0 . Annual price index of 93.9% .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour €’000,000 value force force . Agriculture 2,352 0.02% of the labour force in 2007 2006 .
 Belize City 65,200, San Ignacio/Santa Elena 19,100, Belmopan 18,100; Belmopans 18,000; Orange Walk 16,300; Dangriga 12,000 . Belize has 65,000 people in total .
 Agriculture, fishing, forestry 271,000 10.6% of the labour force in 2007 . Agriculture and fishing is the largest industry in the world .
 Excludes crude petroleum extraction, including crude petroleum extractions . Includes crude oil extraction, and crude oil production .
 Cotonou 719,912; Porto-Novo 255,878; Godomey 187,836; Parakou 178,304; Abomey-Calavi 75,226; Bohicon 74,070 . Porto Novello is
 Porto-Novo, the official capital of the country, is the seat of the legislature . The president and most government ministers reside in Cotonou, the country's capital . The constitution was established under the constitution, but the capital is the capital .
 Excludes reexports (notably petroleum and food products particularly from Nigeria and Niger) valued at U.S. $253,000,000 in 2005 . Reexports from Nigeria, Niger and Nigeria were valued at $1417,000 in 2005 .
 Hamilton 0.0.0 sq mi sq km . Area and population area population population is Hamilton . Area is Hamilton's largest city .
 Agriculture, fishing 45 0. l Quarrying 1 55 ' Construction I 3,544 8.5 per cent of the labour force .
 The economy of Bermuda is overwhelmingly based on service industries such as tourism, insurance companies, offshore financial centres, e-commerce companies and ship repair facilities .
 Bermuda does not have a degree-conferring university, business school, or law school . Many students attend universities abroad because Bermuda has no university or business school . Subscribers. 16 2004-05; many students attend abroad .
 Thimphu 79,185; Phuntsholing 20,537; Gelaphu 9,199; Wangdue 6,714; Samdrup Jongkhar 5,952; Samtse 4,981 . Phuntshunting 20,537; Gel
 Agriculture, forestry 9,578 18.6% of the labour force . Agriculture and forestry is the most productive sector in the world .
 Buddhism is the spiritual heritage of Bhutan per article 3.5 of the 2008 constitution . Buddhism is a part of the Bhutanese state of religion . Bhutan's constitution states Buddhism is its spiritual heritage .
 The ngultrum is at par with the Indian rupee and accepted legal tender . Indian currency is also accepted legal currency .
 Estimated district areas are derived from district area percentages of the total national area as published in the Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan . includes 634,972 residents and 37,453 temporary residents . The estimated district area is based on district area percentage of the national area .
 Includes 48,734 in ill-defined activities and 7,865 unemployed . 7,800 people were unemployed in the U.S.
 Santa Cruz 1,116,059 (urban agglomeration 1,422,000) ; La Paz 789,585 ; El Alto 647,3506; Cochabamba 516,683; Cochibamba 5 16,683 . Cochibambamba 5
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour Bs '000,0009 value forcei i forceii Agriculture 3,920 13.2% of labour is agriculture . Agriculture is the largest agricultural sector in the world .
 Executive and legislative branches meet in La Paz, judiciary in Sucre, Sucre . The 1,425 sq mi area of the Bolivian part of Lake Titicaca is part of the region . The area includes the 1.425 sq m area of Bolivia .
 Sarajevo 376,000 people live in Bosnia and Herzegovina . Banja Luka 165,100; Zenica 84,300; Tuzla 84,100,000; Mostar 63,500 . Mostar is the largest city in the world, with
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1999 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture, forestry 1,716 7.2% of GDP . Agricultural sector 1,700% of the GDP .
 High Representative of the international community per the 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement/EU Special Representative. EU Special Representative . High Representative. High Representative . Special Representative of international community .
 The FBH, RS, and Brcko District budgets were constructed separately . The small central government budget is the largest in the country .
 Taxes on products and imports less subsidies and imputed bank service charges are lower than other subsidies and bank charges .
 Retail price index through 2006, consumer price index beginning 2007 . Consumer price index is based on the retail price index from 2006 to 2007 . Retail prices are based on inflationary measures .
 Gaborone 214,400; Francistown 91,800; Molepolole 65,600; Selebi-Pikwe 54,700; Maun 51,600 . Gaboron 214,200; Francisow 91,000; Mole Pololole 65
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 1,489 1.4% of the labour force . Total labour force was 1.5% of GDP .
 The Ntlo ya Dikgosi is a 35member body consisting of chiefs, subchiefs, and associated members . It includes 4 specially elected members and 2 ex officio members . The statutory number includes the speaker who may be appointed from outside .
 The high court meets in Lobatse, but its move to Gaborone was pending in mid-2009 . The move to the capital was due to take place in mid-'09 .
 Sao Luis 922,200/1,210,027 and Teresina 737,100/778,341 . Sao Bernardo Natal 774,200 /1,174,886 do Campo 767,8007 Maceio 871,900/1089,
 Distribution of income percentage of national income by quintile 1 2 3 4 5 3. 3. 4. 5. 6. 5 . 5. 4 . 5 . 4. 7. 3 . 4 . 6. 7 . 5%. 5. 2. 5%. 4. 2 .
 Agriculture, forestry 72,300 5.3% of the U.S. labour force . Agriculture and forestry is the second-largest industry in the United States . The labour force is the largest in the country .
 U.S. dollar 2.89 2.65 2.34 2.14 1.77 1.34 £ 5.15 5.13 4.03 4.19 3.55 3.41 SDRs 2 4 29 8 2 1 Reserve pos. in IMF —
 Imports,o.b. -48,290 -62,809 -73,606 -91,350 -120,618 -173,197 . Exports, o.b., -48.000 -62.809 . Imports and exports -18,000 -
 Includes 218,000 not adequately defined and 8,210,000 unemployed . As of September, there were more than 8,200,000 joblessless Americans .
 Bandar Ser Seri Begawan 67,100; Kuala Belait 32,000; Seria 30,700; Tutong 19,600 . Kuala Bela Belaar Bela, Kuala Beli Bela and Seria are the other cities in Malaysia .
 A11 official documents that must be published by law in Malay are also required to be issued in an official English version . Official documents must also be published in official English versions .
 Foreign workers accounted for 70% of the 160,500 economically active in 2004 . Foreign workers account for 70 per cent of all economic activity in the country .
 Sofia 1,156,796,796; Plovdiv 345,249; Varna 313,983; Burgas 187,514; Ruse 156,761; Stara Zagora 140,303 . Sofia: 1.6 million people have died in
 Agriculture, forestry 2,028 5.6% of GDP . Agriculture, Forestry 2,027 5.7% of the GDP .
 Bulgaria has no official religion; the constitution refers to Eastern Orthodoxy as the "traditional" religion . The constitution, however, refers to eastern Orthodoxy, as the “traditional” religion .
 Sofia-Grad includes Sofia city and immediately adjacent urban and rural areas . Sofiya-Grad is Sofia's second largest city in the country . Sofia is located in Sofia, Bulgaria, and its second largest province .
 Unofficially up to 40% of the population is estimated to be atheist or agnostic, including short-term public guaranteed external debt . The country is home to a large majority of atheists and agnostic .
 Hemus Air and Bulgaria Air only including significant charter services . These two airlines operated under the name Bulgaria Air from February 2009 . Hemus air and Bulgaria air only operated in the 1990s .
 Ouagadougou 1,475,223; Bobo-Dioulasso 489,967; Koudougou 88,184; Banfora 75,917; Ouahigouya 73,153 . Ouagdougou: 1.475
 Agriculture 1,012,100 32.2% of the CFAF labour force . Agriculture 1 ,012,000 32.3% of labour . Agriculture is the only major industry in the world .
 Foreign trade 7 Balance of trade 7. CFAF ‘’000,000�000% of total -210.000% . Foreign trade is the largest part of the country's economy .
 So far, the world's biggest trade deficit has been in the form of $1.2 billion . The world's largest trading partner in the Middle East is the U.S. largest in the world .
 Based on the 2003 Burkina Faso Demographic and Health Survey, comprising 57,737 people in 9,097 households, about 80% of which are located in rural areas . Subscribers of the 2003 survey were based on the data .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1990 in value % of total labour % of labour U.S.$’000 value force force . Agriculture 342,000 34.5% of labour force .
 Price index 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 11 Consumer price index 73. Price index index 73 . Price index of consumer price index is based on consumer prices .
 HIV/AIDS-related 370, lower respiratory infections 185, diarrheal diseases 128, war-related 114; war related 114, perinatal conditions 100; malaria 57 .
 Telephones Dailies 2007 2015 2.415 . Cellular 2008 48116 6016 Internet users . Internet users 2008 65 8.8 percent .
 South African troops in Burundi representing AU peacekeeping mission 973 . South African forces in Burunundi represent a peacekeeping force .
 Phnom Penh 1,364,000; Battambang 124,290; Sisophon 85,382; Siemreap 83,715; Sihanoukville 66,723 . Cambodia's capital city is 1.6 million people a year .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 10,406 29.6% KHR ‘’000,000’,000 value force force force .
 Importso.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners, includes estimates for illegal exports . Importsob in balance in balance, i.e. in . commodities and . trading partners . Includes estimates for . illegal exports.
 2004 estimate: Adamoua Ngaoundere 24,595 63,701 782,000 Centre Yaounde 26,623 68,953 2,703,000 Est Bertoua 42,086 109,002 816,000 Extreme-Nord Maroua
 Douala 1,371,400,400; Yaounde 1,344,600; Kousseri 476,600 . Garoua 461,300,300; Bamenda 419,400 and Maroua 335,800 . Bamenda, Bamenda and
 HIV/AIDS-related 308, lower respiratory infections 201, malaria 119; malaria 119, diarrheal diseases 88, perinatal conditions 69. HIV/AIDs-related .
 Agriculture, fishing, forestry 1,668 19.7% of labour force . CFAF ‘’000,000’% of total value labour forces . Agricultural, fishing and forestry 19% of the labour force in 2005 .
 Area and population area population Provinces Capitals sq mi sq km 2009 3 estimate . Alberta Edmonton 255,541 661,848 3,632,483 . British Columbia Victoria 364,764 944,735 4,419,974 . Manitoba Winnipeg 250
 Nova Scotia Halifax 21,345 55,284 939,531 Ontario Toronto 415,599 1,076,395 12,986,857 Prince Edward Island Charlottetown 2,185 5,660 140,402 Quebec Quebec Quebec 595,391 1,5
 Distribution of income percentage of family after-tax income by quintile 1 2 3 4 5 2.3% 7.6% 14.8% . Quality of working life. 51.0% Quality of living life.
 Toronto 5,113,149; Montreal 3,635,571; Vancouver 2,116,581; Ottawa-Gatineau 1,130,761; Calgary 1,079,310; Edmonton 1,034,945; Quebec 715,515; Winnipeg
 Abbotsford 159,020 Oshawa 330,594 Sherbrooke 186,952 Barrie 177,061 Regina 194,971 Sudbury 158,258 Halifax 372,858 Saguenay 151,643 Trois-Rivieres 141,529 Kelown
 Agriculture, fishing, forestry 25,965 2.3 per cent of the labour force in Canada . Agriculture and fishing is the largest industry in the country's labour force .
 Price and earnings indexes 2002 2003 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Consumer price index . Hourly earnings indexi® 93: 93: Earnings indexi. 93: 90: Earnest indexi: 93 .
 Foreign trade Balance of trade 2003 2004 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Can$’000,000,00,000 . +47.7% Foreign trade is Canada's biggest trade deficit .
 Includes professional, scientific, and technical services . Summed total equals Can$l,225,687,000,000 . Includes professional and scientific services .
 Praia 125,148; Mindelo (on Sao Vicente) 76,650; Santa Maria 18,780; Assomada 13,562; Assumada 13-562; Pedra Badejo 11,348 . Praia is one of the largest cities in Portugal
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2005 1990 in value % of total labour . Agriculture, fishing 8,904 9.0% 9.9% 9% 9%. Agricultural, fishing, agriculture, fishing 9,934 9.5% .
 George Town 28,836; West Bay 10,855; Bodden Town 8,300; Cayman Brae has 4 small settlements . Caymen Brae is home to the largest island island in the world, with 4 small towns .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour U.S.$’000,000 labour force . Agriculture, forestry, fishing, fishing 10% of the labour force in 2007 .
 Also of great importance to the economy are the captive insurance, mutual fund, and ship registration sectors .
 Bangui 622,771; Bimbo 124,176; Berberati 76,918; Carnot 45,421; Bambari 41,356. Banguinei 6.3 million people live in the capital .
 HIV/AIDS-related 604, lower respiratory infections 184, malaria 158; malaria 158, diarrheal diseases 105 . Lower respiratory infections also included 184, 184 and malaria 158 . Diplotic diseases 105, including malaria, 105 .
 CFAF '000,000 value force force . Agriculture, fishing, forestry 421,900 54.9% of the labour force . Agricultural, fishing and forestry employs more than 1,500,000 .
 Communications units units units number per 1,000 number . Medium date in '000s persons is medium . Televisions 2004 24 6.6.
 Telephones Dailies 2007 5ii 1.211 . Cellular 2008 15412 3512 . Internet users 2008 19 4.6% Internet users .
 Official figure; a roughly equal amount was smuggled out of the country . Official figure: About a third of the smuggled out-of-the-country .
 So.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners . Importsob in balance with balance in balance . Import so.b . in balance, trade and i.e. in trade .
 National roads only; much of the 9,700 mi local road network is unusable . Much of the country's national roads only national roads are national .
 N’Djamena 989,000 3 ; Moundou 108,728; Sarh 95,050; Abeche 63,165; Kelo 36,643; Pala 31,281 . N‘Dhamena 9,000 . 3; M
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 1993 in value % of total labour % of labour CFAF '000,000 value force force' Agriculture Mining 723,700 1,560,700 20.7% of labour .
 Based on the 2003 Chad Demographic and Health Survey, comprising 27,879 people in 5,369 households, about 80% of which were in rural areas .
 Santiago 200,792 8 /5,428,590 9 ; Valparafso-Vina del Mar /803,683; Concepcion 212,003/ 666,381; La Serena-Coquimbo /296,253; Antofagasta 285,
 Price and earnings indexes 2002 2003 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Consumer price index . Hourly earnings index 93.5% of the index is based on earnings data .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture, fishing 3,080 4.0% of the labour force . Total labour force is Ch$’000,000 .
 Includes military pensions and funding for the paramilitary and the Copper Stabilisation Fund . Includes funding for paramilitary forces and the Coincinuity Fund .
 Shanghai 14,987,000, Beijing 11,106,000; Guangzhou 8,829,000 and Wuhan 7,243,000 . Nanjing 3,679,000.000; Guiyang 3,662,000 ; Harbin 3,621
 Distribution of income percentage of urban household income by quintile is based on the income of urban households . Urban households in the U.S. live in the lowest quintile .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 2,404 11.4% of the labour force . The labour force is the largest in the country's labour force in the world . Agriculture and forestry has the largest share of labour in North America .
 Includes 36 seats allotted to Hong Kong and 12 to Macau . Statutory number; includes 36 seats for Hong Kong, 12 for Macau and 36 for the Hong Kong .
 Data for Taiwan, Quemoy, and Matsu included; Hong Kong and Macau excluded . Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan are excluded .
 Includes 7,700,000 registered unemployed; remainder mostly activities not defined . Includes 7.700,00 registered unemployed, with majority of jobs in various industries . Includes more than 7,800,000 people in the U.S.
 Bogota is home to 7,033,914; Medellin 2,248,912; Cali 2,139,535; Barranquilla 1,144,470; Cartagena 871,342 . Bogota's population is 7.033,
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour Col$’000,000 value forced forced . Agriculture, forestry 33,349 8.5% of labour forced forced agriculture, forestry 33,349 8.5%.
 Import figures areo.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners . The figures are based on trade balance and balance in the world .
 Moroni 46,000; Mutsamudu 21,558; Domoni 13,254; Fomboni 13-053; Tsembehou 10,552. Moroni is the largest village in the country .
 Agriculture, fishing 84,119 50.2% of the labour force . Agriculture and fishing is the most labour-intensive form of work .
 26,38711 15.8H real estate 7,948 4.8C real estate . Trade, restaurants, hotels, hotels . Insurance, insurance, finance, insurance .
 Televisions 2002 13 23 PCs . PCs 2004 5. PCs . Communications units units units . number per 1,000 .
 Excludes Mayotte, an overseas possession of France, unless otherwise indicated . 3 languages are official per 2001 constitution .
 A constitutional referendum effective from May 23, 2009, returned greater powers to the central government . The referendum includes 15 indirectly elected seats, including 15 directly elected seats . The result of the referendum was approved in 2009 .
 Kinshashasa 7,273,947; Lubumbashi 1,283,380; MbujiMayi 1,213,726; Kananga 720,362; Kisangani 682,599; Bukavu 471,789. Kins
 Agriculture 1,796,000 43.5% of the total labour force . Agriculture 1.796,00 43.9% of total labour . The labour force is the largest in the country .
 Most transactions are conducted outside of the banking system and often with U.S. dollars . Most transactions in the country are done outside of banking system .
 To be formally reorganized into 25 provinces and 1 city in mid-2009 or later . To be formalized into provinces and cities in mid 2009 or after .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 132,800 5.8% of the labour force . CFAF ‘’000,000 value force force . Agricultural, forestry and fishing 5.7% of labour .
 The post of prime minister, an extraconstitutional creation from January 2005, was abolished on September 15, 2009 . The post was abolished in 2009 .
 Area and population area population population Provinces Capitals sq mi sq km 20071 estimate . Alajuela, Cartago, Guanacaste, Liberia, Heredia, Limon, Puntarenas, San Jose, Liberia . Total population 19,730 51,100
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 753,382 8.6% of the labour force in 2005 . Agriculture and forestry is the second largest industry in the world . The labour force is now the second biggest in the country .
 Abidjan 3,576,000; Bouake 573,700; Daloa 215,100; Yamoussoukro 185,600; Korhogo 115,000 . Bouake, Bouake and Bouake have more than 1,500,000 residents .
 HIV/AIDS-related 299, malaria 153, lower respiratory infections 132, diarrheal diseases 102, perinatal conditions 92 . Malaria-related, malaria-related and other diseases include malaria, malaria, diarrhyal diseases .
 The peace accord signed between the warring factions in March 2007 enabled the creation of a power-sharing transitional government in April 2007 . The peace agreement was signed in 2007 .
 At least 1 million foreigners have been forced to leave southern Cote d’Ivoire since September 2002 . At least one million foreigners forced out of southern Ivory Coast since 2002 .
 UN embargo on rough diamond exports was in effect from November 2004 to November 2007 . UN embargo was in place between November 2004 and November 2007.
 Detail does not add to total given because of rounding errors . Abidjan airport only used to be the site of the most significant airport in Ivory Coast .
 UN 7,800, French 1,800 peacekeepers, but dismantling of buffer zone began in April 2007 . UN peacekeepers occupy buffer zone occupied by peacekeepers .
 Zagreb 691,724; Split 175,140; Rijeka 143,800; Osijek 90,411; Zadar 69,556; Zadejevlija 70,500; Split 69,500 . Split, Rijek 143,
 Agriculture, forestry, hunting, fishing, mining, mining and construction . Manufacturing [ Public utilities > Construction . Transp. and commun communties . Manufacturing .
 16,477 6.477 jobs were created in the U.S. economy in 2010 . The U.N. Census was the highest level of employment in the world, followed by the lowest level of economic activity .
 Havana 2,174,790; Santiago de Cuba 425,990; Camaguey 306,702; Holguin 274,805; Santa Clara 208,739; Guantanamo 208,579 . Santiago de Cuban de Cuba is the largest city in the country .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2004 in value % of total labour % of labour CUP ’0007 value7 forces forces . Agriculture 1,913,600 4.6% of the labour force .
 Provision of separate data below does not imply recognition of either state’s claims but is necessitated by the lack of unified data . Provision does not mean recognition of the claims but it is necessary for the data to be consistent .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour €’000,000 value force force . Agriculture, fishing 306.5% of labour in 2007 2005 . Agriculture and fishing 306% in 2007 .
 Agriculture and fishing 288,152 6.6% of the labour force . Agricultural and fishing is the second largest industry in the world .
 Prague 1,233,211; Brno 370,592; Ostrava 307,767; Plzen 169,273; Liberec 100,914; Olomouc, 100,373. Prague 1.233,210; Prague, Brno, 370,
 Agriculture, forestry 77,416 2.2% of the labour force . Agriculture and forestry is the second largest industry in the world, followed by forestry .
 Balance of trade in 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Kc ’000,000’,000% of total -71.7% of trade was foreign trade . Foreign trade is the largest part of the world's trade deficit .
 Greater Copenhagen 1,153,615; Arhus 237,551; Odense 158,163; Alborg 121,818; Esbjerb 70,880 . Greater Copenhagen: Arhus, Odense, Alborg, Copenhagen, Denmark, Copenhagen .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force . Agriculture, fishing Mining Manufacturing Construction Construction Construction Public utilities Transp. and commune .
 2008 in value DKK ‘’000,000 % of total value 18,489 1.489 . Trade, restaurants Finance, real estate Pub. admin., defense Services Other Total 2008 in Value DKK '000,00'
 Percentage of de jure population economically active based on total population . Percentage of people economically active is based on population size . Percentage based on economic activity based on the size of the population .
 Taxes less subsidies on products, includes 15,100 not adequately defined and 143,300 unemployed . 143,000 people are unemployed .
 Djibouti has 583,000 people; Ali Sabieh 23,000; Dikhil 16,700; Arta 11,600; Tadjourah 8,700 . Djiboutsi has more than 5,000 residents; Dikil is the
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2005 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour FDJ '000,000 value force force' Agriculture 1 Mining 1 Mining ] 4,051 3.051 .
 Weights of consumer price index components for Djibouti city only, indirect taxes. Weights are based on national average prices in Djiboutsi city . Weights include those of Djibououar, Djiboubouar .
 Area and population area population population population 2001 Parishes sq mi sq km census census St. Louis, Louisiana . Area population population increased by population growth in the 1990s .
 Roseau 16,600, Portsmouth 3,600; Marigot 2,900; Berekua 2,600 . Atkinson 2,500; Atkinson 2.500. Portsmouth 2,800 . Portsmouth, 3,800, Marigots, 2,700 .
 Unemployment includes 3,054 unemployed and 43 unclassified by economic activity . The unemployed include 3,000 people who are not classified as unemployed or unclassified .
 Santo Domingo 1,887,586 5 ; Santiago 507,418; Santiago 50,418 . San Pedro de Macoris 193,713; La Romana 191,303; San Cristobal 137,422 . Santo domingo is the capital of the country
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour RD$’000,0006 value force force . Agriculture 24,250 7.7% of labour force .
 2002 census population for national district region (combined population of Santo Domingo province and national district) is 2,731,294 . About 10% of the population of the Dominican Republic is a mix of legally and illegally resident Haitians .
 Dili 151,026; Los Palos 12,612; Same 9,966; Pante Macassar 9,754; Maliana 9,721. Dili is one of the largest countries in the world .
 Communications number units per 1,000 number of people in the U.S. increased to 1,500 in 2007 . Internet users in 2004 1.7% of the world's population .
 iTimor-Leste is the preferred short-form name per the United Nations . Military expenditure as percentage of GDP is a measure of military expenditure .
 Traditional beliefs are also practiced in conjunction with Roman Catholicism . Some vestiges of traditional beliefs are still practiced in the United States .
 57% of paved roads were in poor or damaged condition in late 1999; gravel roads were not usable for most vehicles . 57% paved roads in poor condition in 1999 were paved .
 Guayaquil 2,387,000,000 5 ; Quito 1,514,000 . Cuenca 303,994; Machala 217,266; Santo Domingo de los Colorados 211,689; Portoviejo 194,916. Guayqu
 Quechua and Shuar are also official languages for the indigenous peoples . includes Santa Elena province created in October 2007 . includes Santo Domingo de los Tsachilas province .
 Import figures areo.b. in balance of trade andi.f. for commodities and trading partners . The figures are based on trade balance and trade balance in the world .
 Cairo 6,759 ; Alexandria 4,085; Al-Jlzah 2,891; Shubra al-Khaymah 1,026 . Port Said 571; Port Said, 512; Suez 512. Cairo 6.759 ; . Alexandria 4
 Average household size 4.2; average annual income per household:a.; sources of income:a.a. Source of income, expenditure:a; Source of household income, a. source of income and a source of spending:a . Source of family income, spending, a
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2005-06 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 81,766.6% forced forced labour .
 San Salvador 316,090 ; Santa Ana 245,421; Soyapango 241,403 3 ; San Miguel 218,410; Mejicanos 140,7513. San Salvador is the largest city in the country .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour CFAF ’000,000 value force force . Agriculture, fishing 109,000 1.0% of the total labour force . Agricultural and fishing 1.2% of labour force
 Official government census figures; credible estimates are significantly lower . credible estimates of significantly lower.
 Asmara 435,000, Keren 57,000 and Assab 28,000 . Massawa 25,000; Mendefera 25,00; Mendeefera, Mende-25,000. Teseney 25,500 .
 Structure of gross domestic product 2007 in value % of total U.S. GDP . Agriculture, fishing 235.000,000 jobs in the United States .
 Mandate for the UN peacekeeping force along the EritreanEthiopian border was terminated in July 2008 . Mandate was terminated for peacekeeping forces along the border with Eritreans .
 The name in Tigrinya, the most widely spoken local language, is Hagere Iertra . Tigrinea is Tigrini, the name in the most popular local language .
 New constitution ratified in May 1997 ratified in 1997 was not implemented in August 2009 . New constitution not implemented since August 2009.
 Data taken from a 1996-97 survey of the 12 largest urban centres in the country .
 Tallinn 396,852; Tartu 101,965; Narva 66,712; Kohtla-Jarve 45,399; Parnu 44,074. Tallinn, Tartu and Tartu are Estonian capitals .
 Agriculture, fishing, forestry 5,683 2.7% of the labour force . Agriculture and fishing 2.3% of labour in 2005 .
 Addis Ababa 2,738,248; Adama 222,035; Dire Dawa 222,000; Mekele 215,546; Gonder 206,987; Bahir Dar 180,094. Addis. Ababa .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2004-05 1995“ in value % of total labour % of labour Br ’000,0005 value force force Agriculture 35,948 47.7% of labour .
 Primary 124,20216 12,174,719 66.616 71 . Secondary/Voc. education student/ enrollment teachers students teachers students teacher ratio rate rate . Primary school students/enrolators ratio is at least 66% of teachers .
 Includes 3 special enumeration areas with a total population of 96,570 . Includes 3 special encountations with a total population of 96,570. Includes three special enumeration  areas .
 Based on national Household Income and Expenditure Survey, comprising 17,332 households . Based on the national household income and expenditure Survey, comprises 17,331 households .
 Ethiopian segment of Addis Ababa-Djibouti railroad was in poor condition in 2007 . Length of Ethiopia segment of railroad in 2007 was in bad condition .
 Agriculture 2,410 7 20% of the labour force in 2006 2005 in DKK DKK ’000,000 . Agriculture 2.410 7% of labour force . Agriculture is the largest agricultural sector in the country .
 Formally independent of the national Danish Lutheran church from July 2007 . Formality independent of national Danish . Lutheran church . Formally . independent of Danish Lutheran .
 The maritime boundary demarcation agreement between the Shetland Islands and the Faroes in 1999 allowed for the still unsuccessful exploration for deep-sea petroleum as of mid-2008 .
 Nasinu 87,446 6 ; Suva 85,691 (urban agglomeration, 241,432); Lautoka 52,220; Nausori 47,6046; Nadi 42,284 . Suva is located in Fiji, Fiji, Tongus,
 5,483.35 100.05, 316,041,100,000 balance of payments data . Other 545.88 9.98, 9.88,988 9 .98 — — Total of payments $5,483 .35,000 .
 Matanitu Tu-Vaka-i-koya ko Viti/Viti; Hindustani longform name: Fiji Ripablik . Fiji Ripababik is Fiji Ripabalik, Fiji .
 English, Fijian, and Hindustani had equal status per 1997 constitution . English, Fiji, Hindustan, and Indian language were equal in constitution .
 The 1997 constitution was backed by the military from December 2006 . It was not formally abrogated until April 2009 . Backed by the army, the constitution was formally abolished in April 2009.
 Data for paid employees only who are 15 and over, indirect taxes less imputed bank service charges and subsidies and subsidies .
 Helsinki 576,632 ; Espoo 241,5656; Tampere 209,552; Vantaa 195,3976; Turku 175,582; Oulu 137,061 . Oulu is the largest Finnish city in Finland .
 Agriculture, fishing, forestry 6,021 2.02% of U.S. labour force . Agriculture and fishing is the largest industry in the United States . The labour force is now the largest in the country's economy .
 From farms of 1 hectare and larger only only, includes 204,000 unemployed persons not previously employed and 4,000 not adequately defined, importsi.f., exportso.b.f. Includes 204,500 unemployed persons .
 Paris 2,181,371/10,142,977; Marseille 839,043/1,418,481; Lyon 472,305/1-417,463 . Nice 347,060/940,017; Toulouse 437,715/
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 32,700 1.7 per cent of the labour force in 2006 . Agriculture, fishing 32,700 is agriculture, forestry and fishing 1.3 per cent .
 Central bank discount yields 4.13 4.10 3.41 3.80 4.30 4.23 Industrial share prices 9 72.10 4.20 4.80 .
 Britannica World Data continues to compile separate pages for the four FODs . Britannica acknowledges that some data are without a doubt double-counted .
 Data for France are footnoted if taken from an international source that clearly cites the inclusion of the FODs . Data for the French government are foot notated .
 Includes Monaco . Last state-owned coalproducing mine closed in April 2004 . Includes Monaco.
 In 2004 the European Space Agency accounted for 26% of GDP and employed 8,300 people . In 2004, the European space agency was responsible for almost half of Europe's GDP .
 Faa 29,781 4 ; Papeete 26,050 (urban agglomeration 131,6955) ; Punaauia 25,399 4 ; Pirae 14,551 4 ; Nunue 4,9276 4 .
 Agriculture, fishing 164.6% of the U.S. labour force in 2007 . Agriculture and fishing is the most productive sector in the United States . The labour force is the largest in the country .
 Nunue is the largest town not on the island of Tahiti . Located on Bora-Bora, it is located on the northern part of the island . The island is also known as the most uninhabited island in the world .
 The manufacture of energy-generating products is included in Public utilities . Public utilities are required to make energy-generation products .
 Fruit known locally as nono; also known as Indian mulberry . Imports i.f.f.; exportso.b. n Fruit . Also known as 'Indian mulberry'
 Libreville 661,600,600; Port-Gentil 116,200; Franceville 41,300; Lambarene 9,000 . Libreville is one of the most populous French cities in Haiti .
 Basse 2,048 217,014 Kanifing2.2. Basse is located in the Basse region of Basse . The Basse area has a population of 2.2 million people .
 Serekunda 335,700 2; Brikama 80,700; Bakau 45,5002; Banjul 33,131 ; Farafenni 30,400.2; Farafenna 30,000 .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1993 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 5,321 26.3% of labour is employed in agriculture .
 Cargo loaded and unloaded 2,700 metric tons . Air transport 15; passenger arrivals 300,000, passenger departures 300,00, cargo loaded and unloads 2,800 metric tons. Air transport .
 Greater Banjul, includes national area near the mouth of the Gambia River not allocated by division . Kanifing and Banjil make up most of Greater Banjul . Includes national area of national area not allocated to division .
 Low-income population in Banjul and Kanifing only; weights of consumer price index components . Low-included: Low-Informal population .
 Tbilisi 1,106,500; Kutaisi 188,600; Batumi 122,200; Rustavi 117,300; Zugdidi 72,100 . T.Tbilisi: 1,105,500 people live in the capital, 1,107,
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour . GEL ’000,000 value force force force . Agriculture 1,703.6% GEL '000,00 value force Force Force Agriculture 1.703.2% G
 Russia became the first country to recognize Abkhazia's and South Ossetia’s independence from Georgia in 2008 . Russia recognized the independence of the two regions .
 Georgia claims as part of Shida Kartli region, includes Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Georgia claims the region is part of the region, which is also known as Abkhazaria . The region is claimed to be part of Georgia's territory, including Abkh
 Excludes all but 1,900 people from the populations of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Includes all but 2,800 people from Abkhazi and 1,800 from South Osseta .
 Excludes Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Taxes on products less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges . Excludes Abkhazian and Ossetian territories .
 Favourite leisure activities include playing football (soccer; registered participants, 2004) 6,272,804, as well as watching television, using the computer, going to the cinema, attending theatrical and musical performances .
 Manufacturing enterprises no. of employees wages as a % of avg. of all manufacturing wages value added at factor values . Motor vehicles 516,461 144.5% of manufacturing workers are now employed in manufacturing . Motor vehicle production is the highest level of manufacturing in the world .
 Germany was a world leader in the production of wind and solar power in 2009 . In 2009 Germany was the world's leading producer of wind, solar power .
 United States dollar 0.95 0.79 0.73 0.76 0.70 0.72 £ 1.53 1.41 1.46 1.49 1.36 1.03 SDRs 1,980 1,942 2,061 1,89
 Excludes eastern Germany except for the former East Berlin, includes attempted murder . Includes attempted murder, including attempted murder. Excludes east Germany except the former east Berlin, including East Berlin .
 Accra 1,847,432; Kumasi 627,600; Tamale 269,200; Tema 237,700; Obuasi 122,600 . Accra's population is estimated at 1,800,000 . Kumasi, Kumasi and Tamale are
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1999 in value £’000,000 . Agriculture, forestry, fishing 258,500 34.5 % of total value labour force . Agriculture and forestry, fishing 258,000 34.7 % of labour force Agriculture,
 Athens 745,514 ; Thessaloniki 363,987 ; Piraeus 175,697 6 ; Patrai 161,114; Peristerion 137,918 6 ; Irakleio 133,012 . Athens 7.5 million people live in Athens .
 Autocephalous Greek Orthodox Church has special recognition per the constitution . Hhe autocephalous church has special status as a church in Greece .
 Government states there are no ethnic divisions in Greece . Unofficial source; government states there is no ethnic division in Greece. Unofficial sources: Government says there are not ethnic divisions .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture, fishing, hunting, trapping 92 4.4% of U.S. labour force . Total labour force: 92 4% of GDP .
 Government-owned corporations have debt obligations in ships and buildings . But government-owned companies have obligations to ship and building owners .
 Area and population Parishes 1 Principal towns sq mi area sq km sq km population 2001 census St. Louis-Germans population 1 .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 1998 in value % of total labour % of labour . EC$’000,000 value force force force Agriculture 83% of labour force . Agriculture 83.5% labour force.
 Military expenditure as percentage of GDP:a.; per capita expenditure,a.a. Military expenditure:a. ; per capita spending,a.; military expenditure: A. Military Expenditure: a. Percentage of GDP . Military expenditure is a percentage of the country's GDP .
 Hurricanes Ivan and Emily destroyed much of the nutmeg and cacao fields as well as the banana crop . It is estimated that it will take a decade to regrow nutmeg groves in Grenada .
 Imports areo.b. in balance in balance of trade andi.f. for commodities and trading partners . Imports include commodities and trade partners .
 Primary 3,246i 9 60,769 19.019 . Secondary/Voc. education teachers students students students student/ teacher ratio . Primary school enrollment rate was 3,247i 9,246 . Primary students enrolled in primary school were 3,245i 9 .
 Excludes 19,870 non-salaried workers . Within Pointe-aPitre urban agglomeration . Excludes workers from Point-a-Pitsre .
 Finance, real estate; Public administration, defense, defense; Services includes Transportation and communications . Services includes transportation and communications.
 Tamuning 10,833; Mangilao 7,794; Mangillao 7.794; Yigo 6,391; Astumbo 5,207; Hagatna 1,122. Tamuning is the largest island island in the region .
 Primary i5 1,917 28,106i 6 14.6 students teacher ratio rate . Primary school i5 i5  5 1, 917 students 6 14 teachers 6 14 students 6 teachers 6 students 6 students . i5i5   5 students 7 students 6
 Tncludes active-duty United States military personnel, . United States Department of Defense employees, and dependents of both .
 Payroll employment only; excludes proprietors, the self-employed, unpaid family workers, and military personnel . Military personnel are exempt from payroll employment .
 Other includes Agriculture, Manufacturing, Transportation and communications and communications, and Finance .
 Civilian labour force only, including unemployed, includes unemployed . Includes (significantly petroleum imports for transshipment to Micronesia .
 Includes military physicians licensed by Guam public health office . Includes military doctors licensed by the Guam public service office .
 A 2006 agreement to move 8,000 U.S. Marines from Okinawa to Guam by 2014 was ratified by the Japanese Diet in May 2009 . The agreement was ratified in 2009 by the Japan Diet .
 Guatemala City 942,348; Mixco 277,400 3 ; Villa Nueva 187,700 3 ; Quetzaltenango 106,700; Quetzastenango106,700 ; Escuintla 65,400 . Guatemala City is the largest city in the country
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 29,365 11.5% of the total labour force . Agriculture is the only major source of labour in the country .
 Last operating rail service was shut down September 2007; no passenger service is available . No passenger service was available in 2007 .
 Area and population area population population population 2001 Parishes of Guernsey sq mi sq km census Castel 3 . Area area is 3.5 sq mi square km . Area is 1.6 sq sq sq km .
 Retail price index 2003 2004 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Retail Price Index is 114 . Retail price Index is now 114.
 Horticulture, fishing 24,198 1.0% of the labour force . Horticulture is the most important form of labour in the country .
 2006 i’6i 7 25E 7 . 2007 PCs Dailies 2007 . 2006 i'6i was i”6i . 2007 i‘6i, 25E and 25E were i�’4i .
 iData exclude Alderney and Sark unless otherwise noted . Military Total active duty personnel:a.a.. iData excludes Sark and Sark .
 States of Deliberation was reorganized in 2004 . includes 3 ex officio members (2 of whom have no voting rights) and 2 representatives from Alderney . Includes 3 ex-officio members .
 Sark’s feudal system of government ended with elections to a 28-member assembly in December 2008 . The States of Alderney has a president and 10 elected members . Sark's feudal system was replaced by elections to an assembly of 28 members .
 The Guernsey government issues both paper money and coins . Equivalent in value to pound sterling ; .
 Islets that are directly administered by Guernsey, includes Alderney, Sark, and other dependencies, includes Jersey . Islets are administered by the island's government .
 Financial services accounted for 66% of the export economy in 2002 . Excluding administrative and financial services, financial services were the biggest export sector .
 Conakry 1,851,800, Kankan 113,900, Labe 64,500; Labe64,500, Kindia 56,000; Kindia . Nzerekore 55,000 people live in Guinea .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 4,738.6% of the GDP . Agriculture, Forestry, fishing is the largest industry in the world .
 Daily newspapers are subject to rigorous government censorship . Circulation of daily newspapers is banned in Britain .
 A constitution adopted by the National Assembly in 2001 had been neither promulgated nor vetoed by the President . The constitution includes 2 unfilled seats reserved for citizens of Guinea-Bissau residing abroad . A constitution also includes 2 reserved seats for citizens living abroad .
 In spring 2009 most of Guinea-Bissau’s income was derived from trafficking South American cocaine into Europe . Most of Guinea Bissau's income came from trafficking of South American drug into Europe.
 Georgetown 236,900, Linden 44,900; New Amsterdam 35,700, Corriverton 12,700; Corriveron 12,000; Bartica 11,300 . Georgetown 236.900; Linden, 44,100, New Amsterdam, 35,300; Cor
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour . Sugar 20,457 11.5 per cent of the labour force . Sugar is the only major sugar producer in the United States .
 Statistically derived midpoint within range within range, indirect taxes less subsidies includes 32,100 unemployed . Includes 32,000 unemployed .
 Port-au-Prince 703,023,023 ; Carrefour 336,2225; Delmas 284,0795; Cap-Haitien 111,094; Gonaives 104,825 . Cap-haitien is one of the largest cities in Haiti
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 1990 in value % of total labour % of labour G ’000,0007 value forces forces . Agriculture, forestry 3,204 23.8% of the labour force was agriculture . Agriculture and forestry is the largest sector in
 Includes 63,975 not adequately defined and 339,679 officially unemployed . 339,678 officially unemployed, with more than 50,000 jobless each year .
 Tegucigalpa 967,200; San Pedro Sula 623,100; Choloma 212,400; La Ceiba 167,300; El Progreso 118,200 . La Ceibao is one of the largest cities in Latin America .
 Agriculture 32,823 12.7% of the total labour force . Agriculture is the largest agricultural sector in the world . Agriculture has the largest share of labour force in the country .
 Tn actuality an interim regime supported by the military from June 28, 2009; presidential elections were planned for November 2009 . President Barack Obama was overthrown in 2009 .
 Taxes and import duties less imputed bank service charges, includes official unemployment figures . unofficial estimates of unemployment are significantly higher than official figures .
 Based on the Encuesta Nacional de Demografia y Salud 2005-06 . Subscribers are required to view the results of the study .
 Central & Western District (overlaps with the historic capital area of Victoria), Hong Kong Island, Hong Kong is Hong Kong . The district is located in Central and Western District .
 Kowloon 2,019,533; Victoria 981,714; Tuen Mun 488,249; Sha Tin 425,140; Tseung Kwan O 344,872. Kowloo 2,018,533, Victoria 9,714 . Tuen M
 Balance of trade 2003 2004 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 HK$’000,000,00,000% of total -63.63% of the total . Foreign trade 10 Balance of Trade 2003 2004 . 2006 . 2007 . 2008 . HK$ $’,000 .
 Imports arei.f., exportso.b.n. Includes reexports and domestic exports . Exports are reexported .
 West Rail was inaugurated in December 2003 . East Rail and West Rail are the largest rail network in the world . West Rail is the largest railway network in North America .
 There were an additional 4,848 practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine in Hong Kong at the beginning of 2006 .
 Budapest 1,702,297,297; Debrecen 205,084; Miskolc 171,096; Szeged 167,039; Pecs 156,664; Gyor 128,808. Budapest 1.702,296; De
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture, forestry 878.9% of the labour force .
 Reykjavik has 119,547 people in the city of Iceland, Iceland and the rest of the world . Iceland is the largest city in the world and has the largest population in the country . Iceland has the highest number of cities in Iceland and Greenland .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour . ISK �’000,000’,000 value force force . Agriculture 18.5% of labour force .
 NATO agreed to begin regular supervision of Icelandic airspace from July 2007 . NATO has been monitoring Icelandic airspace since 2007 . Icelandic airspace has been monitored by NATO since 2008 .
 Distribution of expenditure percentage of household expenditure by decile/quintile 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 3. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 7 . 7. 8. 9. 5 . 8. 7: 7. 9: 9. 7
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 8,618 17.6% of the labour force . Agricultural, forestry and fishing 9% of labour force in 1999-2000 . Total labour force of India’s labour force is 1.2% .
 Central bank discount 6.25.25 6.00 6.30 6.50 6.40 6.20 6.45 6.60 6.80 6.70 6.75 6.90 6.95 6.55 6.10 7.30 7.50 7
 Populations are March 1, 2008, official projections based on the 2001 Indian census results . Populations were based on data from the Indian census of 2001 .
 Data are for the 22 scheduled languages of India (including associated languages/dialects of each of the 22) unless otherwise footnoted . Data include associated languages and dialects of all the 22 languages .
 Jakarta 8,603,349,349; Surabaya 2,611,506; Bandung 2,288,570; Medan 2,029,797; Bekasi 1,940,308; Tangerang 1,451,595; Semarang 1
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2006 in value . Agriculture, fishing, forestry 713,291 14.8% of labour force . Agriculture and fishing, forestry 713, 291 14.9% of the labour force.
 Tehran 7,797,520; Mashhad 2,427,316; Esfahan 1,602,110; Tabriz 1,398,060; Karaj 1,386,030; Shiraz 1,227,331; Ahvaz 985,614; Ah
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 2007 Agriculture, forestry 268,002 10.000 people . Agriculture and forestry is the country's main source of GDP .
 Baghdad 5,054,000,000; Mosul 1,316,000 . Irbll 926,000. Al-Basrah 870,000 and Karkuk 750,000 more . Mosul 1.316,300,000 people; Al Basrah 1.
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour ID ‘’000,000’,000 value force force force . Agriculture 4,133 6.9% of the labour force .
 Baghdad-Mosul line was the only operational route in July 2006 . Represents the Baghdad to Mosul line, only operational in 2006 .
 Dublin 506,211 ; Cork 119,418; Galway 72,414; Limerick 52,539; Limgera 52, 539; Waterford 45,748. Dublin 50,211 . Cork 119.418; Limdera 72,415; Limker
 In 2005 there were 243,000 foreigners in the labour force, of which 120,000 were from Poland . In 2005, there were 240,000 foreign workers in Poland, 120,00 from Poland alone .
 Area and population area population population population 2006 . Castletown 2.9 sq km census sq km population population . Area has a population of 2.6sq km population .
 Douglas 26,218; Onchan 9,172; Ramsey 7,309; Peel 4,280; Port Erin 3,575. Douglas, Onchan, Ramsey, Ramsey and Port Erin are the most populated areas .
 Agriculture, fishing 18,514 1.4% of the labour force . Agriculture, fish 18,500 1.5% of labour . Labour force grew to 1.8% in 2006 .
 International business 294,1611° 16.210 I Pub. admin. admin., defense 89,823 5.210 . International business is 294, 16.11° .
 Isle of Man government issues both paper money and coins . Equivalent in value to pound sterling . Isle of man government issues coins and paper money .
 Combined total for Noble’s Hospital and Ramsey and District Cottage Hospital . Ramsey and D.C. Cottage hospital . Combined total of hospital visits to hospital .
 International recognition of Jerusalem's capital status has largely been withheld . Jerusalem is Israel's capital, but international recognition of it has been largely withheld .
 Jerusalem 763,600; Tel Aviv-Yafo 392,500 (metro area 3,040,400) ; Haifa 264,800 ; Haife 264,000 ; Rishon LeZiyyon 226,100 . Jerusalem 7.63,800; Tel
 Agriculture 11,575 1.5% of the total labour force . Agriculture is the only major source of net domestic product . NIS ‘’000,000 value force force .
 Tax on products less imputed bank service charges and statistical discrepancy, includes 23,000 not adequately classified and 180,400 unemployed .
 Importsi.f.; exportso.b.; import of military goods are excluded from foreign trade data .
 Rome 2,718,768 ; Milan 1,299,633 ; Naples 973,132 ; Turin 908,263 ; Palermo 663,173 ; Genoa 610,887; Bologna 372,256; Florence 364,710; Bari 322
 Nearly 100% of dwellings have access to electricity, a safe water supply, and toilet facilities . Nearly 100 per cent of dwellings are equipped with electricity, safe water supplies and toilets facilities .
 Central bank discount yields 4.25 4.26 4.56 3.56 4.05 4.49 4.68 Share prices 11 73.68 - 73.74% of GDP .
 Average household size 2.5; average annual disposable income per household €28,100 (c.5) Average annual income of €28.100 per household . Average annual household size of 2.6-5 . Average family size of 1.5 .
 Monza and Brianza province was created from parts of Milano province, Lombardy region; Fermo from part of Ascoli Piceno province, Marche region; and Barletta-Andria-Trani from parts parts of Bari and Foggia provinces
 According to the general government budget; for Italy this is the central government budget and some of the local government budget . For Italy, this budget is based on the national budget and the local budget .
 Kingston 585,300 5 ; Spanish Town 148,800; Portmore 103,900; Montego Bay 82,700; Mandeville 47,700 . Montegoat 82,000; Mandeleville, 47,000, Mandeeville, May Pen 44
 Agriculture 50,078.6% of the total labour force in 2008 . Agriculture is the largest agricultural sector in the world, followed by agriculture .
 Taxes on products less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges include 1,400 not adequately defined and 134,600 unemployed . 134,000 unemployed .
 Tokyo 8,731,000, Yokohama 3,648,000; Osaka 2,651,000 and Nagoya 2,246,000 . Sapporo 1,898,000 is Sapporo, Sapporo . Kyoto 1,467,000: Fukuoka
 Tokyo 35,676,000 people live in Tokyo, Osaka-Kobe 11,294,000, Nagoya 3,230,000 . Sapporo, Sapporo 2,544,000; Sendai, Sendai 2,250,000 and Hiroshima 2,045,000
 Distribution of income percentage of average household income by quintile . Average household income is based on the income of each individual .
 Leisure/use of personal time is a key part of the daily life of a person . Leisure and leisure activities are a key component of daily life .
 Manufacturing enterprises avg. no. of persons engaged annual wages as a % of avg. of all mfg. wages value added Food products Paints, soaps, and 1,067,940 60,059 pharmaceuticals . pharmaceuticals 203,164 148.8% pharmaceuticals
 Distribution of traffic cargo carried % of national total passengers carried . Road 4,961 91% 91% of the total cargo carried .
 Statistical discrepancy and import duties less imputed bank service charges and less consumption taxes for gross capital formation . Less consumption taxes and less imputing bank service charge .
 Includes 710,000 not adequately defined and 2,560,000 unemployed . Budgeted funds for General Account . Includes 7,500,000 people who are not adequately identified .
 All major coal mines were closed by 2002 but 8 smaller mines were still operational in 2007 . All major mines were shut by 2002 .
 Area and population area population population population 2001 Parishes sq mi sq km census Grouville 3.3.6 sq sq km population . Area population population 3.5 sq sq. km census census census in 2001 census .
 Structure of gross value added 7 and labour force 2008 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture, fishing 56 1.0% of the labour force . Agriculture and fishing 56% of labour in 2008 2007 .
 Education student/ teachers students teacher ratio enrollment rate at 6,980 primary school . Primary school enrollment rate was 6,940 primary school students .
 Based on the Jersey Annual Social Survey 2008, comprising 1,859 people . Based on . The Jersey annual social survey was conducted in 2008 . It is based on the .
 GNI for 2008 equals £J 4,000,000 million; gross value added total includes net interest income from bank profits, which are excluded from GNI calculations . GNI is based on the fact that bank profits from interest income are excluded .
 Amman 1,036,330,330; Az-Zarqa 395,227; Irbid 250,645; ArRusayfah 227,735; Al-Quwaysimah 135,500; Wadi as-Slr 122,032 .
 Net taxes on products less imputed bank service charges, including 4,000 not adequately defined and 187,000 unemployed . 187,00 unemployed . Net tax on goods and services is $1.2 billion .
 Almaty 1,247,896,896; Astana 550,438; Shymkent 526,140; Qaraghandy 446,139; Qaraara, Qaraar, Qararaz 336,057; Taraz 335,057 .
 No election since independence in 1991 has been deemed free and fair by international standards, includes 15 nonelective seats . L No election in 1991 was deemed free or fair . L
 January 1. includes an area of 6,700 sq km (2,600 sq mi) enclosing the Bayqongyr space launch facilities and the city of the city . The area was leased to Russia in 1995 until 2050 .
 The estimated 70,000 residents of Bayqongyr are excluded from the Qyzylorda population total . The population total is estimated to be around 80,000 .
 Nairobi 2,864,700,700; Mombasa 823,500; Nakuru 266,500, Eldoret 227,800; Kisumu 220,000 . Eldoret 228,800,000; Eldoret 226,800 and Ruiru 120,900
 Agriculture 499,421 23.4% of the labour force . Agriculture 499.421 23% of labour . Agriculture is the only major industry in South Africa .
 The post of Prime Minister was created per two bills approved by the National Assembly in March 2008 . The post was created in 2008 .
 Based on 2006 survey that excludes the mostly Muslim North Eastern province . Includes mostly Muslim province of province .
 Includes informally employed, small-scale farmers and pastoralists . Includes unemployed, unemployed, self-employed, and unpaid family workers . Importsi.f.; exportso.b.f., exportsof.f.
 Gilbert Group 285.55 83,683 Abaiang 17.55 . Area and population areas population Island/Atoll Groups 2005 Islands/Atolls 4 sq km census .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour $A '000,000 value force force . Agriculture, fishing 41.5% of labour . Agriculture and fishing 41% of the labour force .
 Televisions 2003 4 44 PCs 2005 1 11 Telephones Dailies 2007 16 0 0 . Communications units units units number per 1,000 number per . 1.000 people are people .
 Administratively Kiribati has seven district councils for outlying islands (including four for the Gilberts and one each for Banaba, the Line Islands, and Phoenix Group) A district council for North Tarawa, and an urban council and town council for South Tarawa .
 Banaba is actually an isolated island to the west of the Gilbert Group . The group includes Caroline, Malden, Starbuck, Vostok, and Flint islands .
 Total area of 64 sq km. includes Birnie, Enderbury, McKean, Manra, Nikumaroro, Nikumoro, Orona, Rawaki, and Kanton islands . Total area is 64sq km.
 Based on the 2006 Household Income and Expenditure Survey, comprising 1,161 households . The survey was conducted by households living in 1,160 households .
 Registered vehicles in South Tarawa only . Registered vehicles only . 3 weeklies only published .
 P’yongyang 3,300,000, Namp’o 1,127,000; Hamhung 773,000 and Ch’ongjin 582,480; Kaesong 334,433; Sinuiju 326,011. P‘
 Data for commodities (imports U.S..$1,525,400,000) exclude trade with South Korea, includes mail and weight of passengers . Data also excludes mail, weight and size of passengers, including mail and passengers .
 The ban on cellular phones, which began in 2004, was lifted in 2008, and service began in January 2009 . The ban began to be lifted in 2004 .
 Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 23,982 2.3 in value . Agricultural, forestry and fishing 2.9% of the total labour force .
 Seoul 10,456,034,034; Pusan 3,596,076; Inch’on 2,741,217; Taegu 2,512,601; Taejon 1,494,951. Seoul is the largest city in South Korea .
 Pristina 165,844; Prizren 107,614; Ferizaj 71,758; Mitrovice 68,929; Gjakove 68,645; Peje 68,551; Pejura 68,599 .
 Albanian independence was declared Feb., 2008, and the new constitution became effective on June 15, 2008 . Alternate short-form names in Albanian include Kosova .
 A 2,000-member EU mission to Kosovo is expected to eventually replace the UN as international administrative authority . EU mission expected to replace UN as world's "administrative authority" in Kosovo .
 Statistical/planning regions; actual local government based on 30 municipalities . Actual local government is based on the municipalities of 30 .
 Formerly important minerals include lead, zinc, ferronickel, and magnesite . Ferronickel mining resumed in late 2007; halloysite is also extracted .
 Troops providing security from 32 nations including 8 non-NATO nations . Troops provide security and stability from 32 countries . Troop providing security for 32 nations .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 70 0.0.0% of labour force . Agriculture is the only major industry in the world .
 April 2005 census total excluding Kuwaitis residing abroad equals 2,213,403 . Of which 973,286 Kuwaitis and 1,893,602 non-Kuwaitis . includes noncitizens .
 2005 census data are based on only about one-half of the non-Kuwaiti population economically active . Unclassified census data show only one-third of the population is economically active in Kuwait .
 Bishkek 794,300, Osh 224,300; Jalal-Abad 85,100,100; Karakol 61,900; Tokmok 54,900 . Jalal Abad: 85,000 people live in Kyrgyms .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour KGS '000,000 value force force' Agriculture 47,801 25.7% of the labour force . Agriculture 47.801 25% of labour .
 Vientiane 194,200 ; Savannakhet 58,200; Pakxe 50,100; Xam Nua 40,700; Muang Khammouan 27,300; Muangs Khammoun 27,400; Louangphrabang 26,400 .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 12,168 30.5% of labour force . Agricultural labour force: 1.7% of the total labour force in the U.S.
 Per an expenditure and consumption survey of 8,100 households, includes trucks and buses . The survey was conducted by 8,000 households, including trucks, buses .
 Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 453,709 2.0% of the labour force . Agricultural, forestry and fishing 2.2% of labour .
 Riga 713,016; Daugavpils 104,857; Liepaja 84,747; Lieputaja 84-747; Jelgava 65,419; Jurmala 55,870 . Latvia has more than 7,000,000 residents .
 Banuary 1; administrative reorganization begun in 2009 to be completed in 2010 . Administrative reorganization began in 2009 and will last until 2010 .
 Beirut 395,000 ; Tripoli 212,900; Sidon 149,000; Tyre 117,100; An-Nabatiyah 89,400 . Tripoli, Sidon, Tyre, Tripoli, Tripoli and Sidon all have more than 1,000 residents .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2005 2001 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 1,690 5.6% of the total labour force . LBP ‘’000,000’,000 value force force force . Agricultural labour force 1,
 One-half of the membership is Christian and one-half Muslim/Druze . J By law, one-quarter is Christian . J
 Created in 2003; actual effective implementation of local government unclear in mid-2009 . Local government was created in 2003 .
 A1-Biqa includes about 425,000 registered Palestinian refugees, of whom about 225,000 live in refugee camps . The region includes Baalbek-Hermel, Baalbek and Baalbek, which includes about 300,000 Palestinians .
 Maseru 116,300; Mafeteng 61,600; Hlotse 50,900; Mohale’s Hoek 44,500; Maputsoe 32,800 . Maputse 32,700; Hllotse's Hoek 50,
 HIV/AIDS-related 1,624, cardiovascular diseases 205, lower respiratory infections 89, diarrheal diseases 84 . Cardiovascular diseases 205; lower respiratory illnesses 89; diarrheals 84 . HIV-related deaths were also reported .
 The number of mine workers in South Africa in late 2005 equaled 51,900 . Data for 2002-03 based on the Household Budget Survey comprising 5,992 households .
 Monrovia 1,010,970,970; Ganta 41,106; Buchanan 34,270; Gbarnga 34,046; Kakata 33,945 . Kakata is the capital of Liberia .
 Telephones 2001 69 25 PCs . PCs 2007 2007 2007 55ii 1511 PCs . Cellular 2008 73212 19312 Internet users 2008 20 5 .
 Excludes informal sector employment equaling 487,000 and an unknown number of unofficially unemployed . Includes informal sector jobs equaling 5,000 .
 No railway lines were operational in early 2009 . Circulation of daily newspapers was limited to daily newspapers .
 Tripoli 1,065,405/ 2,189,000, BanghazI 670,797/ 1,113,000; Misratah 121,669.000 . Tripoli 1.065.405/2,189.000; BanaghazI 1,
 Average household size 5.9; income per household:a.; sources of income:a.a.; expenditure:a; expenditure:b.a. The average household size of a household is 5.3 .
 Primary 755,338H Secondary/Voc. 732,614ii Tertiary 15,711 375,028 23.5% Primary enrollment rate is 7.3% Primary teachers students students students are students .
 By 2005 most ministries had relocated to Surt and other cities as part of a radical decentralization plan . Most ministries were relocated to cities such as Surt as a result of the plan .
 The policy-making body (General People’s Congress) meets annually in Surt .
 Oberland 23,102 Balzers 7.3 Communes sq mi sq km estimate Oberland is estimated Oberland . Area and population area population population increased in 2009 . Oberland has an area of 7.9 sq. km .
 The designation of “state church” for Roman Catholicism per article 37 of the constitution was under review in 2008 . Article 37 of article 37 was reviewed in 2008 under review by the constitution .
 Vilnius 558,165; Kaunas 352,279; Klaipeda 183,433; Siauliai 126,215; Panevezys 112,619; Alytus 67,505 . Vilnus 558.165, 558
 Structure of gross national product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour LTL '000,000 value force force' Agriculture, forestry 4,500 4.500 4,000 people . Agriculture and forestry is the largest industry in South Africa .
 Detail does not add to total given because of rounding . Includes metal furniture, including metal furniture . Detail not added to total .
 Luxembourg 85,467/125,594; Esch-sur-Alzette 29,515/72,437; Petange 15,151/22,379; Differdange 20,4434; Dudelange 18,052 .
 The 22-member Council of State (a 21-member body of unelected citizens appointed by the Grand Duke plus the hereditary Grand Duke) serves in an advisory capacity to the government . In addition to the Council of state, the Council is an advisory body of citizens . The Council of
 In 2007 included 195,800 Luxembourgers, 10,700 resident foreigners, and 136,300 workers from neighbouring countries . In 2007, there were 195,000 Luxembourggers and resident foreigners only .
 Area and population area population population population 2006 . Macau peninsula 3.6 sq mi sq km census census Macau Peninsula 3.5 sq km population . Area population population 3.3 sq km Census of Macau region .
 Includes 12 directly elected seats, 7 seats appointed by the chief executive, and 10 seats made by business and special-interest groups . Military expenditure as percentage of GDP is based on military spending .
 Skopje 486,600, Bitola 73,300, Kumanovo 71,700, Prilep 66,000; PrileP 66,500; Tetovo 54,500 . Bitola, Bitolol, Kumbanovo, Kugno,
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 20076 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 33,320 11.3% of labour is agriculture . Agriculture is the only major industry in the world .
 Detail does not add to total given because of rounding, includes nominal practitioners .
 Rent and taxes on production less imputed bank service charges, includes 323,287 unemployed . Rent, taxes, taxes and taxes are based on production and taxes . Includes 323, 287 unemployed .
 Antananarivo 1,403,449,449; Toamasina 179,045; Antsirabe 160,356; Fianarantsoa 144,225; Mahajanga 135,660. Antanarivo .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2004 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 9,857 26.7% of the total labour force . Agricultural labour force: 9,000,000 .
 Per confirmation of referendum results in April 2007 by the High Constitutional Court . Per confirmation by the high Constitutional Court in 2007 .
 The discovery of offshore and on-land petroleum was announced in September 2005 . The discovery was made in 2005 . It is the largest oil company in the world .
 Indirect taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank charges . The unemployed. u Unemployed.
 Railroad infrastructure was either inoperable or in poor condition in June 2003 . Railroad infrastructure is either either inoperative or inpoor condition .
 Lilongwe 669,021; Blantyre 661,444; Mzuzu 128,432; Zomba 87,366; Kasungu 42,351 . Mzubu is the largest city in the country, with 6,000 residents .
 HIV/AIDS-related 729, lower respiratory infections 244, cardiovascular diseases 175, malaria 169; malaria 169, diarrheal diseases 164 . Lower respiratory infections were 244; cardiovascular disease 175; malaria 175; diabetes 175; and malaria 169 .
 Agriculture 136,432 32.4% of the total labour force in 2008 1998 in value . Agricultural labour is the second-largest in the world's labour force . Agriculture is the only major source of labour in the country .
 June 2009 update of the United States Bureau of the Census International Database . The census International Database was updated in 2009 .
 Based on the Malawi Integrated Household Survey 2004-05, comprising 10,777 households . The survey was based on a survey of Malawi’s households .
 At constant prices of 2005. n Importso.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners . At constant . prices of . 2005. Importsob in balance in balance with . trade and . trading partners. at constant prices .
 Based on the Malawi Demographic and Household Survey 2004, comprising 13,664 households . The survey was based on a national survey of 13,000 households .
 Kuala Lumpur 1,482,400; Subang Jaya 954,300 7; Klang 936,700; Johor Bahru 838,900; Ipoh 692,200; Putrajaya 55,000 . Kuala Lumpur: 1,481,
 Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 76,219 10% of the labour force . Total labour force of RM ‘’000,000 is RM ’000’,000 . Agricultural, forestry and fishing 77% of labour .
 Tncludes 44 appointees of the Paramount Ruler; the remaining 26 are indirectly elected . The remaining 26 were indirectly elected. Tn Includes 44 appointee of the . Paramount Ruler .
 Location of the second royal palace, the prime minister’s office, and the supreme court, includes the population of Putrajaya . Location of second royal . palace, prime minister . office and supreme court is located in the city's capital, Jakarta .
 Male 2 103,693; Hithadhoo 9,465; Fuvammulah 7,636; Kulhudhuffushi 6,998; Thinadhoo 4,442. Male 2103,693. Male 1 103,700; Female 2 103.
 The only non-Sunni are Shfl members of the Indian trading community and non-Muslim workers who serve alcohol on the resort islands .
 Bamako 1,494,000 people live in Bamako . Sikasso 113,803, Segou 90,898; Segou 91,988; Mopti 79,840; Koutiala 74,153; Kayes 67,262. Sikasso,
 Agriculture, fishing 1,302,120 33.3% of the CFAF labour force . Agriculture, fished 1,300,120,000,000 . Labour force is the largest in the country .
 Per 2004 Malian labour force survey, the 2004 population economically active estimate of the ILO Employment Trends Unit is 5,322,000 . The 2004 population of Malian Malians is estimated to be 5, 322,000, according to ILO .
 Based on the Mali Demographic and Health Survey 2001, comprising 64,116 people in 12,331 households . The Mali population is based on data from 2001 .
 Rabat Mosta Birkirkara Zejtun Zabbar Zebbug 1. Area and population area population population population 1.0% of Maltese Islands Statistical districts 4 Largest localities sq mi sq km 2009 3 estimate Comino Gozo Malta .
 Majuro 2 20,800; Ebeye 9,345; Laura 2,256; Ajeltake 1,170; Ajetake 1-170; Enewetak 823. Majuro 20,000 people died in Majuro . Laura 9,256, Laura
 The United States provides for the defense of the Republic of the Marshall Islands under the 1984 and 2003 compacts of free association . In addition, the Council of Iroij , a 12-member body of tribal chiefs, serves in an advisory capacity . Military
 Four districts centred at Majuro, Ebeye, Wotje, and Jaluit make up the local government structure . Four districts are made up of four districts, one of the largest in the country .
 Based on the Marshall Islands 2006 Community Survey, comprising 9,491 respondents . The Marshall Islands are the smallest country in the world and smallest in the Pacific .
 Based on the 2006 RMI Community Survey, comprising 9,491 respondents in 1,205 households . The survey was based on a survey of 9,492 respondents .
 Fort-de-France 90,347 (urban agglomeration, 133,281); Le Lamentin 39,847; Le Robert 23,856; Schcelcher 21,419 . Fort- de-France is one of the largest cities in France .
 Primary 3,031 12 30,156 students enrolled in primary school . Secondary/Voc. education teachers student/ students teacher ratio ratio at school was highest .
 Import duties less subsidies and less imputed financial service charges . Import duties are less subsidised than other countries' subsidies .
 Nouakchott 743,500; Nouadhibou 94,700; Rosso 48,922; Boghe 37,531; Adel Bagrou 36,007. Nouakkott 7.531 .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2000 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture, livestock, fishing 112,075 15.7% of the labour force . Agricultural, livestock and fishing 15.075% of labour in 2006 2000 .
 Primary i4 11,379 483,776 42.7% primary students enrolled in primary schools . Primary school enrollment rate was 42.3% primary school enrollment .
 Includes Vu Vu of the traffic of the defunct Air Afrique . Not adequately defined . Includes Vu of traffic from the defunct air Afrique.
 Port Louis 148,939; Beau Bassin-Rose Hill 109,701; Vacoas-Phoenix 106,865; Curepipe 83,754; Quatre Bornes 80,780. Port Louis is the largest-ever city in the country .
 French is not official but may be used to address the speaker of the National Assembly . It is not an official language used to refer to the speaker . It may also be used in the speaker's address .
 As of 2000 census, includes Rodrigues; Rodrigues is 91% Roman Catholic . Rodrigues was 91% Catholic in the 2000 census .
 Area and population area population population population is 4.6 sq mi sq km . Grande Terre Acoua is the largest island island in the archipelago .
 Structure of value added 11 and labour force 2005 2002 in value . Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 1,000 0.0.00 . Agricultural, forestry and fishing 0.00% of the labour force .
 Mamoudzou 6,186/53,022; Koungou 6.710/19,831; village of Labattoir 15,067/commune of Dzaoudzi 15,339; Pamandzi 9,077/9.077
 A local referendum in March 2009 approved the change of status to an overseas department of France in 2011 . The change was approved in 2011 after a local referendum .
 2,345 students study in metropolitan France or Reunion . Excludes vocational studies . 2, 345 students studied in Reunion, France or metropolitan France .
 Distribution of income percentage of household income by decile is based on the income of each decile . The income of a person per person in a decile means they live in a lower-income area .
 Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 350,955 3.5% of the labour force . Mexico's labour force is the largest in the country .
 Manufacturing Services 328,178 4,198,579 130,000 jobs in Mexico . Manufacturing Services is the largest manufacturing sector in the country . Manufacturing services are the largest in the world .
 Statistically derived midpoint within range, indirect taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges, includes 1,593,300 unemployed . The midpoint includes 1-593,000 unemployed .
 Detail does not add to total given because of rounding errors . Metal content does not reflect the content of the game .
 Area and population area population population States Major Islands . Chuuk Weno 49. sq mi sq km 2000 census Chuuk was the largest island in the world .
 Weno, in Chuuk state 13,802; Palikir, on Pohnpei 6,444; Nett, on Oahu 6,158; Kolonia 5,681; Colonia, on Yap 3,216 . Colonia is on the island of Y
 The U.S. labour force is the largest in the country's labour force . Agriculture and fishing is the second-largest industry in the world . The labour force makes up 44.7% of the GDP, the second biggest in the United States .
 English is the language of the Congress per article 9, section 19, of the constitution . English is used by the U.S. Congress as part of the Constitution .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 20068 20058 in value ‘’000,000 . Moldovan lei value force force force . Agriculture 6,489 14.7% of the labour force .
 Opposition forces in Transdniestria 7,500; Russian troops in 2008 (November 2008) 1,500. Opposition forces 7,000; Russian forces in 2008 1,000 . Opposition forces 8,500 in 2008; Russia 1,200 in 2008 .
 Major causes of death per 100,000 population:a.a.; however, principal causes are those of a developed country with an older population. A. principal cause of death is death of an older person .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 29 — Mining and quarrying 2 — Manufacturing 216 – Manufacturing 216 . Manufacturing 216.7 . Agriculture, farming 29 — Mining, mining and quarrying 2 — Manufacturing .
 Military Defense responsibility lies with France according to the terms of the Versailles Treaty of 1919 . x Under the authority of the prince. Military responsibility .
 The principality is a single administrative unit, and no separate area within it is distinguished as capital . No separate areas within the principality have a capital .
 Fixedwing service is provided at Nice, France; helicopter service is available at Fontvieille . Excludes trade with France; Monaco has participated in customs union with France since 1963 .
 Ulaanbaatar 1,031,200; Erdenet 74,300; Darhan 72,400; Choybalsan 40,123; Moron 28,903. U.N. territory is 1.02% .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2005 2 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 1,151.6% of the total labour force . Agricultural labour force 1,150.5% of GDP .
 Podgorica 136,473; Niksic 58,212; Pljevlja 21,377; Plijevlje 21, 377; Bijelo Polje 15,883; Cetinje . Bar 13,719. Podgoric 136,
 Balance of trade 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 -359. -416. -505. -855 . -855. -1,535. (1,502) Foreign trade is the largest in the world's history . Foreign trade was the biggest factor in the country's economic growth
 Taxes on products less imputed bank service charges and less subsidies . Tax on products that are not imputed banks service charges .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 90,690 13.6% of the total labour force in 2008 2006 . Agriculture and forestry is the largest industry in the world .
 83% of the land area of Laayoune-Bojador-Sakia El-Hamra is located within Western Sahara . About 83 per cent of the area is located in the region .
 The entire area of Oued Eddahab-Lagouira is located within Western Sahara . The area is located in Western Sahara and is located near the capital city of Sahara .
 Detail does not add to total given because of gross rounding of Western Sahara areas of Morocco .
 Excludes Western Sahara n 2004; sum of combined arrondissement populations. n 2004 .
 60% of Morocco’s fisheries production comes from Atlantic waters off of Western Sahara . Roughly 60% come from waters off the region of Morocco . 60% comes from the waters off Western Sahara, 60% from Morocco .
 Morocco was the world’s number 2 producer of cannabis in 2008 . Cannabis is an important illegal export . Morocco is the world's second largest producer in the world .
 Maputo 1,094,315 (urban agglomeration 1,766,823); Matola 672,508; Nampula 477,9003; Beira 431,583; Chimoio 237,278 . Maputo has 1,
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour MTn '000,000 value force force . Agriculture 44,551 25.7% of the labour force is agriculture . Agriculture is the largest agricultural sector in the world .
 Yangon 4,088,000 people; Mandalay 961,000; Naypyidaw 930,000 . Mawlamyine 405,8007; Mawamyine 4,000,000. Yangon . Mandalay 1,000 million people; Mawlam
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2004-05 1997-98 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 4,390 48.5% of labour was employed in agriculture .
 A new draft constitution was approved in a May 2008 referendum . Parliamentary elections are scheduled for 2010 . Military expenditure as percentage of GDP is based on military spending .
 Site near Pyinmana was officially proclaimed the new capital on March 27, 2006 . Site was proclaimed the capital of the country in 2006 .
 Windhoek 277,300, Rundu 62,300; Walvis Bay 54,900, Oshakati 34,900; Oshakatati 34-900; Swakopmund 26,700; Swakaopmund 25,600; Katima Mulilo 25
 Agriculture, fishing 5,844 9.9% of the labour force . Agriculture and fishing is the country's main source of labour .
 Taxes less imputed bank service charges and less subsidies, includes 220,634 unemployed . Includes 220,000 people who are unemployed .
 Based on the Namibia Demographic and Health Survey 2000, comprising 6,392 households . The Namibia survey was conducted in Namibia between 2000 and 2004 .
 Communications units number per 1,000 Medium date in ‘’000s persons . Televisions 2002 0.0.0 .
 Distribution of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1997 in value % of total labour % of labour $A ’000,000 force 7 8 9 force . Agriculture, fishing 3.3 per cent of the labour force .
 The majority of foreign mine workers were repatriated to Kiribati and Tuvalu in 2006 . Most of the foreign workers were sent back to the islands in 2006.
 Phosphate extraction, the backbone of the Nauruan economy, halted in 2003 but resumed in 2006 . Phosphates extraction resumed in 2007 .
 phosphate extraction for the next 5 years to 20 years using processing refurbishments . Expect phosphate extraction to be used for 5 years or 20 years . The phosphate extraction process will be refurbished using refurbished .
 Coral gravel, a by-product of phosphate extraction, was exported in 2008 . Coral gravel was exported from phosphate extraction in 2007 .
 Kathmandu 671,846; Biratnagar 166,674; Lalitpur 162,991; Pokhara 156,312; Pokharara 156-312; Birganj 112,484. Kathmandur 671.846 .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 1998-99 in value % of total labour % of labour NRs ‘’000,000 value forces forces . Agriculture 258,282 31.7% of labour force . Agriculture is the only major source of labour in
 In late December 2007 the interim legislature voted to abolish the monarchy . The formal endorsement of the abolishment of the monarchy occurred in May 2008 .
 Amsterdam 1,482,287: Rotterdam 1,169,800; The Hague 997,323; Utrecht 592,463; Utreecht 5 92,463 and Haarlem 407,521 . Rotterddam 1.169,000:
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2005 . Agriculture, forestry, fishing, fishing Mining Manufacturing Construction Construction Public utilities Transp. and com mu Trade, hotels Finance, real estate Pub. admin., defense Services Other .
 Frisian is officially recognized in Friesland but not legally codified by the national government . Frisians are recognized in the Netherlands but not officially codified in the country's borders .
 Detail does not add to total given because of rounding errors . Importsi.f.; exportso.b.f.m.
 Willemstad 93,599; Kralendijk 3,179; Philipsburg 1,227; Oranjestad 1,003; The Bottom 462 . The Bottom is 462.
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour NAf. ’000,000 value forces forces . Agriculture, forestry, fishing, fishing 1 Mining and quarrying 1 41.5% of labour force .
 The dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles is scheduled to take place in October 2010 . Uhe dissolution is scheduled for the next year .
 Curatjao and Sint Maarten are to become separate overseas territories within the Netherlands with a status similar to Aruba . Curatsjao will be separate from Aruba and Curatijao . Sint Marten will become a separate overseas territory within the Dutch .
 Bonaire, Saba, and Sint Eustatius will be directly integrated into the Netherlands . The islands will become part of the Dutch state of the Netherlands.
 Curasao’s island council has jurisdiction over the other island councils until the dissolution is finalized . The dissolution is expected to be finalized by the end of the year . Curasado’ island council will have jurisdiction over other island council members until the decision is finalised .
 Includes 6,919 unemployed . Includes 6-919 people in the U.S.
 Noumea 91,386 ; Mont-Dore 24,1956; Dumbea 18,602 6; Dum-bea Dum-602 6 ; Pai'ta 12,062 6 ; Poindimie 4,824.6 .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2004 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour CFPF ‘’000,000 value forces forces . Agriculture, fishing 10,105 1.2% of labour force . Agricultural, fishing 1.0% of the labour
 The Noumea Accord granting New Caledonia limited autonomy was signed in May 1998 . Future referenda concerning possible independence are to be held between 2014 and 2018 .
 Taxes and subsidies less imputed bank service charges. n Importsi.f.; exportso.b.f.b; exportsovery.f., exportsob.b . Taxes, subsidies, subsidies and bank fees for imports and exports.n Imports . n Im
 Auckland 6,059 1,414,800 area population . North Islands 116,219 3,250,700 . Northland 13,789 154,700 area population. South Islands 8,140 .
 Auckland 1,313,200, Christchurch 382,200; Wellington 381,900, Wellington 38,900; Hamilton 197,300; Napier 122,600 . Napier, Wellington, Wellington and Auckland also have more than 1,300,000 residents .
 A unitary authority administered by a city council or district council with regional powers . Unitary authority is administered by city councils or district councils with regional power .
 Managua 908,892’ Leon 139,433; Chinandega 95,614; Masaya 92,598; Estelf 90,294. Leon 139.433 . Masaya 90,598, Masaya 93,598 and Estelf 89,294 .
 Agriculture, forestry 21,048.000 people in C$’000,000 force force . Agriculture and forestry is the largest sector in the country's labour force .
 Lakes and lagoons are excluded from the areas of departments and autonomous regions . Lakes are excluded by departments and regions .
 Niamey 707,951 ; Zinder 170,575; Maradi 148,017; Agadez 78,289; Agadz 78.289; Tahoua 73,002 . Niamei 707.951 ; . Zinder . 170,500;
 Based on a 2006 demographic and health survey of 14,945 persons age 25 and over . The survey was based on a national survey of people age 25 to 25 .
 Lagos 9,466,000, Kano 3,140,000; Ibadan 2,628,000 and Abuja 1,576,000 . Abuja: Abuja, Lagos, Abuja; Kaduna, Kaduna 1,442,000. Ben
 HIV/AIDS 258, respiratory infections 182, malaria 181, cardiovascular diseases 167 . Cardiovascular diseases 167, cardiovascular disease 167 .
 Based on the 2003 Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey of 35,173 people, about two-thirds of whom live in rural areas . The survey was conducted in 2003 .
 Area and population area population population population 3 55 sq mi sq km estimate Northern Islands 3 55. sq sq km . Northern Islands is estimated to be at least 3,500 sq km sq km (sq km)
 The Northern Island of Farallon de Medinilla continued to be used as a target range by the United States military . The United States is responsible for military defense .
 November 2008 residents elected their first non-voting delegate to the United States Congress . Tn. Tn November 2008 voters chose a non-vote delegate to represent the state of Tennessee .
 A11 villages are unincorporated census-designated places, includes 1,744 not adequately defined and 1,869 unemployed . A11 village is unincincorporated census designated places, including 1,700 not inadequate defined 
 Oslo 560,484 ; Bergen 247,746; Trondheim 165,191; Stavanger 119,586; Baerum 108,144 . Oslo is the largest city in Norway, with 1,800,000 residents .
 Agriculture, fishing 27,678 1.4% of the Norwegian labour force . Agriculture and fishing 27.678 1% of total labour .
 Persons on Jan Mayen and Svalbard are normally registered as residents on the mainland . Persons on the islands are registered as citizens of the main Norwegian island .
 The population of Svalbard on Jan. 1, 2008, was 2,449, including Norwegian settlements 1,821, the Russian settlement 620, the Polish settlement 8.5 . Jan Mayen is 20, with the population of the rest of the world at 20 .
 Structure of gross national product and labour force 2008 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture, forestry, fishing 234.6% of GDP . Agricultural and forestry 234.5% labour force .
 Education teachers students students students student/ teacher ratio enrollment rate . Primary school enrollment rate: 20,105i 9 278,461 14.319 73 SecondaryA/oc. 19,277i 9 306,377 15.519 79 Tertiary 2,959 69,018 23
 Includes 424,178 expatriate workers and 312,446 Omani workers . Employed only; includes 424,177 expatriates . Includes 310,000 Omanis and 424,179 expatriats .
 Oil and natural gas excludes petroleum products; Manufacturing includes petroleum products . Taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges .
 Karachi 12,130,000 people live in Karachi, Lahore 6,577,000, Faisalabad 2,617,000; Rawalpindi 1,858,000 . Peshawar 1,303,000 live in Peshawar, Peshawar .
 Excludes armed forces, indirect taxes less subsidies, includes 25,000 inadequately defined and 2,680,000 unemployed . Includes 25,00 under-defined, 2,700,000 undiagnosed unemployed and 25,500 under-declared .
 The United States is responsible for the external security of Palau . iFormal transfer of capital to Melekeok on Babelthuap from Koror took place Oct., 2006 . Many ministries and offices remained in Koror in late 2009 .
 Forest area overlaps with other categories, transportation and communications includes Public utilities . Public utilities includes Public Utilities, transportation, communications and transportation .
 Panama City 415,964/845,684 (urban agglomeration 1,281,000); San Miguelito 352,9362; Colon 52,286/205,557; Arraijan 63,753/203,207; La Chorrera 54
 Agriculture, fishing 1,120 6.4% of the labour force . Agriculture and fishing is the largest industry in the world . The labour force is a key component of the economy .
 District adjacent to Panama City within Panama City is Panama City urban agglomeration . Panama City has a population of 9,500,000 .
 Protestant/independent Christian 44%; Roman Catholic 22%; traditional beliefs 34% 5.5.7% of those surveyed were Catholic .
 Port Moresby 289,900; Lae 75,600; Arawa (on Bougainville) 40,300; Mount Hagen 34,900 . Popondetta 30,400; Mendi 28,600. Lae 25,600 .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 6,342.2% of the labour force . Agricultural, forestry and fishing is the largest industry in the world . Agriculture and forestry is the biggest industry in North America .
 A referendum on possible future independence is to be held between 2014 and 2019 . Scotland is set to hold a referendum on future independence in 2014-2019 .
 New Guinea Papuans are predominantly descendants of original arrivals . New Guinea Melanesians are more racially mixed with other Pacific peoples . New Papua Melanesian people are predominantly people of the New Guinea region .
 In actuality, many citizens combine Christian faith with some traditional indigenous practices . Many citizens combine faith and traditional practices .
 So far, the UK has the lowest trade balance in the world, in terms of trade and commodities . The U.S. has the highest level of trade balance and the lowest level of imports . The world's biggest trade deficit is in the form of exports .
 Asuncion 519,361 (urban agglomeration 1,870,000); Ciudad del Este 222,274; San Lorenzo 204,3565; Luque 170,9865; Capiata 154,2745 . Luque: Asuncions
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 13,533.5% of the total labour force in 2007 2005 . Agricultural, forestry and fishing 13.533.7% of labour .
 In September 2009 Brazil agreed to pay Paraguay U.S.$360,000,000 annually for electricity from the shared Itaipu hydroelectric dam .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour S/. '000,000 value forces forces forces Agriculture, forestry, fishing 20,403 6.3% of labour force .
 So.b. in balance of trade and i.f. in commodities and trading partners. n Importso.b in balance in balance with i.e. in . commodities and trade partners. Unemployed.
 Agriculture, fishing 1,102,756 14.000,000 in 2008 . Agricultural sector: 1,100,000 of the total labour force . Agriculture and fishing: 14.7% of the labour force in 2008 2006 .
 Sum of regional areas, including coastal water; actual reported total area is 300,000 sq km . Sum of region areas, includes coastal water . Actual total area of regional regions, including the coastal water, is 300k sq km. Sum of regions is reported to be more than 300
 Reported total; summed total of 88,542,991 excludes 29,344 persons residing in disputed area between the National Capital Region and Calabarzon . 2,279 Filipinos residing in embassies abroad . Reported total is 88,500,000 Filipinos .
 Based on actual reported total area, includes indigenous Catholics and Protestants . Includes indigenous Catholics, Protestants and indigenous Catholics .
 Warsaw 1,709,781,781; Krakow 754,624; Lodz 747,152; Wroclaw 632,162; Poznan 557,264; Gdansk 455,581; Szczecin 406,941. Warsaw
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 44,553 3.5% of the labour force . Agricultural, forestry and fishing is the largest sector in the world .
 Ionian Catholicism has special recognition per 1997 concordat with Vatican City . Ionian Catholics have special recognition for their special status .
 Lisbon 564,657 ; Porto 263,131 ; Braga 164,192; Bragra 164, 192; Coimbra 148,443; Funchal 103,961 . Lisbon, Porto, Lisbon and Porto are the most populous cities in Portugal .
 San Juan 2,608,375; Aguadilla 339,523; Ponce 262,943; San German 147,242; Yauco 124,566; Mayagiiez 110,644; Mayagiez 111,644 .
 Minimum number of seats per constitution; minority parties may have additional representation . Minimum number is minimum number of seats per constitution . Minority parties may be able to elect more members of parliament .
 Ad-Dawhah 339,847; Ar-Rayyan 258,193; AlWakrah 26,993; Umm Salal Muhammad 25,413; Al-Khawr 18,036 . Al-Arwakrah is the largest city in the
 Import duties less imputed bank service charges, including 6,572 unemployed . Unemployment rate at 6.5 per cent, including unemployed .
 Saint-Denis 168,910, Saint-Pierre 144,329; Saint-Paul 99,291; Le Port 64,390 . Le Port is one of the largest French cities in France .
 Trade excludes restaurants and hotels, and Services includes restaurants and hotel rooms . Services include restaurants, hotels and restaurants . Trade is trade, services and trade .
 Taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges . Non-salaried employees. Tax less subsidies . Tax on non-salary employees .
 Bucharest 1,944,367,367; Timisoara 311,586; Iasi 308,843; ClujNapoca 306,474; Constarqa 302,171 . Bucharest is home to more than 1,800,000 people .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing, fishing 32,566. RON ‘’000,000 value force force force . Agriculture, Forestry, fishing was the main industry sector in 2008 .
 St. Petersburg 648,000 1,677,900 13,501,0384 Arkhangelsk . Kaliningrad 5,800 15,100 937,404 Kareliya Petrozavodsk 66,600 172,400 690,653 Komi Sy
 St. Petersburg 32,600 84,500 1,633,350 Murmansk 55,900 144,900 850,929 Nenets 5 Naryan-Mar 68,200 176,700 42,700 . Novgorod Nov.gorod 21,400
 St. Petersburg 4,568,047; Novosibirsk 1,390,513; Yekaterinburg 1,322,954; Nizhny Novgorod 1,274,708; Samara 1,135,422; Omsk 1,
 U.S. dollar 29.45 27.45 . 27.75 28.78 26.33 . £ 52.56 53.60 49.60 . 49.69 49.18 42.18 SDRs 0.25 International reserves 73,175 120,809 175
 Foreign exchange 73,172 120,805 175,690 295,277 464,004 411,494 Gold 12.55 12.44 12.91 14.48 16.48 % world reserves 1.71% of world reserves .
 On Dec., 2005, Komi-Permyak merged with Perm to form Perm . Reported total; summed total equals 6,577,600 sq mi —reason for discrepancy is unknown .
 An additional 449,000 personnel in paramilitary forces include railway troops, special construction troops, federal border guards, interior troops, and interior troops .
 Kigali 860,000 6 ; Gitarama 84,669; Butare 77,449; Ruhengeri 71,511; Gisenyi 67,766 . Kigli 860000 6 .
 Many small usually Christian-linked schismatic religious groups have proliferated since the 1994 genocide . Many of these groups have been formed since the genocide .
 So.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners . Taxes on products less imputed bank service charges. n Importsob.b . in balance in balance .
 Area and population area population population population 2001 Islands Capitals sq mi sq km census 3 Nevis* St. Nevis and St. Virgin Islands . Area population population is 3,000 sq.m sq. km .
 The Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis is the alternate official long-form name, includes 3 appointed seats and 1 ex officio seat for the attorney general (if not elected); in addition, a speaker may be appointed from outside of the National Assembly .
 The Nevis legislature is subordinate to the National Assembly only with regard to external affairs and defense . The National Assembly is currently only in charge of external affairs .
 Light railway formerly serving the sugar industry on Saint Kitts began serving as a scenic tour route in 2003 . The light railway formerly served as a light railway .
 Castries 65,000; Vieux Fort 4,600; Micoud 3,400; Dennery 2,900; Soufriere 2,800 . Castries is 65.000, with a population of 65,600, VieuxFort 4,800; Micou
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour . EC$’000,000 value force force force . Agriculture, forestry, fishing 103.7% of labour force .
 Represents elected seats only; the speaker may be elected from outside the House of Assembly . Speaker may be chosen from outside of the House, Assembly .
 Total includes the uninhabited 30 sq mi (78 sq km) Central Forest Reserve . Total includes uninhabitited 30sq mi (70sq km) of Central Forest Reserves .
 Taxes on products less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges, includes 12,480 unemployed and 4,770 inadequately defined . The unemployed and under-defined unemployed include 12, 480 unemployed .
 Island of Saint Vincent Barrouallie 14.3 sq mi sq km (sq km) is estimated to be the largest island in the Caribbean . Island is located on the island of Saint Vincent Barouallie . Island has a population of 14.4 sq mi
 Varieties of taro roots, indirect taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges, includes 9,258 unemployed . The unemployed, including 9,000 people, are unemployed .
 Apia 37,237 ; Vaitele 6,294 3 ; Faleasi’u 3,548; Vailele 3,174 3 ; Vaileilele 4,174 . 3,015 . Apia’a 37, 237 ; Vaites 6,
 No military forces are maintained; informal defense ties exist with New Zealand . Australia assists with maritime surveillance training . Australia has no military forces .
 Sao Tome 49,957, Neves 6,635, Santana 6,228, Trindade 6,049; Trindades 6, 049; Santo Antonio 1,010 . Sao Tome is the most populous country in Latin America .
 Agriculture, fishing 239,300 16.3% of the labour force in 2006 2001 in value . Agriculture and fishing is the most labour-intensive form of work in the country .
 Primary 1,009 32,6161° 30. 97i° Secondary/Voc. education student/ enrollment teachers students teacher ratio rate . Primary school students/enrollment teachers ratio rate is 1.009 .
 Licenses for petroleum exploration in an offshore area shared by Sao Tome and Principe and Nigeria were awarded in March 2006 . No crude petroleum has been extracted from this area as of October 2009 .
 Riyadh 4,465,000, Jiddah 3,012,000; Mecca 1,385,000 and Medina 1,010,000 . Ad-Dammam 822,000 in total . Riyadh, Mecca, Medina, Mecca and Riyadh all have major cities .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value in value . Agriculture, forestry, fishing 41,050 2.0% of the labour force . Total labour force of SR '000,000' in 2007 was 2.2% of GDP .
 Balance of trade 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 SR '000,000'000 % of total +193.0% of total . Foreign trade is the largest part of the world's trade deficit in the past decade .
 Dakar 2,243,4007; Touba 529,200; Thies 263,500; Kaolack 186,000; Mbour 181,800; Saint-Louis 171,300; Rufisque 162,100. Dakar . Dakar: Dakar
 Includes 65 appointees of president . Originally created in 1999, abolished in 2001, and reinstated in August 2007 . Includes 65 appointed members of the Cabinet .
 Most citizens practice a syncretic form of Islam, includes communes of Pikine and Guediawaye , adjacent to Dakar .
 Includes 484,000 not adequately defined and 351,400 unemployed . Includes 4.4 million people not properly defined, 351,000 unemployed . n Imports i.f.; exportso.b.f., exportsob.b; importso.f.
 Based on the 2005 Senegal Demographic and Health Survey, of which 22,795 people were age 25 and over . The survey was conducted in 2005 .
 Belgrade 1,120,092; Novi Sad 191,405; Nis 173,724; Kragujevac 146,373; Kragjevaca 146, 373; Subotica 99,981; Zrenjanin 79,773.
 Mining and quarrying 1; copper 32,000 5 ; silver 4,150 5 ; selenium 7,500 kg. 5; . silver . 5 . Selenium 5,000 kg. 1; . copper 32.000 5 . 5 ; . . Silver 4,
 Manufacturing 1; food products and beverages 52,302; chemicals and chemical products 23,813; cement, bricks, and ceramics 11,532; fabricated metal products 11,056; base metals 9,407. Manufacturing 1 .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 1 2007 in value CSD ‘000,000’ % of total value labour force % of labour force . Agriculture, forestry, fishing 206.6% of GDP .
 Excludes Kosovo, a disputed transitional republic that declared its independence from Serbia on Feb. 2008 . Kosovo declared independence in 2008 from Serbia .
 Islands 2 sq km census Islands 2sq km census . Inner Inner Islands 243. Island Groups/ 2002 Island Groups . Islands . 243. Islands .
 Creole, English, and French are all national languages per constitution . Creole is the national language of Creole . English, Creole and Creole are national languages .
 The Seychelles are administratively divided into 26 districts and geographically split among 47 Inner Islands, 2 Inner islands, and 70 Outer Islands . Seyschelles is located on 47 Inner islands and 2 Inner Islands .
 Freetown 818,700, Bo 181,800, Kenema 148,800; Makeni 90,400; Koidu 87,300 . Bo 181.800, 150,800 and 148,000 people live in the capital, Freettown .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 3,734,856 53.5% of the labour force . Agriculture, Forestry, fishing is the main source of GDP growth .
 Telephones Dailies 2007 22io 6.510.510 Cellular 2008 L009 11 181H Internet users 2008 14 2.510 Internet users .
 Represents trade and repairs, indirect taxes less imputed bank service charges . Represents trades and repairs . Includes indirect taxes and indirect taxes on bank charges .
 Detail does not add to total given because of rounding due to rounding . Includes estimated value for income in kind .
 S$’000,000 value forces forces forces Agriculture, quarrying 177.6% of the labour force . Agriculture and quarrying was 177.7% of labour force in 2008 .
 Five community development councils were established in 2001 manage a variety of social services . The councils are responsible for a range of community services across the country .
 Singapore produces roughly 30% of the world’s ornamental fish . Aquarium fish farming is also an important economic pursuit .
 Length of Singapore portion of Singapore-to-Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, railway . Singapore to Kuala Lumpur part of Singapore's Singapore to Malaysia railway .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 62,859 3.2% of GDP . Agriculture is the only major industry in the world .
 Primary 13,684 235,378 students enrolled in primary school . Secondary students enrolled at primary school in high-end schools .
 Ljubljana 268,423; Maribor 96,408; Celje 38,047; Celjje 38.047; Kranj 36,357; Velenje 25,935 . Maribar 96, 408,408, Celjine
 Net taxes on products, includes 48,000 unemployed and 10,000 not distributed . Includes 48,00 unemployed and 50,000 unemployed . Net taxes include 48,500 unemployed and 8,000 unpaid .
 Honiara 57,400; Gizo (in the New Georgia Islands) 6,300; Auki 4,400, 4,800; Buala 2,700. Honiar 57,200; Gino (in New Georgia islands) 57,000 . Honi
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 1,217.4 per cent of the total labour force . Agriculture and forestry is the largest sector of the labour force in Canada .
 Production at the country’s only gold mine was suspended from 2000 because of lawlessness, but it resumed in 2007 . Small-scale artisanal production continued, but small-scale production continued .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 2001-02 in value % of total labour % of labour U.S.$’000,000 value force force . Agriculture, livestock Mining 1 Public utilities J 1,657 18 62.
 iProclamation of the “Republic of Somaliland” in May 1991 on territory corresponding to former British Somalililand (which unified with the former Italian Trust Territory of Somalia to form Somalia in 1960) had not received international recognition as of November 2009 .
 Administration disputed (at least in part) between Puntland and Somaliland . Administration disputed between the two countries . Puntlands is located in the Somali region .
 In 2008 18 doctors graduated from a Somali medical institution for the first time since 1990 . 18 doctors from Somali medical institutions graduated from Somalia's medical institutions .
 Johannesburg 3,435,000,000; Cape Town 3,215,000 . Ekurhuleni 2,986,000 and eThekwini 2,729,000 in South Africa . Cape Town, Cape Town and e-thekwini are South Africa's
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force . Agriculture, forestry, fishing, fishing Mining Manufacturing Construction Construction Public utilities Transp. and commune .
 2007 in value R ’000,000% of total value 56,685 2.7% of value was spent on hotels, hotels, trade and other services . Total value of $56,685,000 was the largest amount of value in the world .
 Afrikaans; English; Ndebele; Pedi ; Sotho ; Swazi; Tsonga; Tswana ; Venda; Xhosa; Zulu . Swazi, Tsonga, Tshana; Venda .
 Taxes on products less subsidies on products, includes 4,487,000 unemployed . Unemployment includes 4.487,500 unemployed .
 Excluding gold export earnings estimated at U.S. $5,400,000,000 in 2006 . Circulation of daily newspapers in the United States is the largest in the world .
 Madrid 3,213,271 ; Barcelona 1,615,908 ; Valencia 807,200; Sevilla 699,759; Zaragoza 666,129; Malaga 566,447 . Malaga is the Spanish capital of Spain, home to a total of 3
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 589,998 13.9% of the labour force . Agricultural, forestry and fishing is the largest sector in the world .
 Colombo 672,743 ; Dehiwala-Mount Lavinia 219,827 3 ; Moratuwa 185,668 3 ; Jaffna 151,612; Negombo 150,364 . Negombo . Sri Jayewardenepura Kotte 121,
 Excludes 7 districts in northern and eastern Sri Lanka, includes 166,700 unclassified and 394,000 unemployed . Includes 166,000 unclassified unclassified, includes 4,500 unclassified unemployed . Excludes seven districts in north and east Sri Lanka . Includes 7 districts .
 Omdurman 1,271,403; Khartoum 947,483 15; Juba (in Southern Sudan) 114,980; Port Sudan 308,195; Kassala 234,622 . Juba, in Southern Sudan, is the largest city in the
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2004 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 3,299 28.5% of labour is agriculture . Agriculture is the only major industry in the world .
 Comprehensive peace agreement ending 21-year-long war in southern Sudan signed Jan., 2005 . Interim constitution from July 9, 2005, to be effective for 6 years .
 Areas of Northern and Southern Kordofan are estimated . Includes disputed Abyei area . Area includes disputed disputed region of Abyein .
 Population of 2008 urban agglomeration is 8. million including 1. to 1. million internally displaced persons . Population includes 1 to 1 million internally displaced personnel persuaded persons .
 Southern Sudan—UN peacekeeping force 8,800, 700; Darfur 14,600, 3,900 . Darfur: African Union/UN hybrid peacekeeping forces 14,000 . Southern Sudan: UN peacekeepers 8,000, 700, 700. Darfur—African Union
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 272,799 4.7% of the total labour force in 2006 . Agricultural, forestry and fishing are the main sectors of the labour force .
 Smuggling or unregulated activities in such areas as gold mining and tree removal, includes 16,425 unemployed . Smuggled or unregulated activity includes gold mining, tree removal .
 There are no public railways operating in Suriname; 52 mi of the private railroad were operational in 2003 . Surinamesi has one of the largest railways in the country .
 Manzini 115,200; Mbabane 78,700; Lobamba 11,000; Big Bend 10,400; Malkerns 10,000 . Manzini is the largest city in South Africa, with more than 100,000 residents .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2005 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture 1,277.4% of labour is employed in agriculture . Total labour force is 1.2% of the GDP .
 Based on 4,457 individuals age 25 or over in the Swaziland Demographic and Health Survey 2006-07 . Based on survey of 4,458 people age 25- or over .
 Stockholm 810,120,120; Goteborg 500,197; Malmo 286,535; Uppsala 190,668; Linkoping 141,863 . Linkoping, Sweden, is Sweden's largest city, with 1,800,000 residents .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 42,993 1.9% of the labour force . Agriculture, Forestry, fishing is the main sector of the Swedish economy .
 Zurich 1,132,200; Geneva 503,600; Basel 489,900; Bern 346,300; Lausanne 317,000 . Swiss capital Zurich is home to the world's largest number of people . Zurich has more than 1,000,000 residents .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour CHF '000,000 value force force' Agriculture, forestry, fishing, fishing 5,801 1.5% of labour .
 Detail does not add to total given because of rounding, includes nonresident population of 1,601,900 . Detail doesn't add to the total given as a result of rounding .
 Excludes 218,200 reservists; the 85,000-member civil defense forces are not part of the armed forces . Exclusion includes 218,000 reservists .
 Aleppo 2,181,061; Damascus 1,552,161; Hims 750,501; Hamah 467,807; Latakia 424,392. Aleppo, Damascus 1.5,500,161, and Hims 7,501,000 .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour S.P ‘’000,000 value forces forces forces . Agriculture 413,877 20.7% of labour force . Agriculture is the only major industry in South America .
 Tslam is required to be the religion of the head of state and is the basis of the legal system . Tslam means that Tslam must be a form of religion required by head of country .
 January 1. includes 1,176 sq km of territory in the Golan Heights recognized internationally as part of Syria but occupied by Israel or UN peacekeepers . The territory is recognized internationally but is occupied by either Israel or Israeli forces or UN troops .
 Includes 1,200,000 Iraqi refugees and 450,000 long-term Palestinian refugees in mid-2009 . Includes 1.200,00 Iraqi refugees, 450,00 Palestinian refugees .
 Based on the Household Income and Expenditure Survey with a survey population of 124,525 . Importsi.f.; exportso.b.f., exportsovery.f.
 Taipei 2,629,269/6,698,319; Kao-hsiung 1,520,555/2,767,655; T’ai-chung 1.055,898/2.218,527; T'ai-
 Dushanbe 679,400, Khujand 155,900,900; Kulyab 93,900 and Kurgan-Tyube 71,000; Istaravshan 60,200 . Khujanbe is the largest city in the country .
 Major causes of death per 100,000 population 7.7; diseases of the circulatory system 363.7, of which ischemic heart disease 146.5, hypertensive diseases 89.7 . Malignant neoplasms (cancers) 58.2; accidents 37.
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour TJS ‘’000,000 value force force force . Agriculture Mining j 2,525.5% of labour .
 Tncludes 8 members appointed by the President and 1 seat reserved for the outgoing president . Tn Includes 8 members of the President .
 Russian is the language of communication between nationalities per the constitution . Russian is a language used to communicate with other nationalities .
 Zanzibar only is 99% Muslim . Muslim 35%, Sunni 30%, ShlT 5%; Christian 35%, Christian 35%; other 30% Muslim 30% Sunni 30% Christian 35% Sunni 5% Christian 5% Sunni 35% Christian 30% ShtT 5% Sh
 Dar es Salaam 2,805,500,500; Mwanza 458,100; Zanzibar 422,300; Arusha 362,900; Mbeya 304,200; Dodoma 188,200 . Dar esSalaam has more than 2
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2002 in value % of total labour % of labour TZS ’000,0007 value7 forces forces . Agriculture, fishing 5,690,446 27% of the labour force .
 Tncludes 80 indirectly elected seats, 10 seats appointed by the President, and 10 seats for the Attorney General serving ex officio . Tn Includes 80 indirectly elect seats , 10 seats .
 Unguja island has 3 administrative regions, Pemba island has 2 administrative regions . Has local internal government structure . Has 3 different internal government structures . Ungaja island is the largest island in the country .
 Imports o.b. in balance of trade andi.f. in commodities and trading partners . n Circulation of daily newspapers. Imports in balance in balance with balance in trade and i.b .
 Bangkok 6,704,000,000; Samut Prakan 378,741; Nonthaburi 291,555; Udon Thani 222,425; Nakhon Ratchasima 204,641 . Bangkok's population grew to 6.7 million in 2008
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2008 in value . Agriculture, forestry, fishing 1,056,838 11.7% of the GDP .
 Foreign trade 7 Balance of trade 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 THB '000,000'000 % of total +186.186.000% of total . Foreign trade .
 Lome 921,000 ; Sokode 106,300; Kara 100,400; Kara, 100,000; Atakpame 72,700; Kpalime 71,400 . Lome, Sokode, Kara, Kara and Sokode are the most populous cities in
 Nukualofa 23,658, 34,311, (Greater Nukua-Nua) Nua-Koloua is one of the most populous islands in Tonga .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007-08 2003 in value % of total labour % of labour T$’000 . Agriculture 112,294 20.6% of the labour force was agriculture . Agriculture is the only major source of labour in the country .
 Tonga has defense cooperation agreements with both Australia and New Zealand . Tonga also has agreements with New Zealand, Australia and Australia .
 Tncludes 14 nonelective seats and 9 nobles elected by the 29 hereditary nobles of Tonga . Includes 14 members of Tonganese nobility . Includes 9 members elected by hereditary nobles .
 Chaguanas 73,100; San Juan 57,100 3; San Fernando 56,600; Port of Spain 49,800 3; Arima 35,600 3; Scarborough 4,600 . San Fernando, San Fernando and San Fernando also feature .
 Approximately 2002; exact date of information is unknown . Within greater Port of Spain, approximately 2002 .
 Net of VAT less imputed bank service charges, includes 39,000 unemployed . Net . of VAT, including 39,00 unemployed, includes . 39,500 unemployed .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 4,884,300 9.3% TND ’000 value force force . Agricultural, forestry and fishing 9% of the total labour force .
 Mining and quarrying 554,900 i Public utilities 4,743,8008 9.38 97 Q Manufacturing 9,425,600 18.3897 i Public Utilities 4,700,800 8.38,000 i Mining and Quirking 5,500,000
 Istanbul: Istanbul 10,757,327; Ankara 3,763,591; izmir 2,606,294; Bursa 1,431,172; Adana 1,366,027; Gaziantep 1,175,042 . Ankara: Istanbul: Ankara
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 64,278,298 7.7% of the labour force . Total labour force was 7% higher than in 2007 2006 . Agriculture, Forestry, fishing is the main industry sector .
 Other 99,659,0467 11.77 2,446,0008 9.77 . Total of 853,636,2369 100.09 24,775,0009 100 .
 Ashgabat 744,000, Turkmenabat 256,000; Da§oguz 210,000 and Mary 159,000 . The country is home to more than 1,500,000 people .
 Official Turkmen estimates are significantly higher than those of Turkmen . Estimate of U.S. Census International Database .
 Budget statistics are unreliable because the government spends large amounts of extra-budgetary funds . Budget statistics have been unreliable because of the government's spending on extra funds, experts say .
 ILO Employment Trends Unit estimates 2nd quarter only; from/to Russia only . Estimate of ILO employment Trends Unit . 2nd Quarter only; 2nd . quarter only .
 Based on 2000 Turkmenistan Demographic and Health Survey of 13,566 people age 25 and over . Based on data from Turkmenistani Demographic Survey of 2013-2014 .
 Alapi 1,024; Fakaifou (on Fongafale islet) 1,007; Vaiaku 516; Motufoua 506 . Alapi islet islet on the island of Alapi, a sub-Islet of Fong
 Primary 73 1,460i 6 19.5% of students were students in primary school . Primary 73  1, 460i 6% of teachers in primary schools .
 Local government councils have been established on all true atolls and isolated reef islands . Councils have been set up on atolls, atolls or atolls .
 Kampala 1,533,600, Kira 164,700, Gulu 146,600; Lira 102,200,200; Mbale 86,200 . Mbale is Uganda's largest city .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 7,055,000 23.5% of the labour force . UGX '000,000 value force force in 2003-09 . Agriculture, fishing, fishing is the main industry sector .
 Statistically derived midpoint of range, indirect taxes less imputed bank service charges . Tax rates are based on the amount of tax receipts received by the government .
 Based on the Uganda National Household Survey 2005-06, comprising approximately 7,400 households . Based on a national survey conducted by Uganda's national household survey 2005-2006 .
 A11 Uganda passenger rail service was suspended in 1997; limited service resumed in mid-2007 . Limited service was limited service was resumed in 2007 .
 Kiev 2,765,531; Kharkiv 1,455,964; Dnipropetrovsk 1,017,514; Odesa 1,008,627; Donetsk 974,598. Kiev 2.7 million people live in Ukraine . Donetsk
 Agriculture 64,297 6.9% of the GDP . Agriculture is the only major industry in the world . Agriculture has the lowest labour force in the country .
 Net indirect taxes and taxes on production less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges . Net indirect tax on production is lower than net indirect taxes . Net direct tax on net production is less than net tax on bank deposits . Net net tax is lower on net consumption of net production .
 Dubai 1,354,980,980; Sharjah 685,000; Abu Dhabi 630,000, ‘Ajman 202,244,244; Ra 5 s al-Khaymah 113,347 . Dubai 1.4 million people live in Dubai; Shar
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 in value % of total labour % of labour AED ‘’000,000 value force force force . Agriculture 12,797 1.0% of the labour force AED .
 Hwenty seats are appointed by the rulers of the 7 emirates and 20 seats are indirectly elected . Border/territorial disputes exist with Saudi Arabia/Iran, respectively, respectively .
 No population change predicted between 2008 and 2009 by some unofficial sources because of world economic downturn . Some unofficial sources predict no population change in 2008-2009 by some estimates . No population growth predicted between 2009 and 2009 .
 U.A.E. citizens constituted only 18.7% of the total population in 2008 . U.S. citizens in the U.K. were in the United States in 2008, according to census data .
 Both English and Scots Gaelic in Scotland; both English and Welsh in Wales . English is Welsh; Scots is Welsh in Scotland and Welsh .
 London 7,619,800/8,567,000; . Birmingham 1,010,400/2,285,000, . Manchester 465,900/2.230,000 . Leeds 477,600/1,529,000 7 ; Glasgow 637
 Distribution of disposable income percentage of household income by quintile 1 2 3 4 5 ~1A 11.11.11 . 11.1.1 .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 10,577 0.0% of the labour force in 2006 2008 in value . Agriculture, fishing, agiculticulticulticulture, forestry, fishing 10,577 - 0% of labour .
 U.S. dollar per £ 1.78 1.93 1.72 1.96 2.96 1.00 1.46 SDRs per £ . Gold 10.07 10.04 9.99 9.98 9.97 % world reserves 1.20 1
 Central bank discount: Govt, bond yield long term 4.58 4.93 4.46 4.37 5.04 4.04 . Exports,o.b. -387.25 -461.14 -509.04 -622.02 -639
 Church of England “established” (protected by the state but not “official”); Church of Scotland “national” Church of . Scotland ‘national’ (exclusive jurisdiction in spiritual matters per Church of. Scotland Act 1921) No established church in Northern
 One of nine new unitary authorities formally established in April 2009 . Unitary authorities was established in 2009 .
 Second quarter. VAT and other taxes less subsidies and less imputed bank service charges . Second quarter . Less subsidies, less bank fees and less bank charges .
 Alabama's population 8 change births deaths deaths migration migration Alabama 180,500 4.5 percent . Alabama's total population 8 births deaths, deaths, births, migration, migration is a factor in population growth . Alabama has a population of 180,000,000 .
 St. Paul-Bloomington 3,230,000, Minneapolis 383,000 . San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos 3,001,000 San Diego 1,279,000 people live in San Diego .
 Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater 2,734,000 Tampa 341,000 Baltimore 637,000 Denver-Aurora 2,507,000 . Pittsburgh 2,351,000 Pittsburgh 310,000 Portland-Vancouver-Beaverton 2,207,000
 Alabama 63,235 13.235 births per 1,000 live births . Alabama had an abortion rate of 9 abortion rates of 9 abortions . Alabama's maternal mortality rate is 1% higher than the national average of 1,500 births .
 Leading cause of death by age group total number of deaths death rate total 4 male female per 100,000 population percentage of all deaths . All agesis 2,448,017 1,207,675 1,240,342 825. All ages are at risk of death .
 Distribution of income percentage of disposable family income by quintile 1 2 3 4 5 3. 3. 4. 5 . 5. 5. 4 . 5 . 3. 6. 3 . 4. 6 . 6. 7. 7 .
 Population age 16 and over volunteering for an organization 26.2%; median annual hours 52.2% of those aged 16-19% volunteer for a nonprofit .
 Crime rates per 100,000 population in metropolitan areas in Chicago are 15.6% higher than the national average . Violent crime rates are based on homicide and nonnegligent manslaughter . Chicago has the highest rate of violent crime in the country .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining and quarry industries are key sectors of the economy . Manufacturing, construction and public sector sectors are key areas of economy . Agriculture and forestry is a key sector of economy in South America .
 Trade, hotels, restaurants, finance, real estate, finance and other services contribute to the U.S. economy in 2008 . Total value in 2008 was 157.5% of total .
 Gross domestic product 2003 2004 2004 2005 2006 2007 Gross Domestic Product was 10,971.6% . Gross domestic Product Product Product Index was 10.971% in 2003 . Gross Domestic Domestic Product Index is 10.2% .
 Net exports of goods and services -500. -624. -726. -763. -708 Exports 1,045. -700 . Net exports were $1,000 less than the $1.1 billion forecast .
 Balance of visible trade -545.76 -668.38 -787.06 -843.06 Imports,o.b.54 -826.91 -836.27 Imports . Balance of payments - - -  - - 6% of GDP .
 Alabama 73.7 percent home ownership rate is the highest in the United States . Alabama has the highest percentage of home ownership in the country .
 Navigable channels 26,000 mi, 41,843 km; oil pipeline length 131,000 miles, 210,824 km . Gas pipeline 28 1,462,300 mi, 2,353,300 km; pipeline length 1,460,300 miles, 1,
 Certified route passenger/cargo air carriers 80; operating revenue (U.S..$’000,000) $ 173,104; operating expenses 163,894. Operating revenue was $173,104 . Operating expenses were $163.894 in 2007 .
 Intercity passenger and freight traffic by mode of transportation . Cargo traffic (‘000,000 ton-mi) % of nafl total passenger traffic . Rail 1,558 41.5% of the total cargo traffic .
 An additional 6,500,000 people were not interviewed for this 2003 survey because they did not speak English or had cognitive or mental disabilities . The survey was conducted on behalf of more than 50,000 Americans .
 Excludes 5 nonvoting delegates from the District of Columbia, the U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Guam . Puerto Rico, Guam and the United States Virgin Islands are nonvoted delegates .
 Net change in population does not include a usual small residual population that is not accounted for under births less deaths, deaths in conjunction with net domestic/international migration . Net change is not included in a usual large residual population . net change is based on births and deaths less deaths .
 Gross income from all sources, including transfer payments to individuals, is reported at $1.2 billion . Gross income is based on all sources of income, including transfers to individuals .
 Detail may not add to total given because of incomplete survey results . Detail may be added to the total given due to incomplete data .
 Excludes doctors of osteopathy, physicians with unknown addresses, and inactive physicians . Excludes osteopaths, physicians of osteopath, physicians without addresses and inactive doctors .
 Montevideo 1,269,552,552; Salto 99,072; Paysandu 73,272; Las Piedras 69,222; Rivera 64,426 . Montevideo, Uruguay, is home to more than 1,800,000 people .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2006 in value % of total labour % of labour . UYU ’000,000 value force 3 forces: Agriculture 54,947 10. i 157,200 10.i Agricultural 54, 9. i Agricultural 54.9
 Tashkent 1,959,190; Namangan 446,237; Andijon 321,622; Samarkand 312,863; Bukhara 249,037; Nukus 240,734. Tashtent: 1,
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2000 in value % of total labour % of labour UZS. ’000,000 value force force . Agriculture, fishing, manufacturing, mining, 6,116,400 21.000 UZ .
 Based on the 2002 Uzbekistan Health Examination Survey, of which 9,624 respondents were age 25 and over . Subscribers to the 2002 survey were aged 25 and older .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 1999 in value % of total labour % of labour . Vt ’000,000 value force force force . Agriculture 7,480 14.8% of labour force .
 Production of goods and services that are retained by their producers for their own final consumption is retained in the form of final consumption . Production is a form of production that is retained by the producers for the own consumption .
 Caracas 1,836,286,286 ; Maracaibo 1,571,885 ; Valencia 1,199,510 ; Barquisimeto 862,519 ; Ciudad Guayana 635,978 . Venezuela 1,800,000 people live in
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2006 in value VEB ’000,000 .8 % of total value® labour force % of labour force . Agriculture 1,016,000 8.8% of the total value of the VEB . VEB is VEB '
 Ho Chi Minh City 3,452,100 ; Hanoi 1,420,400 ; Haiphong 591,100; Da Nang 459,400 . Hang City 3.4 million people live in the city .
 Structure of gross domestic product and labour force 2007 2008 in value % of total labour % of labour . Agriculture, fishing 232,188 20.7% of GDP . VND ‘’000,000’,000 labour force VND .
 Estimate of United States Bureau of the Census International Data Base (June 2009 Update). 4 2007 urban agglomeration. 4 2007 Urban agglomation. Estimate .
 Area and population area population population population 1,000 sq mi sq km 2008 estimate: St. Iago . Area is estimated to be at least 1,500 sq km (sq km)
 United States Virgin Islands 45.4%; other Caribbean 34.9%, of which St. Virgin Islands 34.4% of Caribbean islands are U.S. Virgin islands .
 Percentage of births within marriage may be an underestimation due to the common practice of consensual marriage . Percentage of children born within marriage could be underestimated due to common practice .
 Sanaa 2,006,619, Aden 588,938, Ta'izz 466,968,968; AlHudaydah 409,994; Ibb 212,992. Sanaa is the largest city in the country . Aden is the most populous
 Agriculture, forestry, fishings 593,667 10.6% of GDP . Labour force 5.9% in 2008 2005-06 . Agricultural, forestry and fishings 10% of the GDP .
 Primary/Voc. 55,862i 5 1,455,206 24.61 5 37 Tertiary 6,062 209,386 33.414 . Primary school enrollment rate: 110,12714 3,219,564 22.414 75 Secondary/V
 Khat’s agricultural contribution to GDP is about 2.5% of total GDP; khat cultivation employs nearly 15% of the labour force . Khat is an important part of the economy in Afghanistan .
 Virtually all natural gas was flared or reinjected for field pressure maintenance . This includes petroleum refining, including petroleum refining .
 Customs duties less imputed bank service charges, includes 795,316 unemployed . Unemployment includes more than 700,000 people who are unemployed .
 Lusaka 1,306,600; Kitwe 408,300; Ndola 398,100; Kabwe 191,000; Kwebans 191,100 . Chingola 148,600: 148,500; Chingol 148,000 . Kitwa 408
 Detail does not add to total given because of rounding . 3 to 4% in 2005 was rounded up in 2005 . Detail doesn't add to the total given .
 Harare: Harare 1,572,000; Bulawayo 676,787; Chitungwiza 321,782; Mutare 170,106; Gweru 141,260 . Bulawaye: Bulawaya: 676 ,787, 676 .
 HIV/AIDS-related 1,406; cardiovascular diseases 142; lower respiratory infections 84; tuberculosis 55; malignant neoplasms 54 . Cardiovascular diseases 142, tuberculosis 84, tuberculosis 55 .
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 155,807 15.9% of the labour force . Agriculture and forestry is the largest sector in the country's labour force in the world .
 Historic pact for the sharing of executive authority (Constitutional Amendment 19) entered into force Feb., 2009 . Historic pact was created by the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Multiple foreign currencies (including the United States dollar and South African rand) became legal tender in January 2009 . includes 3 million Zimbabweans living outside of the country, many of whom are in South Africa .
 Official year-on-year inflation rate in July 2008 was 231,000,000% . Private sector estimates placed it at 80,000k% or higher . Official inflation rate was 231k% in 2008; private sector estimates were 80k% .
 Lack of commodities in shops and multiple price changes per day make precise calculation of CPI virtually impossible . Lack of commodity in shops makes it impossible to calculate CPI .
 Weights of consumer price index components, indirect taxes less imputed bank service charges, includes 298,000 unemployed . Weights include 298,00 unemployed .
 Based on the 2005-06 Zimbabwe Demographic and Household Survey, comprising 16,082 people . Zimbabwe Demographics and Household survey, by ZBC, was conducted in 2006 .
 South America 7,318 1,565 1,564,000 South Americans . +228,607 517,206 11.7% South America . + 228,607 South America South America Latin American .
 Southwest Asia 2,534 6,440 2,932,353 3,068,5 34 +136,181 191,444 13.6% Southwest Asia . Southwest Asia is the world's most populous region .
 Liechtenstein, Monaco, Norway, San Marino, and Switzerland are the most populous countries in the world .
 In this table “date of independence” may refer to a variety of circumstances . ‘Date of Independence’ is a date of independence . “Date ofindependence” is a number of circumstances in which independence was declared .
 In the case of the newest countries, the date given is usually just what is implied by the heading . The date is usually when the country, within its present borders, attained full sovereignty over both its internal and external affairs .
 In the case of longer established countries, the choice of a single date may be somewhat more complicated, and grounds for the use of several different dates often exist .
 The reader should refer to appropriate Britannica articles on national histories and relevant historical acts .
 The date of the current, or last, constitution is in some ways a less complicated question . Governments sometimes do not adhere to existing constitutional forms or trouble to terminate the previous document and legitimize themselves by replacing it .
 Often, however, the desire to legitimize extraconstitutional political activity by associating it with existing forms of long precedent leads to partial or incomplete modification, suspension, or abrogation of a constitution . The actual day-to-day conduct of government may be largely unrelated to
 When a date in this column is given in italics, it refers to a document that has been suspended, abolished by extraconstitutional action, or modified extensively .
 The characterizations adopted under “type of government” represent a compromise between the national constitution and the more pragmatic language that a political scientist might adopt to describe these same systems . The type of government is a compromise of the forms provided for the constitution .
 For an explanation of the application of these terms in the Britannica World Data, see the Glossary at page 501 .
 The positions denoted by the terms “chief of state” and “head of government” are usually those identified with those functions by the constitution . The positions are usually identified with the functions of the constitution by the president .
 The duties of the chief of state may range from largely ceremonial responsibilities to complete executive authority as the effective head of government . Chief of state is the head of state with little or no authority over the day-to-day conduct of government, but is also the most powerful person in the
 In certain countries, an individual outside the constitutional structure may exercise the powers of both positions . In some countries, a person outside the country's constitutional structure can exercise the role of both .
 Membership in the legislative house of each country as given here includes all elected or appointed members, as well as those who by virtue of some other office or title .
 The legislature of a country with a unicameral system is shown as the upper house in this table . The upper house is shown in the table as a state legislature .
 The number of administrative subdivisions for each country is listed down to the second level . Each country has a second level of administrative divisions .
 In the second half of the table are listed the memberships each country maintains in the principal international intergovernmental organizations of the world . Finally, in the second . half, are listed each country's memberships .
 This part of the table may also be used to provide a complete membership list for each of these organizations as of Dec. 2009 . The membership list is also available for use in the future .
 Constitutions whose dates are in italic type had been wholly or substantially suspended or abolished as of late 2009 . Constituencies whose dates were in bold or bold are suspended, abolished or abolished . The dates are shown to indicate that the dates have been changed in accordance with the Constitution
 The European Union Food and Agriculture Org. FAO FZ FZ G-20 GECF I-ADB IAEA IBRD ICC ICJ ICJ IDA IDB ILO IMF IMO IMO ITU LAS OAS Economic Community of West
 The Franc Zone Group of Twenty Gas Exporting Countries Forum . Inter-American Development Bank International Atomic Energy Agency International Bank for Reconstruction and Development . International Criminal Court International Court of Justice International Development Association Islamic Development Bank IAEI .
 Organization of the Arab States Organization of American States OPEC PC SCO UNCTAD UNESCO UNIDO UNITO WHO WHO WHO WTO .
 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development . United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural and Cultural Org. United Nations conference on Trade . Development .
 Per nondemocratic national referendum of Nov., 1996, amending the constitution . Amending constitution amending constitution . National referendum of 1996 amending national constitution .
 i02Rectangle defined by coordinates; claim extends beyond 12 mi. i03Mix of parliamentary democracy and Samoan customs . i° 4 Royal decrees from March 1,1992, created first written rules of governance, ^Singapore is open to negotiation to the maritime claims of nearby
 The data represent the latest published and unpublished data for both the surveyed area of the countries and their populations, the latter as of a single recent year . The data are presented as of the recent census to provide the fullest comparison of certain demographic measures that are not always available .
 The 2008 Revision, the United States Bureau of the Census International Data Base, databases of other international organizations, and Encyclopaedia Britannica’s own estimates .
 Statistics are estimates of varying, and some of suspect, accuracy, even when they contain a very full enumeration . One principal point to bear in mind is that all of them, whatever degree of precision, are estimates .
 The United States is unable to determine within 1.2% its total population nationally . The U.S. has a long tradition both of census taking and of the use of the most sophisticated analytical tools in processing the data .
 The accuracy of the enumerated count may be off as much as 3.1% at a state level and by a greater percent for a single city . In states and larger cities, where enumeration of particular populations, including illegal, is more difficult, accuracy is off .
 The accuracy attained by census operations in China may approach 0.25% of rigorously maintained civil population registers . The accuracy of China's census operations may be less than 1% of the accuracy achieved .
 Other national census operations not so based, however, are inherently less accurate . Census data is based on the fact that national census data is not based on census data .
 Ethiopia’s first-ever census in 1984 resulted in figures that were 30% or more above prevailing estimates . For example, the first census of Ethiopia in 1984 ended up 30% higher than expected figures .
 An undercount of 2-8% is more typical, but even census operations offering results of 30% or more above or below prevailing estimates can still represent well-founded benchmarks from which future planning may proceed .
 The editors have tried to take account of the range of variation and accuracy in published data . It is difficult to establish a value for many sources of inaccuracy, but it is difficult .
 Afghanistan 249,347 645,807 41 28,150,000 people live in Afghanistan . Afghanistan is the largest country in the world . Afghanistan has the largest population in the country . Afghanistan's population is estimated to be at least 250,000 .
 The sources of these data are censuses, national population registers and sample surveys to establish demographic conditions; and the like. Census data are collected periodically and periodically .
 The statistics provided for area and population by country are ranked . The population densities based on those values are also provided .
 The population densities, for purposes of comparison within this table, are calculated on the bases of the 2009 midyear population estimate as shown and of the total area of the country .
 The data in this section conclude with the estimated average annual growth rate for the country during the five-year period 2004-2009 . The data is based on the growth rate of the country in 2004-2008 .
 In the section containing census data, information supplied includes the census total (more often de facto) the population actually present, rather than de jure, the population legally resident, who might be anywhere . The proportion that is urban (usually according to the country’s own definition)
 Young, fast-growing nations show a high proportion of people under 30 . Many countries in sub-Saharan Africa have about 40% of their population under 15 years . Sweden suffered no age-group losses in World War II .
 The projections for 2010, 2020, and 2030 represent the best fit of available data through late summer 2009 . The projections are based on available data from 2009 to 2010 .
 The evidence of the last 30 years with respect to similar estimates published about 1970, however, shows how cloudy is the glass through which these numbers are read . The evidence shows that this is not the case, however .
 In 1970 no respectable Western analyst would have imagined proposing that mainland China could achieve the degree of birth control that it apparently has since then . On the other hand, even the Chinese admit that their methods have been somewhat Draconian .
 sBeginning of year.006 estimate. i°2001 census household population population. i12001 estimate . i2Based on preliminary census figures. Civil register not a census. i2
 S3|ricludes Svalbard and Jan Mayen. secludes Azad Kashmir, Northern Areas, and Afghan refugees .
 Excludes Azad Kashmir, Northern Areas, and Afghan refugees . Excludes the disputed transitional republic of Kosovo .
 2005 estimate for both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip . iExcludes 305,000 Israeli Jews in West Bank . Excludes East Jerusalem . 2005 estimate includes 305,00 Israeli Jews .
 Most of the populations given refer to a so-called city proper, that is a legally defined, incorporated, or chartered area defined by administrative boundaries and by national or state law . Most of these populations are referred to the city proper .
 In some instances, where cities proper do not exist or are not strictly demarcated, populations of locally defined urban areas may be used . In some cases, the population of people living in such areas may also be used in the United States .
 In a few cases, data refer to the municipality, or commune, similar to the medieval city-state in that the city is governed together with its immediately adjoining, economically dependent areas, whether urban or rural .
 Some countries define no other demographic or legal entities within such communes or municipalities . Many identify a centre, seat, head, head or locality that corresponds to the most densely populated, compact, contiguous core of the municipality .
 Populations for urban agglomerations as defined by the United Nations are occasionally inset beneath the populations of cities proper . Populations are sometimes inset under the population of cities in some areas .
 Urban agglomeration populations are at least three times the size of cities proper . That is when the urban agglomation population is three times that size of the city proper .
 For certain countries, more than one form of the name of the city is given, usually to permit recognition of recent place-name changes or of forms likely to be encountered in press stories . The title of the entry in the Encyclopedia Britannica is spelled according to a different romanization
 Chinese names for China are usually given in their Pinyin spelling, the official Chinese system encountered in official documents and maps . Chinese names are given in the official system of the Chinese language .
 Sources for this data were often national censuses and statistical abstracts of the countries concerned, supplemented by Internet sources .
 St. Albans 131,300, Chula Vista 217,478, McKinney 115,260, South Bend 104,069 Maturin 325,000 . St. Alton 131,000 people live in the city .
 Lusaka Mufulira Baton Rouge Baton Rouge 227,071 Jackson 175,710 St. Louis 350,759 Acarigua 137,000 ★ Luska Mufulir Baton Rouge 225,000 people .
 St. Paul 277,251 Barcelona 328,000 Beaumont 109,579 Jacksonville, Jacksonville 805,605 St. Augustine, Florida, is the largest city in the world .
 The countries, and the principal languages represented in each of each, are listed alphabetically . The countries are listed in alphabetically.
 The sum of the estimates equals the 2003 population of the country given in the “Area and population” table . The sum is the population estimates .
 Many countries do not collect any official data whatever on language use, and published estimates not based on census or survey data usually span a substantial range of uncertainty .
 The editors have adopted the best-founded distribution in the published literature (indicating uncertainty by the degree of rounding shown) but have also adjusted or interpolated using data not part of the base estimate . The editors use this distribution of data to make their point of view .
 Such adjustments have not been made to account for largescale refugee movements, as these are of a temporary nature . Such adjustments are not expected to be made, as such as largescales refugee movements .
 A variety of approaches have been used to approximate mother-tongue distribution when census data were unavailable . The census data was not available when the census was unavailable .
 Some countries collect data on ethnic or “national” groups only . For such countries ethnic distribution often had to be assumed to conform roughly to the distribution of language communities .
 Minority population not always free to educate its children in its own language . Better economic opportunities often draw minority group members into majority-language community . This approach should be viewed with caution .
 For some countries, a given individual may be visible in national statistics only as a passport-holder of a foreign country . However, however long he may remain resident, he may not remain resident in the country .
 Such persons, often guest workers, have sometimes had to be assumed to be speakers of the principal language of their home country . Such persons have sometimes been assumed to speak of their native language .
 For some countries in the Americas, so few speakers of any single indigenous language remain that it was necessary to combine these groups as Amerindian so as to give a fair impression of their aggregate size .
 No systematic attempt has been made to account for populations that may legitimately be described as bilingual, unless the country itself collects data on that basis, such as Bolivia or the Comoros, for example .
 Speakers of the language as a second tongue are shown in italics, even though very few may speak it as a mother tongue . The language is a nonindigenous official or excolonial language .
 Lingua franca figures that are both italicized and indented are not included in population totals . Lingua-Franca figures are also not included into population total .
 No comprehensive effort has been made to distinguish between dialect communities usually classified as belonging to the same language . Such distinctions were possible for some countries— g., between French and Occitan or among various dialects of Chinese .
 Parenthetical alternatives are given for a number of languages that differ markedly from the name of the people speaking them or that may be combined with other groups .
 French is the universal language throughout France . Traditional dialects and minority languages are retained regionally in the approximate numbers shown . 2000 population estimate is 233,000 . lOData reflect multilingualism .
 An assessment was made for each country of the available data on distribution of religious communities within the total population . The best available figures, whether originating as census data, membership figures of the churches concerned, were applied as percentages to the estimated 2001 midyear population .
 Several concepts govern the nature of the available data, each useful separately but none the basis of any standard of international practice in the collection of such data .
 The word “affiliation” was used above to describe the nature of the relationship joining the religious bodies named and the populations shown .
 This term implies some sort of formal, usually documentary, connection between the religion and the individual . It says nothing about the nature of the individual’s personal religious practice, in that the individual may have lapsed or joined another religion .
 The nature of affiliation differs greatly from country to country, but the social context of religious practice does also . The user of these statistics should be careful to note that not only does the nature of the affiliation differ greatly .
 A country in which a single religion has long been predominant will often show more than 90% of its population to be affiliated . No more than 10% of the population may actually practice that religion on a regular basis . A country often shows 90% is affiliated with one religion .
 Such a situation often leads to undercounting of minority religions, blurring of distinctions seen to be significant elsewhere . Double-counting in countries where an individual may practice more than one ‘religion’ at a time .
 Communist countries had for long consciously attempted to ignore, suppress, or render invisible religious practice within their borders . Until 1989 communist countries had tried to ignore or suppress religious practice in their own country .
 Countries with large numbers of adherents of traditional, often animist, religions and belief systems usually have little or no formal methodology for defining the nature of local religious practice .
 On the other hand, countries with strong missionary traditions, or good census organizations, may have very good, detailed, and meaningful data .
 Roman Catholic 3,090,000 Anglican 10,000 traditional beliefs 3,660,000 Tonga Free Wesleyan Roman Catholic other Uruguay Oman Methodist . Hindu 1,050,000 44,000 . Hindu 50,000 Hindu 190,000 other 12,000 Jewish 170,000
 Roman Catholic 36,920,000 Anglican Muslim other Tunisia Sunni Muslim other Russian Orthodox 195,000 Shl'I Muslim 25,010,000 Muslim 200,000 other (mostly Christian Hindu) Hindu 3,560,000 1,730,000 370,000 .
 The accuracy of these data depends on the effectiveness of each respective national system for registering vital and civil events (birth, death, marriage, etc.) and on the sophistication of the analysis that can be brought to bear upon the data so compiled .
 Even in a developed country such identifications are often left to nonmedical personnel . In developing countries there will be too few physicians to perform autopsies to assess accurately the cause of death after the fact .
 Calculating natural increase, which at its most basic is simply the difference between the birth and death rates, may be affected by the differing degrees of completeness of birth registration .
 The total fertility rate may be understood as the average number of children that would be borne per woman if all childbearing women lived to the end of their childbearing years and bore children at each age at the average rate for that age .
 Data for causes of death are difficult to obtain, since many countries are not well equipped to collect the data . Many countries are also difficult to collect, as their accuracy may be suspect and their meaning may be subject to varying interpretation .
 Statistics on causes of death seek to identify the ‘underlying’ cause (that which sets the final train of events leading to death in motion) Statistics often must settle for the most proximate cause or symptom .
 Even this kind of analysis may be misleading for those charged with interpreting the data with a view to ordering health-care priorities for a particular country . The data is based on the national level of health care in the United States .
 The eight groups of causes of death utilized here include most, but not all, of the detailed causes classified by the World Health Organization . This would not, thus, aggregate to the country’s crude death rate for the same year .
 Expectation of life is probably the most accurate single measure of the quality of life in a given society . Expectation is probably most accurate measure of a society's quality, the author says .
 It summarizes in a single number all of the natural and social stresses that operate upon individuals in that society . The number is a simple list of the stresses that affect individuals .
 The number may range from as few as 40 years of life in the least developed countries to as much as 80 years for women in the most developed nations .
 The lost potential in the years separating the two numbers is prodigious, regardless of how the loss arises . The loss is due to poor public health services, or poor individual health practice in matters of nutrition, exercise, stress management .
 Available data usually include both first marriages and remarriages after annulment, divorce, widowhood, or the like . The available data usually includes both first marriage and second marriage .
 Well-defined family data are not collected as part of a country’s national census or vital statistics surveys . Data for households have been substituted on the assumption that most households worldwide represent families in some conventional sense .
 Increasing numbers of census programs are making more adequate provision for distinguishing nontraditional, often nonfamily households . Even in developing countries, even in developing nations, such as China, are making adequate provision .
 Each of these measures represents an aggregate value of goods and services produced by a specific country .
 GDP is a measure of the total value of goods and services produced entirely within a given country . GDP, the more basic of these, is the GDP of the country's economy .
 The GNI, the more comprehensive value, is composed of both domestic production and net income from current transactions with other countries . GNI is made up of domestic production, net income and current transactions from other countries. GNI includes both domestic and current net income .
 In the first section of the table, data are presented for the nominal GNI, the nominal GDP per capita, and the GNI purchasing power parity per capita . In the second section, the data are shown for GNI per capita and GNI Purchasing Power Parity .
 Purchasing power parity is an economic theory used to determine the number of units in a country’s currency that are required to buy the same amount of goods and services in another country . Purchasing price parity is a theory that determines the units needed to buy same amount in a currency
 PPP is expressed in a common currency, usually United States dollars, and as such it is often used to compare the standards of living between countries . PPP has been used in the past to compare living standards of countries .
 PPPs per capita in this table are nearly always calculated by the World Bank . The World Bank values are based on the World's PPP per capita values .
 "Real" GDP figures are adjusted to eliminate the effect of recent inflation or, occasionally, of deflation between two given dates . Average annual population growth rates for the same span of years are shown .
 GDP/GNI values allow comparison of the relative size of national economies, but further information is provided when these aggregates are analyzed according to their industrial sectors of origin and component kinds of expenditure . GDP/ GNI values are used to indicate the size of the national economies .
 Secondary sector is composed of manufacturing, construction, and public utilities . Secondary sector composed of construction, manufacturing, and construction .
 GDP agrimining manuconpublic transp., trade finanother governpower parity GDP lation per capita culture facturstrucutilcommucial Svcs. ment <%) <%> ing tion ities nications Svcs .
 The tertiary sector, which includes transportation and communications, trade, financial services, other services, and government services, is the most important sector .
 The category “other” contains adjustments such as import duties and bank service charges that are not distributed by sector . The category "other" contains adjustments that do not distribute by sector or sector .
 The majority of the world’s countries are in the less developed bloc . Data are given for outstanding external public and publicly guaranteed long-term debt rather than for total public debt, which is the major concern in developed countries .
 External account records the sum of all economic transactions of a current nature between one country and the rest of the world . The external account records all of the economic transactions between the countries .
 The account shows a country’s net of overseas receipts and obligations, including not only the trade of goods and merchandise, but also such invisible items as services, interest and dividends, investments, tourism, transfers to or from overseas residents, etc.
 Each transaction gives rise to a foreign claim for payment, recorded as a deficit (g ., from imports, capital outflows) or a foreign obligation to pay . The transactions give rise to either a deficit or a domestic claim on another country . Each transaction is recorded as either a surplus
 Any international transaction automatically creates a deficit in the balance of payments of one country and a surplus in that of another . This is a result of an international transaction creating a deficit of payments .
 The data is taken from International Financial Statistics published by the International Monetary Fund .
 Net income or expenditure from tourism is often a significant element in a country’s balance of payments . Tourism is a significant part of a country's balance of payability .
 Receipts from foreign nationals reflect payments for goods and services from foreign currency resources by tourists in the given country . The receipts reflect payments by foreign nationals from foreign citizens .
 Expenditures by nationals abroad are also payments for goods and services, but in this case made by the residents of the given country as tourists abroad . Residents of a given country spend money on goods and other services .
 The table focuses on the concept of “economically active population,” which the International Labour Organisation defines as persons of all ages who are either employed or looking for work .
 In general, the economically active population does not include students, retired persons and retired persons . Students, persons occupied solely in domestic duties are not considered economically active .
 Persons engaged in illegal economic activities also fall outside the ILO definition . Illegal economic activities include prostitutes, drug dealers, bootleggers, black marketeers and others .
 Countries differ markedly in their treatment, as part of the labour force, of such groups as members of the armed forces, inmates of institutions, the unemployed (both persons seeking their first job and those previously employed) and the unemployed .
 Some countries include all or most of these groups among the economically active, while others may treat the same groups as inactive . Some countries may include the same group as inactive, while some may treat them as economically active .
 Each of these measures indicates certain characteristics in a given national labour market . None should be interpreted in isolation, however, as the meaning of each is influenced by a variety of factors . Demographic structure and change, social or religious customs, educational opportunity, educational opportunities, sexual differentiation in employment
 Low activity and participation rates might be characteristic of a country having a young population with poor employment possibilities or of a good job market distorted by the presence of large numbers of ‘guest’ or contract workers who are not part of the labour force .
 Loss of working-age men to war, civil violence, or emigration for job opportunities may also affect the structure of a particular labour market . Loss of workers to war or emigrations may affect a particular job market .
 This occurs because the countries involved have poor, largely agrarian economies . The average worker is a farmer who tills his own small plot of land . This is because of the fact that the average worker in these countries is a small farmer .
 In countries with well-developed economies, “employees” will usually constitute the largest portion of the economically active . “Employees’s” are usually the largest part of the economy .
 Caution should be exercised when using the economically active data to make intercountry comparisons . Countries often differ in their choices of classification schemes, definitions, and coverage of groups .
 The population base containing the economically active population may range, in developing countries, from age 9 or 10 with no upper limit to, in developed countries, age 18 or 19 upward to a usual retirement age of from 55 to 65 . In developed countries the average retirement age is 55-65
 Data on female labour-force participation, particular, often lack comparability . Data on women's participation in the labour force often lack comparisonable data .
 Cultural bias favouring traditional roles for women results in the undercounting of economically active women . In many less developed countries, particularly those dominated by the Islamic faith .
 In other less developed countries, the role of women may be overstated . In other countries, particularly those in which subsistence workers are deemed economically active, women may not be economically active .
 The second major section of the table provides data on the distribution by economic sector of the economically active population . The table includes the distribution of economic activity by economic activity .
 The data usually include such groups as unpaid family workers, members of the armed forces, and the unemployed . The data is distributed by industry as far as possible .
 The categorization of industrial sectors is based on the divisions listed in the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities . The sectors are based on a number of industrial activities .
 The ‘other’ category includes persons whose activities were not adequately defined and the unemployed who were not distributable by industrial sector . The “other” category includes those whose activities have not been adequately defined .
 A substantial part of the data presented in this table is summarized from the online database of the ILO . The ILO compiles its statistics both from official publications and from information submitted directly by national census and labour authorities .
 Bolivia 3625 3.525 4525 4.325 9125 9125 8.825 4225 4 .125 7325 7.025 9625 9.325 40921,25 39.421,25 Bosnia and Herzegovina 59 10.325 4.525 4.
 China 99839 4.939 1,27139 6.239 4,97139 24.439 1,08739 5.339 15 15 4,57815,39 2.515, 39 57519, 39 2.819.515 . China 9
 Iraq 1997 4,75765 10.565, 42.565 42.97, 65 24.865 44.765 5.265 47766 11.666 43966 10.666 Ireland 2004 1,876 41.65, 41.666, 4.666
 Liechtenstein 2004 15.673 41.473, 73 45.623, 73 . Lithuania 200324 1,642 49.473 . Lithuania 3,642 .
 Montenegross Morocco 2002: 10,48253 24.853 54.57, 53 35.453 53.553 17.553 . Montenegro, Montenegro and Morocco have been at least one of the world's most populous countries .
 French Guiana 4.847 5.547 4.447 9.447 10.447 . French Polynesia 10 2.947 2.147 13.147, 47 French Polynesnesnesia 10 2,947 French Guiannesia 2,147 French
 Greece 1.94, 5.04, 5 7.94 and 5.54, 5 9.04 . Greenland 5.14,5, 5 1.04 and 5 2.24, 5 8.24 . Greece 5.74, 5 12.74 and 47.
 Jersey 71 5.735 8.835 1.435 2.435 . Japan 4.7 35 8.435 1.535 3 3 3.535 . Jersey 71 . 71.83, 35 52.03, 35 — — — Jersey .
 Malawi 90734 9.234 49634 5.034 2,11834 21.434 63934 6.534 15 15 15 1,82215.34 18.415,34 33421,34 3.421,34 Malaysia 3,421,
 Nepal 48534, 88 5.934, 8 6.834,88 2,04234, 88 24.9 34,88 5.519, 34, 88 The Netherlands, The 5.534 Nepal, 88 4.634 .
 Peru 2002 12,89253 42.053 72.653 48.253 56.253 40.253 - 38.253 38.835, 94, 95 . Philippines 2004 35,830 37.453 67.123 41.553 52.553 - 31,053
 St. Kitts and Nevis 1991 16.94 44.44 70.54 41.64 47.64 . 14.34 14.84 81.94 1.04 2.34 2.44, 45 14.74,45 1.74 and 45 10.54
 Paraguay 30877 3.777 36477 4.477 1,35277 16.377 19777 2.477 15 15 2,28715.77 27.615,77 — — Peru 1,654 4.77 . Paraguay is one of the most populous countries in
 Uganda 1,047 4.214 — — Uganda . Turkmenistan Tuvalu 13 13 . 14 14 14 . 14 . 1,55914 16.214 . — Uganda 1.047 4 .
 The FAO depends largely on questionnaires supplied to each country for its statistics . FAO makes estimates, using incomplete, unofficial, or other similarly limited data .
 FAO provides standardized guidelines upon which many nations have organized their data collection systems and methods . But persistent, often traditional, variations in standards in standards of coverage, methodology, and reporting periods reduce the comparability of statistics that can be supplied on such forms .
 FAO data are based on calendar-year periods; that is, that is the calendar year in which the harvest occurred . FAo data for any particular crop refer to the year of the harvest . FAO figures are published by the World Organization of Agriculture .
 World's agricultural production is probably more often underreported than overreported . Food shortages have been blamed for some of the world's most tragic food shortages .
 Some countries report only crops that are sold commercially and ignore subsistence crops produced for family or communal consumption . Others limit reporting to production for export only, to holdings above a certain size, or represent a sampling only .
 Methodological problems attach to much smaller elements of the agricultural whole, however, however . Methodological issues attach to some of the biggest problems in agriculture, such as agriculture .
 Some countries collect basic data they report to the FAO on sown or cultivated areas instead and calculate production statistics from estimates of yield . Some countries, however, collect the basic data and use it for production statistics .
 Millet and sorghum used primarily as livestock or poultry feed in many countries . Some countries use the same grains for human consumption and report them as cereals . Others use them as animal fodder only .
 FAO statistics include vegetables and melons grown for human consumption only . FAO vegetable statistics are based on vegetable and melon consumption only.
 Smallscale production may account for 20 to 40 percent of total output in certain countries . Some countries do not make this distinction in their reports . Some exclude the production of kitchen gardens and small family plots .
 Livestock statistics may be distorted by the timing of country reports . The timing of the country reports is often affected by the country's timing .
 Ireland, for example, takes a livestock enumeration in December that appears low against data for otherwise comparable countries because of slaughter and export of animals at the close of grazing season .
 It balances this, however, with a June enumeration, when numbers tend to be high . The June census is a good time to count the dead .
 Milk production as defined by the FAO includes whole fresh milk, excluding milk sucked by young animals . It includes amounts fed by farmers or ranchers to livestock but national practices vary .
 Certain countries do not distinguish between milk cows and other cattle, so that yield per dairy cow must be estimated .
 Some countries do not report egg production statistics . External estimates must be based on the numbers of chickens and reported or assumed egg-laying rates .
 Other countries report egg production by number, and this must be converted to weight . Conversion factors are specific to the makeup by species of national poultry flocks .
 Notes that follow, keyed by references in the table headings, provide further definitional information . Table headings provide further definitions of the events in the book .
 Most of the data and concepts used in this table are adapted from the United Nations’ Energy Statistics Yearbook . The table is based on the U.N.’s energy statistics yearbook .
 Total installed electrical power capacity comprises the sum of the rated power capacities of all main and auxiliary generators in a country . Total installed electricity power capacity is the total power capacity of a country with rated power capacity .
 Production of electricity comprises the total gross production of electricity by publicly or privately owned enterprises and also that generated by industrial establishments for their own use . Production excludes consumption by the utility itself .
 Annual production of electricity ranges generally between 50% and 60% of total production capacity . Measured in millions of kilowatt-hours (kWhr), annual production is generally 50% of the capacity .
 The great majority of the world’s electrical and other energy needs are met by the burning of fossil hydrocarbon solids, liquids, and gases, either for thermal generation of electricity or in . internal combustion engines .
 Many renewable and nontraditional sources of energy are still negligible in the world’s total energy consumption . Wood, biogenic gases and liquids, tidal, wave, and wind power are being developed worldwide .
 For this reason only hydroelectric and nuclear generation is considered separately with fossil fuels . Hydroelectric, nuclear generation are considered separately separately .
 Trade in electrical energy refers to the transfer of generated electrical output via an international grid . Trade in electricity is a transfer of electricity via the international grid to the power grid .
 Total electricity consumption (residential and nonresidential) is equal to total electricity requirements less transformation and distribution losses . Total electricity needs equal to the amount of electricity consumption less transformation, distribution losses less transformed and transformed .
 In this table, coal comprises all grades of anthracite, bituminous, subbituminous and lignite that have acquired or may in the future, by reason of new technology or changed market prices, acquire economic value .
 Coal may be differentiated according to heat content and content of impurities . These types of coal may be different from others depending on heat content .
 Most coal reserve data is based on proven recoverable recoverable reserves only, of all grades of coal . Most coal reserves are based on proved recoverable coal reserves .
 Exceptions are footnoted, with proven in-place reserves reported only when recoverable reserves are unknown . Exceptions only occur when recoveredable reserve is unknown .
 Production figures include deposits removed from both surface and underground workings as well as quantities used by the producers themselves or issued to miners .
 Wastes from mines or nearby preparation plants are excluded from production figures . Wastes recovered from mines and nearby plants are not included in the figures .
 This term refers to any combustible gas (usually chiefly methane) of natural origin from underground sources . Methane gas is a form of methane that is produced by underground sources in the United States .
 The data for production cover, to the extent possible, gas obtained from gas fields, petroleum fields, or coal mines that are actually collected and marketed . The data is based on data from the gas field, petroleum field and coal mines .
 Manufactured gas is generally a by-product of industrial operations such as refineries, gasworks, coke ovens, and blast furnaces . Manufactured natural gas is a mixture of natural gas and natural gas .
 It is usually burned at the point of production and rarely enters the marketplace . Rarely enters the market, it is often burned at point-of-production .
 Crude petroleum is the liquid product obtained from oil wells . The term also includes shale oil, tar sand extract, and field or lease condensate . Crude oil is a form of crude oil .
 Production and consumption and consumption per capita data in the table refer, so far as possible, to the same year so that the relationship between national production and consumption patterns can be clearly seen . Data are given in barrels.
 The published proven reserve figures do not necessarily reflect the true reserves of a country . Government authorities or corporations often have political or economic motives for withholding or altering such data .
 Estimated exhaustion rate of petroleum reserves is an extrapolated ratio of published proven reserves to the current rate of withdrawal/ production . The estimated exhaustion rate is based on published proven proven reserves .
 Present world published proven reserves will last about 40 to 45 years at the present rate of withdrawal, but there are large countryto-country variations above or below the average . The world's published proven proven reserves are estimated to last 40-45 years .
 Data on petroleum and gas pipelines are provided because of the great importance to both domestic and international energy markets of this means of bringing these energy sources from their production or transportation points to refineries, refineries and distribution points .
 The pipeline length for petroleum includes the combined total length for both crude and refined petroleum pipelines . Pipeline length for natural gas, condensate, and liquefied petroleum gas pipelines is included in the pipeline length .
 The source for these data was the latest edition of the CIA World Factbook . The data is based on the CIA's latest edition, the World Economic Forum's new book .
 Jamaica 1,469 11,808 7,217 98. H 791H 46,426H 348,982H 6,029H 3411 98H 24,289n Jamaica .
 The availability of information about these services often runs behind the capabilities of the services themselves . Unfortunately, the availability of this information is often limited to the capability of these services .
 Certain countries publish no official information; others publish data analyzed according to a variety of fiscal, calendar, religious, or other years . Still others, while they possess such data almost simultaneously with the end of the business or calendar year, may not see them published .
 Even when such data are published in national statistical summaries, it may be only after a delay of up to several years . The data may be published only after several years of publication .
 The figures include government publications, school texts, offprints, series works, and illustrated works, even those consisting principally of illustrations .
 A book is defined as a work of 49 or more pages . A work published simultaneously in more than one country is counted as having been published in each country .
 A periodical is a publication issued at regular or stated intervals and, in Unesco’s usage, directed to the general public . A periodico is a periodical published at regular intervals and directed to a public .
 Newspapers continually are founded, cease publication, merge, or change frequency of publication . Newspapers worldwide are founded and cease publication .
 Data on circulation are often incomplete, slow to be aggregated at the national level, or regarded as proprietary . Data is often incomplete or slow to collect at national level .
 Post office statistics are compiled mainly from the Universal Postal Union’s annual summary Statistique des services postaux .
 Some countries do not enumerate domestic traffic or may record only international traffic requiring handling charges . Some countries may not record domestic traffic .
 Data on mail traffic includes the number of copies of newspapers and excludes advertising material and ordinary money orders . Data is based on data from the U.S. Census Bureau, which shows that mail traffic is declining .
 Data for some kinds of telecommunications apparatus are relatively easy to collect . Telephones, for example, must be installed, and service recorded so that it may be charged .
 In most countries the other types of apparatus mentioned above may be purchased by anyone and used whenever desired . But in most countries it is not possible to buy such equipment .
 Data on distribution and use of these types of apparatus may be collected in a variety of ways . The data is collected on the basis of numbers of subscribers, licenses issued, sample surveys, trade data, census or housing surveys .
 Data on telephones refer to ‘main lines’ or the lines connecting a subscriber’s apparatus (fixed or mobile) to the public, switched net . Data on phones refers to “main lines,” or lines connecting subscribers’ apparatus to public .
 The Statistical Yearbook of Unesco contains extensive data on book, periodical, and newspaper publishing, and on television broadcasting that have been collected from standardized questionnaires .
 The quality and recency of its data, however, depend on the completion and timely return of each questionnaire by national authorities . The quality of the data is dependent on the accuracy and accuracy of each question .
 The commercially published annual World Radio TV Handbook is a valuable source of information on broadcast media and has complete and timely coverage . It is published by commercially published annually .
 It depends on data received from broadcasters, but some do not respond . Local correspondents and monitors are used in many countries . Unconfirmed or unofficial data is included as estimates .
 This table summarizes the basic indicators of health personnel, hospitals, by kind and utilization . It includes mortality rates that are most indicative of general health services . External controls on health (adequacy of food supply and availability of safe drinking water) Sources and amounts of expenditure on health care .
 Each datum refers more or less directly to the availability or use of a particular health service in a country . While each may be a representative measure at a national level, each may also conceal considerable differences in availability of the particular service to different segments of a population or regions of a country
 Limited financial resources at the national or local level may leave facilities underserved . Lack of good transportation may prevent those most in need from reaching a clinic or hospital .
 Definitions and limits of data have been made as consistent as possible in the compilation of this table .
 Organizations such as the World Health Organization try to maintain more specific international standards for training and qualification . For example, despite wide variation worldwide in the nature of the qualifying or certifying process that permits an individual to represent himself as a physician .
 Statistics for health personnel in this table uniformly include all those actually working in the health service field, whether in the actual provision of services or in teaching, administration, research, or other tasks . Statistics include those who work in the service field .
 Midwives are perhaps the largest and most important category of health auxiliary worldwide . Midwives represent, after nurses, perhaps the most important health auxiliary in the world .
 Hospitals worldwide differ considerably in terms of staffing and services . Hospitals also differ considerably worldwide in which they are different from hospitals .
 In this tabulation, the term hospital refers generally to a permanent facility offering inpatient services and/or nursing care and staffed by at least one physician . The term hospital is generally used to refer to permanent facilities that offer inpatient care and nursing care .
 Establishments offering only outpatient or custodial care are excluded from the list of establishments .
 These statistics are broken down into data for general hospitals, specialized facilities, local medical centres, and rural health-care centres . The last two generally refer to institutions that provide a more limited range of medical or nursing care, often less than full-time .
 Statistics on number of beds refer to beds that are maintained and staffed on a full-time basis for a succession of inpatients to whom care is provided . Inpatients are in the care of a number of patients at the hospital .
 Admission and discharge are the two principal points at which statistics are normally collected . Statistics are the basis for the data on the amount of care by kind of facility .
 The data on numbers of patients exclude babies born during a maternal confinement . The data includes persons who die before being discharged from the hospital . Data on numbers excludes babies born in maternal confinement, but include persons who are discharged .
 The bed-occupancy and average length-of-stay statistics depend on the concept of a “patient-day,” which is the annual total of daily censuses of inpatients . The average patient-day is a ‘patient day,’ which is
 The bed-occupancy rate is the ratio of total patient days to potential days based on the number of beds . The average lengthof-stay rate is based on total patient-days to total admissions . The length of a stay is the average length of stay rate .
 Bed-occupancy rates may exceed 100% because stays of partial days are counted as full days . Bed occupancy rates may be higher than 100% .
 Two measures that give health planners an excellent indication of the level of ordinary health care are those for mortality of children under age five and for maternal mortality . Two measures are important indicators of the quality of health care in the United States .
 The latter refers to deaths attributable to delivery or complications of pregnancy, childbirth, the puerperium , or abortion .
 Levels of nutrition and access to safe drinking water are two of the most basic limitations imposed by the physical environment in which health-care activities take place . Levels of food and water can be a limiting factor for health care workers .
 The nutritional data are based on reported levels of food supply, referred to the recommendations of the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization . Fewer calories are needed in a hot climate to remain in average good health .
 The range of deficiency is less dramatic numerically but far more critical to the countries in which deficiencies are chronic . The deficiencies lead to overall poor health (raising health service needs and costs), to decreased productivity in nearly every area of national economic life .
 By “safe” water is meant only water that has no substantial quantities of chemical or biological pollutants . By "safe" water, it means no significant quantities of pollutants sufficient to cause “immediate” health problems .
 Data refer to proportion of persons having “reasonable access to an “adequate” supply of water within a “convenient” distance of the person’s dwelling, as these concepts are interpreted locally . Data refers to the proportion of people having ‘reasonable
 The data were excerpted from a joint effort by the WHO and the World Bank to create better analytical tools by which the interrelations among health policy, health care delivery systems, and human health might be examined against the more general frameworks of government operations .
 Expenditures were tabulated for direct preventative and curative activities and for public health and public education programs having direct impact on health status . But not more indirect programs like environmental, waste removal, or relief activities .
 Public, parastatal , international aid, and household expenditure reports and surveys were used to build up a comprehensive picture of national, regional, and world patterns of health care expenditures and investment .
 For reasons of space, public and parastatal are combined as the former . Public and public are combined for space reasons of the former, for the first time in a row .
 A principal source for expenditures was the World Bank Group Statistical Database, which includes national statistics, UN databases, and World Bank surveys .
 Pakistan 2002 101,635 4,560 44,520 45,390 23,084 1,516 . 2003 5,496 -16.583.583 . Pakistan 2002: 4.560 44.520 45.390 . 2003: 3,496 .
 Zimbabwe includes Gaza Strip . Number of pharmacies includes pharmacies . Central Hospital only . Central hospital only .
 No well-accepted or well-documented body of statistical comparisons exists in international convention to permit objective assessment of any of these subjects, either from the perspective of a single country .
 The data provided within any single subject area do not represent the most consistent approach to problems of international comparison found in the published literature for that field .
 The provision of social security programs to answer specific social needs, for example, is summarized simply in terms of the existence or nonexistence of a specific type of benefit program . The complexity of national programs is the result of the great complexity of programs, such as eligibility, coverage, term,
 Activities connected to a particular type of benefit often take place at more than one governmental level . Activities connected with a particular kind of benefit may take place through more than a single agency at the same level .
 A bullet symbol indicates that a country has at least one program within the defined area . A circle indicates data is for 2007; in some cases it may have several programs . The bullet symbol is a bullet symbol .
 A blank space indicates that no program existed providing the benefit shown; . ellipses indicate that no information was available as to whether a program existed . ellipasses indicate no program was available for use .
 Data given for social security expenditure as a percentage of total central governmental expenditure are taken from the International Monetary Fund’s Government Finance Statistics Yearbook . The most comparable analytic series is based on the consolidated accounts of central governments .
 Data on the finances of social security programs are taken in large part from the International Labour Office’s The Cost of Social Security (triennial), supplemented by national data sources .
 Statistics are usually based on the number of offenses reported to police, not the amount of offenders apprehended or tried in courts . Statistics are often based on police reports, not on arrests or convictions .
 A person identified as having committed multiple offenses is counted only under the most serious offense . A person who commits multiple offenses can be counted as a person with multiple offenses .
 Murder refers to all acts involving the voluntary taking of life, including infanticide, but excluding abortion, or involuntary acts such as those normally classified as manslaughter . Infanticide is the most common form of murder in the world .
 Assault includes “serious,” or aggravated, assault involving injury, endangering life, or perpetrated with the use of a dangerous instrument . Assault includes serious, or aggravated assault, that involving injury or endangerment of life .
 Interpol statistics are reported as “breaking and entering,” but national data may not always distinguish cases of forcible entry . Burglary involves theft from the premises of another .
 Automobile theft excludes brief use of a car without the owner’s Social protection country social security programs available, 2007 or 2008 expendifinances . Afghanistan • • • 4.5% of the country's social security funds are from the U.S.
 Criminal offense data for certain countries refer to cases disposed of in court, rather than to complaints . Criminal offenses in certain countries are recorded in court cases, not in complaints .
 Police manpower figures refer to full-time, paid professional staff, excluding clerical support and volunteer staff . Figures refer, for the most part, to full time, paid professionals .
 Personnel in military service who perform police functions are presumed to be employed in their principal activity, military service . Personnel in the military service perform police duties in the UK .
 The figures for military manpower refer to full-time, active-duty military service and exclude reserve, militia, paramilitary, and similar organizations . The figures are based on full time, active duty military service .
 The data on military expenditures are from the SIPRI Military Expenditure Database and the IMF’s Government Finance Statistics Yearbook and country statistical publications .
 Programs providing cash payments for each of the three types of longterm benefit indicated to persons exceeding a specified working age who are qualified by a term of covered employment . Qualified by their status as spouse, cohabitant, or dependent minor of a qualified person who dies . Qualifying by
 Programs providing cash or medical services to employment-qualified persons who become temporarily or permanently incapacitated (fully or partially) by work-related injury or illness .
 Programs providing cash payments to families or mothers to mitigate the cost of raising children and to encourage the formation of larger families .
 A police officer is a full-time, paid professional, performing domestic security functions . Police officers perform domestic security duties in the United States .
 Data include administrative staff but exclude clerical employees, volunteers, and members of paramilitary groups . Data include clerical staff but excludes clerical workers, volunteers and paramilitary members .
 Includes active-duty personnel, regular and conscript, performing national security functions . Includes all active and regular military personnel, including conscripts and reservists . Includes active duty personnel and regular service members .
 Excludes reserves, paramilitary forces, border patrols, and gendarmeries . Crime and law enforcement military protection country offenses reported to police per population manpower, 2008 h expenditure, 2007 arms trade .
 Zambia O 9 O 1. 1. The Virgin Islands O O O West Bank Western Sahara Yemen Yemen Yemen — — — Zambia . The U.S. Virgin Islands .
 As of November 2008 United States and allied coalition forces numbered 143,000 and 6,500, respectively . United States military aid of U.S.$2 billion annually .
 Whenever possible, data referring to preprimary education programs have been excluded from this compilation . Preprimary education data has been excluded .
 These data are supplemented at each level by a figure for enrollment ratio, an indicator of each country’s achieved capability to educate the total number of children potentially educable in the age group .
 At the first and second levels this is given as a net enrollment ratio and at the third level as a gross enrollment ratio . At the second level this is based on the enrollment ratio of students in the United States .
 Data in this last group are confined to those who have completed their education and are no longer in school . Data is confined as far as possible to those with completed education .
 At each level of education, differences in national statistical practice, in national educational structure, public-private institutional mix, training and deployment of teachers contribute to the problems of comparability among national educational systems .
 Reporting the number of schools in a country is not simply a matter of counting permanent red-brick buildings with classrooms in them . It's not simply counting permanent buildings with classroom spaces, it's counting buildings in them.
 The resources of a less developed country are such that temporary or outdoor facilities are all that can be afforded, while in a developed but sparsely settled country students might have to travel 80 km a day to find a classroom with 20 students of the same age .
 Many at any level must work part-time, or that institutions in which they work may perform a mixture of functions that do not break down into a tidy categories . Such difficulties also limit the comparability of statistics on numbers of teachers, with the further complications that many at any levels must
 In certain countries teacher training is confined to higher education, in others as a vocational form of secondary training, and so on . In some countries it is a form of training that is limited to secondary education .
 For purposes of this table, teacher training at the secondary level has been treated as vocational education . For purposes, this table includes vocational education at secondary level .
 At the higher level, teacher training is classified as one more specialization in higher education itself . At the highest level, it is considered a teacher training specialization in education .
 Many countries have a primary system composed of grades 1 through 6 that passes students on to some kind of postprimary education . Many countries do, indeed, have primary systems that pass students through grade 6 .
 The difficulties are compounded when a country has instruction in more than one language or when its educational establishment is so small that higher, sometimes even secondary, education cannot take place within the country .
 Enrollment figures in this table may, therefore, include students enrolled outside the country . Students enrolled outside of the country may also be students in the UK .
 Student-teacher ratio usually provides a good measure of the ratio of trained educators to the enrolled educationable . Student teacher-student ratio is one of the highest in the country's schools .
 In general, primary and secondary students have been counted on the basis of full-time enrollment or employment . tertiary students and teachers have been . counted on . basis of both fulltime and part-time enrollments and employment .
 It is not always, however, the best indication of utilization of teaching staff and facilities .
 Utilization, provided here for higher education only, is best seen in gross enrollment ratio . Gross enrollment ratio compares total enrollment to population within the normal age limits for that level of college .
 Literacy data provided here have been compiled as far as possible from data for the population age 15 and over for the best comparability internationally . Literacy statistics provided here are compiled as well as possible .
 Standards as to what constitutes literacy may also differ markedly . Sometimes completion of a certain number of years of school is taken to constitute literacy . Others it may mean only the ability to read or write at a minimal level .
 When a country reports an official 100% literacy rate, it should usually be viewed with caution . Separate studies of ‘functional’ literacy for such a country may indicate 10%, 20%, or even higher rates of inability to read or write .
 UNESCO literacy estimates have been used for some of the least developed countries . UNESCO estimates are used in some countries where literacy is no longer perceived as a problem, thus no longer needed monitoring .
 Data provided for public expenditure on education are complete in that they include all levels of public expenditure (national, state, local) but incomplete for certain countries . In some countries this fraction of the educational establishment may be of a significant size .
 Occasionally data for external aid to education may be included in addition to domestic expenditure .
 Cote d’Ivoire 150,79221 11.621 8916 7,62216 100,29716 13.216 39 2,257 11.216 9,000 people .
 Yemen27 2002-03 11,01313 113,81218 2,950,403 72 1,2244 14,08318 1,364,129 34 1254 1,406 . Zambia 2002-2003 4,22121 36,151 1,731,
 Paraguay 270,5764 22.04 2,16111 57,87411 1,495,957H 25.8H 32 5,764 20.46 87.46 . Paraguay is the largest country in the world .
 Somalia 140,53113 13.013 2123 27,09913 617,89713 22.813 15 1,664 8.56 82.56 . Somalia is estimated to be the largest country in the world . Somalia has a history of piracy .
 Zimbabwe 26 data include Gaza Strip and West Bank . Public schools only used in 1999-2000 .
 The following list indicates the principal documentary sources used in the compilation of Britannica World Data . The list of documentary sources is compiled by Britannica's World Data database .
 It is by no means a complete list, either for international or for national sources, but is indicative more of the range of materials to which reference has been made in preparing this compilation .
 Uniform resource locators for mainly official sites have been added to both country statements and individual Comparative National Statistics tables . When a source providing comparable international data existed, these locators were added to the tables .
 Many sites exist that are narrower in coverage or less official and that may also serve the reader (on-line newspapers; full texts of national constitutions; business and bank sites) but space permitted for the top national and intergovernmental sites .
 Sites that are wholly or predominantly in a language other than English are identified . Sites that use English are so identified are identified by their language .
 Trade Yearbook; Yearbook of Forest Products; State of the World’s Forests 2003 . State of State of World's Forests: 2003 .
 Constitutions of the Countries of the World; Constituted of Dependencies and Territories . Constitution of the countries of the world . Constitutionutions of countries, territories, and countries .
 Industrial Commodities Statistics Yearbook . Energy Statistics and International Trade Statistics Yearbooks . Monthly Bulletin of Statistics; Statistical Yearbook. Industrial Statistics and Energy Statistics Year Books .
 American Samoa at a Glance’, Report on the State of the Island ( U.S. Department of the Interior ; 2000 Census of Population and Housing . American Samoa Statistical Yearbook. American Samoa .
 Statistical Appendix ; Statistical Yearbook; 2001 Population and Housing Census . 2001 Census . Census. Census. 2001 Census. Statistics. Census Yearbook . 2001 Population & Housing Census.
 Statistical Yearbook of the Argentine Republic; Censo nacional de poblacion, hogares, y vivienda 2001 . Statistical yearbook of Argentine Republic . 2001 .
 Census of Population and Housing 2000; Statistical Abstract; Quarterly Statistical Digest; Central Bank of the Bahamas Annual Report . Census of population and housing 2000; Census ofPopulation of Bahamas 2000; . Statistical Abstract ; Quarterly Statistical Digit; Quarterly Statistic Digest; .
 Bangladesh population Census, 2001; Statistical Yearbook of Bangladesh; Central Bank Annual Report . Bangladesh population census, 2001, Census of Bangladesh, 2001 . Bangladesh's Central Bank annual report: "Bangladesh is Bangladesh"
 Barbados Economic Report ; Monthly Digest of Statistics; Annual Statistical Digest; Central Bank Annual Report; Barbados Population and Housing Census 2000 . Barbados Census 2000: Barbados population, housing census 2000 .
 Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan is published by Bhutan Statistical Year Book . Population and Housing Census was conducted in Bhutan in 2005 . Population Census was published in 2005; population and housing Census in 2005 was recorded in 2006 .
 Annual Economic Report 2006: Overseas Trade Report 2006; Overseas trade Report 2006 . Labour Force Survey 2006: Employment Survey 2006. Annual Economic Survey 2006 . Overseas and Foreign Trade Report: 2006. Overseas Economy Report 2006.
 China Statistical Yearbook; 2000 Population Census of the People's Republic of China . 2000 population census of the country was held in 2000 . Census was conducted in China's capital, Beijing and Shanghai .
 Costa Rica at a Glance . IX censo nacional de poblacion y V de viviendas, 2000. Anuario estadistico .
 Monthly Statistical Review; Census of Population, Households and Dwellings 31st March 2001; Statistical Yearbook . Census of population, households and dwellings 31 March 2001 . Census Census Census 2001: Census Census, Census of populations, households, Dwellings and Dwelling .
 Central Bank Informe de la Economia Dominicana ; Cifras Dominic anas . Censo nacional de poblacion y vivienda, 2002. Central Bank informe of the economy .
 Monthly Bulletin of Statistics; Statistical Indicators about Egypt; Census Population, Housing, and Establishment, 2006; Statistical Yearbook . Census Population and Housing Census of Egypt, 2006, Census Population of Egypt .
 Monthly Bulletin of Estonian Statistics; 2000 Population and Housing Census; Statistical Yearbook of Estonia; The 2006 National Statistics. Monthly Bulletin . Estonian Census of Estonia in 2006 .
 Bulletin d’information statistique ; Annee 2006 des Resultats Mediocres . Annee des Resultsats Mediores. .
 Judaea, Samaria, and Gaza Area Statistics Quarterly . Statistics Quarterly; Palestinian Statistical Abstract.
 Statistisches Jahrbuch fur die Bundesrepublik Deutschland ; Germany Facts and Trends . Germany Facts & Trends .
 Statistical Appendix (IMF Staff Country Report ) ; 2001 Population and Housing Census . 2001 population and housing Census. 2001 population census. 2001 Population Census. Census Census.
 Banco de Guatemala Annual Report. Boletin estadistico . Anuario estadististica . Instituto nacional de Estadistica censos nationales . XI de poblacion y VI de habitacion . 2002; Banco of Guatemala Annual
 Census of population of Ireland, 2006; National Income and Expenditure ; Statistical Yearbook of Ireland . Census of Population of Ireland 2006 . National Income, Expenditure and National Income . Expenditure of Ireland in 2006 .
 Korea Statistical Yearbook; Social Indicators in Korea ; 2005 Population and Housing Census. 2005 Population & Housing Census . 2005 Population Census. Korea Statistics Yearbook . 2005 Census Census: South Korea .
 Statistical Appendix ; Statistichesky Yezhegodnik Kyrgyzstana (Statistical Yearbook of Kyrgygyzstan) Population Census 1999; Population census 1999 . Statistical Appendix . National Bank of the country Monthly Bulletin .
 Statistical Appendix ; Statistical Yearbook; 2006 Population Census; 2006 population Census . Central Bank Annual Report . Statistical Appendix . Statistical Year Book; 2006 Census Census; Central Bank annual Report .
 Chiffres-cles de Luxembourg (annual); Annuaire statistique; Bulletin du STATEC ; Bulletin du statEC ; Recensement general de la population du 15 fevrier 2001 . Luxembourg .
 Republica Moldova in Cifre ; Population Census 2004 . Population Census of Moldova, Moldova .
 Report to the Pyithu Hluttaw on the Financial, Social, and Economic Conditions for 20 ** ; Statistical Abstract ; 1983 Population Census . 1983 population Census. Report . Report .
 Statistical Yearbook of the Netherlands; Monthly Bulletin of Statistics of Statistics. Statistics of Netherlands . Statistics of the country's economic growth in the 1990s .
 Netherlands Antilles 2001 Census: Fourth Population and Housing Census Netherlands Antille 2001 . Census: Census of Netherlands Antylylvans Antilles . Census of Dutch Antilles: 2001 Census, 2001 Census of population, housing, employment, education, employment . Census also included: Fourth Census
 New Zealand Census of Population and Dwellings; New Zealand Official Yearbook. New Zealand.06 New Zealand census of population and Dwelling . Census of population in New Zealand was published by New Zealand's official yearbook.
 Folke-og boligtelling 2001 (Population and Housing Census); lndustristatistikk ; Statistical Yearbook of Norway; Statistical Year . of Norway . 2001 Census: Population, Housing Census, Census and Census .
 General Census of Population, Housing, and Establishments ; Statistical Yearbook; Bank of Oman Annual Report . General census of population, housing, and establishablishments .
 Pakistan Economic Survey ; Pakistan Statistical Yearbook; Population Census of Pakistan, 1998 . Economic Survey; Pakistan Economic Yearbook . Population Census: Pakistan Census, 1998. Economic Survey .
 Narodowy spis powszechny 2002 (National Population and Housing Census); Statistical Bulletin ; Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of Poland; Demographic Yearbook . 2001 . 2002 . National population and housing Census .
 Statistical Appendix (IMF Staff Country Report) ; 2001 Population Census . 2001 population Census. 2001 population census. 2001 Population Survey. 2001 Census Census.
 General Census of Housing and Inhabitants, 1994; Statistical Abstract ; Central Bank Quarterly Bulletin. General Census Of Housing and . Inhabits of housing and .
 Genel Niifus Sayimi (2000 Census of Population); Central Bank Quarterly Bulletin; Statistical Yearbook of Turkey. Turkey. 2000 Census of population . Central Bank quarterly Bulletin: Central Bank Weekly Bulletin .
 Tuvalu Country Profile 2003; Annual Statistical Report; 2002 Population and Housing Census; 2001 Population Census; 2002 population Census . Statistical Report 2005: Population, Housing Census, 2002 Population Census, 2001 Population Survey, 2001 Census, Census Report 2005 .
 Census 2001, Census 2001 and Census 2001; General Household Survey series . Monthly Bulletin of Statistics: Census 2001 . Census 2001 Census 2001. Census 2001 census 2001; Census 2001 ; Census 2001 survey. Census 2000 Census. Census. 2001 census. Census . Census 2000 census. census. 2001
 SIC-Based Products ; United States Imports: SICBased Products . Vital and Health Statistics: Vital, Health Statistics . 2000 Census of Population and Housing: 2000 census of population and Housing .
 Statistical Digest; 2000 Census of Population and Housing . 2000 census of population and housing . United States Virgin Islands Economic Indicators; United States . Virgin . Islands Economic Review and Industry Outlook .
 Population, Housing and Establishment Census — 1997; Palestinian Statistical Abstract. Population, . Housing and . Establishment Census . 1997 . Palestinian Statistics Abstract .
 For exam'pie, "military affairs" appeared every year from 2001 through 2010 . This indicates that military affairs appeared in the exam pie chart .
 References that appear with page number but without a year are references for the current yearbook . Other references that appear without page number are references to current yearbooks .
 Indented entries under a topic refer by page number to some other places in the yearbook text where the topic is discussed . Indented entry under topic refers to some of the topics discussed in the book . Indenting entries under topic refer to other places where the book was written .
 Names of people covered in biographies and obituaries are usually followed by the abbreviation ““” or """" with the year in dark type and page number in light type . Names of those covered include Jackman, Hugh 10:91, or Cronkite
 Samak Sundaravej died at the age of 53 . He was a member of the Samak family .
 DeLorean, John Zachary, Vine, Jr. and Brad Deloria are all named . Deloria, Vine and Delp are named for the late Air Lines, Inc. DeLorean .
 References giving only a page number in light type are for the current edition of this edition . References given only the page numbers in light form are for this edition of the book .
 Inarritu, Alejandro Gonzalez 08:84 incandescent lightbulb environment 235, i.84 incallistic lightbulbs . Gonzalez: "I'm not sure what's going to happen next"
 Kiribati 10:425; 09:424; 09 :424; 08:424 ; 07:420; 06:421; 05:423; 04:425, 03:456; 02:453; 01:455 see also world data on Kiribatis .
 United States election of 2008 (special report) 09:176 United States 482, il. U.S. 482 and il. 2,000 Americans voted for president in 2008 .
 References giving only a page number in light type are for the current edition . References showing only the page number are given for the purposes of this edition . The Radical Stronghold of European Muslims"" (Tom Gallagher)