 This documentary series will cover that crisis one day at a time, but first we’re releasing two preludes to the crisis to set the stage . The documentary series is set to cover the crisis in the United States .
 Never before and never since has that possibility of our world being suddenly destroyed been so close . Never before, never since, has the possibility of a world suddenly destroyed being so close.
 To understand the Crisis, we first have to look at where the two superpowers stand in 1962 . The Crisis is the result of a crisis between the U.S. and Russia .
 The capitalist and communist systems have been in opposition from the day the Bolsheviks seized power in Russia after the 1917 Revolutions . Capitalism and communism have been opposed to each other since 1917 .
 The Soviets see the Capitalist system as a scourge of humanity that needed to be eliminated . The Soviets believe that the capitalist system is a scourge that needs to be eradicated .
 On the American side, the communist system is seen as a direct threat to the American way of life . On the U.S. side, it is considered a threat to American life .
 The persecution of communists in the states during the cold war and McCarthyism are well known, but this started already in the 1920s with the Red Scare . Thousands of American communists were prosecuted and even exiled for their political beliefs .
 The hatchet was briefly buried when the two became allies against Germany in the Second World War . But it was dug up as that war ended, and in 1962 it is unclear which ideology will prevail .
 The western world, led by the U.S., is establishing a system of more or less free trade and alliances based on independence, inclusion, and personal freedoms . Western world is establishing more or more free trade, alliances, based on freedom .
 The communist world, led by the Soviet Union, is developing a system of planned economy and regulated trade . It depends on expanding the communist system to client states under Soviet or Chinese control .
 As WWII ended, many of the Eastern and Central European countries that had been invaded by Germany and then liberated by Russia’s Red Army fell under Soviet control .
 The Soviets also kept control of East Germany when Germany was split into east and west, but this was only the beginning of Soviet expansion . The Soviets kept control when the country was divided into two countries .
 The Soviet Union theoretically strives for a world without borders, controlled by the dictatorship of the proletariat . Under Communist doctrine, the Soviet Union is supposed to be a socialist state .
 To achieve this, it seeds and supports communist revolutions wherever possible, it aims to achieve this . To achieve it, it seed and supports communists wherever possible .
 The United States began a policy of global containment, supporting and financing anti-communist movements in Europe, Africa and Latin America . This is a direct threat to the democratic principles of much of the western world, so the U.S. began supporting and supporting anti-Communist movements
 This is an expansion of the Monroe Doctrine from the 1800s, named after President James Monroe, which says that any European Colonialism in the Americas will be actively opposed by the U.S. The United States will actively oppose any European colonialism .
 This web of principles and theories brings the two superpowers into direct conflict all over the world . It provides the basis for the basis on which the Cold War would be fought .
 It leads to a long series of proxy wars, covert operations of influence, and the fanning of regional conflicts to further the interests of each side, says the author of the book . "It leads to proxy wars and covert operations," he says .
 In early 1948, the western Allies introduce the new Deutschmark as the currency in Berlin . The first major confrontations arise when the democracy in Czechoslovakia is overthrown .
 The introduction of a new currency is a direct threat to Soviet economic control over the city . New currency introduced by the Soviet Union is a threat to economic control .
 President Harry Truman and the US had not decided what to do with Berlin . They weren't even sure if they would keep armed forces within the city . Up to then, the US hadn't even decided whether to keep military forces in Berlin .
 Josef Stalin wanted to keep control of all of East Germany, including Berlin, and milk it for as many resources as possible . Stalin's gang would keep control over all of the East Germany and milk the resources it had .
 They had, in fact, managed to turn their zone’s population against them, by plundering industrial resources, forcibly deporting workers, and even transporting whole factories to Russian territory . They had also managed to . to plunder industrial resources and forcibly . deporting . workers, forcibly
 Everyone is striving for a reunited Germany with Berlin as its capital . France and Great Britain, for their part, are staunchly opposed to a Soviet Berlin . The U.S. and Britain pressure the United States to hold out against Russia .
 Stalin orders a full blockade of the city, so that no food, materials, or supplies can be brought in . In an attempt to stop the Deutschmark, Stalin orders the city to be closed .
 Allies respond by creating an air bridge into the city, flying in enough food and materials to keep the city alive . The Allies respond to the situation by flying in food and other materials to help .
 The Berlin Airlift eventually brings in so many supplies that Stalin gives up . The blockade is practically over by May 1949, though officially its lifted in September . Both sides move to assert their control over Germany .
 Federal Republic of Germany is created as a democratic state on May 5, 1949 . First, the Federal Republic is created in 1949 . Germany is the first democratic state of Germany .
 The East German Communist party proclaims the German Democratic Republic on October 7th . Despite its name, the state was a satellite state to the Soviet Union .
 With all of this, the threat that the Soviet Union is to the West is now tangible and immediate . The threat is tangible, and immediate, according to CNN.com's John Sutter .
 NATO was a bulwark against Soviet expansion . It brings the western Allies closer together and they create the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . NATO was created in 1953 .
 Korea has been split into the North under Soviet control and the South under US control . Both claim sovereignty over each other’s territory . After being being liberated from Japan during WWII, Korea was divided into two countries .
 The attempt to create two independent states fails in 1950 when the North invades the South and The Korean War breaks out . The North invaded the South in the 1950s and the Korean War broke out .
 A large part of the rest of the world unites in defense of the South, in a combined intervention under the United Nations flag . The Soviets and Chinese back the North, while the Soviets and China back the South .
 The war even actually sees direct battle between Russians and Americans as Soviet airmen fight their U.S. Air Force counterparts in the Korean skies . The war actually actually saw direct battle .
 Three years of bloody war end with a divided Korea along the line of the DMZ . Not too different from the straight division along the 38th Parallel where they had begun in 1950 .
 The conflict around West and East Germany continues to escalate . Meanwhile in Europe, the conflict around East and West Germany is escalating .
 West Germany refuses, fearing the Soviets will not stick to their promises of allowing the new country independence . West Germany fears they will not be allowed to leave the Soviet Union .
 To what extent the proposal actually comes from the Soviets or is a real East German initiative, is still an issue of debate . If so it is a missed opportunity for genuine reunification, it is still a debate .
 After Stalin’s death in 1953, the Soviet Union propose that it too should join NATO to preserve peace in Europe . The Soviet Union proposed to join NATO in 1953 after Stalin died in 1953 .
 The United States and U.K. reject this, seeing it as an attempt to stop the buildup of NATO forces in Europe . The U.S. and UK see this as a bid to stop NATO forces .
 The Soviet reaction is to form the Warsaw Pact in 1955 . Instead of joining NATO, they move to include West Germany in NATO . The Warsaw Pact was formed in 1955 after West Germany joined NATO .
 This effectively joins the Soviet Union and seven central and eastern European satellite states into a single cohesive military force . The Soviet Union joins seven eastern and central European states in a single unified force .
 On paper the two blocks are now in a balance of power state, but only if you don't consider the nuclear arms race . The two blocks now sit on top of the world's most powerful nuclear powers .
 The Soviets had already begun developing nuclear arms during WWII, but it would take until 1949 for them to develop a functional atom bomb to test . The Soviets would not be able to test their first atomic bomb until after 1949 .
 The U.S. increases its nuclear program from an estimated 13 warheads in 1947 to 2,422 by 1955 . The United States is well aware of Soviet efforts, and in response increases its nukes .
 By the time John F Kennedy is inaugurated as president in 1961, the U.S. has an estimated 22,229 operational warheads . The Soviets possess just 2,492 operational warheads while the United States possess 22,230 .
 Russia has no realistic chance of launching a first strike that would lead to immediate self-destruction . The deployment systems of the US are so much more advanced, that the Russians would not launch a strike . Furthermore, the US deployment systems are so advanced that the Russian forces have no realistic
 JFK knows this, the by now sole leader of the Soviet Union Nikita Khrushchev knows this . The KGB and the CIA know this, but the American and Soviet public do not, and this will prove crucial .
 In Asia, Latin America, Africa, and Europe, the dance of revolutionary and counter-revolutionary actions goes on . Meanwhile, in Asia and Latin America,. Africa, Europe, and Asia, the dances of revolutionary . actions go on .
 Developments in Southeast Asia in the 1950s lead to the Domino Theory, formulated by President Dwight Eisenhower in 1954 . President Eisenhower said in 1954 that the domino theory was formed by President Eisenhower in 1953 .
 It states that if one country in a region is allowed to fall to communism, then the rest will swiftly follow . It says if one nation falls to communism then the whole region will do so .
 The Laotian Civil War is a proxy war that neither the Soviets nor the U.S. are really keen on fighting, but still have to stay engaged in . Neither the Soviet nor the United States are really interested in fighting the civil war .
 Domino Theory predicts that Vietnam War will reignite Korean War in 1953 . Vietnam War begins two years later, which in turn will partly reignite the Korean War . That war breaks out in 1953, but will soon spill into the Vietnam War, which begins in 1961 .
 After New Year’s 1959, Fidel Castro unexpectedly succeeds with the Cuban Revolution, the U.S. thinks it has all the reason in the world to fear a communist surge in its own back yard . The United States thinks it needs to be stopped as swiftly as possible .
 Western Powers under U.S. leadership have more money than the Soviet Union, more resources, and more resources . They out-power it in nuclear arms by a factor of ten . The West has more money, resources and nuclear arms than the Soviets .
 Both sides are capable of destroying the world, and yet both sides can destroy the world . The 1960s are about to begin, with them facing each other ever more warily, over a world ever more divided in two .
 I mentioned Stalin’s death, but if you want to see his rise to power you can click here for out B2W episode about that . Click here to read the full transcript of the B2 W interview .
 The latest episode of TimeGhost’s latest series, The Game of Thrones . Episode 1 is a look at some of the most recent moments in the series .