 It began on October 15, 1962, a day after a U-2 spy-plane discovered Soviet nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba . The U.2 spy plane discovered the missiles a day later .
 13 days of chaos had the entire world on its toes, as aggression on the part of either the U.S. or the Soviet would have flared into a full-fledged world war . This time around there was a lot more at stake, as nuclear weapons had made their way into
 In 1962, the Soviet Union orchestrated Operation Anadyr, and covertly placed nuclear-armed missiles in communist-led Cuba . The Soviet Union placed the missiles in Cuba in the garb of empowering them to defend themselves .
 Their main objective was to keep the U.S. in check, so as to ensure that it would not interfere in their attempt to force West Berlin to join East Germany .
 The U.S. helped Cuba reduce the gap with the United States in terms of nuclear arsenal . Besides, it was also important to protect Cuba from American invasion, he says .
 As part of Operation Anadyr, the Soviet Union deployed SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . The missiles had a range of 1,266 miles, and were deployed in Cuba as part of the operation .
 The nuclear warhead used in these missiles were 60 times more destructive than the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima . The warhead was 60 times the size of the Hiroshima nuclear bomb .
 Soviet commander had the authority to launch them at his discretion without seeking permission from Moscow . While not as powerful as the MRBMs, the deployment of these weapons was a cause of worry .
 It was the photographic evidence of ballistic missile facilities in Cuba that set the ball rolling for the U.S. It was collected on October 14, 2013 .
 Ironically, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev had dismissed him as too liberal to fight . Ironically, he had been dismissed by Nikita as too conservative to fight in the Soviet Union .
 The Executive Committee of the National Security Council was formed to serve as an advisory council to the President . The committee was formed in 2003 .
 Most members of EXCOMM were in favor of a military strike to destroy the ballistic missile facilities in Cuba before the missiles became operational . Most of the ex-EXCOMM members wanted a strike before the missile facilities became operational in Cuba .
 President Kennedy quarantined Cuba to prevent the installation of nuclear missiles . President Kennedy decided to quarantine Cuba after deliberating over the issue . The quarantine was designed to prevent installation of nukes .
 The word 'quarantine' was used instead of 'blockade', as the latter amounted to an act of war, as per international law . The word was used as a word of quarantine, instead of a declaration of war .
 The quarantine of Cuba did not diffuse the crisis per se, it did give the U.S. enough time to deliberate further course of action .
 The United States was to assure that it would never invade Cuba, and withdraw its missiles deployed in Turkey within six months if the Soviet Union was to pull its missiles from Cuba immediately . The deal was made with the United States to assure the U.S. never invaded Cuba .
 The withdrawal of missiles from Turkey was kept a secret, as the U.S. feared that it would lead to political embarrassment . The withdrawal was kept secret as the United States feared it would be embarrassing .
 The offer was accompanied by a thinly veiled threat, that the United States would attack Cuba within 24 hours if the same was rejected . The U.S. offered the same offer, accompanied by the threat of attacking Cuba .
 Some historians believe that it was this threat that worked in the U.S. favor, as it was unlikely that Khrushchev would have risked a war . Some historians say that this worked in favor of the United States .
 On October 28, Khrushchev accepted the deal, and announced that the Soviet Union would withdraw their missiles from Cuba with immediate effect . The Soviet Union withdrew its missiles from the Cuban territory with the end of October 28 .
 Even after the crisis was over, the quarantine of Cuba continued for a considerable time . The United States kept a close watch on the region to ensure that the missiles were dismantled and sent back to the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev thought the assurances he got from the U.S. of never invading Cuba and withdrawing missiles from Turkey came as significant concessions . The assurances he received from the United States were significant concessions, he says .