 No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, or otherwise, without permission in writing from the publisher .
 The assassination of President John Kennedy is easily the greatest whodunit murder mystery of the twentieth century . You have put your finger on it. —Warren Commission Executive session, Jan., 1964 .
 JFK, a young and beloved president, was cruelly and brutally gunned down at half-past noon at his wife’s side . JFK was a young, beloved president . He was shot and killed by his wife at the side of his wife .
 Zapruder film was suppressed from full public viewing for more than a decade . The images of his murder, captured that day in Dealey Plaza by dozens of amateur photographers, were so horrific that many of them were suppressed from public viewing .
 Camelot, the magic of the JFK administration, was destroyed in the span of less than ten seconds . Camelot was destroyed by the collapse of the Kennedy administration .
 The presumed assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, was identified in the first hour after the shooting . Oswald was the presumed assassin of President Lincoln Lincoln Lincoln .
 Dallas Police found him hiding in a dark movie theater, sitting alone, with his .38 snub-nose revolver in his belt . He was found by police less than an hour later .
 Oswald punched McDonald between the eyes with his left fist . McDonald reached for Oswald’s right wrist, then punched him in the face . McDonald was shot in the head with his right fist .
 Oswald drew a .38 out of his belt after McDonald hit him back, and in the ensuing scuffle, Oswald drew the .38 from his belt . McDonald hit Oswald back, drawing Oswald's gun .
 The gun misfired, and in the course of grappling with Oswald, McDonald suffered a pronounced four-inch scratch . McDonald suffered the scratch, from the corner of his eye down to the comer of his mouth .
 Oswald turned out to be a loner who moved to Russia intending to give up his U.S. citizenship . Oswald moved to the Russian republic intending to leave the United States for Russia . Oswald was born in New York City, New York, but later moved to Moscow .
 In Russia, he acquired a Russian bride and became a self-professed Marxist . He acquired a bride and later married a Russian woman .
 Oswald brought back his Russian wife, Marina, and their first child, June Lee . When he returned from Russia, Oswald brought her back with his wife and their daughter . June Lee was June Lee, the daughter of Oswald and Marina .
 Oswald had a history of living alone . Even with his family in the United States, Oswald lived alone . Oswald's family was not in the U.S.
 Oswald was living in a rooming house at the time of the assassination, while his wife and daughter were rooming with a Russian speaking acquaintance, Ruth Paine .
 Marina gave birth to their second daughter, Audrey Marina Rachel Oswald, approximately one month before JFK assassination . Four days later, on October 20, 1963, she gave birth .
 JFK assassination was a watershed event in U.S. history . Truly, the JFK assassination is a watershed .
 The innocence of the postwar prosperity and optimism of the Eisenhower years died for good . The instant rifle fire broke out on that sunny November day in Dallas, Texas, was a disaster .
 President Lyndon Baines Johnson was sworn into office before Air Force One departed Dallas that day for Washington . Johnson was the first president to be sworn in to office .
 After JFK’s death Johnson led the nation into the dark days of Vietnam . Johnson declared the necessity of a war JFK had already decided to abandon .
 The 1960s, after JEK’s death, was marked by antiwar protests, urban racial riots, the feminist revolution and the rise of a new sexuality . It was also marked by an upheaval in economics and politics that questioned whether the United States could provide social and economic
 Warren Commission delivered its final report to President Johnson on September 24, 1964 . Critics began to raise serious considerations that the Commission was a whitewash .
 The Warren Commission was not unanimous in its conclusion Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin . The commission concluded that Oswald was not the only one to blame .
 U.S. Senator Richard Russell Jr. led a group of three dissenting members of the Warren Commission on September 18, 1964 . Russell was a Democrat, a Democrat and member of the Commission .
 Rep. John Sherman Cooper, a Republican from Kentucky with a reputation for his independent views, is running for the Senate . Rep. Sherman Cooper is a Democrat from Kentucky and Rep. Cooper is an independent Republican . Cooper and Cooper are both Republicans from Kentucky .
 Hale Boggs was a Democrat from Louisiana who was then serving as majority whip of the United States House of Representatives . He was a member of the Louisiana Democratic Party . Hale was the House's majority whip .
 Supreme Court Justice Earl Warren insisted the final report needed to be unanimous . The dissenters accepted the report with minor changes, but only after Warren insisted it was unanimous . Justice Warren insisted that the report was unanimous and the dissenters accept the report .
 Russell was shocked to find out that of the 13 executive sessions held by the Warren Commission, the one where the objections were made was the only session that had not been transcribed . Russell: Of the 13 sessions held, the only one was not transcribed. Russell: "Of the
 Minutes of the meeting left out any mention of the disagreement . Instead, all that was published were brief minutes .
 Russell again proclaimed his doubts about the Warren Commission’s conclusion . Russell died less than a year before his death in 1970 .
 In a 2003 Gallup poll three-quarters of Americans said they believed Lee Harvey Oswald did not act alone . 75 percent of Americans believe Oswald acted alone, poll shows .
 Fifty years after the assassination, the CIA and other U.S. agencies continue to lock away hundreds of thousands of documents in secret files . Despite repeated efforts by the United States Congress to force full disclosure, despite repeated efforts .
 To maintain the shroud of secrecy over the JFK assassination a half-century after the event is a disgrace for a nation that proclaims values of truth and justice . JFK assassination is still shrouded in secrecy, a disgrace to a nation .
 In 2013 the government continues to suppress key documents regarding the JFK assassination, which reinforces the suspicion that there remains some deep, dark, disturbing truth that would be more than the American people could handle .
 JFK died along with JFK in the streets of Dallas on November 22, 1963 . Truthfully, the innocence of accepting government at face value died . "It's a sign that government is not going to be fooled by the people in Dallas, Texas," says author .
 A nation committed to a robust First Amendment would welcome the challenge of contesting competing versions of history . Evidence abounds that Lee Harvey Oswald was not a lone-nut assassin, but a highly complicated young man with tentacles that reached into the CIA, the FBI, and Navy Intelligence .
 JFK assassination may endure as a perpetual mystery of American politics . The JFK assassination, as is the case with the Lincoln assassination, may endure forever as a mystery of politics .
 Each generation sees the trauma through the lens of their particular experience with politics . Each generation remains fascinated with the enigma of the political world .
 "This book begins where all good murder investigations should begin, namely, with an investigation of the ballistics evidence," author says .
 A careful examination of the ballistics evidence makes clear a lone-assassin cannot account for all the bullet damage that occurred that day . The point of the first chapter is that a single-assassassin can't account for the damage .
 After fifty years of continuing controversy, no book could possibly cover every aspect of the JFK assassination . The JFK assassination is still controversial and controversial .
 The investigation of JFK assassination is more than an attempt to find the shooters, it says . Instead it seeks to communicate that the investigation of the JFK assassination was more than a search for the shooters .
 It is an attempt to plumb the motivation of the guilty parties, regardless of how high up the suspicion goes . It is a bid to find out what the motivation is behind the murder of the suspects .
 JFK was shot to death so LBJ could be placed in the White House . JFK was assassinated by LBJ in order to keep LBJ from becoming president . JFK's assassination was a major political assassination of LBJ's presidency .
 The inquiry must probe who were the forces higher up that organized the conspiracy and why did they want JFK murdered . To be successful, the inquiry must look at who was behind the conspiracy .
 A week after the assassination, FBI chief J Edgar Hoover told President Lyndon Johnson that three shots were fired, with two hitting JFK and a separate shot hitting Governor John Connally . But on the Life blowups, I saw for the first time enough evidence to prove that Connally had not
 Hoover did not imagine one shot had missed . Hoover: "I don't think one shot has missed. It's a miracle"
 Hoover identified incorrectly the bullet the Warren Commission later was to designate as the single bullet that hit both JFK and Connally . More important, Hoover rushed to identify incorrectly the . bullet . The bullet was to be designated as the one that hit Connally.
 Hoover told LBJ, “one complete bullet rolled out of the President’s head,” after the bullet destroyed much of JFK's head on impact . Hoover said LBJ was killed by the bullet that hit JFK in the head .
 A nearly pristine bullet was important in the process of framing Lee Harvey Oswald as the assassin . But somehow, from the very beginning of the investigation into the assassination, it was important to find the bullet . The bullet was found in a nearly pristine piece of evidence .
 Life Magazine writer Paul Mandel published an article in the December 6, 1963 issue, in which he asked questions that ultimately led to the conclusion of a conspiracy . Only days after the assassination, Mandel wrote an article about the assassination .
 Mandel makes people aware that JFK’s neck wound was an entry wound . Perhaps most important, Mandel reminds people that JFK was shot in the neck .
 There was a second sniper somewhere else in the U.S. sniper ring, but it's not clear if there was another sniper .
 8 mm video shows President turning his body far around to the right as he waves to someone in the crowd . The 8 mm footage shows the President turning around to a far right, but the President turns his body around to wave .
 Life had purchased the exclusive rights to the Zapruder film and did not make it available to the public, so Mandel’s claim had to be taken at face value . Life did not release the film for the public .
 In a special memorial issue that Life published in the days after the assassination, the editors chose to show some of the stills from the film .
 Mandel assumed only three bullets were fired and that a separate bullet hit JFK and Connally . Mandel also assumed that only three bullet shots were fired . He also assumed only a single bullet hit Connally and JFK .
 All three bullets have been recovered — one deformed, from the floor of the limousine; one from the stretcher that carried the President; one that entered the President’s body . One deformed bullet was recovered; one entered the body of the President .
 The truth is that no bullet was found in the limousine and no bullet recovered from the president’s body, the president's body . No bullet was recovered from President Barack Obama's body, he said . The president was shot in the head by a police officer, a
 The bullet that was found at Parkland Hospital, marked Warren Commission Exhibit 399, was found on a stretcher . There is no evidence President Kennedy’s body was ever placed on that stretcher. The bullet was found in the hospital .
 Mandel assumed the first bullet struck JFK, the second bullet struck Connally, and the third bullet was the fatal headshot . JFK was mortally wounded at Zapruder frame 313 .
 Information was being fed to credible journalists like Mandel at Life to refute the physical evidence observed by the physicians who treated JFK at Parkland Hospital .
 James Tague, a witness to the assassination, was hit in the cheek by a ricochet from a missed shot . The FBI's official theory remained that three bullets had been fired, with two hitting Kennedy and one hitting Connally .
 On July 23, 1964, Warren Commission counsel Wesley J Liebeler took Tague’s testimony in Dallas . Tague testified before the Warren Commission in 1964 .
 As the motorcade passed through Dealey Plaza, Tague was standing on the far side of the triple underpass by the bridge abatement .
 He ducked behind the bridge abatement to hide behind a bridge . When he realized what he first heard as firecrackers were actually gunshots, he ducked to hide .
 The deputy sheriff was in civilian clothes at the time of the incident . The sheriff was a deputy sheriff, but he was not in uniform .
 The same day, Liebeler took the testimony of Dallas County Deputy Sheriff Eddy Raymond Walthers who confirmed Tague’s story . Tague was found dead in a Dallas County Sheriff's office .
 Walthers remembered a man who claimed he was struck by something on the face during the shooting in Dealey Plaza . Tague's name was not released, but Walther said he had been struck in the face by something .
 Tague was not sure which shot resulted in ricochet that hit him . He believed it was the second or third shot, not the first . Tague said he was hit by a ricochet .
 The Warren Commission’s final report conceded that one shot missed, although the report equivocated over whether the missed shot was the first or the second .
 Commission implied a single bullet had to have been responsible for both JFK and Connally . Tague was hit by a stray bullet .
 The alternative was to argue a bullet fragment had hit Tague, most likely from the third shot that hit JFK’s head . Tague had been hit by a fragment from the bullet fragment .
 The markings the bullet left on the pavement prior to ricocheting to hit Tague made it unlikely that Tague was hit by a bullet fragment . But the markings on Tague's pavement make it unlikely the bullet fragment hit him .
 The only room for doubt left was whether the first shot had missed, or the second, the Warren Commission’s conclusion . The Warren Commission concluded that the only room left for doubt was whether it had missed or missed .
 The Warren Commission was stuck attributing all the damage done to JFK and Connally to two bullets . But either way, the Warren Commission is stuck to attributing the damage .
 The pristine bullet J Edgar Hoover had discussed with LBJ in the immediate aftermath of the assassination came in handy . Hoover had a pristine bullet that he had talked about with the president .
 Warren Commission junior counsel Arlen Specter crafted the pristine bullet into the single bullet that hit both JFK and Connally . Specter cleverly decided to craft the bullet into a single bullet .
 If a first shot missed, Specter reasoned that was the shot that ricocheted to hit Tague, with the second shot hitting both JFK and Connally . The third shot was the head shot that killed JFK at Zapruder frame 313 .
 The first shot may have hit both JFK and Connally, with the second shot ricocheting to hit Tague, and the third shot being the head shot that killed JFK at Zapruder frame 313 .
 The pristine bullet Hoover discussed became the ‘single bullet’ of the Specter theory . Either way, the pristine bullet was the "single bullet" of the theory .
 Doubters quickly characterized Specter’s single bullet as the “magic bullet” that injured two adult men . The theory quickly raised eyebrows from those experienced with firearms . Specter's single bullet emerged from Connally's body in pristine condition, raising eyebrows .
 Key to the Warren Commission’s conclusion that a lone shooter was responsible for killing JFK is what has become known as the “magic bullet . A pristine bullet identified as Commission Exhibit 399, or CE399 for short .
 The bullet was found on a stretcher at Parkland Hospital in the first hour after JFK was admitted for treatment . Ballistics linked it to having been fired from Oswald’s Mannlicher-Carcano rifle .
 The precise stretcher on which the bullet was found is not certain, and because Parkland Hospital employees who found the bullet were unable to identify with certainty that it was the CE399 bullet .
 As a footnote, without explanation the Warren Commission dropped Hoover’s suggestion the pristine bullet had fallen on a stretcher as a result of massaging JFK's heart on the way to the hospital . Hoover's suggestion that JFK's bullet fell on the stretcher was dropped .
 Jackie Kennedy and a brain-dead JFK remained in the back seat of the limo on the way to the hospital . No one massaged JFK’s heart. JFK's heart was massaged .
 Specter: If the pristine bullet remained in JFK’s body, then it couldn’t have been the single bullet that hit both JFK and Connally . And second, Specter had to dismiss the idea the . pristine bullet dropped from JFK's body because if the .
 Commission never seems to have considered the possibility the bullet was planted . Commission never seemed to consider the possibility of planting the bullet .
 If this possibility had been considered, then the Commission might have realized that some of the evidence might be ‘fake” and could have been deliberately faked . The Commission may have considered that evidence might have been faked .
 At the time when the planting could have been done, it was not known if any other ballistics evidence survived the shooting .
 In the process of arranging the stretchers to allow someone to use a restroom along the wall, Tomlinson bumped the wall with the stretcher he took off the elevator .
 Tomlinson assumed the bullet had been lodged under the edge of a mat on top of the stretcher . Tomlins assumed it was lodged under edge of the mat .
 Specter was unable to establish that the bullet was found on the stretcher Tomlinson rode with in the elevator . Despite repeated attempts, Specter could not establish where the bullet may have come from .
 Tomlinson testified the bullet came from the stretcher already in the hall on the ground floor . Specter said the bullet was in the same stretcher he found in the elevator when he entered . The bullet was found in a stretcher that was already on the floor .
 Tomlinson’s testimony even weaker, at no point did Specter show him a photograph of the bullet he found on the stretcher at Parkland Hospital . At no point Specter showed him CE399, or a photograph, to ask him if it was the bullet .
 Interview under oath ended without Tomlinson making a positive ID of CE399 as the bullet he found . Just to be clear, the interview under oath ends without an ID .
 Security director for Dallas County Hospital District is a former detective with the Dallas Police Department . He is the personnel director of security for the district .
 Commission Exhibit 1024, CE1024 for short, is a note from FBI Special Agent E Johnson, dated 7:30 m.m. on November 22, 1963 . The note is dated November 22 .
 The attached expended bullet was received by me about 5 min. prior to Mrs. Smith's death . Mrs Smith was shot in the head with a bullet that struck her .
 It was found on one of the stretchers located in the emergency ward of the hospital . It is found on a stretcher located in an emergency ward .
 Also on this same stretcher was rubber gloves, a stethoscope and other doctor’s paraphernalia . Also on the stretcher were rubber gloves and other medical supplies .
 It could not be determined who had used this stretcher or if President Kennedy had occupied it . It was not known if the stretcher was used by President Kennedy .
 An exhaustive search of the documentary record failed to produce any photograph of the bullet found on the stretcher before the FBI removed the bullet from Parkland Hospital .
 FBI Special Agent Johnson made no note of the two bloody sheets Tomlinson noticed on the stretcher he found in the hall on the ground floor . The FBI agent found the bloody sheets on a stretcher on the floor .
 On June 12, 1964, FBI Special Agent Bardwell Odum showed Tomlinson and Wright CE399 and both stated that while the bullet looked like the bullet . Both said they did not positively identify CE399 as the bullet they found on the stretcher .
 Wright told Josiah Thompson, author of the 1967 book Six Seconds in Dallas, that the bullet Tomlinson found on the stretcher on November 22, 1963, had a pointed tip . Wright told Thompson that the pointed tip of the bullet did not meet the description of the rounded tip
 Wright reached into his desk and produced a pointed .30 caliber round he claimed looked like the bullet Tomlinson found . Wright reached in his desk to produce the bullet he claimed was the bullet found .
 Thompson photographed Wright’s pointed-tip round next to a key to give an indication of size . Thompson was so impressed by the discrepancy that he photographed the round .
 The pointed .30 caliber round Wright produced is shorter than CE399 and bears a pointed tip distinct from CE399’s rounded tip . Wright's version of CE399 bears a rounded tip, not a rounded .
 Thompson also researched and ruled out that the stretcher on which Tomlinson found the bullet was a stretcher used for either President Kennedy or Governor Connally . Thompson also ruled out the possibility of finding the bullet in the bullet .
 JFK was pronounced dead at 1:00 a.m., approximately the same time Tomlinson testified he found the bullet . JFK was taken to Trauma Room 1, where he was pronounced .
 JFK’s body remained on his stretcher until 1:45m., when the casket arrived . JFK's casket was placed on a stretcher in front of the crowd at 1:30 p.m. JFK's body was placed in a casket on the stret
 Connally was taken to Trauma Room 2 on a stretcher and then wheeled into Operating Room 5 . Connally is now in a stable condition in a critical condition .
 The stretcher was wheeled out of Operating Room 5, placed on an elevator, and returned to the ER at approximately 1:00 a.m. Connally was being placed under anesthesia in operating Room 5 . Connally's stretcher is wheeled away from the ER in an
 Tomlinson testified he found the bullet at approximately 1:00m. on a stretcher located on the ground floor that was already in the hall when his elevator door opened . The bullet was found in the hallway of the elevator when Tomlison's elevator opened .
 The Warren Commission concluded that the bullet came from the Governor’s stretcher . In the final report, the Warren Commission wrote, “Although Tomlinson was not certain whether the . bullet came . from the Connally . stretcher or the adjacent one, the Commission concluded
 The Warren Commission wanted CE399 to have been found on Connally’s stretcher . That would support the single-bullet theory that assumes Connally wounded JFK after wounding JFK in the back and neck .
 Finding CE399 on Connally’s stretcher would eliminate the problem that no bullet had been found in either body . CE399 was found in Connally's stretcher, but no bullet has been found .
 Four other emergency cases were admitted to Parkland Memorial Hospital in a space of twenty minutes, with two of these patients bleeding profusely . The Warren Commission's logic that because CE399 was not found on JFK’s stretcher it had to be found on Connally’
 Helen Guycion was admitted to Parkland Hospital, bleeding from the mouth . At 12:38 a.m., a woman identified as Helen Guycin was admitted . She was taken to the hospital with bleeding from her mouth .
 Arnold Fuller, a two-and-a-half-year-old child, was admitted with a deep cut on his chin . Sixteen minutes later, Arnold Fuller was admitted to the hospital with the cut . Arnold Fuller is admitted to hospital with a cut on the chin .
 Secret Service Agent Andrew Berger, in a memorandum placed into evidence with the Warren Commission’s Report as Commission Exhibit 1024, described a bizarre incident where a man claiming to be an FBI agent tried to force his way into the ER trauma room where JFK was being treated .
 'Just as we began to ask for his credentials, he abruptly attempted to enter the emergency room and had to be forcibly restrained by us. Just as we . began to . ask for . credentials, "Just as . we began . to . begin to ask . for his . credentials
 Two witnesses to the Warren Commission testified to having seen Jack Ruby at Parkland Hospital at about the time JFK’s death was announced . Josiah Thompson pointed out that two witnesses .
 Ruby’s Carousel Club featured burlesque-like strip-tease dancers . A nightclub owner with connections to the mob, he had a habit of schmoozing with police to ensure his business was not harassed .
 Ruby was seen milling around the heart of the action anytime the police radio announced something of special interest was happening in the city . Ruby was not unusual to see Ruby milling about the action .
 Seth Kantor, a Scripps Howard newspaper writer, testified to the Warren Commission on June 2, 1964, that he saw Ruby near the entrance to Parkland Hospital after the JFK shooting .
 The lone assassin theory came to hinge on the Warren Commission proving the near-pristine bullet CE399 struck both JFK and Governor John Connally . The Warren Commission proved the bullet hit both JFK .
 Warren Commission’s failure to consider the possibility CE399 was planted on the stretcher at Parkland Hospital, possibly by Jack Ruby, suggests the Warren Commission was primarily interested in CE399 because it could be made to fit the predetermined theory that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin .
 Chief of thoracic surgery at Parkland Hospital in Dallas operated on Connally’s obvious and serious chest wound . Dr. Robert Roeder Shaw operated on the actor's chest wound at the hospital .
 Shaw established that he had personal experience with approximately one thousand cases involving bullet wounds . Shaw was chief of thoracic surgery in Paris, France, during World War II, when he served as chief surgeon .
 Shaw testified that a bullet entered Connally’s back just below his right shoulder blade, proceeded to shatter his fifth rib, and exited just below Connally's right nipple . Shaw said the bullet struck Connally just below the right nipple of his back . Shaw testified in the trial
 Shaw testified that he assumed at the time the wounds to Connelly’s chest, wrist, and thigh had been caused by the same bullet . Shaw also considered it possible that a second or even a third bullet might have caused the wrist and thigh wounds .
 Shaw gave Connelly’s wrist and thigh wounds only cursory thought or examination . With his focus on making sure Connelly could breathe, Shaw gave his attention to the injured .
 Warren Commission counsel Arlen Specter asked Shaw whether he believed CE399, the pristine bullet found on the stretcher at Parkland Hospital, could have caused all three of Connally’s wounds . Shaw said CE399 could have been the same bullet that struck Connally three times
 For CE399 to have emerged in near-pristine shape after having inflicted the wounds Shaw observed and treated on Connally was simply not credible . Shaw's treatment of Connally's wounds on CE399 is not credible, he says .
 The original weight of this bullet before it was fired was approximately 160—161 grains . The original, pristine weight of the bullet before its firing was 160-161 grains.
 The Commission reported the weight of the bullet recovered on the stretcher at 158 grains in Parkland Hospital . The Commission said the bullet was recovered on a stretcher in the hospital .
 This single-bullet theory asks us to believe that this bullet went through seven layers of skin, tough, elastic, resistant skin . The theory is based on the fact that the bullet passed through the skin seven layers .
 I just can't believe that this bullet had the force to do what have demanded of it; and I don't think they have really stopped to think out carefully what they have asked of this bullet, for the simple reason that they still do not understand the resistant nature of human skin to
 X-rays showed that there were more than three grains of metal from the bullet lodged in the wrist . The bullet was ruled out of the possibility that CE399 was the bullet that hit Connelly .
 James Humes, the presiding pathologist at JFK’s autopsy at Bethesda Naval Hospital, also hesitated to agree that CE399 was responsible for Connally's injuries . Humes: "CE399 is responsible for the injuries"
 William Osborne hand at least five bullet fragments to Bell that he had removed from Connally’s arm . Osborne also hand out five fragments of Connally's bullet fragments that he removed from his arm to Bell .
 Audrey Bell, operating room nurse, gave the bullet fragments to Bob Dolan of the Dallas Police Department, who gave them to Captain Fritz . Captain Fritz transferred the fragments to a crime lab, who transferred them to Dallas Police .
 Who received the bullet fragments at the FBI and when are not indicated, leaving open the question whether the fragments are the same ones that ended up in the FBI crime lab .
 Chain of custody of Connally bullet fragments was so poorly established there was no chance any of these bullet fragments would ever be introduced in court . The chain of custody was so poor established that the fragments would never be introduced .
 Assassination researcher Russell Kent has catalogued fifteen references in the Warren Commission Reports and the House Select Committee on Assassinations that itemize various bullet fragments from Connally’s wrist .
 The historical record of the bullet fragments taken from Connally’s wrist is woefully inadequate as the type of forensic documentation needed for these various bullet fragments to serve any purpose, including being introduced as evidence in court proceeding .
 The possibility remains open that only some of the bullet fragments from Connally’s wrist made their way into one or more of the various fifteen different exhibit references .
 The answer is inevitably a resounding ‘no,” judging from the JFK assassination medical record, as documented by the Warren Committee or the House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 Doctors at Parkland Hospital were interested first in making sure Connally’s life was secure and second in operating on him as quickly and efficiently as possible . Connally's medical condition was stable and his chances of healing were high .
 Medical considerations completely outweighed legal considerations in Connally’s emergency medical treatment . But when the victim was the governor of Texas, shot in what turned out to be the assassination of the president of the United States .
 Doctors at Parkland Hospital cared for Connelly as a patient . The primary concern of the doctors was the care of Connelly .
 Forensic importance of metal fragments in Connally’s body could not have been higher . Yet, in the most important criminal case in twentieth-century U.S. history, the importance of the metal fragments could not be higher .
 The record shows that while Parkland Hospital physicians did their job, no similar attention was given to the legal implications of the medical evidence they were encountering .
 Law enforcement personnel were allowed to be in the operating room as surgeons were treating Connally’s wounds . Even more remarkable was the number of law enforcement personnel allowed in the room .
 They appear to have been lax regarding the importance of preserving for trial the ballistic evidence extracted from Connally’s body during the operation .
 The chain-of-custody description shows law enforcement procedures were sloppy at best . Tracking the bullet fragments from the hospital to the Dallas Police Department to the FBI was sloppy . Once the doctors removed the . bullets fragments from Connally’s wrist, the . doctors removed them
 Debate continues regarding how much lead was removed from Connally’s body, where those bullet fragments ended up . Debate continues over how much of the lead was left in Connally's body .
 So the debate over bullet fragments and the so-called "magic bullet" continues .
 Those arguing CE399 is the same bullet that hit JFK in the back and neck and hit Connally in the chest, the wrist, and the thigh are bound to assume that all bullet fragments have been identified and measured precisely .
 A frantic effort to get family permission to extract bullet fragments from Connally's body was unsuccessful . Connally died in 1993, and the family was unable to extract the fragments .
 Connally was buried with bullet fragments from the JFK assassination still in his body . The Justice Department refused to intervene, and the Justice Department did not intervene . Connally's bullet fragments were still in the body .
 JFK was pronounced dead in the operating room . Doctors at Parkland Hospital never performed surgery in the attempt to save his life .
 They never removed or measured bullet fragments remaining in JFK’s brain and skull . Therefore, they never removed . bullet fragments from JFK's brain or skull .
 Since the head wound was obviously a fatal wound, they had no reason to find or treat any other wounds . The head wound is obviously fatal wound .
 No precise determination appears to have been made at Parkland Hospital regarding what bullet fragments remained in JFK’s body at the time of his death . JFK's autopsy at Bethesda Hospital was not complete .
 Bullet fragments were widely scattered throughout the limousine, possibly even causing the fractures observed on the windshield after the shooting had occurred . Moreover, given the massive nature of JFK’s head wounds, bullet fragments may even have caused the fractures .
 JFK skull and brain matter splattered out of the limousine, hitting motorcycle officers and Secret Service Agent Clint Hill as he jumped onto the limo from behind . JFK skull, brain matter hit the motorcycle officers trailing the limosine . Secret Service agent Clint Hill jumped on the lim
 Law enforcement officers appear to have made no attempt to precisely gather bullet fragments from the street, from bystanders, from motorcycle officers or from Agent Clint Hill .
 Government officials cleaned the limousine with a bucket of water and cloth rags to remove the blood, skull parts, and brain debris from the limo’s interior, with no apparent regard for the evidence .
 The limousine was cleaned at Parkland and sent for repairs before forensic experts had a chance to collect evidence . Yet, not only was the limo cleaned at the Parkland, but it was sent to repairs . The limo was sent back to Parkland for repairs, not
 The lack of deformity observed in CE399 is a problem with the investigation and ballistic analysis . Another problem is the lack of deformation observed in the CE399 .
 Assassination researcher Josiah Thompson found the lack of deformity in the bullet CE399 to be a major problem .
 Thompson argued in his 1967 book, Six Seconds in Dallas, that he was not convinced the weight loss evidenced in the bullet fragments precluded CE399 from being the bullet that wounded Connally .
 On April 14, 1964, Warren Commission staff arranged viewing of Zapruder film with two autopsy surgeons and two experts from the Army’s Wound Ballistics Branch at Edgewood Arsenal .
 Such a conclusion, if embraced by the Warren Commission, would have been lethal to the single-bullet theory . The Warren Commission would have rejected such a conclusion .
 The bullet recovered from Connally’s stretcher could not have broken his radius without having suffered more distortion . Light and Dolce expressed themselves very strongly that the bullet recovered .
 The impact badly smashed the front end of the resulting bullet, shown in the Warren Commission’s report as CE856 . The impact of the bullet is shown in a photo of the impact .
 Oliver had a bullet fired through an anesthetized goat to simulate 66 percent of resistance encountered by a bullet through Connally’s chest . Oliver had another bullet fired . Anesthetised goat was also used to simulate the resistance encountered .
 CE853 was badly squeezed along a longitudinal axis . As a result, the projectile was squeezed along the longitudinal axis of the projectile, as seen in CE854 . The projectile is seen to have been squeezed by the projectile .
 A third bullet was fired into a skull, with the resulting two pieces of the bullet being scarcely recognizable, as seen in CE857 . The resulting pieces were scarcely recognizable .
 Cyril Wecht shows the X-rays of Connally’s chest and wrist together with multiple close-up photographs of CE399 . Connally died at the age of 58 in September 1968 .
 Wecht left no doubt that his conclusion was that the single-bullet theory was nonsense . Wecht concluded that the theory is nonsense and that it is nonsense .
 I do not think that it could have been possible for the bullet shown as CE399 to have been a bullet that traversed the bodies of both President Kennedy and Governor Connally . I think it could not be possible for a bullet to have traversed President Kennedy's bodies .
 The bullet is not fragmented, not deformed or mutilated, with just a slight defect at the tail could have inflicted this amount of damage . I think it’s something which I could not accept, that this bullet which is . not fragmented or mutilation, with a slight
 "It just does not seem to fit with any of the cases I’ve seen of what happens to pellets after they have struck bone. It just doesn’t seem to ... fit with other cases of pellets striking bone," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Guinn insisted fragments allegedly from Connally’s wrist came from CE399 . Still, despite admitting the ammunition manufactured by Western Cartridge for the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle had no consistency of composition .
 FBI fragments are now ‘missing’ and their weights unknown . FBI fragments now 'missing' and 'their weights unknown' The FBI fragments were 'missing and weights unknown'.
 CE842 contained 2,400 percent more sodium and 1,100 percent more chlorine . Professor Ronald White points out that while Guinn concluded the fragments came from CE399 because they were similar in chemical composition, CE8 42 contained more sodium .
 White also noted that to confirm the single-bullet theory, it is necessary to link CE399 with Kennedy’s neck and back wounds . White: To confirm the theory, CE399 is needed to link the wounds to Kennedy .
 No bullet fragments were removed from Kennedy’s neck and back wounds even at the autopsy . It is impossible to link CE399 to JFK with certainty with certainty, even if CE399 matched precisely the chemical composition of the fragments .
 A spokesman for Western Cartridge declared the reliability of such ammunition would be questionable today .
 The ER team at Parkland Hospital in Dallas and the autopsy team at Bethesda Naval Hospital produced medical records that describe two completely different views of JFK’s wounds . JFK's back and neck wounds were discovered in his autopsy .
 The ER team did not turn over the President’s body, and therefore did not notice another bullet wound . Because the ER team focused exclusively on stabilizing vital signs, they didn't turn over President's body . The wound was located in the President's upper back .
 'We have the makings of one of the most incredible foul-ups in medical history,' says Dr. Andrew Hammond . 'It's the beginning of a very long history of medical errors,' he says .
 Parkland physicians didn’t know of the back wound . Bethesda autopsy team did not know that the tracheostomy incision concealed a bullet wound . Parkland doctors didn't know of back wound and the autopsy team didn't .
 JFK motorcade rushed from Dealey Plaza directly to Parkland Hospital . Motorcade rushed to hospital after realizing JFK had been shot .
 The ER team at Parkland went into immediate action implementing trauma efforts to resuscitate JFK, despite realizing almost immediately that the president’s massive head wounds made their efforts to save his life futile .
 Once JFK was pronounced dead, a scuffle arose between the Secret Service and local Dallas authorities . The Secret Service insisted the crime committed in Dallas had to be investigated and prosecuted in Dallas .
 At issue was whether or not the autopsy should be done in Dallas, Texas, supervised by Texas law enforcement personnel under the jurisdiction of Texas criminal law . The autopsy should have been performed in Dallas .
 The jurisdiction for the investigation and prosecution of the crime fell under the jurisdiction of Texas law . Thus, the case fell under Texas law.
 In 1963 there was no law making it a federal crime to assassinate the president . In 1963, no law was passed making it illegal to assassinate a president .
 Jackie Kennedy and the White House had no authority to remove JFK’s body from Dallas, Texas . Truthfully, Jackie Kennedy .
 Autopsy should have been performed in Dallas under Texas law, criminal investigation should have taken place in Dallas . Autopsy results should have come from Dallas under Dallas law, Texas law says .
 JFK’s body should have remained in Dallas for autopsy, and the criminal investigation and trial should have been handled locally . Under Texas and federal statutes at the time, JFK should have stayed in Dallas .
 The White House and the Secret Service won the argument in a confrontation that almost ended up in a fistfight . Yet, the White House wins the argument .
 A casket was ordered to fly JFK’s body back to Washington, D.C. The Secret Service quietly took LBJ back to Love Field . JFK's body was flown back to the airport .
 JFK’s body was whisked from Parkland Hospital and driven to Love Field where it was loaded aboard Air Force One . Once the casket arrived, the Secret Service made sure JFK's body was driven directly to the airport .
 Chaos would perhaps best describe the way JFK’s body left Dallas . Controversy may best describe how the JFK autopsy was conducted .
 The hurriedly assembled autopsy team in Washington was not given the luxury of even a single night to prepare . It was not the first time the team had been given a night out .
 An autopsy team takes time to research the case and plan the autopsy based on reports of the crime scene . The autopsy team can produce reliable and comprehensive medical evidence that would be admissible in court .
 Jackie Kennedy insisted that since JFK was a navy officer, the autopsy should take place at Bethesda Naval Hospital . She overruled administration officials who scheduled the autopsy to be conducted at the army’s Walter Reed Hospital .
 Junior counsel Arlen Specter virtually singlehandedly took over configuring the medical evidence into a legal argument to frame Lee Harvey Oswald as the victim before the official Warren Commission government inquiry into the assassination .
 Specter concocted his single-bullet theory in order to deflect consideration of a conspiracy . In doing so, Specter pinned the blame on the conveniently deceased Lee Harvey Oswald as the sole gunman responsible for shooting the president . Specter created the theory to deflect discussion of a possible conspiracy
 Lee Harvey Oswald’s murder brought the criminal investigation to a screeching halt and obviated the need for a criminal prosecution . Oswald's murder was the murder of the president of the United States in 1945 . Oswald was shot and killed by President Lincoln Lincoln .
 Specter’s singlebullet theory depended upon establishing medical proof that CE399 passed from the entrance wound in JFK’�s back, through JFK's body, to exit in his throat . This theory was never considered or pursued by the medical team at either Dallas Parkland
 The doctors at Parkland assumed JFK had been shot from the front, while the doctors at Bethesda concluded JFK's death was from the rear . Parkland doctors assumed JFK was shot in the rear, while Bethesda doctors concluded JFK was hit from the back .
 Only after Arlen Specter proposed the single-bullet theory did it become important to prove the bullet that wounded JFK’s back and neck was the same bullet . Connally was shot in the neck and back in the back and back .
 Warren Commission concluded only three shots could have been fired by the Mannlicher-Carcano bolt-action rifle in the time available for shooting . Both men had to have been wounded by the same bullet, or a second shooter .
 If the throat wound was determined to be an entrance wound, there had to be a second shooter positioned to the front of the motorcade . The throat wound is believed to be the entrance wound of the shooter .
 Specter's entire argument came to rest on the hypothesis the bullet that entered JFK’s back exited through his throat and went on to cause all the wounds, despite the fact neither the medical evidence ascertained in the ER at Parkland nor the autopsy at Bethesda supported that theory .
 Arlen Specter was out of luck when he realized neither the doctors at Parkland nor Bethesda had established a bullet path through JFK’s body . Specter: “I’m not going to be able to get a bullet through JFK's body’
 Specter says Oswald was the lone gunman responsible for gunning down JFK . That was a lynchpin for the Warren Commission’s central conclusion . But Specter did not deter Specter, who says he did not believe Oswald was Oswald .
 Specter argued that a trajectory could be established making it possible for a single bullet to injure both men . Specter resorted to elaborate diagrams of various assassination reconstructions to prove the point .
 The Warren Commission argued it was possible the bullet entered JFK’s back, exited his throat, and then continued on its trajectory to hit Connally in the back, lungs, wrist, and thigh . Despite medical and ballistics evidence, the Warren Commission resorted to arguing that the bullet
 The Commission had to succeed in their argument otherwise the effort to establish that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin would fail . The Commission must succeed in its argument otherwise .
 If there were more than one shooter, that would mean there was a conspiracy to assassinate JFK . That would instigate a public outcry for an investigation .
 The Warren Commission sought to avoid that because no one knew how high up and widespread a conspiracy might go . No one knows how widespread and high-level a conspiracy may go . Warren Commission: No one knew it might be a conspiracy .
 As long as Lee Harvey Oswald remains the only viable suspect, the case could be closed as a horrible accident of history . Oswald was the only suspect in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 No doctor at Parkland or Bethesda ever thought to postulate a single-bullet theory . No doctor in the U.S. has ever postulated a single bullet theory .
 JFK was long buried at Arlington Cemetery before anyone realized the single-bullet theory would depend on medical questions the doctors at Parkland and Bethesda had never thought to ask . Ballistic evidence establishing a bullet path from the back wound to the neck wound is key to the theory . And JFK was
 Doctors examining JFK at Parkland and at Bethesda never thought to connect the bullet paths through Kennedy’s body . Kennedy's bullet paths were not connected to each other, doctors say . The simple truth was the doctors examining JFK never thought they would connect the paths .
 President Lyndon B Johnson and the Justice Department used the Warren Commission to create an official government narrative explaining why and how JFK was killed . The Warren Commission was created to create a government narrative .
 Transcripts provide insight into the leading nature of the investigation and the desire to force a particular outcome . Transcripts reveal the desire for the investigation to force the outcome .
 The Warren Commission largely ignored how the doctors at Parkland Hospital, the first to see JFK’s wounds, describe their findings in contradiction to their conclusions . But if we take a look at the facts, the Warren Commission's findings are correct, they are correct .
 JFK suffered an entrance wound in his neck, according to doctors at Parkland hospital . JFK suffered entrance wound to his neck .
 At a press conference held at Parkland Hospital on November 22, 1963, a newsman asked Dr. Dr. George Sutter if he would be allowed to leave the hospital . Dr. Sutter's death was the result of a fight against the government .
 Malcolm Perry, the physician who had performed the tracheotomy on JFK, is unsure whether the wound was an entrance wound . Perry performed the operation on JFK's throat .
 The wound appeared to be an entrance wound in the front of the throat; yes, that is correct. The wound appears to be a front entrance wound, the doctor says .
 "It could have been the head or there could have a second wound of the head," says the victim . "There was a wound in the head. It could be a wound of head or a second of head," she says .
 Wicker also reported JFK had “a massive, gaping wound” in the back and on the right side of his head . Parkland physicians said immediately after the shooting that it was impossible to tell if JFK’s wounds were caused by one or two bullets .
 The Warren Commission, the Authorities, and the Report, is considered the definitive guide to the Warren Commission testimony . The Report is based on testimony from the Commission's testimony .
 Charles James Carrico explains why the back wound went unnoticed at Parkland Hospital . Charles explains why he was left with a back wound that went unnoticed . Charles James Jarrico explains why his wound was unnoticed .
 "No time to examine the president completely for all small wounds. No, sir; at least initially there was no time," he said . "No, sir," he added .
 All we had time to do was to determine what things were life-threatening right then and attempt to resuscitate him . We didn’t have time to examine for other wounds, and we didn't have time . We had to try and resuscitate an acutely ill patient, says
 The cardiac massage prevented any further examination during this time this was being done . As we said initially, this was an acute emergency situation and there was not time initially . This was not the time initially and when the cardiac massage was done this prevented any more examination .
 After the President was pronounced dead, his wife was there, he was the President, and we felt certainly that complete examination would be carried out . "No one had the heart, I believe, to examine him there. After the . President died, his . wife was . there,
 Secret Service Agent Roy Kellerman described how he discovered JFK’s back wound in the morgue at Bethesda Naval Hospital the evening of the assassination just prior to the start of the autopsy .
 Nobody was aware until they lifted him up that there was a hole in his shoulder . And with the part of the skull removed, and the hole in the throat, nobody was aware of the hole . The boy was taken to hospital with a serious injury to his head .
 Kellerman did not get questioned on this point and he did not return to explain the comment . Unfortunately, Kellerman didn't get questioned about the comments .
 The comment suggests a sequence of shots that would separate JFK’s back wound from his throat wound . JFK's back wound would have been separate from the throat wound, but the comment suggests that .
 Humes examined the back wound and found it to be a shallow entry wound that had penetrated less than an inch into JFEK’s back . The wound was found to be the result of a gunshot wound to the back .
 Navy Commander J Thornton Boswell, attending the autopsy, found the depth of JFK’s back wound could be probed up to only the first or second knuckle of the little finger, a depth of two inches .
 No path through JFK’s body could be established for the missile . X-rays failed to detect any bullets yet remaining in JFK's body . No path was established for missile, according to JFK's autopsy .
 No complete bullet of any size could be located in the brain area . No bullet could be found in the back or any other area of the body as determined by total body X-rays and physical inspection revealing there was no point of exit .
 Claw Shaw was the only person brought to trial in connection with JFK assassination . Shaw was a New Orleans businessman who was only person to be tried in the assassination case .
 U.S. Army physician, Lt. Lt. Cpl. John Sutter, was acquitted in the trial . He was acquitted of the charges .
 A participant in the JFK autopsy at Bethesda admitted that military brass present in the Bethesda autopsy room interfered with the doctors conducting the autopsy . Pierre A Finck, a member of the autopsy, said military brass interfered with doctors .
 He claimed military brass stopped doctors from performing procedures they felt were necessary to determine the exact type and nature of wounds JFK suffered .
 Alvin Oser, one of the chief prosecutors working on the trial under the direction of District Attorney Jim Garrison, cross-examined Finck . Oser: Finck is not a serial killer . Finck's trial is set to last for two years .
 Finck had testified to the Warren Commission that he was confident that the bullet which hit JFK’s back had passed through his neck and continued on to injure Connally . Finck said he believed a bullet doing this much damage would have fragmented or deformed .
 Finck told the Warren Commission he was completely confident that JFK’s wounds were exit wounds, consistent with JFK being shot from behind . Finck said JFK was shot in the head, not in the face, but in the back .
 At the end of the autopsy we were specifically told by Admiral Kenney, the Surgeon General of the Navy, not to discuss the case . "When you are a Lieutenant Colonel in the Army you just follow orders," he says .
 There are many factors influencing the ability to talk or not after a shot . There are also many factors in determining whether to talk after a given shot .
 Your Honor, I would like an answer from the Colonel and I would ask the Court so to direct. Your Honor would like a direct answer, Your Honor says .
 Prosecutors in this autopsy didn't remove organs of the neck, to my recollection . I was told that the family wanted an examination of the head, as I recall, the head and the chest, but the prosecutors didn’t remove organs .
 From what I recall I looked at the trachea, there was a tracheotomy wound the best I can remember, but I didn’t dissect or remove these organs . "I didn't dissect ... these organs," he says .
 Your Honor, I would ask Your Honor to direct the witness to answer my question, Your Honor says . Your Honor would like to hear from the witness, the witness says .
 We were told to examine the head and the chest cavity, and that doesn’t include removal of the organs of the neck . Because of that, it's not possible to remove organs from the head or chest cavity . We're not allowed to examine head and chest cavities,
 I was interested in the track and I had observed the conditions of bruising between the point of entry in the back of the neck and the point . The conditions are entirely compatible with the bullet path, which is entirely compatible . The condition of bruising is similar to that of a bullet path .
 Finck was perhaps the most highly qualified forensic pathologist to attend the JFK autopsy in Bethesda, Maryland . Finck's autopsy was the first of its kind to be performed in the U.S. since JFK .
 If he had been allowed to dissect the back and neck wounds to his satisfaction, Finck would have concluded the neck wound was an entry wound . Finck likely would have rejected the lone-gun hypothesis, and rejected it .
 Finck's conclusions would have been devastating to any attempt to frame Lee Harvey Oswald as the sole assassin . Finck had been allowed to complete his work, Finck said .
 Military brass at the autopsy intervened to stop his work most likely because politics dictated they do so . Military brass stopped him from working on the autopsy at the time .
 Finck acquiesced to Arlen Specter's hypothetical questions that all the wounds seen in JFK’s body could have been caused by shots from the rear because politics dictated him to do so, Finck said .
 As a junior military officer Finck did not feel he had the authority to countermand orders . Finck was a junior officer at the time and did not believe he had any authority .
 J Thornton Boswell, another of the pathologists attending the JFK autopsy, who was in charge of the autopsy, said he was shocked to learn of the tragedy .
 Boswell explained to the review board [Mr Eardley from the Justice Department] was really upset . Boswell said to the board that the Justice Dept. was 'really upset' with the decision .
 The DOJ officials in New Orleans showed Boswell a transcript of Finck’s testimony . Boswell spent all night reviewing Finck's testimony .
 Justice Department says answer could not be allowed to stand on the record without a rebuttal . Justice Department: "This was an answer the Justice Department obviously felt could not have been allowed to ... without a response"
 If Oswald was to be framed as the lone-gun assassin, Arlen Specter continually posed to medical witnesses that a path from the back wound to the neck wound could have been established if only it had been examined, had to remain open . Specter's hypothetical possibility that the path
 A message from Dallas changed the course of the examination at the autopsy room at Bethesda Naval Hospital . The medical team was alerted to the situation by a doctor in Dallas .
 While the autopsy was yet in progress on the night of the assassination, Dr. George H. Rockefeller's autopsy was still in progress . Dr. Rockefeller died of a gunshot wound to the head .
 Humes received information that a bullet had been found on a stretcher at Parkland Hospital . Humes at Bethesda received information about a bullet being found at the hospital . A bullet was found on the stretcher of a patient in a wheelchair .
 A portion of JFK's skull apparently had also been delivered from Dallas . That information arrived with the delivery of a piece of JFK’s skull .
 Humes stated that the pattern was clear that the one bullet had entered the President’s back and had worked its way out of the body during external cardiac massage . A second high-velocity bullet entered the rear of the skull and had fragmented prior to exit through the top of
 Humes had no idea Arlen Specter would later expect him to declare the back wound as an entrance wound and the throat wound as exit wound . Humes' back wound was later declared an exit wound by Specter .
 News that a bullet had been found at Parkland Hospital was “a godsend” that “reduced the high stress level taking its toll” on the doctors . Doctors “were frantically searching for a missile in Kennedy’s body,” noted assassination
 The problem is there was no chain of evidence to link CE399 to JFK’s back wound . JFK's back wound was the result of a gunshot wound to his back .
 There is no proof the stretcher on which CE399 was found was a stretcher ever used to hold JFK’s body . The stretcher was found on CE399 is believed to have been used by JFK .
 The "magic bullet," identified by the Warren Commission as CE399, fell out of JFK's throat but only after it exited JFK’s throat and passed through his chest, fractured his right wrist, and punctured his thigh . Specter would also argue that the pristine “
 Sylvia Meagher pointed out that Humes at the autopsy did not even realize the throat wound involved a bullet wound . Humes thought it was a tracheotomy and nothing more, Meagher said . Meagher also said Humes didn't even realize that the wound was a gunshot wound
 The observers at the autopsy took away the impression that the bullet in the back had penetrated only a short distance, without exiting from the body . The surgeons believed that the missile had worked its way out of the body during external cardiac massage, the observers said .
 Dr. Humes did not come to believe the bullet had passed through and exited from the body until at least the next day . Humes learned from Dr. Dr. J. T. Terence Humes that he had been hit by the bullet .
 The President arrived at Parkland Hospital with a bullet wound at the Adam’s apple which had been obliterated during the tracheotomy . The wound was discovered by Dr. Perry .
 Arlen Specter and the Warren Commission had to have two shooters, one in front of the limousine and the other in back of the vehicle . That was a problem for Specter, who had a throat wound in the throat and the back wound in his car .
 Journalist Martin Agronsky interviewed Governor John Connally from his Parkland Memorial Hospital room on November 27, 1963, five days after the JFK assassination .
 "We heard a shot; I turned to my left—I was sitting in the jump seat. And then we had just turned the corner," he says . "And then we just turned to our left, we heard a gunshot," he adds .
 I turned to my left to look in the back seat -- the President had slumped . I turned my eyes to the President's back seat . The President slumped. "I don't think it's a bad thing," he said .
 "Almost simultaneously, as I turned, I was hit and I knew I had been hit badly. Almost simultaneously,  as I turned ... I was struck badly," he said . "I was hit badly, and knew I was going to be hit badly"
 President Obama was hit by a third shot and was hit again and we thought then very seriously seriously . Then there was a second shot and the President was shot again, he said. Then there were a third shots and the president was hit .
 I had still retained consciousness but the President had slumped in Mrs. Michelle Obama's arms . Mrs. Obama had slumped into Mrs. Bush's arms, she said . The President had collapsed in the President's arms and died in hospital .
 After the third shot, the Secret Service man, the chauffeur had pulled out of the line, they said, “Get out of here” They said, "Get us to a hospital immediately” and we pulled out, of course, immediately, as fast as
 In the space of a few seconds, it is unbelievable what can happen, Martin says . Martin: "It's unbelievable what you can do, Martin. It's unbelievable that things can happen"
 On April 21, 1964, Connally testified to the Warren Commission, telling essentially the same story . Connally said he was hit by the second shot; he testified in April 1964 .
 Governor Connally: We had just made the turn ... when I heard what I thought was a shot . Connally was governor of Texas when he was killed . Governor: "I thought I thought I was shot"
 "I immediately—the only thought that crossed my mind was that this is an assassination attempt," he says . "Once I heard the shot in my own mind I identified it as a rifle shot," he adds .
 I was turning to look back over my left shoulder into the back seat, but I never got that far in my turn . So I looked, failing to see him, I was looking for him, but he didn't see him . He was looking back over his left shoulder, but
 "I got about in the position I am now in facing you, looking a little bit to the left of center, and then I felt like somebody had hit me in the back," he says . "I felt like I was hit by somebody," he adds .
 I suppose my trend of thought just happened to be, I suppose along this line. Again I suppose . Again my trend was to say, "I suppose along the line"
 "There were either two or three people involved or more in this or someone was shooting with an automatic rifle. I knew it when I just looked down and I was covered with blood," he said . "The thought immediately passed through my mind"
 "I immediately assumed, because of the amount of blood, and, in fact, that it had obviously passed through my chest that I had probably been fatally shot," he says . "These were just thoughts that went through my mind," he adds .
 "So, I merely doubled up, and then turned to my right again and began to begin to—I just sat there, and Mrs. Mrs. Smith sat there and sat there . So, I simply doubled up and then began to turn right again," she said .
 "She was sitting, of course, on the jump seat, so I reclined with my head in her lap, conscious all the time, and with my eyes open" "I heard the shot very clearly," she says . "Then, course, the third shot sounded, and
 I heard the shot hit something, and I assumed again—it never entered my mind that it ever hit anybody but the President . "I assumed again, I assumed that it hit something," he said .
 Specter repeatedly asked the same question slightly rephrased each time he asked it . Specter was emphatic about the time frame, even when under crossexamination Specter repeated the question .
 Governor Connally: 'I thought it was a rifle shot' Connally says he thought the sound came from . Connally was struck by the sound of a gunshot .
 "I immediately thought of an assassination attempt, and I turned to see if I could see the President, if he was all right," says President Obama . "I thought of a assassination attempt. I immediately thought it was an attempt," he says .
 Failing to see him over my right shoulder, I turned to look over my left shoulder . I turned the left shoulder to look at him again, but failed to find him again .
 Connally testified he did not hear any shots from the direction of the overpass ahead of the limousine . Connally said he didn't see any shots fired from the area of the road .
 Nellie Connally, the governor’s wife, testified to the Warren Commission immediately following her husband . She testified before her husband, George W. Bush .
 In fact, the receptions had been so good every place that I had showed much restraint by not mentioning something about it before . The receptions were so good that I showed restraint, he said .
 It seems to me it was very soon, that I heard a noise, and not being an expert rifleman, I was not aware that it was a rifle .
 I turned over my right shoulder and looked back, and saw the President as he had both hands at his neck. "I turned over his right shoulder, looked back and saw him," he said . The president's hands were both hands on his neck .
 You are indicating with your own hands, two hands crossing over gripping your own neck . And you are . indicating with two hands . Two hands crossed over gripping their own neck. And you were indicating with . own hands .
 The controversy over which bullet hit Connally intensified in November 1966 . Life Magazine arranged to have Connally inspect enlarged frames from the Zapruder film . Connally was hit by a bullet in the film, but was not killed .
 Life on November 25, 1966, hit the newsstands on the third anniversary of the assassination . The film, "Life’ the Assassination Film," was published on the same date as the Warren Report . It was published by Life magazine on the 25th anniversary of JFK's
 The multiple-page article featured on the magazine’s cover, contained a full-page photograph of Connally, shown with a magnifying glass held in both hands, bent over a light table to examine enlarged positives of six frames from the Zapruder film displayed for his examination
 At frame 222, as the limousine pulls clear of the highway sign, Governor Connally emerges, still turned to his right . Connally emerged, still turning to the right, from frame 222 .
 At frame 225, President Kennedy emerges from the highway sign and it is clear he has been hit . President Kennedy can be seen, a sixth of a second later, at frame 225 . The president is hit by a highway sign .
 Governor Connally turns his head leftward until, in 228, he faces straight ahead through frame 231 . Life showed on a page-and-a-half spread featuring frames from the Zapruder film .
 Connally told Life he believed, as best he could judge it, that the bullet hit him in frame 234, nine frames and one-half second later than the Warren Commission said he had been hit . Connally said he believed he was hit 9 frames and 1-and-a
 In the interview with Life, Nellie Connally was equally firm on her testimony . Connally says she is proud of her role in the White House .
 To the end of their lives, both John Connally and his wife Nellie held to their original recollections of the shooting .
 The Warren Commission chose to disregard the testimony of John and Nellie Connally because the single-bullet theory required that JFK and Connally had to have been hit by the same shot . Arlen Specter’s single-Bullet theory was the basis for the Warren
 This contradicts the statement by both John and Nellie Connally that they saw JFK react to the neck wound before the shot that hit Connally in the back . This directly contradicts the statements made by both Connally and his wife .
 Specter pressed medical doctors not trained in the fine points of legal testimony to answer hypothetical questions . Specter had pressed the medical doctors with hypothetical questions about the case .
 Competent lawyers would be expected to coach clients never to answer such questions in court . But competent lawyers would coach clients not to answer them in court, he says .
 Hypothetical questions always propose a fictional possibility, or counterfactual conclusion, in which even the most outrageous outcomes typically cannot be ruled out . Hypotical questions propose fictional possibilities, or countershadows .
 The Warren Commission grasped the Specter-postulated counterfactual as if it were proven fact . Nellie Connally’s testimony, the Warren Commission said, “Nellie, Connally,” was the subject of the Warren Inquiry .
 Specter hung his single-bullet interpretation on the assumption that Connally had a “delayed reaction” to having been shot, allowing for the possibility Connally misinterpreted that the first shot missed and the second shot might have been the one that hit both JFK and Conn
 "I have been told by my professional associates of any number of instances where people received penetrating wounds in various portions of the body and have only the sensation of a slight discomfort or slight slap"
 "I am sure he would be aware that something happened to him, but that he was shot," she says . "He would be very aware of something happened, but not that he had been shot"
 It could very easily be one of some type of an injury—I mean the awareness that he had been struck by a missile. It could easily be an injury, he says. He says .
 People have been drilled through with a missile and didn’t know it,86 Dr. Dr. Martin says . He says people have been drilling through with missiles and didn't know it .
 Humes in his next answer blew Specter’s single-bullet theory out of the water . Specter: “I’m not sure what happened. I’ve never seen a single bullet in my life,” Humes said .
 Humes testified it was “extremely unlikely’t the nearly pristine CE399 struck Connally’s thigh . X-rays show metallic fragments in the thigh bone, Humes said .
 The Commission conveniently overlooked that comment and focused on the possibility of a delayed reaction to a gunshot wound . The Commission said that .
 Governor did not even know that he had been struck in the wrist or thigh until he regained consciousness in the hospital the next day . Governor didn't even know he was struck until he regains consciousness in hospital .
 He testified that he did not hear what he thought was the second shot, although he did hear a subsequent shot, which coincided with the shattering of the President’s head .
 Zapruder film does not enable viewer to pinpoint exact moment of impact of impact, or of the bullet that struck the Governor, Sylvia Meagher wrote . One possibility is that Governor heard first shot, did not immediately feel the penetration of bullet, then felt delayed reaction of impact .
 Connally was sitting in the limousine’s jump Seat several inches below JFK . Connally would have to allow a downward trajectory to prove the bullet hit him .
 CE385 is inconsistent with the testimony of the doctors at both Parkland and Bethesda and with autopsy photographs that place JFK’s back wound considerably lower on the back .
 The drawing was controversial because it showed the bullet trajectory on a downward angle . The natural assumption and the available medical evidence of JFK wounds suggest that a line drawn from a back entrance wound to a neck exit would be on an upward bullet trajectory .
 To achieve this affect, Specter had the drawing made to show the point where the bullet entered JFK's back higher than where it actually did enter .
 Specter also drew the attention of the commissioners to photographs showing JFK’s suit jacket was bunched up in the back so as to explain why the bullet holes observed in the shirt and suit coat were lower down on the back where he argued the bullet entered .
 Specter argued that JFK’s suit jacket was bunched up in back at the time of the shooting . Three important photographs taken instants before JFK was wounded the first time, supported Specter's argument .
 A bullet hitting JFK in the back an inch or more below the neck would have had an upward trajectory to exit JFK’s neck . Yet all three photographs show JFK sitting upright, such a bullet hitting him would have been an inch above the neck .
 JFK is clearly seen sitting in a normal posture with his head upright as he observed bystanders along Elm Street on the right side of the limo . JFK sat in a regular posture and his head was clearly visible in the photo .
 Betzner’s photo shows JFK sitting upright, with his head held upright and JFK looking right . JFK sat upright in the photo . JFK was assassinated in 1968 . JFK's funeral was held in New York .
 World War II Army Air Corp. veteran was at Pearl Harbor the day the Japanese attacked . Willis Willis was a WWII vet . Willis: "It's not easy to say goodbye to Pearl Harbor. It's the end of the war"
 Willis immediately recognized the first shot as a gunshot . Willis was in the military and hunting experience . Willis said he recognized the sound of the first gunshot .
 Zapruder frame 202 shows Kennedy’s limo approaching the Stemmons Freeway sign . His photograph is corresponding to Zapruders frame 202, corresponding to frame 202 .
 Kennedy can be seen sitting upright, his head held upright, with his gaze turned slightly to the right as the limo approached the Stemmons Freeway “Keep Right” road sign . JFK looks to his right at the bystanders on Elm Street .
 JFK's head is clearly upright as he looks slightly to the right . JFK’s head was clearly upright in the photo . JFK's photo was taken at JFK's memorial service .
 There is no doubt Kennedy is sitting upright, with the entry point on his back clearly being lower than where Kennedy’s neck wound was found . The entry point is clearly lower than the wound that was found in his neck .
 The photo makes it obvious that any bullet passing through JFK’s body from the back to the neck would have had to have been on an upward trajectory . The photo shows that the bullet would have passed through JFK's body .
 A shot hitting Kennedy three to four inches down on the right side of his back would have passed through his body on a slightly upward trajectory, not the downward trajectory required by the single-bullet theory . So, a careful analysis of the Betzner and Willis photographs suggests a shot
 The back wound was located at the third thoracic vertebrae, which would place the bullet wound some three to four inches from the base of the neck . Various documents, including JFK’s death certificate, reveal the back wound .
 This evidence suggests that JFK’s suit coat bunched up in back, but not bunched so high as to reverse the bullet trajectory .
 A horizontal angle would have missed the entry point on Connally’s back near the angle of the shoulder blade . At most, it would have been horizontal instead of downward, and a horizontal angle missed altogether .
 Two standins are sitting in the JFK limo, one in JFK's seat and the other in Connally's seat . The standins sit in JFK’s seat and Connally‘s seat . JFK's funeral limo was attended by President John Kennedy .
 The person in Connally’s seat is wearing the same suit jacket Connally wore when he was shot . Connally was shot in the head in the early hours of his death .
 Specter was given an exact location within which to point the tip of his metal rod . This gave Specter an exact spot within which he pointed the metal rod at . Specter used the position of the rod to give Specter the perfect angle of attack .
 Specter had placed the pointer on JFK’s shoulder to make the angle work .
 Had Specter placed the pointer four or five inches down on the JFK actor’s back —much closer to the actual location in which the bullet hit JFK — would have had to travel an upward trajectory, making it highly likely the bullet would have missed Connally .
 There is no deflection in the bullet from the time it left the barrel until it exited from the Governor’s body . We have to assume that there is absolutely no deflected .
 That assumes that it has gone through the President's body and through the Governor's body . That assumption is that the President’s body has passed through the governors’ bodies . President Obama has been in office since 2009 .
 I feel that physically this would have been possible because of the positions of the Presidential standin and the Governor’s standin , it would be entirely possible for this to have occurred . The President and Governor's standin were both in attendance .
 "I myself don’t have any technical evidence, which would permit me to say one way or the other," he says . However, he says he has no technical evidence .
 In other words, that would support it as far as my rendering an opinion as an expert . "That would support that," she says . "I'm not an expert," she adds .
 I would certainly say it was possible but I don't say that it probably occurred because I don’t have the evidence on which to base a statement like that, he says . I would say it's possible but not likely occurred, he adds .
 "We are dealing with hypothetical situations here of placing people in cars from photographs which are not absolutely accurate," says CNN.com .
 They are as accurate as you can accurately place the people but it isn’t absolute, they are accurate .
 We don't know whether, I don’t know technically, whether there was any deviation in the bullet which struck the President in the back, and exited from his throat . Secondly, we are dealing with the fact that we don”t know whether . there was . any
 If there were a few degrees deviation then it may affect my opinion as to whether or not it would have struck the governor. "I'm not sure what happened to the governor," he says .
 Governor was in front of the President in such a position that he could have taken. We are dealing with an assumed fact that the Governor was . We are . dealing with the fact that . the Governor . was in . front of . the President . The governor was in the position that
 Even if a straight-line hypothetically existed at the moment of the JFK assassination, that still does not prove that a single bullet actually hit both men as speculated .
 Single-bullet theory at best assumes the status of a clever solution to a whodunit parlor game . As a consequence, the theory is not proven, but a possible, but not proven explanation for who committed a crime .
 The single-bullet theory is not definitive proof Lee Harvey Oswald pulled off the greatest political crime of the twentieth century with an Italian Army World War II surplus rifle he purchased by mail order for around twenty dollars, including tax and shipping .
 The facts that were established leave us with an unexplained entry wound in JFK’s neck that, by itself, proves the presence of a second shooter from the front . The facts are established, and the facts that are established leave . .
 CE399 mysteriously appeared at Parkland Hospital and caused massive damage in two adult men without fragmenting or becoming distorted in the process . We are also left with CE399, a pristine bullet that strains credibility by mysteriously appearing at the hospital .
 Autopsy failed to establish a bullet path through JFK’s body connecting his back wound with his neck wound . There is no proof whatsoever that CE399 is the missile that wounded both JFK and Governor Connally .
 A Sniper Looks at Dealey Plaza, 19949° Key to deciphering JFK assassination is the geography of the crime scene . A sniper looks at the site .
 During his year in Vietnam, Roberts recalled he had “numerous occasions to line up living, breathing human beings in the crosshairs of my precision Unertl scope and squeeze the trigger of my bolt-action Winchester .’s .30 caliber match-grade round z
 Roberts concluded that acting alone, even with the precision equipment he used in Vietnam, he doubted he could duplicate the shooting feat the Warren Commission ascribed to Oswald .
 Normally, the smallest team would consist of two men, a sniper and a spotter who would double as security . Normally, Roberts pointed out, a team would include two men and a sniper . The smallest team is usually made up of a sniper, two men .
 Spotter equipped with a scope or binoculars typically accompanies a marksman . Even in police SWAT teams, a spotter is a member of a SWAT team .
 This was the street on which the motorcade approached Dealey Plaza . Roberts concluded it was his second choice as a zone of engagement . The motorcade left the area on which it arrived on the presidential road .
 The sharp angle turned onto Elm meant the limousine would be virtually stopped directly below the sniper’s nest window, affording the sniper a close-range full-body shot at JFK as he sat in the back seat .
 Once the limousine made the hard left turn from Houston onto Elm, there was no choice but to continue west along Elm until the triple underpass had been reached .
 The only part of JFK's body likely to be visible from the sixth floor corner window was a distant shot at JFK’s back and shoulders . The view partly blocked by a tree .
 The “highlow formula,” also known as the minute-of-angle rule, demanded a sniper had to aim low at the range selected to avoid missing the target by shooting high by as much as a foot .
 Elm Street makes a pronounced S-curve as it winds toward the triple underpass . The angle of the shot from the sixth floor corner window to the back of JFK’s head was constantly changing .
 Houston Street is straight and level, without the shooting complications Elm Street involves . By comparison, Houston Street was Elm Street . Houston Street has a straight, level, level of street .
 Roberts realized the Mannlicher-Carcano with its bolt-action complicated the use of the telescopic scope . Also, Roberts said it was difficult to use the scope because of its bolt action .
 Roberts concluded the shots the Warren Commission reported Oswald took were the farthest and most difficult he could have taken from the sixth floor corner window, given the geography of Dealey Plaza . Roberts concluded that the shots were the most difficult to take from the 6th floor corner .
 The third, fatal headshot was the most distant of the available shots, at a range between eighty and ninety yards . Roberts estimated somewhere between eighty- ninety yards for the shot .
 Oswald had a full-body shot only a few yards away when the limo came to a near stop before making a sharply angled left turn from Houston onto Elm, directly below the sniper’s window . This is absurd considering that Oswald's full body shot was just yards from the
 Oswald's limo disappeared at an accelerated rate, escaping under the triple underpass . The only more difficult shot Oswald could have taken would have been to fire an additional last shot as the limo .
 The Mannlicher-Carcano rifle Dallas Police found on the sixth floor is unlikely to be involved in the shooting . Dallas sniper who knows weapons says it was unlikely to have been involved in shooting .
 The clip for a Model 1891 6. mm Mannlicher-Carcano rifle holds six cartridges . The clip is supposed to fall out of the bottom of the magazine after the last round is chambered .
 The clip in the rifle had been loaded with old surplus bullets considered highly unreliable that had been manufactured in the United States by the Western Cartridge Company decades earlier .
 No clip was found on the floor with the three cartridge shells an indication that the weapon was planted as a decoy . Or was the fact no clip of the three cartridges found on floor with three cartridges an indication of the weapon being planted .
 The Dallas Police Department ran no tests on the Mannlicher-Carcano to determine if it had been fired recently . The weapon was found in Dallas, Texas .
 For an amateur like Oswald, Dealey Plaza was far too difficult a kill zone to have any reasonable chance of success . What Roberts concluded was that for an amateur to have a successful kill zone was impossible for Oswald .
 NCAA Division I men's football players only 1. percent make the pros . In men's baseball, it’s only . percent that make the big leagues . Only 1.5 percent of Division I football players make the pro leagues .
 A high school baseball player might get lucky and knock a professional’s pitch out of the park once, but it is not the way to bet . High school baseball players might be able to get lucky .
 "The curve in all athletics to get the improvement needed to be world class is incredibly steep," says Olympic gold medallist David Weir .
 The transition to world class involves a transformation where the pro learns to see the game differently than the amateur . Typically the transition to the professional involves the pro learning to see and understand the game .
 Chess masters see no more moves ahead in chess games than beginners, studies show . Chess masters have shown chess masters truly see no moves ahead of chess players . Beginner chess players see no further moves ahead than chess masters .
 Chess masters see patterns in chess games, chess players see patterns . Chess masters are masters of chess chess, not beginners . Chess master chess master sees patterns in patterns, chess player says .
 The easy shot from the sixth floor window as the limo came down Houston or turned the corner onto Elm would draw too much attention to the location where the shots originated .
 Successful sniping requires not only the ability to plan and take the shot so as to hit the target, but also to escape undetected and to escape without being captured after the shot has been taken . Sniping is a form of sniping that allows you to plan, take and
 The tree that blocked much of the view complicated the shot from the sixth floor window, to say nothing of the diminishing target as the car went .
 The prime spot for the kill zone was as the car cleared the tree just before the Stemmons Freeway sign . If there were multiple shooters, the prime spot would be in the car clearing the tree .
 A little further down Elm past the Stemmons Freeway sign, a shooter on the grassy knoll behind the picket fence close to the railroad would have a close distance shot that would include JFK’s torso as well as his head . The shot would have included JFK
 Triangulating the kill shot by positioning additional shooters behind JFK would afford multiple opportunities to hit the target simultaneously from the front and the back of the limo .
 Multiple shooting had to be timed perfectly for the full advantages of multiple shooting to be gained . Multiple shooting is possible, but it's possible to use multiple shooting technology .
 Random shooting by will from multiple shooters would convey to onlookers the impression of crossfire . Multiple shooters would make it difficult, if not impossible, to pin the shooting on a fall guy . Oswald described himself as a "patsy"
 Oswald was to be framed as the lone shooter . The timing of the shots had to be timed so that onlookers would assume that one gunman was firing three shots each, for a total of nine shots . The reality might be that three gunmen were firing three times each, or three times
 To achieve the effect of synchronized shooting, the team had to have a fixed signal or target point for when the shooting was to begin . To achieve this, they had to be able to shoot at a target point .
 From the first shot fired, each shooter could count from the first to the last shot fired . Each shooter would have sufficient time to chamber the next round and aim, so that each shot would be counted .
 If the shooters had a spotter, the spotter could receive the signal to shoot by walkietalkie, to keep the shooter in sequence . The spotter received the signal from a walkietalker to shoot .
 Synchronized shooting from multiple concealed locations was a solution that made Dealey Plaza an ideal kill zone . Each shooter had an accomplice to assist with communications, sighting, and escape .
 Dealey Plaza quickly transformed from a nearly impossible kill zone for an amateur acting alone to a near-sure thing for a team of world-class marksmen . The best marksmanship of the day was captured on the night of the shooting .
 This could not be the first kill for any of the shooters or their accomplices . This is not the first killing for anyone involved in the shooting .
 The adrenalin flow in seeing JFK alive and knowing you were about to assassinate the president of the U.S. required steely nerves only a proven sniper with a track record of success would have .
 Only shooters with the demonstrated ability to remain dispassionate and calculating could get this particular job done . Only shooters who have a proven track record can get this job done.
 An amateur could be expected to fumble with the bolt-action loading an old World War II Italian Army rifle . The rifle is loaded with bolt action loading .
 A high-powered scope filled the shooter’s vision with a highly magnified vision of a small part of the target's body might make finding and locking on the target more difficult for an amateur . High-powered scopes might make it more difficult to find and lock on the
 One foul-up and the target might be wounded but not killed, or the shooter might be detected and brought into custody . One foul up might be a mistake or a mistake, but the shooter may be caught .
 Taking photos after the limo passed the Stemmons Freeway sign would take advantage of a relaxed entourage . Taking the shots would take a relaxed group of people . The photos were taken after limo had passed the freeway sign .
 The motorcade began at Love Field and wound through downtown Dallas . It was the last leg of a long motorcade that began at the airport .
 The VIPs in the JFK limo would be looking forward to getting out of the sun and into the ample shade under the triple underpass . The underpass is located in the middle of a busy intersection .
 They were anticipating getting to the Trade Center where JFK was to give a luncheon address and a cool drink and something to eat would be waiting for them . They would be able to get to the World War II memorial where JFK gave a speech .
 The crowd was expected to thin as the limo traveled Elm Street . It was assumed spectators would prefer downtown vantage points where the passage would be slower . The limo is expected to travel through Elm Street at the end of the day .
 The Secret Service and Dallas police accompanying the motorcade were likely also to be ready to relax their guard . After successfully negotiating downtown without an incident, the Secret Service is likely to relax .
 The back entrance wound penetrated less than one joint of a doctor’s little finger, as measured at the autopsy . The doctor's little finger was found to have been penetrated by the back entrance of the wound .
 The headshot or headshot shattered JFK’s skull and splattered brain tissue in a mist that reached a foot or more in the air and wafted back to bathe the motorcycle police immediately tailing the limo . Yet, the headshots or headshots shattered JFK
 This difference in ballistic impact on the target would suggest each shooter had a different type of ammunition and very likely a different weapon . The difference in impact on a target is likely to be from different ammunition .
 It's hard to imagine requiring shooters to change weapons and ammunition as the kill proceeded . It's not easy to imagine changing weapons or ammunition during the kill .
 This would imply each shooter could have had in mind or had been assigned a particular kind of shot that required a particular weapon and type of ammunition . It would imply that each shooter had a particular type of shot .
 In other words, it is conceivable the various shots taken during the assassination could well have been designed to have different effects .
 The first two shots to hit JFK may have been set-up shots . JFK was hit in the neck and the back of the back .
 JFK was only wounded by these shots and the surprise of being shot was obvious on his face . JFK was shot in the face but was not wounded by the shots .
 Security personnel and others in the car could be expected to react relatively slowly, or so it would seem to shooters . The slow-motion bubble that surrounds professional snipers at the moment of their kill is expected to be slow .
 Films taken during the assassination show that Greer applied the brakes, slowing down enough to bring the limo to a near halt . Orville Nix took the film, which shows Greer applying the brakes .
 The therapeutic back-brace that JFK habitually wore was wrapped tightly around his torso under his shirt that day . Ironically, the therapeutic back brace was wrapped around JFK’s torso .
 The back-brace JFK habitually wore would hold his torso upright and straight, provided the bullets selected to hit his neck and back were a sufficiently low caliber . An experienced sniper designing the assassination may have known the back brace would hold him upright .
 A wounded JFK was partially immobilized, held upright, and struggling to react . It was a perfect set-up for the final headshot, or headshots, to kill JFK .
 Each shooter on the team could have been given a particular objective, a particular weapon, and a particular shot to achieve a particular effect . Each shooter was given a specific objective, weapon, or shot that would achieve a certain effect .
 Attempting a fatal headshot from the rear was risky because that shot was the most difficult . Attempting the fatal head shot from the back was risky .
 The only way it made sense for shooters positioned in the buildings behind the limo to attempt a head shot was if their head shots were designed as a back-up to the more sure-fire head shots planned to be taken by the shooters planned at the front of the motorcade .
 The first shots that entered JFK’s back from behind and his throat from the front involved lower-powered ammunition most likely fired by low-powered weapons . The first shot was likely fired from a low-power weapon .
 A bullet that entered the head might not have sufficient velocity or power to exit the skull . These two shots might have been aimed as head shots, but may not have enough velocity .
 A .22 caliber bullet would have most likely done irreparable damage to JFK’s brain, but not nearly as much damage as a higher-caliber bullet or a custom-designed explosive bullet . JFK's brain was likely damaged by the bullet, but it was not irreparable .
 The headshot from the back blew out the head-flap at JFK’s forehead may have been done with a custom-designed bullet where the point had been hollowed out or filled with mercury .
 A modified hollowpoint bullet was the favorite of many assassins because it explodes upon impact and causes massive damage . The bullet is a modified version of a bullet that exploded upon impact . It was a favorite of assassins because of its explosion .
 An exploding, hollow-point bullet could explain the fracture damage seen in the autopsy photos of JFK’s skull, as well as the plume of brain tissue and blood that shot out of the head on impact .
 In the immediate aftermath of the shooting, witnesses in Dealey Plaza rushed the grassy knoll, searching for the killers . In the aftermath, witnesses rushed to the knoll to look for the killer .
 Lane was extremely critical of the interview the Warren Commission had conducted with Bowers in Dallas . Lane was critical of interview conducted by Bowers on April 2, 1964 . Lane testified that he observed three suspicious automobiles enter the area in the half-hour preceding the assassination .
 The first car was a 1959 blue-and-white Oldsmobile, with an out-of-state license plate, and a “Goldwater for President” bumper sticker . It was a '60s blue and '59s car with 'Goldwater' bumper sticker
 The second car, a 1957 black Ford with a Texas license plate, entered the area around 12:20m., some ten minutes after the first car . A white male was driving with one hand while holding what looked like a microphone with his other hand .
 Bowers explained the black Ford came in from the extension of Elm Street in front of the school depository and left after three or four minutes . Bowers said it was a black Ford coming in from Elm Street .
 The third car, a 1961 or 1962 four-door white Chevrolet Impala with an out-of-state license plate, circled the tower and probed one spot right at the tower in an attempt to get out . The car was driven by a white male, driven by an out
 Bowers was too busy to watch to see if the car left the area, but the last he remembered, the car paused just above the assassination site . Bowers watched the car leave the area .
 Bowers also observed the first and third car were covered with a red mud . Bowers said the first car was covered with red mud, and the other was covered in mud .
 Just prior to the shooting, Bowers observed two men standing behind the picket fence toward the mouth of the underpass, he says . Bowers says he saw two men behind the fence .
 Bowers described one of the men as “middle-aged, or slightly older, fairly heavy set,” and wearing a white shirt and fairly dark trousers .
 The second, younger man was in his mid-twenties, wearing either a plaid shirt or plaid coat or jacket . The man in his twenties was wearing either an outfit or a coat or coat .
 Bowers observed the two men were within ten or fifteen feet of each other, facing the motorcade as it approached . Bowers: The two men are within 10 or 15 feet away from each other .
 All the others Bowers saw in the area, he knew, including two policemen standing on the overpass, a railroad signal man, two welders, and a labor’s assistant helping the welders .
 Something out of the ordinary occurred in this particular spot, which attracted my eye for some reason, which I could not identify . I just am unable to describe rather than it was a sort of milling around, but something occurred in the particular spot .
 Bowers would have explained what it was in the area behind the fence that caught his attention at the time JFK was shot . Mark noted that Ball’s interruption prevented Bowers from concluding his most important sentence .
 At the time of the shooting, in the vicinity of where the two men were, there was a flash of light or, as far as I am concerned, something I could not identify, but there was something which occurred which caught my eye in this immediate area .
 There was a flash of light or smoke or something which caused me to feel like something out of the ordinary had occurred there. Now, what this was, I could not state at that time, and at this time I couldn't identify it, other than there was some unusual occurrence .
 In reading your testimony, Mr Bowers, it appears that just as you were about to make that statement, you were interrupted in the middle of the sentence by the Commission counsel, who then went into another area .
 Both Vincent Bugliosi and Gerald Posner discount the testimony of Lee Bowers . They argue echoes in Dealey Plaza made difficult the determination of where shots came from .
 A railroad employee was standing at the bannister of the triple underpass, by the railroad yard, at the time of the shooting . He testified he heard four shots fired and saw a puff of smoke emerge from under the trees on the grassy knoll .
 Holland also supported Governor Connally’s recollection . Holland said JFK was hit by the first shot and Connally by the second shot . Holland also backed Connally's recollection .
 “It looked to me like somebody had been standing there for a long time,” he testified . “I saw somebody standing there,’ he testified. ‘I didn’t think it was going to be easy. It looked like it was a long
 William E Newman Jr. and his wife Gayle were standing on the north curb of Elm Street with their two children, waving at the president as the limousine passed, some fifteen feet from the president .
 In several interviews, Newman insisted that the shots were fired from directly behind where he was standing with his wife and children, from behind the picket fence at the top of the grassy knoll . Newman insisted in several different interviews, including an interview with police in Dealey Plaza at
 Newman swore to the truth of his recollection the shots came from directly behind where he and his family were standing . Newman identified the shots as having come from behind the picket fence on the grassy knoll . Newman said the shots were fired from the knoll behind a fence .
 Both men believed the shots were fired from behind them on the grassy knoll . Their affidavits were ignored by the official inquiry and neither was called to give testimony to the Warren Commission .
 Brennan claimed to have had a clear view of the assassin in the sixth floor corner window of the depository building, directly above his vantage point . Brennan claims to have been able to see the assassin from a vantage point in the building's sixth floor .
 As it appeared to me he was standing up and resting against the left window sill, with gun shouldered to his right shoulder, holding the gun with his left hand and taking positive aim and firing his last shot . Well, as it appeared, as well as appearing to him he was
 At a police lineup the night of the assassination, Brennan apparently was either unable or unwilling to positively identify Oswald as the shooter . Brennan's credibility should have badly damaged his credibility, he says .
 You said that you told him that this particular person looked the most like the man you saw on the sixth floor of the building there . As I understand your testimony, then, you said that . You said he looked most likely to be the same person you saw .
 "I believe I reached home quarter to three or something of that, 15 minutes either way," he says . "I saw his picture twice on television before I went down to the police station for the lineup," he adds .
 Brennan later said he hesitated to give a positive description of Oswald at the lineup because he was afraid doing so might place him and his family in personal danger of a reprisal . Brennan did not specify who might do what to him or to his family . Brennan said he did not give a
 The Warren Commission and Bugliosi provide no proof Brennan's description was the basis for the police radio suspect description .
 Neither the Warren Commission nor Bugliosi provide any testimony or evidence that would resolve the question with certainty . The Warren Commission provides no testimony that would solve the question .
 Posner's insistence that Oswald acted alone would not allow him to posit the idea of an accomplice who might seek to silence witnesses . Posner’s insistence that he acted alone wouldn’t allow Posner to suggest that .
 Reading the Warren Commission testimony closely, there does not seem to be support for McKnight’s supposition . The Warren Commission testified on behalf of President Obama .
 There had been a shooting at the time the President’s motorcade had gone by, but nobody seemed to know who the shots were directed at or what had actually happened, except there was a shooting here .
 Brennan claimed to have seen the shooter so that he could describe his physical characteristics and his actions in detail . Brennan claimed that when Oswald had fired his last shot, he paused to contemplate the scene with satisfaction .
 Sawyer could not remember the man’s name and he could not provide a physical description of the witness, except to say he was around thirty-five years old . Sawyer said the witness was around 30-years-old . Sawyer was not able to remember the witness's name and
 Brennan was forty-five years old on November 22, 1963, and he was wearing a white construction hard hat in Dealey Plaza during the motorcade . Brennan was wearing the hat at the time of the assassination .
 Sawyer remembered none of the details about the man who gave him the suspect description . Sawyer said he was not sure if he knew the suspect in the case . Sawyer says he has no recollection of the description .
 Sawyer testified he never saw the man again, not even at the lineups the Dallas Police Department held that evening with Oswald . Sawyer testified the man never saw him again .
 Brennan also testified that he gave his story to Secret Service Agent Forrest V Sorrels, the head of the Dallas Secret Service office . Brennan says he gave the story to the Secret Service agent, who is now in charge of the office .
 In Commission Exhibit 479, Brennan is twisted around to his left, supporting his twisted body by bracing his left hand, palm down, on the top of the concrete wall . Brennan is seen holding his hand palm down on the wall .
 Brennan has his back still facing Zapruder’s camera, watching JFK as the limousine disappears behind the Stemmons Freeway sign . Brennan had his back turned around to watch the final moments of JFK's life .
 Brennan can be seen in the Zapruder film from frame 133, the first frame of the film in which the JFK limo appears after it has turned onto Elm from Houston, through frame 208, when the limo is heading down Elm and JFK’s head is all that
 With his back tured to the book depository throughout the shooting sequence, it is hard to see how Brennan could have observed as much as he claims to have seen . Brennan's back was at the depository at the time .
 Brennan said he observed two African-Americans he thought were watching the motorcade from the fifth floor window below the sniper’s nest . Brennan says he saw them from a fifth-floor window . Brennan: Two African-American men thought to have been watching motorcade .
 A standing shooter would have a difficult time getting the angle needed to hit the motorcade . The limo passed the Stemmons Freeway sign on Elm Street . Shooting through this narrow opening is so low to the floor, a standing shot would be difficult .
 The obviously dirty windows would have made it, difficult if not impossible, to identify a standing man with any clarity from his belt up . Furthermore, it would have been difficult to identify the standing man from his waist up .
 The shape of a man might have been visible, but the dirty windows would have obscured any details . A man's shape was visible but the shape of the man was clearly visible .
 No Secret Service agents were assigned duty in Dealey Plaza that day . Bystanders rushed the grassy knoll to examine the parking lot and railroad yard . Several people reported encountering Secret Service .
 Seymour Weitzman was a Dallas County deputy constable who played a major role in the search of Dealey Plaza immediately after the assassination . He was one of many bystanders who helped with the search .
 Weitzman's recollection of the Secret Service being there is particularly vivid because it involves a fragment of JFK’s skull . JFK's skull was part of a fragment that was found in his skull .
 We noticed numerous kinds of footprints that did not make any sense because they were going different directions . We noticed many of the footprints that didn't make no sense .
 Someone brought him a piece of what he thought to be a firecracker . It turned out to be, I believe, I wouldn’t quote this, but I turned it over to one of the secret Service men . I told them it should go to the lab because it
 Mr Smith: 'This woman came up to me and she was just in hysterics. She was just hysterics'
 "I was checking all the bushes and I checked all the cars in the parking lot. I was checking the bushes," she said . "I checked all of the cars," she added .
 There was some deputy sheriff with me, and I believe one Secret Service man when I got down there . "There was some Deputy Sheriff's with me," he said .
 "I felt awfully silly, but after the shot and this woman, I pulled my pistol from my holster, and I thought, this is silly," she said . "After the shot, I felt awfully . silly"
 Sorrels rode in the lead car of the motorcade to Parkland Hospital . He went back to Dealey Plaza to join in the criminal investigation . Sorrel: "I'm a hero. I'm not afraid to die"
 Few mysteries in the case are as important as this one, and it is appalling that the Commission ignored or failed to recognize the grounds here for serious suspicion of a well-planned conspiracy at work .
 Dealey Plaza was at the end of the motorcade route, with the entrance to Stemmons Freeway just beyond the triple underpass . The entrance to the Stemmon Freeway was also at the Dealey plaza .
 Within minutes of the shooting, the sparse crowd in Dealey Plaza was enlarged by a surge of onlookers who rushed from downtown in the vicinity of Houston and Main .
 The photographs of the Dealey Plaza area immediately after the shooting show large numbers of people climbing the grassy knoll to mill around in the parking lot and railroad yard .
 An assassin handing off a rifle for deposit in a case or a parked car, could easily walk away, mixing in with the crowd . An assassin could walk away from the scene and mix in the crowd with the crowds .
 If a person looked official enough, perhaps dressed in a suit and tie and claimed to be a Secret Service agent, he could have easily slipped away . A person could easily slip away from the scene .
 Even experienced Dallas Police officers took the time to study credentials even when they were presented .
 The escape strategy for a professional team of assassins in Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963, was simple . "Blend into the crowd and walk away. Walk away," the assassin's escape strategy .
 If stopped and questioned, claim to be a Secret Service agent and flash what looked like credentials . Claimed to be an agent and flashed credentials .
 Warren Commission Liebeler acknowledged this exact point in interview with James Tague . Tague was a bystander whose cheek was nicked by a bullet ricocheted in the shooting . The shooting victim was shot in the head by a police officer .
 The only thing that I saw that I thought was wrong was that there was about 5 or 6 or 7 minutes in there before anybody done anything about anything . "There was about 6 or 8 minutes in that time before anybody did anything about it," he said . "The only thing I
 There was no action taken except for the one policeman that stopped his motorcycle, and it fell over on him first . He got it standing upright and drew his gun, and he was the only one doing anything about it about it .
 It is unclear if the grassy knoll or the parking lot and railroad yard beyond were ever secured as a crime scene . It is not known if the knoll and parking lot was secured .
 The value of Dealey Plaza as a crime scene was irreparably lost . With the instant flood of onlookers into the kill zone, the value of the site was lost . The value was lost in the shooting .
 Any evidence of the assassination that might have been found and properly identified for use in subsequent criminal proceedings was squandered . Bystanders and police picked up pieces of evidence and handed them over to people they perceived as authorities .
 The swarm of people descended on Dealey Plaza in the aftermath of the shooting is a case study only in how rapidly police can and do lose control of a crime scene in a downtown outdoor venue open to the public .
 Josiah Thompson conducted an analysis of the Zapruder and the Nix films of the assassination for his 1967 book, Six Seconds in Dallas . Thompson conducted the analysis for his book .
 He concluded the headshot that killed JFK was a double shot, with one bullet hitting him in the back of the head, followed a fraction of a second later by a shot from the front .
 These findings suggest crossfire on Elm Street, as the car approached the triple underpass . These findings suggested crossfire between two cars .
 More than one shooter, by definition, means JFK was assassinated by a conspiracy . More than a single shooter is more likely to be involved in JFK's assassination .
 Zapruder film then shows JFK’s head being thrown violently back and to the left, a motion that suggests a shot came from the front and left side of the limo to the front .
 The right part of JFK’s forehead flaps open and a massive section of his skull in the back is blown out . JFK's skull was blown out by the explosion . JFK suffered a massive skull injury .
 Bone fragments and brain matter from JFK’s skull and brain spew out onto the trunk of the limousine . Secret Service Agent Clint Hill rushes forward to get his foot on the left running board at the back . Hill grabs the left handrail on the limo's trunk .
 Thompson argued his findings of a double headshot almost simultaneously hit JFK from the front and rear explain the contradictory medical testimony from Parkland Hospital that identified JFK’s head wounds as entry wounds . Medical testimony from Bethesda Naval Hospital where autopsy photographs show the back of JFK's head appeared virtually
 The puzzle remains that the Bethesda autopsy photos fail to show the large gaping exit wound in the right back of JFK’s head that the doctors at Parkland described . JFK's autopsy photos do not reveal the large exit wound that doctors described .
 Jackie Kennedy climbed out onto the back of the limousine, not to help Secret Service Special Agent Clint Hill get into the moving vehicle, but to pick up a piece of her husband’s skull .
 The largest fragment of JFK's skull to have flown clear of JFK’s body in the explosion of his head resulting from the headshots . It has been identified as occipital bone, from the back of Kennedy's skull . And why the “Harper fragment”
 The pattern that emerges from this study of medical evidence is a dual one. The pattern emerges is that the study is of two medical evidence .
 A bullet struck the right front of the President’s head on a tangent, ranged backward causing massive damage to the right brain hemisphere, sprung open the occipital and parietal bones, and exploded out over the rear of the limousine . A bullet hit the right
 From the surgeons we get the picture of a bullet entering the rear of the President’s head and driving forward to the midtemple region . From the Bethesda surgeons we can’t imagine what happened to the President .
 Putting the two pictures together, we discern the outlines of the double impact . Putting the photos together, the images show the impact of the two impact .
 First, a bullet from behind exploding forward, and in that same split second another bullet driving into the exploding mass, forcing tissue and skull in the opposite direction . Then, a second bullet drives into the . exploding mass .
 This is not a pretty picture, but it reconciles the evidence of the Zapruder film, eye-and-ear-witness reports, and the curious double dispersion of impact debris . The film was shot in New York City, New York, on June 4, 1945
 Much of the confusion interpreting the ballistics of JFK’s headshot involves attempting to explain all the conflicting damage observed by one bullet, either from the front or from the rear .
 Lifton argued the goal was to alter JFK’s body so the medical examiner would conclude all shots had been fired from the front, a requirement if a patsy like Lee Harvey Oswald was to take the fall as the lone shooter . Lifton: The goal, Lifton
 If the body were altered in accordance with the trajectory-reversal scheme, plotters must have put a rifle and sniper’s nest behind and above the motorcade, but shot Kennedy from the front . Plotters must also have a sniper's nest behind, above and above
 Lifton’s point is that a conspiracy to assassinate JFK required a . conspiracy to alter or eliminate any medical evidence that contradicted the one-shooter theory . Lifton: A conspiracy to kill JFK required the assassination required a conspiracy .
 Lifton’s postulated secret autopsy is dismissed as unlikely or impossible . In a sense, this is precisely what the Warren Commission did, even though Lifton's postulated autopsy is unlikely . The Warren Commission is still trying to find out what happened .
 Arlen Specter invented the single-bullet theory to force all the evidence into a conclusion that Lee Harvey Oswald was a lone-nut gunman . Specter said the psychological problems led him to commit the JFK assassination without accomplices .
 Ballistic evidence shows JFK's throat wound was an entry wound or a superficial wound that did not penetrate the body . JFK’s back wound was a superficial injury that didn’t penetrate his body, he says .
 Ballistic evidence shows bullet fragments found in the limousine after the shooting were fired from the Mannlicher-Carcano . That does not prove Lee Harvey Oswald fired the weapon, Thompson argues .
 What becomes untenable as evidence accumulates, however, is the assumption the Mannlicher-Carcano was the only weapon fired . Evidence accumulates as evidence builds up .
 One of the key witnesses in Lifton’s book was a laboratory technician at Bethesda Naval Hospital . Paul O’Connor, a lab technician at the hospital, witnessed the autopsy . Lifton's book was published in October .
 Lifton knew that a sheet of plastic had been used to line the Dallas casket before JFK’s body was placed into the casket . Lifton startled Lifton because he knew that the plastic sheet had been placed in the coffin of JFK .
 O’Connor’s testimony supported Lifton's hypothesis that JFK’�s body had been taken from Andrews Air Force Base and transported by helicopter to Walter Reed Hospital . The Army maintains that a secret autopsy was performed to remove any bullet fragments or medical evidence .
 Lifton believes JFK’s body was then delivered to Bethesda Naval Hospital for the official autopsy . Lifton says JFK's body was delivered to the hospital for the autopsy .
 There was no intermediate stop recorded on the official timetable where any ‘surgery’ on JFK’s skull had been done . JFK's skull was never found to have been operated on .
 Autopsy begins at 8:00m. CST in Dallas, then at Bethesda Naval Hospital in Bethesda, Maryland . Autopsy will take place in Dallas and Bethesda, Washington, DC, on Monday morning .
 FBI and LBJ assumed control over the criminal investigation and the “best evidence of the crime,” namely, JFK’s body . JFK's body was found in 1963 . LBJ and FBI had assumed control of the investigation .
 There was no way to know how any fingerprint or palm print information gained from the rifle was not planted there . There is no way of knowing how the information was planted .
 The FBI had taken over the investigation of the crime, despite lacking legal justification to do so . The FBI has not been able to find out why they took over the case .
 With control of the case moving to Washington, altering of evidence to fit the official theory of the assassination was no longer a possibility .
 Earl Rose stood in the doorway at Parkland Hospital while JFK’s body remained in Dallas so he could conduct a proper autopsy . Six months before the assassination, he stood in front of JFK's body in Dallas to conduct an autopsy .
 Federal agents threatened Rose with automatic weapons to get him to stand out of the way . Rose was shot by federal agents at the scene of the shooting .
 They seemed to command a lot of respect and attention — sinister looking people . They seemed like sinister looking looking people. They were powerful looking people, they said . They commanded respect, attention and attention .
 Boswell’s shoulder, then they’d go back and have a little conference in the comer . Boswell: ‘They’re going to be very happy to see each other again. They’ll be very pleased with each other’
 Paul Peters used his right hand to indicate the back of his head behind his right ear to describe JFK’s head wound that he saw as having blown out the right occipital-parietal part of his brain and skull . Peters indicated that the wound blew out part of JFK
 Robert McClelland said on film that almost a fifth to a quarter to ‘the right back part of the head’ had been blasted out, along with most of the brain tissue in that area .
 JFK autopsy photographs show the back of JFK’s head intact, with his hair in place . The autopsy photographs, however, show the head intact . The JFK autopsy photos show JFK's hair intact .
 A remarkable series of frames shows a frantic Jackie Kennedy in the back seat propping her husband up to a full sitting position, as if he were alive . The Zapruder film shows the president's wife propping him up as he dies .
 The sequence of the Zapruder film, rarely watched or studied, begins around frame 454 . It is rarely watched and studied .
 Jackie Kennedy reacted with the type of hysteria that some unfortunate victims experience who have lost an appendage, such as a finger, a hand, or even an arm . In the instant after the fatal headshot, Jackie Kennedy reacts with the kind of hysteria some victims experience .
 In the film Jackie scrambles onto the trunk of the limo trying to grab some part of JFK’s skull or brain matter . Just as those victims will try to jam the severed appendage back in place, in the film, in Jackie .
 Jackie desperately tries to put Jack back together again to the point of moving the head flap back in place . Once Jackie gets back in the seat, it appears she tries to get Jack back to the seat .
 Jackie Kennedy was asked if she remembered Secret Service Agent Clint Hill who climbed on the back of the limo to help . Secret Service agent Clint Hill was the hero of the day .
 Kennedy and Me, in which he describes his experience during the JFK assassination, was published in 2012 . The book, "Kennedy and Me," was published by the author of the book JFK and Me .
 In the same instant, blood, brain matter, and bone fragments exploded from the back of the president’s head . The president was hit by the blast, but was struck by the fragments .
 The various photographs of the JFK assassination make clear that Hill was running to get on the trunk of the trunk . Hill was seen running to the trunk. Hill was killed by the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Hill to have seen brain matter explode out of JFK's head meant the wound at the back of JFK’s head had to have been an exit wound . Hill said the wound was likely to have caused brain matter to explode .
 The importance of these few frames at the end of the Zapruder film is that we get a fleeting view at the back of JFK’s head . We get a few frames of JFK's head in the final moments .
 The hair around the back head wound is a richer brownish-red color, and the wound adjacent to the right ear is the size of a grapefruit . The hair is the color of a red hair .
 Parkland Hospital press conference held one hour and fifteen minutes after JFK had been pronounced dead . JFK was pronounced dead at a Parkland hospital in Florida .
 Dr. Malcolm Perry, one of the attending physicians in the emergency room, and Dr. Malcom Perry, the attending physician in the ER . Dr. Perry: "I'm not sure what I'm doing, but I'm sure I'm going to get a lot of help,"
 Two doctors considered the gaping hole at the back of JFK’s skull to have been an exit wound . The bullet hole observed in JFK's neck was also thought to be an entrance wound .
 Charles Carrico, a surgeon doing his residency at Parkland Hospital at the time, was the first physician to treat JFK in the emergency room . He was doing a residency at the hospital .
 This was a 5-by 51-cm defect in the posterior skull, the occipital region . The defect is a 5 by 51cm defect . It is the size of a five-by-51cm hole in the skull .
 There was an absence of the calvarium or skull in this area, with shredded tissue, brain tissue present and initially considerable slow oozing . There was also a large area of shredded tissue and brain tissue left .
 There was 'profuse bleeding from the wound' after the attack, according to the doctor . "Then after we established some circulation there was more profuse bleeding," he said .
 McClelland arrived after the tracheotomy had been given . He arrived at the emergency room after the operation .
 Putting on surgical gloves, McClelland also observed a massive wound to the back of JFK’s head . The wound was caused by JFK's assassination .
 The Warren Commission had to ignore or otherwise obfuscate the medical evidence that Oswald suffered an exit wound in the back of his head . Oswald suffered a gunshot wound to the head that killed JFK in the assassination .
 The same police officer who found a piece of JFK’s skull and encountered what he thought was a Secret Service agent was present in the aftermath of the shooting . Seymour Weitzman was present when the rifle was found .
 Dallas Police Department ordered all of the sixth floor sealed off and searched . At this time Captain Fritz [Dallas Police Department] arrived and ordered all . The sixth floor was searched .
 I was working with Deputy S Boone of the Sheriff’s Department and helping in the search. I was . working with . Deputy Boone of . the Sheriff's Department . The search was successful .
 The rifle was a 7.65 Mauser bolt action equipped with a 4/18 scope, a thick leather brownishlooking sling on it . It was a Mauser rifle equipped with an 8-inch scope and a 4-inch leather sling .
 Captain Fritz ejected one live round from the chamber of his rifle . Captain Fritz took charge of the rifle and ejected the live round . The action was captured on film .
 "I proceeded to the sixth floor of the building to search for the rifle. I proceeded to ... find the rifle," he said .
 "I started on the east end of the building and worked my way to the west end," she says . "I'm not going to be afraid of the future," she adds .
 In the northwest corner of the building approx. three feet from the east wall of the stairwell and behind a row of cases of books I saw the rifle, what appeared to be a 7.65 Mauser .
 The rifle had what appeared to be a brownish-black stock and blue steel, metal parts . The rifle was a rifle with what appears to be brownish black stock .
 Fritz DPD was called to this location and along with an ID man DPD took charge of the rifle . DPD said the rifle was stolen from the home of a man .
 He had knelt down there to look at it, and before he removed it, not knowing what it was, he said that is what it looks like. He said that was what it looked like. It's not known what it is .
 This is when Lieutenant Day, I believe his name is, the ID man was getting ready to photograph it . The ID man got ready to take it down, but it was too late .
 The story appeared to change on Saturday, November 23, 1963, the day following the assassination . FBI tracked the purchase and shipment of an Italian Mannlicher-Carcano carbine to an A Hidell in Dallas, Texas .
 Dallas police claim to have found a forged Selective Service card with a photograph of Oswald and a photo of him . That card matched a photograph and the name Alex James Hidell that was found in Oswald’s wallet at the time of his arrest .
 As a condition of testifying to the Warren Commission, he obtained permission to examine the rifle . Warren Commission critic Mark Lane, in his 1966 book, Rush to Judgment, pointed out as a condition . Lane: "The rifle is a weapon of choice. It is a rifle of choice."
 The words “MADE ITALY” and “CAL 6.5” were stamped on the rifle . Lane found it not credible that any policeman finding the rifle on the sixth floor of the School Depository could possibly mistake the weapon for a German-made
 The pristine bullet Arlen Specter used as the foundation for his single-bullet theory . For the answer, consider CE399, the pristine bullet used by Specter as a foundation .
 Specter felt he had a ‘lock’ on the case, if only he could establish that CE399 was the bullet that hit both JFK and Connally .
 The problem remained that no authoritative chain of custody could be established for CE399 . The suspicion remained that CE399 might have been planted on the stretcher at Parkland Hospital where it was found by Darrell C Tomlinson .
 Mannlicher-Carcano was the government’s rifle of choice after the alias A Hidell established a link between Oswald as the buyer of the weapon and a mail-order shop in Chicago as the seller .
 The German rifle simply disappears from the case once the Commission realizes linking the murder weapon to Oswald becomes a lot easier to establish if the 6.6. rifle was the 6th weapon used to assassinate JFK .
 If Oswald was A Hidell, he had to be the lone gunman, as proved by the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle and CE399 . Or, to put the chain of deduction more simply, if Oswald was a Hidell . Or to put it simply, he must be
 CE399 was not found in the body of JFK or Connally . No bullet or bullet fragment pulled out of JFK's body could be traced back to the Mannlicher-Carcano with certainty .
 The Mannlicher-Carcano was a notoriously inaccurate weapon to fire and ammunition was World War II vintage . Evidently, the Warren Commission hoped the American public would just forget the weapon was inaccurate to fire .
 Oswald's only thought should have been to get away undetected as fast as possible, Oswald says . Oswald murdered the president of the U.S. in September 1963 . Oswald's motive should be to escape undetected, he says .
 If the shooter had been professional, no shell casings or rifle would ever have been found, unless, of course, they were planted, in order that they would be found . The shooter would have planted the casings and rifle in order to find them .
 The Mannlicher-Carcano was easily traceable back to Lee Harvey Oswald via the mailorder receipt in the name of the alias Alex Hidell . The receipt was sent to Hidell via the alias of Hidell, the alias used by Hidell and Oswald .
 Three spent shell casings would lead investigators to conclude no more than three shots had been fired, a conclusion that would help rule out multiple shooters organized in a conspiracy . Not only would it frame Oswald as the shooter, the three spent shells would also rule out other shooters .
 A Dallas Police Department incompetent enough to have allowed the assassination to have occurred in the first place could clearly attempt redemption by solving the crime this expeditiously .
 The rifle was identified as a 7.65 Mauser by investigators when they found it, police say . It's unclear why investigators identified the rifle as a Mauser .
 The Warren Commission simply dismissed any evidence that contradicted the pre-determined, politically acceptable solution to the crime, namely that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone-gun assassin . The truth is the truth, the Warren Commission just dismissed any . evidence that contradicts the politically acceptable conclusion .
 As we have seen, the Warren Commission ignored the testimony of the many eyewitnesses who were convinced the shots had come from the grassy knoll . The Warren Commission has ignored testimony from eyewitnesses in the shooting .
 Carolyn Walthers, for instance, was a spectator who watched the motorcade from Houston Street, some fifty to sixty feet south of the corner of Elm and Houston, from a vantage point in front of the Criminal Courts building . She says, "The motorcade is a great thing
 Witnesses disagreed regarding how many shots were fired, whether the first and second shots came in rapid sequence, or whether the rapid sequence involved the second and third shots . Witnesses disagreed on how many of the shots were shot .
 Some witnesses heard the shots, especially the first shot, as a firecracker, while others reported the shots boomed like a cannon . Some witnesses said the shots were fired from a cannon, others said they sounded like firecrackers .
 Warren Commission did not probe whether more than one weapon may have accounted for the different ways witnesses heard the shots . The Warren Commission didn't look at whether more weapons may have been used .
 The Warren Commission typically ignored testimony that did not fit the theory that Oswald was the lone shooter . Oswald was not the only shooter, the Warren Commission did not always agree .
 The Warren Commission published more than two thousand volumes of hearings that included more than 2,000 documents . Maybe the Warren Commission deemed publishing the hearings as sufficient weight of evidence to silence doubters .
 The problem from the beginning was that careful doubters took the time and trouble to read and study the twenty-six volumes . The problem was that careless doubters had to take the time to study the volumes .
 Skeptics raise questions that the Warren Commission could not easily answer . The Warren Commission's own independent research also raises questions about the panel .
 If the goal of the Warren Commission was to solve the crime, it took exactly the wrong approach . The Warren Commission took exactly wrong approach to solving the crime . It took a different approach to the case .
 The Warren Commission should have avoided forming any hypothesis regarding who killed JFK and how, until after all available evidence had been collected and all available testimony had been taken .
 LBJ pushed a political conclusion that demanded dissenters be dismissed as ‘conspiracy theory’ nut cases . LBJ and the Justice Department pushed the political conclusion . Instead, LBJ said dissenters were dismissed as conspiracy theories .
 By violating the pursuit for truth, the Warren Commission has committed a more serious crime on the nation than was committed in the JFK assassination itself . The Warren Commission violated the pursuit of the truth, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 For fifty years now the Commission has committed violence against our most sacred of freedoms, our First Amendment right to free speech and the ability to dissent respectfully . For 50 years now, the Commission's actions have committed violence .
 Dallas Police Department motorcycle patrolman Marrion L Baker testified to the Warren Commission on March 25, 1964 . Baker testified that he was trailing the JFK limo in the motorcade by about a block . Dallas police officer testified to Warren Commission .
 JFK's limo was heading down Elm toward the triple underpass . He heard the first shot as he was proceeding down Houston, as JFK’s limo .
 Baker recognized the first shot as a rifle shot because he had just returned from deer hunting, where he had heard rifle fire for about a week . Baker said he had returned from hunting for deer hunting to hear rifle fire again . Baker: "I'm not sure what happened to the first
 As I was looking up, all these pigeons began to fly up to the top of the buildings here and I saw those come up and start flying around . The pigeons started to fly around, and the pigeons were flying around.
 "I heard the two extra shots, the three shots. Yes, sir," he says . "Yes, sir; I heard—now before I revved up this motorcycle, I heard the, you know, the ... three shots"
 He parked his motorcycle approximately 45 feet from the doorway of the Texas School Depository Building . The motorcycle was parked 45 feet away from the entrance of the building .
 Together, they ran to the northwest side of the building and started taking the stairs . They realized waiting for the elevator was going to take too long and took the stairs instead of waiting for it .
 On the second floor, he got a glimpse of a man who later turned out to be Oswald . Oswald was Oswald's friend . Oswald died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head in November 1945 .
 As I came out to the second floor there, Mr Truly was ahead of me, and as he came out I was kind of scanning, you know, the rooms, and I caught a glimpse of this man walking away from this—I happened to see him through the window in this
 I don’t know how I came to see him, but I had a glimpse of him coming down here, he says . "I had a chance of him going down here. I don't know how he came to ... see him," he adds .
 Baker testified he had his revolver in his hand and the man he observed had nothing in his hands . Baker testified the man had no hands in his own hands .
 "I turned immediately and went on out up the stairs. And he said yes, and I turned immediately," she said . "He said yes," she says .
 Baker saw Oswald in custody in the homicide office of the Dallas Police Department . Baker recognized Oswald as the man he saw in the second floor lunchroom minutes after the shots were fired .
 "I turned immediately and run on up, I halfway turned then when I was talking to Mr Truly. After he says, “Yes he works here,” I turned immediately . "Yes, yes, Mr Truly."
 Truly told the Warren Commission he and Baker encountered Oswald on the second floor, just inside the lunchroom . Truly said the two men encountered Oswald just inside a lunchroom in the lunch room . Truly later told the commission that Oswald was Oswald's target .
 Baker had his gun drawn and pointed toward the middle portion of Oswald’s body . Baker had a gun drawn . Baker was in the middle of Oswald's body .
 Truly vouched for Oswald as an employee, Baker resumed running up the stairs . Baker was determined to search the roof .
 He left immediately after I told him—after he asked me, does this man work here? "He left immediately . After he left, I asked him to tell him, 'Does this man actually work here?'
 "He might have been a bit startled, like I might be if somebody confronted me," she said . "I might be a bit surprised," she added .
 Reid had been standing in the street in front of the depository as the motorcade went by . Reid had stood in the middle of the street . Reid: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm glad to see what happened"
 After the shooting, she ran back into the building and went directly to her office . She ran into her office after the shooting and went straight to her job .
 Oswald was coming to the back of the office at the time of the assassination, Oswald said, "I kept walking and I looked up and looked up" Oswald was walking .
 "I thought it was a little strange that one of the warehouse boys would be up in the office at that time, not that he had done anything wrong. He had gotten a Coke and was holding it in his hands and I guess the reason it impressed me seeing him in there was
 The only time I had seen him in the office was to come and get change and he already had his Coke in hand so he didn’t come for change and I dismissed him. He said: “I dismissed him and said he was going to get his Coke and I
 He stated that as he was leaving, two men intercepted him at the front door, identified themselves as Secret Service agents . They asked for the location of a telephone, he said, and asked for a telephone .
 Pierce Allman, a newsman with WFAA-TV in Dallas telephoned the news of the shooting from a phone in the book depository . A man he could not identify directed him and one of his fellow workers, Terry Ford, to a telephone in the depository
 Dallas Police did not question Allman regarding whether the man in the book depository who directed him to a telephone was Oswald . Allman says he was directed to a phone by a man who was in the depository at the time of the shooting .
 Allman could not state for certain whether Oswald was the person at the book depository he asked for a phone . The Secret Service was shown pictures of Oswald by the Secret Service . Allman said he could not be certain if Oswald was Oswald .
 MacNeil did run to the book depository and did ask someone at the entrance for a phone . After running on top of the grassy knoll to look over the concrete barrier, he did look into the railroad yard . MacNeil ran to the depository to get a phone call
 MacNeil saw Oswald several times at the jail but he reported nothing clicked in his mind to recognize him . MacNeil says he saw Oswald a few times but he never saw him again .
 Oswald said the man who asked for the phone was a young blond blond crew cut Secret Service man . MacNeil admits to fitting the description to which he admits fitting at the time . Oswald said MacNeil admitted the phone call was a Secret Service call .
 Oswald gave directions to what he thought were Secret Service agents as to where they could find a telephone to use inside the building . Then, Oswald walked quietly out the front door, pausing to give directions to the agents .
 President Obama was assassinated in Washington, D.C. last week . The president was assassinated by a Democratic senator in South Carolina . Obama was shot in the head by Sen. Ted Cruz, a Democrat in Texas .
 Rather than rushing out of the building through the back exit to escape law enforcement who could be rushing in to seal off the building, he took his time . Instead of rushing out, he decided to take his time to get to safety . He took his own way out, leaving the building
 Oswald was either in the secondfloor lunchroom or on his way to the lunchroom when the shooting actually happened . Witness testimony suggests that Oswald was in the lunch room at the time of the shooting . Oswald's behavior in the minutes after the shooting suggests he was not there at that time
 After seeing the fatal head shot, Adams and her coworker Sandra Styles ran to the stairwell and raced down the stairs to the first floor . They were determined to get out the back of the building to see what they could find in the railroad yard behind the fence .
 The key aspect of her testimony was that the stairway Adams took was the same stairway Lee Harvey Oswald would have had to take to get from the sixth floor to the lunchroom where he was found by Baker and Truly .
 Adams testified she saw and heard nobody else on the stairs at that time . Adams testified that she saw no other people on that stairwell . Adams said she saw nobody else and heard nothing from anyone else .
 She estimated the time between hearing the shots and leaving the window to head for the stairway was between 15 and 20 seconds . She estimated that the time she heard the shots was between fifteen and twenty seconds .
 She estimated it took less than a minute to run down the stairs from the fourth floor to the first floor . She said it took her less than half an hour to run the stairs down .
 She explained how various government officials, including the Dallas Police Department, had harassed her over her testimony . She said she was harassed by the Dallas police department .
 She produced for Ernest a 1964 letter her attorney had written to J Lee Rankin, the chief counsel for the Warren Commission . She complained that someone had made changes in her deposition, altering her meaning .
 She explained to Ernest Ernest that she left Dallas after the assassination because she was seeking to disappear . She left Dallas because she wanted to disappear, Ernest said .
 There is no photograph showing Lee Harvey Oswald on the sixth floor during the JFK shooting, and there is no testimony from anyone who worked in the building to suggest he was there either .
 The Warren Commission dismissed Victoria Adams, saying she must have come down the stairs later than she estimated . Adams was dismissed by the Warren Commission . Adams said she came down stairs after Oswald had already passed by .
 Dallas nightclub owner Jack Ruby gunned down Lee Harvey Oswald two days after JFK assassination . Ruby shot Oswald in the basement of Dallas Police headquarters adjacent to Dealey Plaza . Ruby was only two blocks from where JFK was murdered .
 The Warren Commission concluded these were independent events, with no prior connections between Oswald, Tippit, and Ruby . Oswald, Ruby, Oswald, Oswald and Ruby were not connected to each other .
 “Tippit was acquainted with either Ruby or Oswald,” the Warren Commission Report declared emphatically . Tippit’s relationship with Ruby and Oswald was “obvious”
 Tippit was cruising east on 10th Street in Oak Cliff, just past the intersection of 10th and Patton, when he saw someone he considered suspicious . According to the Warren Commission’s version of events, approximately 1:15m. on the day of the assassination,
 He approached the car and apparently exchanged words with Tippit through the right front or vent window . Police say he approached the vehicle and spoke to him through the window .
 This is where the Warren Commission assumes Oswald shot Tippit before he could draw his weapon on Oswald . The Warren Commission assumed the shooting occurred before Oswald could have drawn his weapon . Oswald was shot dead by Oswald, the commission says .
 Oswald walked away from the book depository to get a bus when he could have easily walked home . Oswald could have walked home from the depository on his way to the White House .
 In a reconstruction of the bus trip, Secret Service and FBI agents walked the seven blocks from the entrance of the book depository to the corner of Elm and Murphy, averaging six and a half minutes .
 Bus was timed as taking four minutes on Elm from Murphy to Lamar . Bus was moving through heavy traffic on Elm between Murphy and Lamar at the time .
 Oswald walked to the Greyhound Bus Terminal at Lamar and Jackson Streets, where he entered a taxicab at 12:47 or 12:48m. From there, Oswald walked . Oswald then entered a taxi . Oswald is believed to have been in a taxi at 12.47 or
 Oswald took a cab to Neely and Beckley in Oak Cliff, Texas, at approximately 12:54m. Oswald's cab ride to Oak Cliff took approximately six minutes, placing Oswald there at 12.54m . Oswald is believed to have been in the cab at around 12:
 Oswald walked from Neely and Beckley to his rooming house about 12:59 to 1:00m., approximately one-half hour after the assassination . The Warren Commission calculated Oswald arrived there about 1.00m. Oswald arrived at the house about one half an hour later .
 "Just long enough, I guess, to go in there and put it on and he went out zipping it up. Oh, maybe not over three or four minutes," he said .
 Roberts testified she couldn’t remember the color of the shirt Oswald put on . She testified she can't remember if it was long sleeve or short sleeve or long sleeve .
 Her testimony that she saw Oswald zipping up his jacket as he left was significant because she did not report noticing a gun stuffed in Oswald’s pants . Her testimony was significant as she didn’t report noticing the gun .
 Roberts testified that she cleaned Oswald’s room and she did not recall ever seeing a gun . She also clarified that it was “against the rules” to go through the belongings of a roomer .
 She also acknowledged that when police searched Oswald’s room, they found a gun holster she had never seen before . Police also found a holster she never saw before, she said .
 Oswald’s room at 1026 North Berkeley, Berkeley, was found in Oswald's room . Oswald was the assassin or fall-guy?
 Landlady told police there had not been a gun in the room only to have her words disregarded . Her voice was trembling with the indignation of a law-abiding, respectable landlady who had told the police .
 There was no hiding place in Oswald's room unless there was some elaborate cavity in the floor or in the walls which would have been discovered and would also militate against the account that Oswald ran in and out of his room . Yet as I stood there it was obvious that there was absolutely
 Oswald was in his room for three or four minutes, Roberts says . The police car stopped in front of the house, with the police in the car tapping the horn, he says .
 A police car stopped and honked at the door of a woman's home, police said . The incident happened right in front of the door, a police car honked and stopped .
 I had worked for some policemen and sometimes they come by and tell me something that maybe their wives would want me to know, and | thought it was them, and I just glanced out and saw the number . I said, “Oh, that’s not their car,
 I don't know—I didn’t pay any attention to it after I noticed it was not them, he says . "I didn't know ... I didn”t. I don’ know— I didn't pay any . attention to them," he says of
 It was the third house off of Zangs and they just went around the corner that way. And then they just eased on—the way it is --and then they eased on, the way it's the way way .
 Lee Harvey Oswald stood on the curb at a bus stop in Dallas, Texas . Roberts looked out the window and saw Oswald standing at the curb .
 She did not know whether he took a bus, whether the police car returned to pick him up, or if someone else picked him up . Nor did she know if he went to school, whether he was picked up by a police car or if he was dropped off .
 She did not continue watching Oswald long enough to know how much time he spent there waiting, or how precisely he decided to move on . Oswald's fate is not known .
 Henry Hurt spent years sifting through JFK assassination data, cross-checking and corroborating facts, and tracking down participants and witnesses .
 Oswald was simply waiting for Officer Tippit to come around and pick him up, as had been pre-arranged . Roberts observed Oswald standing at the bus stop, Oswald was waiting for the officer .
 The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald left his rooming house a few minutes after 1:00m. He needed to have reached 10th and Patton before 1:16m. Oswald was killed in the November 4, 1963, assassination .
 The timing was important because Tippit’s murder was recorded on the police radio tape at 1:16m., when a citizen witness to the shooting went into the patrol car and used the radio to tell Dallas Police . The timing of the shooting was important to police .
 Oswald had to have had enough time to walk leisurely out of the book depository’s front door, walk to a bus stop, get stuck in traffic, grab a cab, ride a short distance to his rooming house, change clothes, and then walk down 10th
 The Warren Commission’s reconstruction of the Tippit killing on East 10th Street near Patton Avenue in Oak Cliff, Texas . Oswald stopped casually, bended by resting both elbows on the passenger door so he could see Tippits through the passenger window, and spoke to T
 Oswald stepped back from the car and shot Tippit three times in the chest . Oswald then stepped back and shot the man in the head, killing him in the car . Oswald was killed in the shooting .
 Oswald moved around the front of the car to shoot him in the head, execution style . Oswald shot Tippit in execution style after he fell to the pavement . Oswald then shot him to the head with a gun .
 Witnesses gave conflicting testimony over whether Oswald was walking east or west when Tippit’s patrol car came up on him . Witnesses said Oswald was not walking east, west or west at the time of the incident .
 There was also conflicting testimony over whether Tippit’s patrol car first passed Oswald, or whether Oswald tured and went the opposite direction . Oswald was shot in the head with a bullet to the head .
 Oswald, or whoever the person was, approached the car from the passenger’s side to begin what seemed at first to be an amicable conversation . What was a consensus was that Tippit stopped and Oswald stopped and approached the vehicle .
 There was conflicting testimony whether Tippit was reaching for his gun after he got out of the patrol car, but what was Clear was that the assailant opened fire suddenly, pumping three shots into the chest with a revolver .
 The assailant pumped one more round into Tippit, a severely wounded man lying helpless and bleeding on the pavement . Calmly, he pumped one last round into the man, just to make sure he was dead .
 The assailant reloaded, casually tossing the spent shells away at the scene of the crime, seemingly unconcerned about witnesses the assailant knew were watching . Then, walking away, he reloaded and casually tossed the spent shell casings away .
 We surely cannot believe that Tippit, presumably alerted that a presidential assassin was on the loose, would give an unknown suspect the chance to draw first .
 The manner of shooting bears all the earmarks of a cold-blooded, professional, gangland slaying, not the nervous or impulsive reaction of a person like Oswald . Oswald had no prior history of ever having shot or killed anyone .
 In her testimony to the Warren Commission, Grant said that one of her coworkers at the Las Vegas Club, Leo Torti, showed her a magazine photo of Tippit after he was killed . Grant said she remembered that he had been in the Vegas Club around a month prior to his
 Journalist Joachim Joesten also confirmed Ruby knew Tippit as part of his policy of working with the cops . Ruby worked with the police in the past .
 Warren Commission's conclusion is belied by evidence the Warren Commission had, but refused to consider seriously . Yet that conclusion was belied, according to evidence from the Warren commission, but not seriously considered .
 Oswald, Jack Ruby, and Officer Tippit all frequented the same restaurant, Dobbs House Restaurant, in Oak Cliff, Texas . Oswald, Ruby and Tipperit were documented in a report filed by FBI Special Agent James Swinford .
 Oswald was last seen by her in the restaurant at about 10:00 AM, Wednesday, November 20, 1963, at which time he was “nasty” and used curse words in connection with his order . She recalled she recalled the person now recognized as Oswald was .
 Miss Dowling professed not to have known Jack Ruby as a customer . But she said she had heard from another employee he was a night customer .
 Sylvia Meagher took the Warren Commission to task for what she termed a “well-defined pattern” in the Commission’s ‘fact-finding’ in which the Commission first discounted information inimical to its thesis Oswald was the lone assassin . Meagher:
 When Tippit realized JFK had been assassinated, he changed his mind . He was set up to help the assassin escape, but then realized that he had been set up .
 Oswald was relaxed as he approached Tippit’s patrol car, as indicated by Oswald leaning against the passenger door with both forearms and speaking to him . Oswald was pleased to find Tipperit, and was relaxed when he approached his patrol car . Oswald, pleased with his
 Oswald was surprised Oswald was not reacting according to how the script had been written . Oswald said Tippit was reacting to the script, but was surprised by the reaction .
 Tippit was being aggressive, acting as if he intended to arrest Oswald . Oswald took Oswald completely by surprise . Oswald was taken aback by the aggressive move . Oswald's actions surprised him .
 Buchanan notes Jim Lehrer, then reporting for the Dallas Times Herald, wrote on December 20, 1963, that Ruby had made five reservations on a plane leaving for Mexico . Buchanan notes Lehrer wrote that Ruby, then traveling to Mexico, had reservations on the plane .
 Oswald turned the tables and killed Tippit, the most upset was Oswald . Oswald was upset when he killed Tipperit, but he was not killed by Oswald .
 Tippit's patrol car was found lying in the street in Dallas, Texas . Bowley, then a thirty-five-year-old Dallas resident, was driving on 10th Street when he saw the accident . Tipperit was a Dallas police officer .
 Dallas police squad car stopped in traffic lane headed east on 10th Street . Dallas police car was stopped in the traffic lane heading east from 10th St.
 A man was trying to use the radio in the squad car but stated he didn’t know how to operate it . The man was arrested for allegedly trying to operate the radio .
 As we picked up the officer up, I noticed his pistol laying on the ground under him . The officer's pistol was lying under him, police say . "As we picked him up, we noticed the pistol laying under him," officer says .
 When the police arrived, Bowley explained he did not see the shooting . Bowley said he took the gun and put it inside the squad car,231 When the ambulance left, he took it out of the car .
 The Tippit shooting took place a few minutes before 1:10m, making it impossible for Oswald to be the shooter . Assuming Bowley’s watch was accurate, this would place the shooting at a time of 1.10m .
 The police radio broadcast log for November 22, 1963, substantiated Bowley’s affidavit, Lane said . Lane noted that the log showed a citizen call over the police radio to the dispatcher was responsible for notifying the Dallas Police Department that Tippit had been shot .
 Benavides testified to the Warren Commission that he was driving in his 1958 Chevrolet pickup truck on 10th Street about fifteen feet from Officer Tippit’s stopped police car when he saw the first shot . Benavide testified that he saw Officer Tippyit shoot .
 "I thought he went in back of the house or something. After that, I set there for just a few minutes to kind of, I thought he was gone," he said . "I didn't know where he was going," he says .
 At the time, I thought maybe he might have lived in there and I didn’t want to get out and rush right up. I didn't want to rush up and rush up, he said . At the . time, he thought maybe . he might . have lived there
 Mr Benavides: Then I don’t know if I opened the car door back further than what it was or not, but anyway, I went in and pulled the radio and I mashed the button and told them that an officer had been shot, and I didn’
 "I put the radio back. Then he started to—then I don’t know what he said; but I put it back," she says .
 I mean, the microphone back up, and this other guy was standing there, so I got out of the car, and I don't know, I wasn’t sure if he heard me, and the other guy sat down in the car . "I wasn't sure if
 He was standing at the door of the car, and I don’t know what he said to the officer or the phone, but the officer told him to keep the line clear, or something, and stay off the phone . The officer said to him, "Keep the line
 Mark Lane focused on the timeline. That he already knew about it, Lane says . Lane: "I'm not going to be surprised. That's what I know about it." Lane: Lane is not surprised that Lane knew more about the timeline .
 Lane estimated that Earlene Roberts saw Oswald standing at the bus stop at 1:04m. Lane estimated the incident occurred at 1.04m . Lane estimated Earlene saw Oswald at the stop at the time of the attack .
 He calculated that testimony of Benavides and Bowley put the Tippit murder at no later than 1:12m. He said the testimony of the two men put the killing at no earlier than 1.12m .
 The distance between the bus stop and the 10th Street Tippit shooting was just under one mile . The distance from the shooting was about one mile from the stop .
 Sylvia Meagher, in her 1967 book, Accessories After the Fact, is also very critical of the Warren Commission regarding the Tippit murder timeline . Meagher also wrote a book about the Warren commission .
 There is no evidence Oswald took the shortest route . Warren Commission counsel David Belin re-enacted the route, with a stopwatch in hand, taking the “long way around route”
 I wanted to know if that day when you were in there if you saw anyone in there— Mrs. Mrs. Smith . Smith: "I wanted to ask if that was any day when I was in there ... if you had seen anyone in that day"
 "Cold chills just run all over me. When I saw this man I wasn't sure, but I had cold chills run over me," she said .
 Sylvia Meagher felt cold chills reading testimony about Oswald killing Tippit . Meagher said she felt the cold chill when reading the testimony about the ‘identification’ on which the Commission relied on .
 Markham, who had been greatly upset by her experience, was able to view a lineup of four men handcuffed together at the police station . Markham had been very upset by the experience .
 Markham confirmed her positive identification of Lee Harvey Oswald as the man she saw kill Officer Tippit . Markham also confirmed she saw Oswald kill her officer in the early hours of the day .
 In an affidavit Markham signed on November 22, 1963, she placed the time of the Tippit shooting at 1:06m . The Warren Commission omitted that fact in the final report .
 Taxicab driver William Scoggins, was eating his lunch at the corner of 10th and Patton when Tippit was killed . Taxiab driver was eating lunch when he died .
 He cannot truly be considered an eyewitness because his view was obstructed by shrubbery . The witness cannot be considered a true eyewitness because of the obstructions to his view .
 Scoggins claims to have caught a glimpse of the assailant’s face as the assailant looked back over his shoulder while running from the scene through some shrubbery about twelve feet away .
 Whaley’s description of the lineup makes clear picking Oswald out was not a difficult task, whether or not a positive identification could be made . Whaley: Oswald was not easy to identify, but it was easy to do .
 "They all were handcuffed together. Then they took me down in their room where they have their show-ups," he says . "They brought in six men, young teenagers, and they all were handcuffs together," he adds .
 At that time he had a pair of black pants and white T-shirt, that was all he had on . At that point he had only black pants, a white shirt and a white t-shirt .
 You could have picked him out without identifying him by just listening to him because he was bawling out the policemen, telling them it wasn’t right to put him in line with these teenagers and all of that . They asked me which one and I told them. But you
 Not much younger, but just young kids, they might have got them in jail . "Just young kids," they might be in jail," says one of the parents . "Young kids" might have been in jail.
 He showed no respect for the policemen, he told them what he thought about him, he said . He said: 'He showed no disrespect for the police. He showed them what they thought about me'
 "They knew what they were doing and they were trying to railroad him and he wanted his lawyer," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "They know what they're doing," he says .
 President Bush said he would have picked out the right one just for that . He said anybody who wasn’t sure could have picked up the right ones .
 It didn't aid me because I knew he was the right one as soon as I saw him. It didn’t aid me as I knew I was going to marry him, he said . It was not the first time I had seen him, it was the second time I
 Oswald’s action in offering to give up the cab is not consistent with the behavior that might be expected from a vicious criminal who had just assassinated the president of the United States . Oswald was desperate to escape capture, but his actions were not typical of the behavior of a vicious killer
 The Warren Commission never interviewed two neighbors who told investigators two men were involved in the Tippit shooting . Two neighbors told investigators they saw two men involved in shooting . Private investigators never interviewed the neighbors .
 Acquilla Clemons claimed to have seen two assailants flee the scene after the shooting . Clemons said she saw two assailants fleeing the scene of the shooting in the early hours .
 She saw a second taller thinner man across the street who looked like he was giving a “go-ahead” sign to the shooter, she said . She said she saw a taller thinner thinner man . She also saw a tall thinner man giving a "go" sign .
 After the shooting, the taller-thinner man went in one direction while the shorter-stocky man went to the other . The taller-than-skinned man was shot in the head by a man he was trying to shoot .
 Frank Wright, who lived nearby, went to his front porch on hearing the shooting . Frank Wright was on his porch when the shooting occurred .
 He described the shooter as being of medium height and wearing a long coat . The shooter is described as being medium-heighted and wearing medium height .
 In 1978, Anthony Summers, a former investigative journalist for the BBC, had William Alexander, an assistant Dallas district attorney in 1963, drive him around the area of the shooting .
 Dallas police had measured the routes Oswald might have taken, interrogated bus drivers, and examined taxicab records . Police still have not determined how precisely Oswald got to the scene of the Tippit shooting or what he was doing .
 Alexander slapped the dashboard and repeated, “Oswald’s movements don’t add up then,” Summers reported . Alexander said he slapped the car's dashboard and hit the dashboard .
 The letter indicated that Tippit had been having an affair with a ‘small blonde waitress’ who worked at Austin’s Barbecue Drive-in, a Dallas restaurant . The letter also indicated that the waitress worked at the restaurant in Dallas .
 On November 22, 1963, Tippit evidently knew the waitress was pregnant with his child . The baby was born in 1963 .
 On August 6, 1963, the former waitress was granted a divorce by the court, giving her custody of her four children . The woman's husband evidently did not show up at court to contest the divorce .
 Author Thomas Buchanan speculates Tippit was involved with gangsters attempting to get Oswald out of town following the assassination . The author also speculates that Jack Ruby was involved in the plot .
 The former husband of the waitress had a history of stalking Tippit and his wife when they went out together, leading some to speculate the murder may have been simply an act of revenge by a jealous husband .
 At approximately 12:45m., about a half hour before he was killed, Tippit was observed in his police car on the Oak Cliff side of the Houston St. viaduct .
 He sat in his car at a GLOCO gas station and observed traffic crossing the bridge for about ten minutes . The driver sat in a car and observed the bridge crossing for 10 minutes .
 Tippit suddenly sped out of the gas station and headed south on Lancaster Street . He then sped south on the highway .
 At 12:54 a.m., Tippit answered his dispatcher and said he was at “8th and Lancaster,” about a mile south of the GLOCO gas station . At 12.54 a .m., he answered his . dispatcher and told his dispatcher
 Tippet let the number he dialed ring ring seven or eight times, and hung up without saying a word . He hung up the phone without saying what he said .
 Tippit rushed out of the store, jumped in his squad car and sped north across Jefferson Boulevard . He ran a stop sign, turned right on Sunset, and was last seen by multiple witnesses speeding east, one block from North Beckley .
 Oswald was supposed to have been at work in the book depository all day on November 22, 1963 . The FBI disregarded the story because Oswald was not supposed to be at work that day . Oswald was believed to be working in the depository .
 Oswald's story conflicts with the Warren Commission narrative that had Oswald spending the night of the twenty-first in Irving, Texas, with his wife and daughters, who were then living with Ruth Paine . The story also conflicts with that of Oswald spending that night with his family .
 The Commission had reported that Oswald returned to the Paine home on Thursday night, November 21, 1963, to pick up “curtain rods” a cover story for what the Commission maintained was in reality the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle hidden in a crudely constructed paper
 Oswald left the Paine residence at 7:15m. the morming of the assassination . Marina Oswald was still in bed when Oswald left his wife's bedside . Oswald's wife was in bed at the time of the shooting .
 Oswald was driven to work on November 22, 1963, by Buell Wesley Frazier, a neighbor of Ruth Paine . Frazier drove Oswald to work that day, the Commission reported . Frazier was Frazier's neighbor .
 Oswald was waiting at the store around 7:30m. when Stark arrived the day of the assassination . Stark confirmed that Oswald had been waiting for Stark at the time of the shooting . Oswald was in the store when Stark was killed .
 Stark recalls Oswald bought a ticket to the Dick Clark Show and left by bus . Stark recalled that Oswald bought the ticket to Dick Clark show and left on bus .
 Stark did not know anyone by the name of Whitten and did not believe there was a Whitten who had a connection to the store . Stark says he does not believe anyone by Whitten has a connection with the store.
 No one has established the identity of the person Tippit called from the record store moments before he was shot to death . The identity has not been established .
 Police dispatch assigned Tippit to patrol Oak Cliff, an area he didn't normally patrol . It's not clear why dispatch assigned him to Oak Cliff when police units were being called downtown to assist in the assassination investigation .
 Dallas Police dispatch records show that when Tippit called at 8th Street and Lancaster, he was told to stay at large for any emergency that came in . Police say he was in the area at the time of the call .
 Tippit stepped away from his patrol car without notifying the dispatcher, a habit he'd developed over the last few years . The officer had stepped off from his car without telling the dispatcher .
 The next mention of Tippit in the Dallas Police dispatch records is when a citizen calls in saying, "We’ve had a shooting out here,” at what appears to be 1:16m. A citizen calls the 911 call to report a shooting at 1:
 Markham’s contemporaneous description of the gunman and her positive identification of Oswald at a police lineup, the Commission considers her testimony reliable . The Commission considers Markham's description of Oswald as reliable .
 Dallas Police found a light-gray Eisenhower-style zipper jacket evidently abandoned under a two-door Oldsmobile parked at Ballew’s Texaco service station at Crawford and Jefferson .
 The Commission felt these facts warranted the finding that Lee Harvey Oswald disposed of his jacket as he fled from the scene of the Tippit shooting . Oswald's jacket was disposed of by the moment he fled the scene .
 Oswald must have felt he would have been less recognizable if he changed his appearance by discarding the jacket . The assumption appeared to be that Oswald thought he would be less recognizable . Oswald was wearing the jacket at the time of the assassination .
 Witnesses who testified Oswald was wearing a jacket when he left the rooming house disagree when describing the jacket . Oswald was not wearing the jacket at the time of the shooting .
 Others claimed the jacket they saw Oswald wear was more “tan” in color . Others claimed it was more "tan’s in color"
 Senior Dallas Police officer on the scene of the Tippit shooting leads search along Jefferson Boulevard . Officer Westbrook, senior Dallas officer on scene of shooting, was on Jefferson Boulevard at the time .
 When things like this happen, it was happening so fast you don’t remember these things,’s the author says . ‘When things like these things happen, you don't remember these moments.’ The author says. ‘You can't forget these things
 Westbrook’s testimony under oath would have been a gift to a competent defense lawyer representing Oswald at trial . Westbrook testified under oath under oath in the trial .
 Dallas Police Department at the scene failed to establish chain of custody for jacket seen in Commission Exhibit 162 . Officer Westbrook established under friendly questioning from counsel .
 Dallas Police officer credited with finding jacket did not initial jacket as required by police policy . Officer Westbrook did not establish chain of custody that could be used in court if necessary .
 Even if CE162 was the jacket found at the scene of the Tippit killing, tying that jacket to Oswald would be difficult . Even if the jacket was found in Oswald's home, tying it to Oswald is difficult .
 Eyewitnesses may have agreed Oswald was wearing a jacket when he left his rooming house, but they disagreed over the description of the jacket . Oswald was not wearing the jacket at the time .
 In both cases, handwriting experts established that the signature and other writing on the mail order applications belonged to Oswald . Oswald's signature was found in both cases . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family .
 The Warren Commission dismissed the possibility an expert forger may have completed the mail-order application without Oswald’s knowledge . This was evidently sufficient for the Warren Commission .
 Warren Commission established that four bullets were removed from the body of Officer Tippit . Four bullets were taken from the officer's body, the Warren Commission said .
 Of the four recovered bullets, three were copper-coated lead bullets of Western-Winchester manufacture . The fourth was a lead bullet of Remington-Peters manufacture . Three of the recovered bullets were bullets made by Remington Peters .
 Of the four cartridge cases recovered at the scene of the Tippet shooting, two were Western-Winchester and two were Remington-Peters . Two of the four cartridges recovered were found in the case of the shooting . The case was the first of four recovered from the
 Smith & Wesson Victory Model snub-nose revolver could fire a wide range of ammunition . But the bullets recovered at the crime scene did not match the make of the cartridge cases recovered from the scene .
 Oswald had in his pocked five live cartridges, all Western-Winchester .38s . Oswald also had five live ammunition, all in his pocket . Oswald was carrying a pistol with him .
 Oswald’s rooming house in Oak Cliff and Paine home in Irving, Texas, were found without bullets . Oswald's wife and daughters were living in the home of Paine and Oswald . Oswald was found with no bullets of either kind in his room or his home .
 Meagher stressed that Oswald’s purchase of this ammunition was never established . Meagher stresses that Oswald's purchase of the ammunition was not established .
 "There is nothing whatsoever to suggest that he ever fired the .38 Smith & Wesson revolver at any time before November 22, 1963," he said .
 If he did purchase supplies of each brand, there is no evidence of the transaction . No evidence of use, and no left-over ammunition are among his possessions .
 Benavides said he watched as the shooter emptied the spent shell cases and tossed them into shrubs . He said he saw the shooter empty the spent shells and toss them into some shrubs in the area .
 He did not pick up the cases until some twenty minutes after the shooting had taken place . Still, he didn't pick up cases until 20 minutes after they were taken off .
 Neighbors Barbara and Virginia Davis found two other spent shell casings outside their apartment . Neighbors found two more spent shells outside the apartment .
 Poe gathered all four shell casings found at the scene of the Tippit shooting, neglected to place his initials on any of them . Poe gathered the four spent shells from the scene but did not write his own initials on them .
 Dallas Police in 1963 did not consistently follow rules for marking of evidence . No reliable chain of custody could be established for shell cases found at the site of Tippit murder .
 That the murderer would reload the weapon on the scene, throwing the spent shell cartridges in some bushes, strains credibility . The person wanted the shell cartridges to be found, unless the person wanted to find them .
 The discarded spent cartridges would obviously provide a positive identification of the murder weapon . Given that the weapon was just used to kill a policeman, the discarded spent cartridge would obviously identify the weapon .
 The strange mix of WesternWinchester and Remington-Peters bullets would reinforce this identification . The bullets were found in the car .
 There is no proof Oswald kept a .38 weapon in his rooming house or that he left the afternoon of the assassination with a weapon . Oswald left the rooming . house with a gun, but there is no evidence he kept the weapon .
 Oswald was in possession of a .38 handgun loaded with that particular mix of bullets . Oswald was apprehended at the Texas Theater, where he was arrested .
 The person who shot Tippit was observed leaving the scene . No one reported observing where the murderer was headed, but no one reported where he was headed .
 Oswald was observed leaving the rooming house, but was not identified with certainty until he was apprehended at the Texas Theater . Oswald was captured at the theater in Dallas, Texas, Texas . Oswald is believed to be the only person to have been captured in Texas .
 Oswald's pistol was in possession when he was apprehended at the Texas Theater . There is nothing in the record of the case to rule out that Tippit’s murderer might have been someone different who met up with Oswald and gave him the pistol that was in his possession . Oswald
 One of the cartridges in the .38 when Oswald was captured displayed a primer indentation, confirming that Oswald had pulled the trigger in the theater, but the gun did not fire .
 The Warren Commission merely assumed that the two weapons were the same, ignoring the need to conduct ballistic tests to establish the fact that a revolver that fired to murder Tippit had misfired in the scuffle with McDonald .
 A wallet belonging to Lee Harvey Oswald was found by police at the scene of the Tippit shooting . Oswald's wallet was found at the site of the shooting in Dallas, Texas . Oswald was shot dead in the early hours of September 4 .
 Near the puddle of blood in the street where Officer Tippit lay slain, Dallas Police Captain Westbrook found a man’s wallet . The wallet contained IDs .
 If any clue suggests the Tippit murder was done in a fashion so as to frame Lee Harvey Oswald for the shooting, that detail was the wallet found on the scene . Oswald's wallet was found on a wallet .
 The victim had a wallet in his hand when he found the wallet, police say . The wallet was found in the victim's hand, but he had no idea where it was .
 Had the FBI agent on the scene of the Tippit murder been James P. Hosty, Jr., instead of Bob Barrett, might have learned about Lee Harvey Oswald immediately .
 Hosty, the FBI agent assigned by Washington to keep track of Oswald in Dallas, had held repeated meetings with Oswald prior to the assassination . Hosty had been assigned to keep eye on Oswald, but Oswald was never found guilty of any wrongdoing .
 Oswald said: Near the puddle of blood where Tippit's body had lain, Westbrook had found a man’s leather wallet . Oswald, saying: ‘Near the puddles of blood were found a leather wallet.’
 In it, he discovered identification for Lee Oswald, as well as other identifications for Alek J Hidell . Lee Oswald's identification was also discovered .
 Westbrook called Barrett over and showed him the wallet and identifications . Westbrook called him over to show him his wallet and ID cards .
 Westbrook asked Barrett if the FBI knew anything about Oswald or Hidell . Barrett said the FBI did not know anything about Hidell or Oswald .
 Westbrook took the wallet into his custody so that it could be placed into police property later . Westbrook took his wallet into custody . It was placed in police property .
 Barrett told me that if I had been at the scene with Westbrook, I would have immediately known who Oswald was . Barrett said he would have known Oswald was Oswald when he saw him . Barrett: "I would have been able to identify Oswald"
 Oswald’s wallet and identification were found near where Tippit was killed, Barrett says . Official police reports would later state that Oswald's wallet and ID were found on his person when he was arrested .
 Westbrook had given the wallet to a lower-ranking officer, and in the confusion it was assumed that wallet had been retrieved from Oswald’s person . I have to speculate that at the theater, Westbrook had handed the wallet . Westbrook had already given the card to a higher-ranking
 Barrett’s version was further proof Oswald had in fact gunned Officer Tippit down . The FBI decided to go with the official police version, even though Barrett's version was more proof .
 Dallas Police Sargent Calvin "Bud" Owens is seen holding Tippit's service revolver in his left hand and a man's leather wallet in his right . Reiland took the news footage immediately after the shooting .
 Owens shows wallet to Dallas Police Captain George Doughty, who is standing to his left . Owens then shows the wallet to Doughty . Doughty says Owens is a Dallas police officer . Owens says the wallet was found in Dallas .
 Owens holds open wallet while Doughty examines item in plastic sleeve . Third person approaches Owens and Doughty to examine items in wallet . Owens holds wallet open as he examines wallet .
 Reiland narrated the film sequence during its first showing on television . Reiland narrates the first showing of the film on television.
 Reiland: "This gun you see in the background here in hand is the one that was allegedly used to shoot the police officer" Reiland reported that Tippit’s revolver and the wallet were shown .
 Reiland was helpful in documenting that a wallet was picked up at the crime scene but he was wrong in his identification of both the weapon and the billfold . Reiland said he was correct in documenting a wallet found at the scene of the crime .
 Oswald's wallet was positively identified as Oswald’s wallet, but its origins are questionable . The wallet turned out to be Oswald's weapon, but the origins of its weapon were questionable . Tippit's weapon was found in the wallet .
 If Owens found the wallet himself or whether the wallet was handed to him by a bystander has never been determined . Owens' wallet was found by a passer-by or if he was handed it to him .
 In his sworn testimony to the Warren Commission, Westbrook said nothing about finding a wallet belonging to Oswald at the scene . In his testimony, Westbrook gives extensive testimony about finding jacket .
 Oswald’s service revolver was reported to be found at the Tippit murder scene, but no mention was made in the police reports of finding a wallet belonging to Oswald . Oswald's wallet was also reported to have been found by police at the murder scene .
 Butler confirmed that a police service revolver was found near Tippit's body . Butler confirmed a revolver was also found near the body of the victim .
 All Tippit’s personal items, including his wallet, were removed from his pockets at Methodist Hospital after his death .
 A list of Tippit’s personal effects prepared by the Dallas Police Crime Scene Search Section lists one of his personal effects at the time of his death . The list of personal effects lists one “black billfold” as among Tippits’ personal effects .
 The only item brought to the Methodist Hospital and added to Tippit’s personal effects after his death was his service revolver . The revolver was left behind at the murder scene, most likely in the possession of Captain Westbrook .
 Oswald's wallet was found loose at the crime scene believed to have belonged to Oswald . The wallet found at the scene was believed to be believed to belong to Oswald.
 Oswald bought popcorn before sitting down at the Texas Theater . It is debatable whether or not Oswald paid for a ticket prior to entering the theater . Oswald purchased popcorn before he sat down .
 Oswald had $13.87 on his person at the time of arrest, Dallas Police reported . Oswald was arrested in Dallas, Texas, in August .
 Oswald bought refreshments at the Texas Theater with loose change, not realizing he lost his wallet . Oswald's wallet was found in the theater's parking lot . Oswald purchased refreshments from the theater with loose money .
 Oswald’s employment at the book depository was established, police would naturally link Oswald to the JFK assassination . Oswald was found to have worked at the depository .
 The Tippit shooting then would be the key to establishing Oswald’s guilt, the author says . Oswald's guilt would then be established, he says, in the case of Oswald .
 Whoever planned the JFK assassination knew the police would immediately conclude Oswald killed Tippit because he was on the run and he wanted to avoid arrest . The JFK assassination was the first time Oswald was killed in the assassination .
 If Tippit had stopped Oswald, he did not follow Dallas Police Department procedure . Oswald was not stopped by Dallas police, police say .
 Tippit did not radio to the police dispatcher that he had identified a suspect . Tippits did not tell the dispatcher he was a suspect in the case .
 If Tippit had suspected the man he encountered had a weapon and that his life was in danger, he did not act like it . The incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Tippit killing is the Rosetta Stone to the JFK assassination, a former Warren Commission lawyer says . David Belin, assistant counsel to the Warren Commission, says the killing was the murder's "Rosetta Stone" killing .
 Belin is right, but not because the Tippit murder proves Oswald was JFK’s assassin . Belin says Oswald was Oswald's assassin, not JFK's assassin . Oswald was the only person to kill JFK in the White House .
 The Tippit killing is the Rosetta Stone to the JFK assassination . It proves the gunman set Oswald up as the killer . Oswald was Oswald's killer, the FBI says .
 JFK entrance wound in the neck was sufficient evidence to prove JFK was killed by a conspiracy . Oswald’s wallet at the scene of the Tippit murder proves there was a gunman complicit in the plot who got away .
 It is hard, if not impossible, to shake the suspicious nature of the evidence . However, it is hard to believe that the evidence is not consistent with what is being investigated .
 Oswald wallet was one of three Oswald wallets positively identified in the case . The Oswald wallet has been identified as one of the three positively identified wallets .
 The wallet was dropped in the lap of the Dallas police and the FBI . It contained documents linking “Lee Harvey Oswald” to “Alex James Hiddel,” the alias used to purchase via mail order the MannlicherCarcano rifle .
 There was no evidence to establish that Lee Harvey Oswald had ever owned this wallet or created the ID papers found in the wallet . Like much of the evidence in the case against Oswald, the wallet was just too good and too conveniently found to be believable .
 Julia Postal was the Texas Theater ticket taker the afternoon that JFK was murdered . Postal took the ticket to the theater the day of JFK's murder . Postal was a member of the staff at the theater in Dallas, Texas .
 Postal had testified to the Warren Commission that both she and Warren Burroughs, the ticket taker who also worked the concession stand inside the movie theater, were preoccupied, listening on a transistor radio to early news report about the JFK shooting . Postal testified that she and Butch Bur
 Objectively viewed, we have to ask why Oswald decided to go to the movies . Objectively . viewed, it has to be asked why Oswald went to the movie .
 Or was he following instructions to head to this movie theater after the assassination to meet a contact that would provide him money, his next instructions, and possibly a plan to get out of Dallas? Or? Was he really trying to get to this theater to meet with a contact?
 Oswald had to know police all over the city were looking for JFK’s killer . Going to the movies has to be seen as reflecting a desire to drop from public view, at a time .
 Oswald’s motivation to go to the movies may have been, it is hard to understand why he would have wanted to draw attention to himself by sneaking into the movie theater without paying the ninety cents for a ticket when he had nearly $15.00 with him .
 Butch Burroughs sold Oswald the popcorn without confronting Oswald about not paying for a movie ticket . Oswald was the only person to confront him about not buying a ticket .
 Oswald sat next to a pregnant woman sitting alone in the mid-seat section of the movie theater’s lower floor . Oswald returned to the theater and sat in a different seat next to the pregnant woman . Oswald sat in the middle of the theater's lower floor section .
 Oswald moved to a seat alone in the center section three rows from the back, in the second seat from the aisle . Minutes before the police arrived, this woman got up and moved to the balcony . Oswald moved into a seat in the balcony, and Oswald sat alone .
 Oswald was found when a small army of Dallas police and sheriff’s deputies stormed the Texas Theater . The theater is where Oswald was killed .
 Oswald had been instructed that after the assassination he would meet a person who would give him an airplane ticket or a car ride out of Dallas, some much needed cash, and instructions regarding what he should do next . Oswald may have been instructed to meet someone who would offer him a plane ticket
 Oswald had nothing to do with the Tippit murder and was never at the scene of the murder scene . Oswald was never involved in the murder . Oswald had no connection to the murder of Oswald's friend, author says .
 Dallas police made a complete list of everyone who was in the Texas Theater at the time of the shooting . The Dallas police have made a list of all those who were in the theater at that time .
 The Warren Commission began taking testimony in 1964 . That list of names had disappeared by the time the Warren Commission started taking testimony .
 Oswald was apprehended at approximately 1:51m., less than an hour-and-a-half after JFK’s fatal shooting . Oswald had been in the Texas Theater for some fifty minutes before police apprehended him . Oswald was in the theater for more than 50 minutes before he was
 FBI Agent Barrett and Dallas Police Captain Westbrook both rushed to the Texas Theater when the Dallas police radio call went out . Both were standing in the theater when a police rush subdued Oswald following the scuffle .
 Barrett and Westbrook immediately identified the man apprehended in the Texas Theater as Oswald . Oswald's photographs of Lee Harvey Oswald were found in the wallet at the Tippit murder . Barrett, Westbrook and Westbrook identified Oswald from the identification papers found .
 It is interesting to surmise that the possibility that one or more of the officers had missed an assignment . The possibility of missing an assignment is interesting .
 Oswald had to have been startled in the Texas Theater when the movie stopped and the house lights went on . Oswald had been startled by the lights in the theater .
 Oswald must have quickly figured out the police were after him, police say . Oswald was in the crowd when he saw police move into the seating area from various directions . Oswald is believed to have been shot dead by police .
 Oswald had to have been prepared for his life to end, right then and there . Oswald drew a gun on officer McDonald, and his life was likely to end .
 Jack Ruby's death would have changed the course of history if it had happened . Jack Ruby is the son of former President George W. Bush . Ruby was assassinated in 1968 .
 With Oswald dead, there would have been no need for Jack Ruby to kill him, Ruby says . Oswald was killed by Jack Ruby in the early 1940s . Ruby killed Oswald with a bullet to the head .
 District Attorney Henry Wade gave a press conference on November 23, 1963, at 12:30m., almost precisely twelve hours after the assassination . Ruby knew Oswald prior to the assassination, according to District Attorney Wade . Ruby and Oswald were involved in the Dallas assassination .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, the suspect for both the Tippit murder and the JFK assassination, had been in police custody since approximately 2:00m., within an hour and a half of the shooting . Remarkably, Oswald was in custody for both of the two events . Oswald was
 Jack Ruby, the owner of a well-known downtown strip joint and nightclub named The Carousel, had been present in Dallas Police headquarters continuously since shortly after the assassination . Ruby was seen mixing freely with reporters and Dallas police as if he had an official purpose being present .
 Wade was asked about Oswald’s motive, whether he belonged to any Communist organizations . Wade was also asked whether Oswald belonged to a Communist organization . Wade said Oswald's motive was not to blame .
 Jack said, nodding his head toward the man on his right, who was sitting at the table in his own cloud of detachment . Jack nodded his head to the man, nodding toward him, who sat in a cloud of  detachment .
 Beverly tried to extend a simple hello to acknowledge Jack’s friend but he seemed as if he could care less about meeting anyone . Beverly said she was trying to get him to say hello .
 Beverly met people she saw them as having either light or dark personalities, and this man disturbed her . Beverly was disturbed by the man she met . Beverly saw people as having a dark or light personality, and was disturbed .
 She had an unsolicited gut-feeling she had. Not that he said anything to warrant that impression, it was a gut feeling .
 Oswald was dressed in casual drab; he was slouched in his chair, his arms folded defiantly across his chest . Oswald was wearing a simple black jacket . Oswald's arms crossed over his chest as he sat in the chair .
 Beverly didn't know what the CIA was but thought it must be important or Jack wouldn't have brought it up . Beverly didn’t know what it was but she thought it was important . Beverly thought Jack would not have brought up the CIA .
 She wondered if Lee Oswald really was a friend, or if Jack was once again a little loose with his terminology . She wondered whether Lee Oswald was really a friend or if he really was .
 Oswald verbally assaulted a comic named Wally . Oswald stood up in the club and verbally assaulted the comic, she said . Oswald also verbally assaulted another comic, Wally .
 Oliver was suspicious when a dancer at the Carousel Club named “Jada” disappeared after telling reporters that Ruby had introduced her to Oswald at the club a couple of weeks before the assassination . Oliver was also suspicious about the disappearance of a dancer who told reporters she met Oswald at
 Oliver was doubly suspicious when she found out Jada had disappeared leaving part of her wardrobe at the club . Oliver was also suspicious when he found out that Jada was missing .
 "L. L Lee" was talking with Jack Ruby about plans to kill the governor of Texas, John Connally . Ruby and Lee planned to kill Gov. Connally in Texas . Ruby was killed in Texas in the 1970s .
 Jarnagin, in his cover letter to FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, noted he had passed this information on to the Texas Department of Public Safety on October 5, 1963, by telephone . He wrote that he passed the information to the FBI Director of J. Edgar Hoover . Jarn
 Jarnagin related that he heard Oswald ask Ruby for money because he just returned from New Orleans where he got put in jail over a street fight . Oswald had just returned to New Orleans from a fight he'd been in jail . Ruby had been arrested in New Orleans .
 Oswald was arrested for disturbing the peace in New Orleans on August 16, 1963 . Oswald was distributing leaflets for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . This appeared to coincide with Oswald’s arrest in New New Orleans .
 FBI Special Agents Ralph Rawlings and Bardwell Odum interviewed Jarnagin and filed a report on December 19, 1963 . The report was filed by the FBI on December 20, 1963.
 Jarnagin was in the company of a striptease dancer he identified as Robin Hood, plotting to kill the governor of Texas, he says . Ruby and Oswald had a conversation at the Carousel Club in Dallas, Texas, on October 4, 1963 . The FBI report documents
 The FBI report noted the Texas Department of Public Safety had no record of any call being received from Jarnagin or anyone else regarding an alleged attempt to assassinate Governor Connally . The report also indicates the FBI tracked down Shirley Ann Mauldin, the dancer known as Robin Hood .
 She admitted to being at the Carousel Club with Jarnagin and meeting Jack Ruby there, but denied overhearing any conversation about a plan to assassinate the governor . She said she met Ruby at the club, but said she didn't overhear any conversation .
 Julia Ann Mercer claimed she was brought to a stop because a green Ford pickup truck was parked and blocking her lane . The truck had a Texas license plate and the words “Air Conditioning” painted on the side of it .
 She waited approximately three minutes as a younger man in a plaid shirt got out of the passenger side of the truck and went around to the rear . She waited about three minutes before the man got out .
 From the tailgate of the pickup truck, the younger man opened a long tool compartment in the back of the truck and removed a package she believed was a rifle case . The younger man then opened the tool compartment and removed the package .
 The young man walked up the embankment with the package in the direction of the grassy knoll area . The package was delivered to a grass-covered knoll .
 As she moved her car to get around the green truck, her eyes locked with those of the man driving the truck . Her eyes locked up with the man who was driving the vehicle .
 Miss Mercer said she was able to see him very clearly, identifying him as heavy built with a round face . She said he was heavy built and had a round round face and heavy built body .
 Officers from the Dallas Sheriff’s office and the FBI interviewed Mercer the night of the assassination . Mercer was interviewed by the FBI the night before his assassination .
 On November 22, 1963, Mercer signed an affidavit at the Dallas County Sheriff’s office that described her sighting of the green Ford pickup truck . Mercer signed the affidavit . The affidavit was filed in 1963 .
 In a deposition she said a man was sitting under the wheel of the car and slouched over the wheel . In the deposition, she said, “A man was sat under the . wheel of . the car’s . She said she saw a man “slouched
 This man had on a green jacket, was a white male and about in his 40’s and was heavyset . This man was white male with a beard, white and in his early 40s .
 On Sunday morning after the assassination, she saw Ruby shoot Oswald . She was watching television with friends and saw the shooting on Sunday morning .
 She recognized these two men as the ones she had identified for the FBI on Friday . Instantly, she recognized them as the two men she'd identified for FBI .
 She realized she had seen Ruby as the driver and Oswald as the young man with the rifle . She realized that she'd seen Ruby and Oswald in the same way .
 She could not believe it included a statement attributed to her that said she did not see the driver clearly enough to identify him . She said she was shocked to see that she had not seen him clearly enough .
 Oswald and Ruby turned out to be the “loners” as they had been painted in the 1964 investigation . Neither Oswald nor Ruby were the ‘loners,’ as they were painted in 1964 . Oswald was found dead of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to
 The scientific evidence mentioned in the above quote involved acoustics evidence obtained from a police dictabelt believed to contain sounds of the shooting recorded in Dealey Plaza . A microphone switch stuck open on a motorcycle in JFK’s police escort recorded a channel of police transmissions .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations realized the minute scientific evidence challenged the assumption Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone . The point is that the committee realized the moment scientific evidence challenges the assumption .
 If all the damage done to JFK, Governor Connally, and witness James Tague could not be done by three shots from a bolt-action Mannlicher-Carcano rifle in the time span available for the shooting . One or more additional gunmen may have been involved .
 If Oswald was merely the fall guy or the patsy he insisted he was, Oswald had to be silenced . Oswald had been silenced. Oswald's silence was needed to prevent the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 The risk was that if Oswald began talking, he knew enough to implicate those in the conspiracy above him . The risk is that Oswald knew enough enough to incriminate those above him, the government says .
 Oswald's murder looks like a gangland slaying, the Oswald murder looks even more so . Tippit and Oswald were gunned down in the early 1960s . Oswald was shot and killed by the White House in September 1963 .
 Jack Ruby began stalking Oswald in the halls of the Dallas Police and Courts Building . Ruby stalked Oswald from the moment he was captured on November 22, 1963 . Ruby was captured in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 News film taken within the Dallas Police Department shows numerous clear and unmistakable views of Ruby mixed in with police and reporters . Ruby was captured on the night of the shooting .
 In polite Dallas society, the Carousel Club might have been called a nightclub . A more correct designation would have been to characterize the establishment as a strip joint .
 Strip joints in America in the 1960s were typically connected to the underworld . A holdover from the 1930s and 1940s burlesque theater, strip joints were associated with underworld .
 Second-rate comics mixed openly with striptease dancers, a free flow of alcohol, and relatively cheap but passable food .
 Jack Ruby owned the Carousel Club in Dallas, Texas, in the 1960s . Ruby had underworld connections to the underworld . Ruby was the owner of the club .
 Oswald was subjected to a rigorous schedule of questioning by seasoned police detectives accompanied by FBI, all without legal representation . Once in police custody, Oswald was questioned by seasoned detectives and the FBI .
 Oswald had $13.87 in cash on his person, a paltry sum for a man who planned in advance to make a run for it . Dallas police apprehended Oswald at the Texas Theater, Dallas . Oswald was apprehended at the theater .
 Oswald called for “someone to come forward,” suggesting that possibly a lawyer or maybe even some official in the government would come forward to explain he was not an assassin . Oswald: "Someone will come forward. Someone should come forward"
 Oswald was charged with JFK assassination as well as the Tippit shooting . Oswald appeared shocked when he was told by reporters at a press conference held in the Dallas Police Department .
 Oswald's post-assassination getaway was not going as planned, not as far as Oswald was concerned . Clearly, the getaway wasn't going as well as planned . Oswald was killed by a bomb blast at the White House in 1945 .
 Oswald realized fully that he had been set up as the fall guy, his silence likely not likely to last . Oswald's silence was not likely long after he realized he was the fall-guy .
 Oswald displayed a calculating intelligence and a wry wit under police questioning . Oswald displayed his calculating intelligence under questioning by police officers .
 Oswald was clearly continuing to think and calculate in his few brief televised press conferences or in his off-the-cuff responses to questions reporters threw him in the halls of the Dallas Police Department . Oswald's only public statements were brief televised interviews or in the Dallas police department .
 Oswald appeared after his arrest to be a highly intelligent individual who was doing his best to cope with a near impossible situation . Oswald appeared to be an intelligent individual, according to his arrest report .
 Oswald’s patience appeared to be running thin in the short time he was held under arrest before he was murdered . Observed closely, Oswald's patience was running thin during his arrest .
 The only way to protect other conspirators higher up was to silence Oswald permanently . Viewed from an underworld or intelligence agency perspective, the only way was to protect others higher up .
 Cheramie predicted JFK would be assassinated in Dallas that coming Friday, Dallas, Texas . She predicted that JFK would have been assassinated in the coming Friday .
 Rose Cherami, or Cheramie, was one of some thirty aliases used by Melba Christine Marcades . Marcades was born Melba Christina Youngblood . She was also known as Cherami and Cherami .
 She was a thirty-four-year-old drug and substance abuser with a long list of prostitution and other arrests since she turned eighteen . She was arrested in December .
 She had worked as a B-girl for Jack Ruby in his Carousel Club in Dallas, Texas . She had been mainlining heroin for nine years .
 A staff report compiled by the House Special Committee on Assassinations reported Cheramie had taken her last injection of heroin around 2:00 pm on Nov. 30, 1963 .
 Cheramie was interviewed at Moosa Memorial Hospital in Eunice, Louisiana . Francis Fruge of the Louisiana State Police was the first to interview her . She was interviewed by the hospital .
 Fruge placed Cheramie in the Eunice City Jail because she had no funds or insurance . Cheramies was placed in jail because of her lack of funds and no insurance . The hospital was a private hospital .
 Dr. Derouin, a local doctor from the coroner’s office, administered a sedative to calm her from the effects of drug withdrawal .
 Derouin made the decision to commit her to the state hospital in Jackson, Louisiana . The hospital is located in the state of Louisiana .
 Cheramie told him she was coming from Florida to Dallas with two men who were Italians or resembled Italians . Fruge gave a deposition to the House Select Committee on Assassinations on Tuesday .
 They stopped at this lounge ... and they’d had a few drinks and got into an argument or something . They got into a fight or something, he says . He says they stopped at the lounge .
 Cheramie’s farfetched story had a basis in fact in fact, Fruge said . With further investigation, the story was found to have been true .
 Fruge tracked down the owner of the Silver Slipper Lounge, Mr Mac Manual, who told him Cheramie had come into the bar with two men who were pimps engaged in the business of hauling prostitutes in from Florida . Cheramies had come in with two pim
 When Cheramie became intoxicated and rowdy, one of these men supposedly “slapped her around” and threw her outside . Cheramies was allegedly thrown outside by one of the men .
 At that time, Aracha Smith befriended anti-Castro activist David Ferrie, a shadowy New Orleans figure . Ferrie figured prominently in the investigation of New Orleans prosecutor Jim Garrison .
 There is a suggestion Louisiana state police found diagrams of the sewer system in Dealey Plaza among the contents of Aracha Smith’s apartment in Dallas .
 The following morning, Cheramie told Fruge the two men traveling with her from Miami were going to Dallas to assassinate the president . Cheramies said the men were traveling from Miami to Dallas, Texas, to Dallas .
 Cheramie claimed her role was to obtain $8,000 from an unidentified source in Dallas, who was evidently holding her child, and proceed to Houston with the two men to complete a drug deal . Cheramies claimed she was going to get the money from the unidentified source,
 She said the trio was to meet a seaman who was bringing in eight kilos of heroin to Galveston by boat . She said they were going to meet the seaman bringing in the heroin .
 From Galveston, the trio is expected to head to Mexico . The trio is believed to be in the process of completing a drug transaction .
 Fruge took Cheramie into custody after customs chief in Galveston verified the scheduled docking of the boat and the name of the seaman . The seaman was taken into custody .
 Cheramie noticed a newspaper with headlines suggesting investigators were trying to establish a link between Ruby and Oswald . Fruge says she noticed the headlines on a flight from Houston to Houston .
 Cheramie Fruge laughed at the newspaper article, according to a deposition from a House Select Committee . The former president's wife is accused of lying to the House of Representatives .
 She explained to Fruge that she had worked for Ruby, or Pinky as she knew him, at his Dallas nightclub in Dallas . She claimed Ruby and Oswald “had been shacking up for years” as homosexual lovers .
 Fruge had his superior call Captain Will Frit of the Dallas Police Department with this information, only to find Fritz responded that he was not interested . Fritz responded to his superior's call, saying he did not want to talk .
 Cheramie predicted the JFK assassination at the state hospital on November 22, 1963 . Other reports indicated that several nurses were watching television with her when she again predicted the assassination .
 Witnesses say Rose Cheramie said to them moments before Kennedy was shot . Witnesses say she told them, "This is when it is going to happen' and at that moment Kennedy was assassinated .
 Cheramie told him she knew both Ruby and Oswald and had seen them sitting together in Ruby’s club . Victor Weis, a psychiatrist at the hospital, also confirmed the pair had seen each other in the club .
 Cheramie had warned him and other interns that the plot involved a man named Jack Rubenstein . Wayne Owen, who had been interning from LSU, later told the Madison Capital Times that he had been warned of the plot .
 Owen said he and the other interns shrugged it off at the time but were shocked when they saw Ruby kill Oswald and found out that Jack Ruby was born Jack Rubenstein . Owen said they were shocked to find out that Ruby was actually born Jack Ruby .
 A study has argued that ‘Lee Harvey Oswald’ was a case of double identity created by the intelligence community from the time Oswald was 13 years old .
 The plan was to merge the identity of a Russian-speaking refugee with that of American born Lee Harvey Oswald over a period of many years . Oswald's identity was to be merged into that of an American born American born .
 If the merging of identities was successful the CIA could then place a native Russian-speaking young man, with an American identity, in the Soviet Union as a spy .
 The young man known to the world as “Lee Harvey Oswald” successfully “defected” to the Soviet Union in 1959 . He returned to the United States with a Russian wife in 1962 .
 A year anda half later this young man was set-up as the ‘patsy’ in an elaborate scheme engineered by career CIA officials to assassinate John F Kennedy .
 Harvey Oswald, a Russian-speaking refugee, was shot and killed by Dallas nightclub owner/CIA gunrunner, Jack Ruby . Two days after the assassination of President Kennedy, Harvey Oswald was shot dead by Jack Ruby, a CIA gunrunner .
 People's descriptions of ‘Lee Harvey Oswald’ often vary widely with respect to eye color, height, weight, hair color, and physical characteristics . People’s descriptions of Lee Harvey Oswald vary widely .
 Lee never spoke or read Russian or supported communism . Lee often got drunk, got into fights and never spoke Russian . Lee never supported communism.
 Harvey rarely drank, was never known to get into a fight; he spoke, read, and wrote Russian, and supported communism . Harvey rarely drinked, never got in a fight, and never got involved with a fight .
 Oswald applied for a job at the multistory Statler Hilton in downtown Dallas . Oswald applied October 31 for a position at the hotel .
 Armstrong wrote a one-thousand-page book published with a comprehensive CD-ROM of backup photographs and other documenting material . Armstrong went through Oswald’s life history, demonstrating many instances where biographical discrepancies almost demand a concept of double identity .
 Armstrong’s theory does help explain a lot of inconsistent Oswald descriptions and sightings, such as the sworn testimony of Dallas County Sheriff's Department officer Roger Craig to the Warren Commission . Armstrong's theory helps explain some inconsistent descriptions of Oswald sightings .
 Even Armostrong’s book is insufficient to sort out all the complications involved in a two-Oswald double-identity theory . The theory is complicated by the fact that two Oswald Oswald twins are identical .
 The use of doubles has traditionally offered the intelligence community endless opportunities for deception . Armstrong pointed out that doubles have traditionally provided endless opportunities to deceive .
 Armstrong admits prying apart the two lives creates a story that becomes very difficult, if not impossible to follow, with twists that are hard to comprehend and results that may seem bizarre at best . Armstrong also admits that the story is difficult to follow because of the twists and twists .
 The JFK assassination record contains many documented but inconsistent or conflicting stories of who exactly Lee Harvey Oswald was, stretching back to 1956 . Oswald joined the marines at the time of the JFK assassination . Oswald was a member of the marines .
 Dallas police officer Tippit was shot and killed in Dallas, Texas, last week . The suspect has been apprehended in connection with the murder of the officer . Dallas police chief Will Fritz visited Will Fritz’s office to see the suspect .
 Oswald was seen running down the grassy knoll to get into the Nash Rambler being driven by the dark-complected man . Craig gave a positive identification that Oswald was the man he had seen .
 Oswald interrupted and said to Craig, "That station wagon belongs to Ruth Paine," according to testimony . Paine was a member of Paine’s political party .
 Marina Oswald, Lee Harvey Oswald’s wife, was rooming with Ruth Paine in Irving, Texas, at the time of the JFK assassination . Paine was a resident of Irving, a suburb within the greater Dallas area .
 Oswald did not expand on the comment, as Armstrong did not elaborate on it . This is what Armstrong apparently believed, although we can only speculate what Oswald meant .
 In Murray’s photograph of the Nash Rambler, the Hertz rent-a-car sign on top of the School Depository building records the time as being 12:40m., approximately ten minutes after the shooting . The time of the shooting at the scene was 12
 Oswald's escape would have been a much more direct escape route for Oswald . Just like walking home, hopping into the Nash Rambler heading west on Elm Street would've been a better escape route . Oswald walked home from the scene of the shooting .
 Oswald and the driver needed only to drive a few blocks on Elm to arrive at Elm and Beckley, a short distance from Oswald’s rooming house at 1026 North Beckley . Oswald and his driver entered the Nash Rambler in a short time .
 The problem was that if the Warren Commission accepted Officer Roger Craig’s testimony, then Oswald had an accomplice . Oswald had a accomplice, according to a report from the CIA .
 Ruth Paine owned a Nash Rambler at the time of the assassination, Craig Craig described . Paine's wife, Ruth, was also a friend of Paine .
 Deputy constable Seymour Weitzman declared the weapon to be a 7.65 German Mauser . The weapon was found on the sixth floor .
 Craig’s testimony was also at odds with the testimony of fellow workers in the book depository that insisted Oswald was seen in the lunchroom in the immediate aftermath of the shooting .
 The first inclination would be that both could not be right, or that the witnesses in the book depository and Craig were describing two completely different people that resembled one another . The first instinct would be to think that both were right, and that they were not .
 Craig was fired from the Sheriff’s office on July 4, 1967 . Craig was unable to find steady work after being fired from Sheriff's office . Craig had difficulty finding steady work .
 Craig was alleged to have committed suicide on May 15, 1975 . Craig suspected multiple attempts made on his life that Craig suspected were attempts to silence him . After multiple documented but unsolved attempts on Craig's life, Craig suspected that he was being targeted .
 In the next chapter, we will look at the involvement of intelligence agencies in the JFK assassination . The next chapter of this article will look back at the assassination .
 In chapter 5, we will consider the creation by the CIA of an assassination model plan that dates back to Guatemala in the 1950s, involving the creation of a patsy to take the blame . Chapter 5: The CIA created a model plan for the assassination model in Guatemala that dates
 Former marine, Lee Harvey Oswald gave up his American citizenship and moved to Russia . “All I know is that my son is an agent, and that he deserves to be buried in Arlington Cemetery.” —Ronald Reagan .
 He realized KGB involvement in the assassination could well lead to a nuclear war with Russia . If proved, if proved, it could lead to nuclear war .
 LBJ realized immediately the JFK assassination amounted to nothing less than a coup d’état . If the CIA were involved, LBJ. realized immediately . LBJ . realized immediately that the CIA was involved, the assassination was a coup .
 A blue-ribbon commission could put an end to speculation that Oswald was the assassin . The commission should conclude Lee Harvey Oswald is the assassin and that Oswald had no accomplices in committing his crime .
 This was an especially convenient solution because Lee Harvey Oswald was dead . This was especially convenient because Oswald's body was found in Oswald's home .
 With Oswald already framed as the assassin, no trial would ever challenge a verdict already reached in the court of public opinion . Oswald would never be able to challenge the conviction of the assassin in court-martial .
 Speculation about Oswald’s motivation ought to be cut off . We should have some basis for rebutting thought that this was a Communist conspiracy or a right-wing conspiracy to blame it on the Communists .
 There is credible evidence Oswald was a KGB agent, but strong arguments can be made that he was a double agent . Oswald was actually working for a combination of naval intelligence and the CIA when he defected to the Soviet Union .
 The problem with Oswald is determining whether he was a committed Marxist or not he was just pretending to be a Marxist . The problem is determining if he was actually a Marxist or just a Marxist, he says .
 The similarities between the three plots leaves no doubt it was a conspiracy that involved the KGB, the CIA, or the mob, or some combination of all three . The KGB, CIA, the mob and the mob were involved in the plot .
 The assassination of JFK was a conspiracy becomes inevitable once we realize two counterparts with remarkable parallels to Lee Harvey Oswald had been setup equally as patsies . One was positioned in Chicago and the other in Tampa, one positioned in Tampa .
 Pacepa was one of three deputy chiefs of the Departamentul de Informatii Externe . He was living in his native Bucharest when JFK was assassinated .
 In January 2013, I e-mailed Pacepa specifically regarding his direct experience in Romania’s intelligence operations . The Romanian intelligence officer says he is proud of his work in Romania .
 Pacepa makes a convincing argument that Lee Harvey Oswald was a KGB agent . The author also makes a compelling argument for the Kennedy assassination .
 Pacepa began examining the documents on the JFK assassination published by the U.S. government in 1990 . In 1990, after he became a United States citizen, he began examining documents on JFK .
 U.S. investigators lacked the experience and familiarity with Soviet intelligence operations to recognize the telltale patterns that Oswald was a KGB agent . He was impressed with the wealth of Soviet operational patterns visible throughout the material on Oswald that had been turned up by investigators .
 He became convinced Oswald was recruited by the Soviets when he was a Marine stationed in Atsugi, Japan, outside Tokyo . Oswald was in Japan at the time of his assassination .
 The Secret War of Lee Harvey Oswald interviewed some four hundred people who knew Oswald . Zack Stout was a Marine stationed with Oswald at the top secret U-2 Navy base at Atsugi, Japan . Stout was one of the Marines who worked with Oswald in Japan .
 Stout told Lipton that Oswald was spending time with an attractive girl who "worked" at the Queen Bee, one of the three most expensive nightclubs in Tokyo . Stout said the girl worked at the club, which catered to American senior air officers and U2 pilots . Stout told
 The Queen Bee, Stout noted, had more than one hundred strikingly beautiful Japanese hostesses . Stout noted that the Queen Bee had over 100 strikingly beautiful hostesses. Stout: "The Queen Bee"
 To take a hostess out of a nightclub required paying not only for the girl and for a hotel room, but also compensating the nightclub for the bar business lost during her absence .
 A “date” at the Queen Bee could cost anywhere from sixty to eighty dollars a night, at a time when Oswald was earning less than eighty-five dollars a month .
 Oswald saw her regularly, reportedly even bringing her back to the base area several times . Oswald reportedly brought her back several times to see her . Oswald says he saw her often, bringing her to base .
 Other Marines less friendly to Oswald were astonished someone of her “class” would go out with Oswald at all .
 The PGU’s eye fell on Oswald soon after he began frequenting the bars around the base, he says . He says he is convinced that the PGU .
 The incident was a severe embarrassment to the Eisenhower administration that was forced to admit the operation of the secret U.S. spy planes over Russia after the Soviet Union produced intact pieces of the U-2 airplane .
 Edward Jay Lipton wrote that after Powers was returned to the United States he suggested it might have been Oswald who provided the Soviets with the secret information about his flight . Lipton suggested that Oswald might have provided the information .
 When Pacepa was an intelligence officer for Romania, the KGB pressed him for confirmation that the U-2 spy plane could fly at altitudes of about thirty thousand meters, approximately ninety thousand feet . The KGB in the summer of 1959 pressed him to confirm that the spy plane can fly
 Pacepa’s intelligence station in Romania was asked to make a special effort to check out that information and expedite to headquarters any confirmation or expansion .
 Pacepa has no doubt Oswald was the source of the Soviet’s U-2 intelligence . The U.2 intelligence came from Oswald, a former CIA operative .
 In exchange for providing the intelligence needed, the Soviet government richly rewarded Oswald . Oswald was rewarded for his role in the Soviet Union's success .
 On May Day, the U-2 became what Pacepa considered the crowning foreign policy success of Khrushchev’s career . The U.2 became the crown-of-the-Krushchev-era U.S. military aircraft .
 Oswald helped the Russians know the U-2 altitude because of his specialized knowledge . Oswald’s version of helping the Russians knows the altitude has been questioned . However, the commonly accepted version of Oswald's help is questioned .
 Lee Harvey Oswald in the Far East, claims the Soviets had been tracking all U-2 flights from Atsugi . Oswald claims the U.2 was tracked by the Soviets . Oswald was in Japan at the time of the Second World War .
 The extensive Soviet tracking of U-2 flights should have given them sufficient knowledge of the altitude at which the flights flew . The extensive tracking of the U.2 flights would have given the Soviets enough altitude to know what altitude they flew .
 Swike was confident Oswald’s appeal to the Soviets involved not specialized U-2 knowledge, but nuclear knowledge . Swike: Oswald's awareness of the nuclear possibilities the U.S. government was considering for U.2 flights . Oswald's appeal was not specialized knowledge, Sw
 Swike documented the presence of a Nuclear Weapons Assembly team on base at Atsugi, Japan, in addition to the U-2 program . Swike also documented a nuclear weapons assembly team .
 Swike questions how much detailed technical information Oswald obtained at Atsugi concerning the U-2 program . Swike directly questioned how much of the information Oswald had been able to obtain .
 Oswald's interest to the Russians may have been because of his knowledge of the marine’s secret atomic weapons facilities at Atsugi . He also suggests that Oswald’�s interest to Russia may be because of the secret atomic weapon facilities .
 In those years, the Soviets were intensely interested in tracking any and all United States nuclear facilities that may have violated international agreements at the end of World War II to keep Japan nuclear free .
 The Soviets had an interest in identifying and inventorying all U.S. nuclear facilities . This was an important subset of the larger interest the Soviets had in the 1950s .
 The U.S. foreign policy in 1963 was obsessed with Cuba and the threat of Soviet nuclear weapons . Mao Tse-Tung and the Communist Chinese were on the fast track to testing an atomic weapon, the author says .
 JFK selected veteran U.S. diplomat and Soviet expert W Averell Harriman to push forward with Moscow the idea . The idea the United States and the USSR would jointly launch a military attack on China’s atomic facilities would prevent or at least slow China from advancing with
 JFK ruled out attacking China unilaterally . Joint American-Soviet preemptive nuclear attack on China was actively discussed at the top levels of the Kennedy administration .
 Chang documented that discussions continued within the White House even as LBJ assumed the presidency . Chang documented discussions continued even after LBJ took over the presidency in LBJ's first term .
 This puts an entirely different spin on what the CIA possibly may have had in mind for Lee Harvey Oswald . This puts a new perspective on the Oswald case .
 Oswald was filmed on August 16, 1963, in New Orleans handing out leaflets for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Oswald was a few months prior to the JFK assassination .
 By traveling to Cuba the students risked losing their passports, facing long court battles in the U.S. and facing fines up to $5,000 plus five years in jail . The students risk losing their passport, facing court battles and jail time .
 In testimony to the Warren Commission, Lee tried to deny any knowledge of Oswald . Lee claimed many people wrote letters to him that he did not personally know . Lee said in testimony to Warren Commission that many letters he received from Oswald .
 CIA might have claimed Oswald was not specifically a KGB agent, but a Maoist . Progressive Labor movement's decision to embrace Chinese Communism in their support of Castro’s revolution in Cuba led to their embrace of Chinese Communism .
 The storyline could have been that Oswald was a Marxist who became a KGB agent after he defected to Russia . Once in Russia, Oswald became disillusioned with Russian Communism, as he sided ideologically increasingly with China .
 JFK was not going to launch a unilateral atomic attack on China’s nuclear facilities, he says . The goal could have been to cause the American people to rise up, not just against Cuba for being responsible for JFK's assassination, but also against Communist China .
 Identifying Oswald as a Maoist would have focused public anger on China, allowing the CIA and State Department to leverage the United States resentment against China as a means of widening the Sino-Soviet split . The uprising after 9/11 allowed President Bush to invade Afghanistan and Iraq .
 CIA could not spread the disinformation that Oswald was a Maoist if Oswald remained alive . However, the CIA would not have been able to spread the spread of the disinformation if Oswald was still alive . Oswald's death would have prevented the CIA spreading the disinformation .
 Oswald might have exposed an intelligence operation that extended back into the 1950s . With a lawyer’s assistance, Oswald may have exposed the operation . Both the USSR and the United States are likely to be culpable .
 Oswald would have had no chance to hear anything Oswald may have wanted to say . But with Oswald dead before being arrested, the press would have been able to hear what he wanted .
 Oswald never got the chance to make his criminal defense, or give his explanation of how he had been manipulated in the run-up to the assassination . Oswald was never given the opportunity to explain his role in the assassination or explain his involvement .
 Officer Tippit was charged with the murder of the President of the United States. Clearly, if not also disgusted, he appeared surprised when a reporter shouted out to him the charges .
 CE399, the “magic bullet,” which likely was planted on the stretcher, could have been linked to the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle . CE399 was likely planted on a stretcher and could be the "magic bullet"
 The wallet found at the Tippit murder scene was likely planted there, evidence against Lee Harvey Oswald was circumstantial at best . Oswald's wallet was found in the wallet at the scene of the murder of Tippits .
 The only eyewitness that positively identified Oswald was Howard L Brennan . Brennan’s testimony would have been easy to challenge in court .
 Oswald shot anyone on November 22, 1963, but there was not proof beyond a reasonable doubt that he shot anyone . Oswald never had a criminal trial at which he had an opportunity to defend himself . Oswald was not convicted of shooting anyone in 1963 .
 Once Oswald survived the post-assassination chaos and was in police custody, the CIA had to back off all attempts to leverage the assassination against China . At any rate, if the plan was to gain public support against Cuba and China, it would have to backtrack .
 CIA masterminds had no alternative but to frame Oswald as the lone-gun assassin . JFK's assassination turned into a huge disaster with Oswald arrested and Oswald arrested . Oswald was the only one to be charged with Oswald's murder .
 Ruby had a history of working with both the mob and the CIA as a gunrunner to Cuba . Ruby was a Dallas nightclub manager who ran a strip joint . He worked with the mob as a young man in Chicago and then as a nightclub manager .
 Ruby burst into the JFK assassination drama as if he were acting on his own, perhaps out of sympathy with JFK’s widow and children . Ruby's background quickly cast that myth into doubt .
 Former CIA director Allen Dulles made a seemingly out of context statement during the Warren Commission hearings . The statement was made during the hearings of the CIA director .
 The date was June 9, 1964, and the witness was Abram Chaynes, a legal advisor to the State Department . The witness was a legal adviser to the state Department .
 The issue before the Warren Commission was whether or not Oswald’s 1959-issued United States passport should have been returned to him in July 1961 for the purpose of returning to the United States . Oswald applied to renew his U.S. passport on June 24, 1963, when Oswald
 The record clearly shows Allen Dulles was thinking about the possibility . Yet, he had no problem pointing out the possibility to the Committee .
 In 1994 an FBI memorandum dated November 26, 1963, four days after JFK assassination, surfaced . In 1994, an FBI memo dated November 25, 1963 surfaced . It was dated four days before JFK's assassination .
 Wannell addressed to William C Sullivan, then the head of FBI intelligence operations . The letter was addressed to then-FBI chief Sullivan .
 It referenced information provided by Bernard Weisman, an employee of the U.S. Information Agency, or USIA, that suggested the Communist Chinese were behind the JFK assassination .
 President Kennedy’s assassination could have advanced the interests of Communist China, memo says . Oswald's disillusionment with the Soviet Union, his recent activities in connection with the FPCC and the fact that he still reportedly held Marxist ideas” indicated that President Kennedy's assassination may have advanced
 J Edgar Hoover enjoyed juggling both the “lone nut’s and “communist conspiracy” angles of the assassination .
 Pacepa supervised Romania’s ultra-secret equivalent of the U.S. National Security Agency . He also became familiar with Soviet ciphers and codes, he wrote .
 Pacepa is convinced Oswald’s mission upon his return to the United States was to assassinate President Kennedy in retaliation for his forcing Russia to erect the Berlin Wall in 1961 and withdraw their missiles from Cuba in 1962 .
 Khrushchev was Pacepa’s supreme boss for nine years, as he was promoted up to the top of the Soviet bloc intelligence community . Pacepas was the supreme boss of the KGB during the 1960s .
 The next morning Romanian head of state Gheorghiu-Dej was having breakfast with Khrushchev . General Vladimir Yefimovich Semichansky, the new chairman of the KGB, presented the Soviet leader with a cable from Washington . Kennedy canceled an eighteen-day trip
 Pacepa recounted Dej’s astonishment when Khrushchev tumed purple reading the cable . Dej recalls Khrushchchev tuming purple reading a cable reading the phone .
 Khrushchev cursed violently as he threw the cable on the floor and ground his heel into it . Khrushchevitch cursed violently, then threw it on the ground .
 Pacepa was with Dej in Bucharest when Khrushchev decided to recall the Russian ships . The move avoided a challenge to a U.S. naval blockade and brought an end to the Cuban missile crisis .
 Pacepa commented that Dej’s reaction was that while Kennedy had won this standoff, his life was now in danger . Dej said Kennedy's life was in danger after Kennedy's victory in the standoff .
 Dej appeared to enjoy witnessing Khrushchev’s humiliation, but was also troubled . Dej said he was troubled by the humiliation of the Soviet leader .
 The Soviet espionage service PGU under General Sakharovsky had a distinct methodology in training an assassin . The PGU had a unique methodology to train assassins .
 The next step was to imprint in the officer’s mind a future vision of the wonderful life he would have in the ‘proletarian paradise’ after completing his mission abroad .
 The Thirteenth Department of the KGB prepared a cover story for Oswald, creating a life for him working at a radio factory in Mimsk, Russia . Oswald worked for the KGB at the time of his assassination .
 Oswald wrote a letter to the United States embassy in Moscow, asking to return to the U.S. as a United States citizen . Oswald had become disillusioned with his experience in the USSR and had never become a Soviet citizen .
 The United States embassy gave Oswald his passport back and initiated immigration procedures for his Soviet wife, Marina . Oswald's passport was returned to the U.S. embassy .
 George DeMohrenschildt befriended Lee Harvey Oswald and Oswald’s wife, Marina, when the couple returned to the U.S. and settled in the Dallas-Ft. Dallas-area . He and his wife, Jeanne, befriended Oswald's wife and Oswald
 DeMohrenschildt was Oswald’s KGB “handler,” the person Russian intelligence assigned to watch over and monitor Lee Harvey Oswald in the U.S. Both Pacepa and assassination researcher and author Edward Jay Epstein concluded the man was Oswald's KGB handler .
 The Secret World of Lee Harvey Oswald, reported that DeMohrenschildt remained a mystery to the FBI, CIA, and Office of Naval Intelligence that had investigated his activities since 1941 . The Secret . World of Oswald, published by the CIA, remains a mystery .
 DeMohrenschildt arrived in the United States in May 1938 on the SS Manhattan, traveling under a Russian passport issued in Belgium . Epstein says all that was known for certain about him was that he had arrived in U.S. in 1938 .
 DeMohrenschildt claimed to have attended a commercial school in Belgium founded by Napoleon . The school was founded by the German Baronessessess .
 After World War II, he claimed his father had been a Russian engineer in the Romanian Ploiesti oilfields where he was captured by the Soviet Army and executed . He claimed that his father was captured and executed by the Soviets .
 Claiming to be a “petroleum” engineer, DeMohrenschildt worked for a series of American oil companies in Cuba and Venezuela . Claiming that he was a ‘petroleum engineer’, he claimed to be an American oil engineer .
 DeMohrenschildt was remarkably vague about how he and his wife, Jeanne, met the Oswalds . In testifying to the Warren Commission, he said he and Jeanne met Oswalds at the time .
 Her vagueness on recalling how she and her husband first met Lee and Marina Oswald strains their credibility to the breaking point . Her husband and wife first met the Oswalds, Lee, Oswalds' parents .
 Attorney Bill Simpich has documented that DeMohrenschildts’s relationship to the CIA traces back to the 1950s . He was identified as part of an anti-Soviet movement known by its initials ‘NTS” standing for the National Alliance of Russian Solidar
 In the 1950s, the CIA included NTS within the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty organization, a pet project of Cord Meyer, a World War IT hero with excellent connections in Boston society . Cord Meyer was the CIA International Organization’s head who had a background of being a World
 Meyers reported directly to CIA Director Allen Dulles and his best friend in the CIA was Counterintelligence chief James Angleton . Angleton was Meyers' best friend . Meyers worked for the CIA in the 1960s and '90s .
 DeMohrenschildt got in touch with Oswald as a result of a request from Dallas CIA station chief J Walton Moore . Oswald had been working for the CIA in Dallas, Texas, in the 1960s .
 In February 1963 Ruth Paine attended a party in Dallas especially to meet Marina Marina supposedly because Ruth was looking for someone with whom to practice her Russian .
 Marina Oswald subsequently moved into Ruth Paine’s home as a roomer, as noted earlier, and was living there at the time of the assassination . She was living in the home at the same time .
 Ruth Paine’s testimony would be particularly damaging to Lee Harvey Oswald . She described him as being a deeply disturbed individual, extremely unhappy with his life in the U.S. and always potentially violent .
 The evidence that DeMohrenschildt’s CIA connections were the magnet that drew him to Oswald is a strong counterweight to Pacepa's suggestion that he was a KGB agent assigned to be Oswald's handler in Dallas . The evidence is strong and important .
 Oswald posed in two backyard photographs holding a rifle, which the Warren Commission assumed was the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle Oswald bought by mail order . Oswald also wore a holster containing a handgun that the Commission assumed to be the handgun used to kill Officer Tippit .
 Oswald was holding up a March 24, 1963, issue of The Worker and The Militant, two Communist publications . Oswald subscribed to the Communist publications to which he was photographed .
 By holding these two papers, Oswald made a statement that he supported the Trotskyite/Maoist side of the Sino-Soviet . Oswald held the papers, making a statement about his support for the Communist Party in China .
 Oswald claimed the photographs were doctored, with his head placed on someone else's body . Oswald claimed his head was placed on the body of someone else . Oswald was arrested in Dallas, Texas, on suspicion of murder .
 Marina gave DeMohrenschildt a copy of the photograph, which was signed “For George, Lee Harvey Oswald” and dated April 5, 1963 . The photograph is signed ‘For George’, Lee .
 Marina had scribbled on the photograph in Russian, “Hunter of Fascists.” Marina wrote on the photo in Russian . Marina also scribbled ‘Hunter of Fascistists’ in Russian.
 Oswald photographed the alley behind Walker’s home in the wealthy Turtle Creek suburb of Dallas, Texas . Oswald photographed Walker's alley behind his home on Sunday, March 10, 1963 .
 Oswald also took careful measurements of various points around the house, using a nine-power hand telescope . Oswald also used a nine power telescope to measure the size of the house .
 Oswald collected bus timetables from the area, putting the photographs and other information into a journal he kept in his study . Oswald collected timetables and photographs of the area from his study in his home .
 Oswald left Marina a note in Russian instructing her to contact the Red Cross for help if he was apprehended by police, he was killed, or he had to flee . Then, on April 10, 1963, Oswald left a note to Marina telling her to call the . Red Cross if
 Marina Oswald was kept in the dark about most of Lee Harvey Oswald’s activities when he was away from her . She certainly had knowledge of her husband's intelligence agency connections, especially with regard to Soviet Union .
 Walker was working on his income taxes when a bullet penetrated the window and slammed into the wall, narrowly missing his head . Walker was shot in the head at 9:00m. that evening .
 Epstein: Oswald got home around 11:30m., breathing hard and appearing extremely tense . According to the story as told by Epstein, Oswald was breathing hard . Epstein says Oswald returned home from work at 11 a.m. and appeared tense .
 DeMohrenschildt said he saw the rifle in a closet at the home Oswald was renting from Ruth Paine . Paine had been renting the home at the time of the 1963 shooting . The couple left off a rabbit toy for their young daughter on Easter Sunday .
 Oswald told DeMohrenschildt he had the gun for target shooting . Oswald said it was a target shooting weapon . Oswald was the only person who had a gun .
 For some reason, DeMohrenschildt associated this rifle with the attempt on General Walker . For some unexplained reason, this rifle was associated with Walker's attempt .
 Oswald smiled to that, because just a few days before there was an attempt at General Walker’s life, and it was very highly publicized in the papers, and I knew that Oswald disliked General Walker, you see. And he smiled . Oswald smiled .
 "I can clearly see his face, you know. So I took a chance and I asked him this question, you see, and I can . See, I can clearly hear his face," he says .
 "I became tense, you see, and didn’t answer anything, smiled, you know, made a sarcastic—not sarcastic—face," she said . "I made a peculiar face. Became tense, and . didn”
 Marina went in the garden and picked up a large bouquet of roses for us . Marina went to the garden to pick up the flowers for us.
 The rabbit was given to the family by a friend and family member . They gave the family the gift of the rabbit .
 He stresses that she should contact the “embassy,” and that they have “friends here” The “Red Cross” (written in English) will help her financially .
 Oswald wanted to be sure Marina Marina would understand what she should immediately inform the Soviet embassy . At that time, the code for embassy was “office,” but it seems Oswald wanted her to understand . Oswald wanted Marina to understand what Marina should do .
 Marina did not mention this note to U.S. authorities after Oswald’s arrest . Pacepa also found it noteworthy that Marina didn’t mention the note to United States authorities .
 Pacepa has personal experience operating in the upper ranks of the Soviet’s Eastern Bloc intelligence network . The ace in the hole for Pacepas is his personal experience in the Soviet intelligence network.
 Pacepa's claims about Oswald and DeMohrenschildt are credible because he was there at the time of the alleged murders . The claims are so credible that they were made by the former secretary of state .
 He reported from what he saw and heard in person operating as a Soviet Bloc intelligence operative . What he reported, he said, was what he knew from the source .
 For instance, he knew for a fact that DeMohrenschildt was in contact with the KGB in 1957, he says . He also knew that he had contact with a KGB officer .
 Pacepa concluded de Mohrenshildt’s efforts to minimize and distort his contact with Oswald suggest DeMohrenschildt was still acting under PGU guidance during the time he was in contact .
 The attempt on General Walker played an important role in the Warren Commission's conclusion that Oswald was the sole shooter in the JFK assassination . It provided insights into Oswald’s motivation for the assassination, including his motivation .
 Oswald left photographs of him with the rifle and Communist papers at home when he made his attack on Walker . Oswald may have been concerned about his place in history . Oswald left the photographs at home to make his attack against Walker .
 Oswald's photos would probably have appeared on the front pages of newspapers and magazines all over the country if he had been caught . Oswald's photo of the attack would have been published in the United States .
 Oswald would have been equally enthusiastic to murder General Walker, a right-wing member of the John Birch Society, and President John F Kennedy, a moderate Democrat . Right-wing extremists in Dallas at the time tended to view Kennedy as being virtually a Communist himself .
 Warren Commission’s determination to use the attempt on Walker as proof that Oswald was the JFK assassin demands we accept Oswald as an equal opportunity murderer . The Warren Commission's determination to . use . use of the attempt to use . as proof of Oswald's assassination demands that he was an
 Even if Oswald were an expert shot, he never had any military sniper experience . Oswald had never been an expert sniper .
 An expert sniper understands how to succeed, choosing a high probability shot that takes the best advantage of the physical circumstances of the setting . Expert sniper chooses the best shot to take advantage of physical circumstances .
 Oswald missed an unsuspecting older man sitting largely stationary in a chair with all the time in the world . Oswald was no expert, having missed the man sitting in the same chair .
 An expert sniper not only would have no trouble hitting such an easy target, he wouldn’t brag about having taken it . Further, an expert sniper would not have to be bragged about taking the target .
 Oswald shot at General Walker but missed would have been to assume JFK had nothing to worry about . If anything, the conclusion would be to assume that JFK had no problem with Oswald .
 DeMohrenschildt’s testimony before the Warren Commission was one of the most extensive sworn testimony taken . The Commission believed it was to provide insight into Oswald's psychological state and motivations at the time of the assassination .
 DeMohrenschildt’s testimony supplied the basis for the Warren Commission to conclude Oswald was a lone loser . Subtly, it was that Oswald was the lone loser in the assassination .
 He claimed no government would be stupid enough to trust Oswald with anything important . He said Oswald would not have been trusted by any government . Oswald died in August 1945 at the hands of President Eisenhower .
 DeMohrenschildt told the Warren Commission that Oswald was unhappy in his marriage . Oswald had been unhappy with his wife . Oswald was married to a woman who had an affair .
 Jeanne DeMohrenschildt advanced the same themes, claiming Oswald was “cruel” to his wife . Jeanne De Mohrenschildschildt also claimed Oswald was "cruel" to her .
 George DeMohrenschildt testified that in their arguments Marina became so enraged she scratched Oswald with her fingernails . This, after George testified, Marina became enraged and scratched Oswald .
 Jeanne contrasted Oswald's life with JFK's . Everything he did ended up in failure, she said .
 George and Jeanne gave their testimony to the Warren Commission . The testimony reinforced their impression of Lee Harvey Oswald as a misfit, a loner, a loser .
 George and Jeanne DeMohrenschildt were engaged in a classic example of intelligence disinformation . Their goal was to build a story that would frame Oswald as a confused, Communistsympathizing misfit who was capable of a violent act .
 George and Jeanne DeMohrenschildt befriended the Oswalds from out of nowhere and got to know them well enough that their testimony to the Warren Commission would convey at least surface credibility . The husband-wife pair did an excellent job befriending the Oswald family .
 Bogdan Stashinsky was decorated by Khrushchev for assassinating two enemies of the Soviet Union living in the West . The West German Supreme Court mounted a public trial of the KGB officer in 1962 . The trial took place at the end of that year .
 Having backed down in the Cuban missile crisis, the last thing top Soviet officials wanted was to cause another provocation that could bring the U.S. and the Soviet Union into direct confrontation . The Soviet Union backed down after backing down in Cuba's missile crisis .
 DeMohrenschildt and his wife abruptly left Dallas for Haiti in 1963 . Shortly after the attempt on Walker, on April 19, 1963, they left for Haiti .
 Papeca attributes this to a decision Khrushchev made that he was no longer interested in having Kennedy assassinated . Kennedy was assassinated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The DeMohrenschildts only briefly returned to Dallas only briefly, to pack up their household belongings in two days and leave again, without saying good-bye to the Oswalds . The Oswalds were the only family members to return to Dallas .
 From Dallas, the DeMohrenschildts drove to Miami, to fly on to Haiti, where they arrived on June 2, 1963 . They arrived in Haiti on June 3, 1963, in Haiti .
 They remained in Haiti until April 1964, when they were called to testify . The Warren Commission called them to testify before the Warren Commission .
 A “substantial” sum of money, in the range of $200,000 to $250,000 had been deposited in the DeMohrenschildts’s account in Port-au-Prince .
 Epstein was in the process of interviewing DeMohrenschildt at the Breakers Hotel in Palm Beach, Florida, on March 29, 1977, when they broke for lunch . Epstein was apparently determined to confront DeMohreldschildt about serving as Oswald’s KGB handler .
 DeMohrenschildt returned to the Palm Beach where he was staying . Planning to meet again at 3:00 p.m.
 He found a card informing him that he had been subpoenaed to testify before the House Select Committee on Assassinations . He was subpoenaed by the committee to testify about the assassination .
 Even though shotguns are not typically used in suicides, the death was ruled a suicide and never investigated . The death was never investigated because of the lack of investigation .
 Pacepa is convinced Moscow tried to deprogram Oswald to no avail and that despite Moscow’s instruction that Oswald should not assassinate JFK, Oswald proceeded with his original plans . Oswald believed he was fulfilling his “historic” task .
 Oswald had to find a way to convince the KGB that allowing him to go ahead with the original plan remained a good idea . This would have meant he had to convince them that it was still a good plan .
 Pacepa believes Oswald took a secret trip to Mexico in April 1963 to meet with the KGB in an effort to convince the Russians he was able to carry out the mission without adverse consequences to the Soviet Union . The trip is believed to have taken Oswald to Mexico to convince them he was
 Comrade Kostikov was an officer of the KGB’s Thirteenth Department responsible for foreign assassinations . He was a KGB officer responsible for assassinations in the Soviet Union . He is believed to be a former KGB officer .
 Kostikov was assigned under diplomatic cover to the Soviet embassy in Mexico . He was assigned to the embassy under the cover of the embassy .
 After the assassination, Oswald’s handwritten draft of the letter to the Soviet embassy was found among Oswald's effects in the garage of Ruth Paine's home .
 This is to inform you of recent events since my meetings with Comrade Kostin [of new events since] in the Embassy of the Soviet Union, Mexico City, Mexico . This is the first time I have seen such events since I met comrade Kostine in the embassy of
 I was unable to remain in Mexico indefinitely because of my Mexican visa restrictions which were for 15 days only . I was able to stay in Mexico for a 15-day period, but my visa was only 15 days .
 I could not take a chance on requesting a new visa unless I used my real name, so I returned to the U.S. "I'm not afraid to take a risk," she says .
 The Warren Commission had no knowledge of a meeting Oswald may have had with Kostikov in April 1963 . The Commission managed to deepen the mystery over Oswald’s subsequent trip to Mexico that Oswald took in September 1963 . Oswald arrived in Mexico City on September 27, arriving in Mexico
 Oswald went almost directly to the Cuban embassy and applied for a visa to Cuba in transit to Russia . The Warren Commission reported Oswald went to the embassy to apply for a Cuban visa . Oswald was killed in the Cuban assassination in November 1945 .
 Oswald was the head of the New Orleans branch of the pro-Castro organization Fair Play for Cuba . Oswald noted his previous residence in the Soviet Union and indicated his desire to return there to live .
 The Cubans would not give Oswald a visa until he received one from the Russians, which would take several months . Oswald would not be allowed to travel to Cuba until the Russians gave him a visa .
 The Warren Commission reported that Oswald became agitated at being given the runaround . Oswald left Mexico City on October 2, 1963, after having been rebuffed by both the Cuban and Soviet embassies .
 The Warren Commission was forced to publish the photo in order to quash her allegations . It was published by the Warren Commission in response to her claims .
 To this day, the person photographed by the CIA in Mexico has not been identified . The person in the photograph is clearly neither Oswald nor Ruby . The photograph was taken in Mexico in 1953 .
 The CIA advised that on October 1, 1963, an individual identified himself as Lee Harvey Oswald, who contacted the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City inquiring as to any messages . An extremely sensitive source had reported that an individual . identified himself . as Lee Oswald .
 Oswald's visit to Mexico in 1963 remains one of the most hotly debated issues in the JFK assassination mystery . Whether or not Oswald visited Mexico in the 1960s remains a hotly debated issue in the case .
 The person in the photograph bears no resemblance whatsoever to Lee Harvey Oswald . The photograph was released by the CIA . Oswald was killed in November 1945 .
 The person in the photograph has never been identified . The photograph was released by the CIA in 1996 .
 Pacepa remains convinced that Oswald did connect with Kostikov in Mexico City . Still, he says, he believes Oswald was connected to Kostkov .
 Pacepa focused on a Mexico City guidebook for the week September 28-October 4, 1963, found among Oswald’s effects . The guidebook included a Spanish-English directory, a guidebook and a directory .
 The guidebook had the Soviet embassy’s telephone number underlined in pencil . The names Kosten and Osvald were written in Cyrillic on the page listing Diplomats in Mexico, as well as checkmarks next to five movie theaters .
 Pacepa notes the Palace of Fine Arts was a favorite place for tourists to assemble on Sunday mornings to watch the Ballet Folklorico . Also marked on the map is a place where tourists gathered to watch Sunday morning shows .
 Pacepa: Oswald and Kostikov had a secret ‘iron meeting’ in Mexico City . All this suggests they met in a secret meeting, he says . Oswald was assassinated in November 1944 .
 Iron meetings, or invariable meetings, were meetings the KGB used as standard procedure for emergency situations . Iron meetings were meetings that were used to prepare for emergencies .
 Oswald knew too much about the original KGB plan, Moscow arranged for him to be silenced forever . Moscow feared that sooner or later Oswald would break down and begin talking to the police more openly and honestly . Oswald was silenced forever, fearing that sooner than later he might break down .
 Pacepa is correct that Oswald was on a mission only he truly understood . Most likely he was trying to find a way to get around the world .
 Pacepa argues that the information that Khrushchev had lost his nerve and called off the JFK assassination might just be disinformation best disregarded . For all Oswald knew, the information may just be the best best disregarding, he says .
 Even if Pacepa is right in arguing that Oswald followed the KGB methodology of acting alone, we must draw a distinction . The Warren Commission used the term "lone-gun assassin" to refer to Oswald .
 The Warren Commission intended to dismiss the idea Oswald had accomplices in order to rule out the possibility of a conspiracy . Oswald's accomplices were never found .
 Pacepa understands that Oswald was carrying out a KGB-ordered foreign assassination that by definition involved an international conspiracy tracing back to Moscow . Pacepas understands that . Oswald was Carrying out an international . assassination that . involved international conspiracy traced back to Russia .
 Nothing about unraveling the mystery surrounding the JFK assassination is so easy as to lay all the blame on the KGB alone . Still, it's not so easy to blame the KGB for the assassination .
 Not unless we want to make the KGB responsible for launching multiple look-alike plans to assassinate JFK . We are willing to turn a blind eye to the recently discovered evidence of the involvement of the mob and the CIA in the assassination plots .
 Two earlier assassination plots were thwarted: one in Chicago on November 2 and one in Tampa on November 18 . John and Robert Kennedy planned to kill JFK in Dallas .
 The assassination attempt in Chicago was scheduled for Saturday, November 2, 1963 . JFK's assassination attempt was scheduled to take place in Chicago, Illinois .
 JEK was scheduled to proceed from Chicago’s O’Hare Airport via motorcade to Soldier Field, where he was to watch the Army-Air Force football game with Mayor Daley . Mayor was to attend the game with the Army and Air Force .
 The eleven-mile motorcade was planned to proceed down what was then known as the Northwester Expressway to the Loop in downtown Chicago . It was planned for an 11-mile trip .
 At Jackson Street, the motorcade would make a difficult left-hand turn off the exit ramp onto the street to the stadium . The motorcade made a difficult turn at Jackson Street .
 The Jackson Street turn, like the turn from Houston onto Elm, involved a ninety-degree turn that would bring the presidential limousine to a virtual standstill . The president's limo would have to make a quick turn to Houston .
 FBI sent a teletype message on October 30, 1963, to the Secret Service in Chicago, Chicago, stating that an attempt to assassinate JFK would be made on November 2, by a four-man team using high-powered rifles . According to Secret Service agent Abraham Bolden, the
 On November 2, Secret Service agents in an unmarked car tailed two of the four men after they left the rooming house together . Secret Service agent in unmarked car followed the men in a car with an unmarked vehicle .
 The two men being tailed caught onto the surveillance after they doubled back and overheard the agent’s radio . The men were caught on surveillance after doubling back and hearing the radio .
 With their cover blown, the Secret Service agents apprehended the two men . They were brought to the Chicago Secret Service office for questioning . The two men were arrested and questioned .
 When no weapons were found in their possession or back at the rooming house, they were ultimately released . The men were arrested and charged with trespassing .
 Vallee was awarded the Purple Heart for wounds he suffered in the Vietnam War . Vallee served in the U.S. Army in Vietnam and received the award for his service .
 Vallee was a member of the John Birch Society at the group’s zenith . He was known in Chicago for his outspoken criticism of JFK's foreign policy views .
 Vallee worked for a printing company located in a warehouse building along the JFK motorcade route . She worked for the printing company along the route .
 When arrested, Vallee had in his automobile an M-1 rifle, a handgun, and three thousand rounds of ammunition . Vallee was arrested after he was found with an arsenal of weapons and ammunition .
 The meeting could have been scheduled for a secluded spot or warehouse near Vallee’s place of work on Jackson, along the route of the JFK motorcade . Vallee could have met with the motorcade at the site of the meeting .
 Vallee had worked at a secret U-2 base commanded by the CIA at Camp Otsu, Japan . Vallee later worked with CIA at a camp near Levittown, Long Island, helping to train Cuban exiles to assassinate Fidel Castro .
 Kennedy’s trip to Chicago on November 2, 1963, was unexpectedly canceled that day at 10:10m. Kennedy's trip to the city unexpectedly canceled . Kennedy's visit to Chicago in 1963 was canceled .
 The JFK motorcade planned for Tampa on November 18, 1963, was one of the longest amounts of time in the open for JFK of his presidency . Vallee, while being released from Chicago police custody on the evening of November 2, 1963 .
 The motorcade was scheduled to go from MacDill Air Force Base to Al Lopez Field to downtown Tampa . The National Guard Armory and the International Inn were also scheduled to be part of the parade .
 Secret Service had warned Tampa Police Department of the threat . No information had been shared about the assassination plot in Chicago earlier that month, he said .
 JFK did not feel a second motorcade could be canceled after Chicago without raising suspicion . JFK had been briefed of the danger in Tampa; however, he didn't feel it would raise suspicion . Waldron and Hartmann also report that JFK was briefed of Tampa danger .
 It was not brought to light until Waldron and Hartmann brought the plot to the attention of the JFK Assassination Review Board in 1995 . Of particular concern in the forty-minute motorcade was the Floridian Hotel, the tallest building in Tampa .
 Deputies from the sheriff’s office controlled the roofs of the major buildings in the downtown and suburban areas . Every Overpass was lined with police officers on alert .
 JFK rode in the back of the same SS-100-X Lincoln limousine he used in Dallas . JFK's motorcade was the same car he used to ride in Dallas, Texas .
 The “bubbletop” typically used on the limo in bad weather was not deployed on that beautiful Tampa day . JFK felt placing it on the car in good weather gave the wrong message . The bubbletop was not bulletproof .
 JFK stood in the limo for much of the motorcade, making him an easily visible target . JFK's limo made him an easy target for the assassination attempt .
 In contrast to Dallas, two Secret Service agents rode on the running boards on the back of the JFK limo for much of the motorcade . The motorcycle escort was properly deployed, surrounding the limo in motorcycle coverage .
 Gilberto Policarpo Lopez was the patsy in the Tampa assassination plot . Lopez was a young Cuban exile who had moved from the Florida Keys to Tampa in the fall of 1963 . He was under surveillance by the FBI .
 This need to get a favorable determination on his status could make him amenable to taking risks for a U.S. agency or make him subject to manipulation by someone saying they could help with his document problems .
 The CIA could blame any problem on the Russians if they were caught . Each of the CIA operatives had a Russian connection in their background, meaning the CIA could use it to blame .
 The same attributes would also make both good Mafia patsies for the JFK assassination . These attributes would make both men good Mafia suspects .
 Waldron and Hartmann conclude the parallels strongly suggest that in the months preceding the JFK assassination, the same people were manipulating both men, for the same reasons . Waldron, Hartmann: In the months prior to the assassination, both men were manipulating for the very reasons .
 Lopez was allowed to travel to Cuba, while Oswald was denied a visa, may indicate that Lopez’s KGB mission in Tampa was finished as soon as the assassination attempt was canceled .
 On November 22, 1963, a Cubana Airlines flight from Mexico City to Havana, Cuba, was delayed for five hours awaiting a passenger . The flight was delayed five hours for five minutes .
 The airfield in Mexico City was particularly clogged with diplomatic personnel hours after the JFK assassination .
 Passenger arrives at 10:30m. local time on private twin engine plane .
 Reportedly, the passenger got out of the private airplane and boarded the Cubana flight directly, without going through customs . The passenger boarded the plane directly, according to reports .
 Once aboard, the passenger entered the cockpit of the airplane, where he remained for the duration of the flight . The passenger remained in the cockpit for the entire duration of flight .
 None of the passengers recognized him well enough to make a positive identification . The man was arrested on suspicion of DUI .
 Passenger identified as Miguel Casas Saez, also known as Angel Dominquez Martinez, the name under which he entered the United States in early November 1963 .
 Casas left Cuba on September 26, 1963, by small boat . After being caught in a hurricane off the coast of Florida, he landed in Puerto Rico and entered Miami . He entered Miami from Puerto Rico using the alias Angel Dominguez Martinez .
 Sources told the CIA that Casas spoke Russian well and that he was an infiltrator who entered the U.S. on an espionage mission . Casas is believed to have entered the United States on a mission .
 A CIA report filed November 2, 1964, also gives a strange account of airplane activity the CIA investigators felt was possibly connected with the JFK assassination . The CIA report was filed in 1964 .
 A source identified only as “a well-known Cuban scientist” reported that by chance he was at the Havana airport on the afternoon of November 22, 1963, when an airplane with Mexican markings landed at the far side of the field .
 The scientist determined the aircraft had just arrived from Dallas, Texas, via Tijuana and Mexico City . The plane was en route from Dallas to Tijuana via Mexico City, Mexico .
 Pacepa recounts how he was paid a surprise visit in Bucharest by General Sakharovsky, the chief Soviet intelligence advisor for Romania, four days after JFK's assassination .
 Oswald’s closest friend in the U.S. had been arranged to be a Russian émigré by the name of George DeMohrenschildt . He was told Oswald's closest friend was a friend of a Russian .
 Pacepa was convinced Oswald had been recruited to be a Soviet agent . This was enough to convince him that Oswald was an agent for the Soviets . Oswald was found to have been recruited by the CIA .
 The next day, Pacepa and his intelligence colleagues in Romania began working on the directive Sakharovsky had brought with him . The directive was part of a secret operation to find out what had happened .
 That Kennedy wanted to end the Cold War was seen as a threat to the CIA’s power . Kennedy wanted end of Cold War as seen as threat to CIA's power . That Kennedy .
 Pacepa related that the cover story was to focus on Lee Harvey Oswald, an enlisted marine the CIA had chosen for carrying out the operation . The cover story would have been to be focused on the enlisted marine chosen by the CIA to carry out the attack .
 Oswald represented as a CIA agent who had been sent to the Soviet Union under cover as a defector . Oswald was sent back to the U.S. three years later, after completing his mission .
 The directive instructed Romanian intelligence to construct the story so as to make the world believe the assassination had been perpetrated by the U.S. government, the directive said .
 Pacepa noted Sakharovsky’s directive had been transformed into a disinformation operational plan . Operation Dragon was code name Operation Dragon . The disinformation operation was codenamed 'Operation Dragon'
 Pacepa found himself drafting an attachment to Operation Dragon containing guidelines for another rumor that was to be circulated . The vice president feared JFK would replace him with a member of the Kennedy clan for the 1964 elections .
 Pacepa was bombarded with nearly frantic cables from the KGB demanding that Operation Dragon be put into high gear . The KGB demanded that the operation be put in high gear after being bombarded by cables from Washington .
 Pacepa’s assertion that a Soviet disinformation campaign was the origin of the various ‘conspiracy theories” that have sought to explain the JFK assassination in the last fifty years got strong support in 1992 when the British Secret Intelligence Service extracted retired KGB officer Vasili Mitro
 The Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the KGB listed a number of prominent books financed by the KGB to promote JFK assassination conspiracy theories . History professor Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokin listed a list of books .
 Lane founded what he called the “Citizens’ Committee of Inquiry” in a small office in Manhattan . He gave nightly renditions of what became known as “The Speech,” a rendition of his conspiracy theories .
 Through a trusted intermediary, the KGB sent Lane fifteen hundred dollars to help finance his research . Lane says he received the money from the KGB to help fund his research. Lane: "It's a good thing to know that the KGB is sending him money to do research"
 Lane was paid to travel to Europe to continue his research . The same intermediary also provided five hundred dollars to pay for Lane to continue research . Lane's research was funded by the same intermediary who paid for him to travel .
 Remarkably, neither Khrushchev nor LBJ wanted a thorough and honest investigation . Remarkly, neither were keen on a thorough, honest investigation.
 Lee Harvey Oswald the guilty party and move on, free of the risk that a trial could embarrass either Russia or the U.S. Better to declare Oswald guilty party, declare him guilty .
 The Warren Commission’s result was exactly the result the U.S. government wanted . The result was that neither the CIA, the FBI, nor the KGB knew anything about Oswald . The CIA, FBI, and KGB knew nothing about Oswald, the Commission said .
 The Soviets preferred a result that put the blame on the CIA, but in the final analysis, the Soviets were satisfied as long as the Warren Commission did not blame the Russian government or the KGB for having ordered and arranged that JFK be murdered . The Soviets would be satisfied if the CIA blamed
 Neither Khrushchev nor LBJ wanted to go to war over JFK’s assassination . JFK's assassination was the first time JFK was assassinated .
 Khrushchev and LBJ were sticking to the story that Lee Harvey Oswald shot JFK and acted alone was a good story . JFK's assassination was a success story, and both Khrushches and LBj stuck to it . LBJ was sticking to it, and Khrushchchev
 Pacepa says Soviet disinformation was aimed at putting the blame back on the USA, as a defensive policy . The disinformation was meant to keep Oswald's KGB ties from being taken too seriously by the Soviets .
 The success of the argument that the CIA was behind the JFK assassination is evidence not in the facts of the CIA’s involvement but in how well designed and effective the Soviet disinformation campaign to blame the CIA turned out to be . Pacepa: The success is evidence that the Soviet
 Epstein unfortunately bought into some of the conspiracy theories later in his career, Pacepa said . Epstein was accused of being involved in a sex assault scandal involving underage girls .
 Pacepa felt Epstein’s “very well documented story is left hanging in mid-air,” a defect he felt he could correct in a future manuscript . Epstein's story is “left hanging in middle-air” as a result of the defect,
 Conspiracy theorists like Joesten or Lane knowingly or not knowingly accepted funding from Soviet intelligence sources does not disqualify the value of the questions asked .
 A particular argument or theory is not wrong simply because it can be traced to a KGB disinformation directive . A particular theory or theory can't be wrong because it's based on a KGB-influenced theory .
 Had the Warren Commission case against Oswald been ironclad, conspiracy theorists would not have been interesting enough to command an audience . Conspiracy theorists, no matter how creative, would have not have commanded a audience .
 LBJ assigned the Warren Commission a fool’s errand when assigning it the mission of finding Oswald guilty as the lone-nut gunman . The truth is, LBJ and the U.S. Justice Department assigned the task to find Oswald guilty .
 LBJ wanted the Warren Commission to reach that conclusion as soon as possible, so a final report could be published before the 1964 presidential election .
 In the final analysis, the Warren Commission failed in its disinformation efforts to pin all the guilt on Oswald because the case against Oswald is not ironclad . The evidence supporting the conclusion the CIA was involved in the JFK assassination is more convincing than the official Warren Commission cover story .
 CIA brokered a substantial financial pay-off to Marina Oswald after JFK assassination . Marina Oswald received a substantial payout from the CIA in the aftermath of the assassination .
 Anti-communist journalist and author Isaac Don Levine befriended Marina Oswald shortly after the JFK assassination . Marina Oswald was a member of the Oswald family .
 Marina Oswald reportedly ended up receiving over $200,000 in what has been described as a ‘payoff’ that Levine arranged . The book was never written, and Marina Oswald ended up getting over $100,000 .
 In 1948 Jackson had become managing director of Time-Life International . Jackson had previously been managing editor of Time Life International .
 Jackson subsequently became the publisher of Fortune magazine, another Henry Luce creation, Fortune magazine . Jackson later became the owner of Fortune .
 In February 1953 Jackson was appointed as a special assistant to President Eisenhower in a role that included coordinating with the CIA and advising Eisenhower on cold war planning and tactics of psychological warfare .
 Jackson suppressed making the Zapruder film available for the public to view . Jackson said the film was too graphically violent for widespread distribution . Jackson: "It was too graphicically violent"
 He spent an intensive week coaching Marina Oswald just prior to her first session before the Warren Commission on February 3, 1964 . Oswald was the subject of an investigation into alleged sexual abuse of children .
 Levine published a stream of articles analyzing the dangers to the U.S. from China after its fall to the Communist Chinese following Mao’s revolution, which began in 1949 .
 Levine's history as an anti-Communist also included credits for encouraging Whittaker Chambers to speak out against Alger Hiss . Levine’s history included credits .
 Oswald perfectly fit the type of person sought out by serious assassination planners who needed a dupe to play the role they had written for the patsy . Oswald was the perfect person to fit the role of a serious assassination planner . Oswald's role in the assassination was to be played by
 Jack Ruby jumped out at him with a gun in his hand in the basement of the Dallas Police Department . He could not have been more perfect, especially since he probably did not fully appreciate the extent to which he had been set up and abandoned, not until he saw Jack Ruby .
 Oswald often acted as if he expected to be misunderstood, or if he was indifferent as to whether or not those in positions of authority understood him . Oswald often seemed indifferent to whether he was misunderstood or not understood .
 He was vulnerable not because he wanted to be understood, but because he dreaded being seen as unimportant . He said: 'He was vulnerable because he feared being unimportant. He was not afraid to be unimportant'
 Marguerite told the Warren Commission she asked her son why he came back to the U.S. She told them she asked him why he had to return to the United States .
 She knew he had a good job in Russia because he sent her expensive gifts, and he was married to a Russian girl . He knew she was going to be happy with him, she said . She said he sent expensive gifts to her, and she was happy with her husband .
 She believed her son died in the service of his country—the United States of America—and that he laid out his role playing out his assigned role .
 Marguerite Oswald did not understand and certainly could not explain anything Lee Harvey Oswald had done, probably since he was a child, she says . She says she could not understand why he went to Russia, or why he chose to come home .
 The assassination of President Kennedy occurred in Guatemala in November 1963 . The CIA and CIA were involved in the assassination of the Guatemalan president .
 The morning he died, John F Kennedy had talked about being assassinated . The morning of his death, he had talked to JFK about being killed, he said .
 Kennedy and myself met Kennedy about a half an hour before he left the Hotel Texas to depart for Carswell Air Force Base . Kennedy and himself, perhaps a half hour before his departure, were in the hotel .
 Tell us exactly what he said at that time, please. And tell us, as nearly as nearly . recollect, please . Tell us what you think he said .
 The President was talking to his wife about the Secret Service's role in protecting him from crowds . He said their main function was to see that an unruly or sometimes an overexcited crowd did not generate into a riot .
 President Obama said that if anybody really wanted to shoot the President of the United States, it was not a very difficult job . "All one had to do was get a high building some day with a telescopic rifle," he said .
 JFK had discussed being shot by a high-powered rifle from a tall building so frequently he appeared to have been obsessed with that assassination method . JFK was obsessed with being shot at a high powered rifle from tall buildings .
 The reason he was obsessed with being assassinated by a sniper was because he had been warned that that is precisely how he would be killed . The reason was that he was warned that was precisely how to be killed, he said .
 Jim Bishop recounts the last time he saw JFK was on October 24, 1963, approximately one month before the assassination . The author of The Day Kennedy Was Shot recounts that he last saw JFK in October 1963 .
 JFK selected JFK's assassination as the subject for their last chat . JFK recalled JFK selected assassination to be the subject of his last chat with Bishop . JFK had enjoyed reading Bishop's earlier book, The Day Lincoln Was Shot .
 Every modern-day president is aware, at least intellectually, that the possibility of assassination is very real . The possibility of assassinating a president is real, but it's not always the case .
 The roots of his premonition were not psychic in nature; he was aware of the threat because he had been warned a plot to assassinate him was in the works . He had been told a plot was being planned to kill him in the future .
 JFK had been given numerous warnings of specific and credible threats to his life . JFK was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963, Dallas, Dallas .
 On the morning of November 22, 1963, the rain had stopped, probably a reason for the assassination to take place . The rain stopped in the morning, probably because of the weather .
 The bubbletop would have been placed on the car if the rain had continued, and although it wasn’t bulletproof, it might have caused refractions in the bullets’ trajectories, which could have been sufficient to call off the mission .
 When JFK visited Ireland in June, five months before he was assassinated, the Irish police took extra security precautions after receiving three death threats . The threats included a warning a sniper with a rifle would take up a position on a rooftop overlooking the president’s motorcade route .
 There had been multiple recurring credible threats of assassination surfacing that indicated specific plans were in the works to assassinate JFK soon . JFK was assassinated in 1963 .
 The plans all had a common element: a sniper with a high-powered rifle equipped with a scope, shooting from a tall building . Even more seriously worrisome, the plans all included a sniper sniper .
 The CIA-engineered assassination of Carlos Castillo Armas in Guatamala on July 26, 1957, and the assassination of JFK on November 22, 1963, suggest what the CIA had learned in Central America might have been duplicated in Dallas .
 If the JFK assassination was a rerun of Carlos Castillo Armas in Guatemala, professional politicians could look the other way and deny complicity . Richard Nixon and Lyndon Johnson, such as Richard Nixon, could deny complicity.
 Union organizer William Somersett, a former member of the Ku Klux Klan, allowed police to record a conversation with a right-wing extremist . Somersett allowed the Miami police to secretly record a phone conversation with his old friend, Joseph Milteer .
 Milteer insisted the plan was ‘in the works’ and that a patsy would be blamed for the crime . Milteeer insisted a plan was in the works and that the crime was not a crime . The plan was revealed in a press conference in London
 Somersett replied that somebody would have to go to jail if JFK got killed . Somersett said somebody would be going to prison if JFK was killed. Somersett responded: "I'm not going to jail"
 Milteer responded by saying it would be just like Bruno Hauptman in the Lindberg kidnapping case . He said it would have taken the punishment for a crime he did not commit . Milteeer responded to the comment, saying it was just like the case of Bruno Hau
 Former prosecutor Vincent Bugliosi convinced Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone . Secret Service Special Agent Robert Jamison took the threat seriously enough to have Somersett call Milteer on November 18 .
 No violence-prone associates of Milteer were in Miami that day, the Secret Service closed the case . When Somersett confirmed that no violence-plastic associates were in the city that day the case was closed .
 The Secret Service failed to notify the Washington, D.C., Secret Service detail in charge of the Dallas trip or the Secret Service in Dallas about Milteer’s remarks .
 Bugliosi chooses to interpret Milteer’s recorded comments as nothing more than idle speculation . The conversation is one more indication that a wide conspiracy was in the works, according to Buglio .
 Secret Service Special Agent Forrest V Sorrels described to the Warren Commission the advance work done to plan the JFK motorcade on November 22 . The motorcade took place in Dallas, Texas .
 "That insofar as I have been concerned, I am sure that every member of the Service, especially the Detail—that is always of concern to us," he said .
 President of the U.S. could be shot with a high-powered rifle and telescopic sight from some building or some hillside, he says . That has always been a concern to us, about the buildings, about buildings, he adds .
 For a popular president in the JFK-era, the danger was unavoidable . Riding in a motorcade in a closed limousine or under the cover of a bubble top would have conveyed a level of cowardice that itself would have been fatal .
 Milteer's information dovetails with what we now know about the plot to assassinate JFK in Tampa, Florida . What remains intriguing is that his information doesvetails in the assassination plot .
 Motorcades in Tampa and Miami were not canceled, but security was increased in both cities . Security increased in Miami, Tampa and Tampa .
 If someone wanted to assassinate the President, it could be done with a rifle from a high building, says Special Agent-in-Charge .
 President Kennedy himself had remarked he could be shot from a high building and little could be done to stop it . President Kennedy said little was done to prevent him being shot .
 Unless the Secret Service had a specific reason to suspect the occupants or activities of a certain building, it would not inspect it . The Secret Service will not inspect the building in any way .
 The committee found that at the time of the Dallas trip, there was not sufficient concern about the possibility of an attack from a high building . Agents responsible for the trip planned to develop security precautions to minimize the risk, committee says .
 The Secret Service office in Dallas was not aware of the threats in Chicago and Tampa earlier in the month . They likely would have taken extra precautions .
 Both the Secret Service and Dallas police were unusually lax about allowing windows in tall buildings along the motorcade route to remain open . The Secret Service was unusually relaxed about allowing the windows in high-rise buildings .
 The testimony of Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels to the Warren Commission was important on these points . The testimony was important for the Secret Service .
 Sorrels rode in the lead car along with Dallas Police Chief Jessie Curry . Dallas police chief Jessie Curry rode in front of JFK’s limousine .
 He continued watching the motorcade as it turned left onto Elm Street . He continued to watch as it left the building .
 Sorrels testified that he saw two African-Americans watching the motorcade from a window a couple of floors from the top of the book depository . But he did not recall seeing any activity in the windows of the building that caused him particular concern .
 There is nothing in the record to suggest Lee Harvey Oswald ever received specific training to be a sniper . Oswald was a sniper, not a sniper. Oswald was not trained specifically for sniper training .
 Adams disputes official Secret Service account that places Milteer in Georgia on November 22, 1963 . Adams disputes the official Secret service account . Adams is a former FBI agent involved in the JFK assassination .
 A man in the crowd who looks very much like Milteer is seen in photos of the JFK limousine proceeding down Houston Street . The JFK limo was driven by a man in a crowd who looked very much similar to Milteeer .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded the man in the photo was “substantially taller” by more than six inches . Milteer, who was estimated to be five feet four inches tall, was only 5 feet 4 inches tall .
 No evidence could be found that Milteer was in Dallas on the day of the assassination . House Select Committee noted that no evidence could have been found that he was there .
 Adams first saw the photograph of Milteer in the Dallas crowd in 1993, when he picked up a copy of Robert Groden and Harrison Edward Livingstone’s 1989 book, High Treason . Adams says the photograph was taken in 1993 .
 Someone who threatened to kill the President of the United States, standing alongside the motorcade route that fateful day in Dallas, Texas .
 I had been sent to find Milteer in Georgia the afternoon of the assassination, but didn’t locate him until Wednesday the 27th . He was found in Georgia that afternoon .
 Dulles bought a large block of United Fruit stock after being retained as legal counsel . Dulles was retained by United Fruit's legal counsel, and bought the stock .
 He was Harvard trained, a . clerk for Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, and a confidante of President Franklin D Roosevelt . Roosevelt .
 Since the 1940s, the company had also retained Edward L Bernays, the genius consultant credited for inventing public relations as a profession . Bernays' 1928 book, Propaganda, was openly admired by Nazi Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels .
 The company’s workers formed a union and demanded $2.50 a day for each worker, up from $1.36 . The union cut into the firm's profits, cutting into its profits . The company's workers form a union .
 3 percent of the landholders held some 70 percent of land in Guatemala . As was typical in Central America in that time, some 3 per cent of land was held by 3 percent .
 By 1954, the CIA became concerned Communists in Guatemala were organizing behind Arbenz . CIA reports suggested the U.S.R. had begun covertly supplying the regime with arms .
 Arbenz permitted the existence of a small Communist party in Guatemala, though he had no avid Communists at any top positions in his government . He allowed a small party to exist, but no avid Communist Party members .
 Arbenz nationalized over 1.1 million acres, including some of his family land, to turn over to peasants . Ultimately, he turned over the land to peasants in order to give it to the peasants .
 Eisenhower ordered the National Security Council to overthrow the Arbenz regime in Guatemala . Eisenhower and Nixon ordered the overthrow of Guatemala's regime .
 President Eisenhower introduced Hunt to Edward Bernays, the public relations consultant retained by United Fruit to promote the company . After Hunt accepted the assignment, President Eisenhower called in the Oval Office .
 Bernays organized at least five two-week "fact-finding" junkets to Guatemala, with as many as ten news reporters on each trip . Between early 1952 and the spring of 1954, Bernays had organized five trips to Guatemala .
 The United Fruit Company spared no expense, claimed Thomas McCann, a former company official who worked with Bernays to organize the trips . Bernays was a fruit company executive .
 McCann concluded the trips represented “a serious attempt to compromise objectivity” of the press . Speaking candidly, McCann said the trips were ‘serious attempt’ to compromise objective objectivity .
 Hunt determined that within the CIA the Guatemalan operation would be conducted on a need-to-know basis . Hunt determined to provide the Eisenhower administration the required “plausible deniability,” Hunt determined .
 Hunt's unit had its own funds, communications center, and chain of command within the CIA’s Western Hemisphere Division . Hunt was in charge of a unit that had own funds and communications center .
 Hunt was issued forged documentation from the CIA’s Central Cover Division . Hunt set up field headquarters in a two-story barracks at a former United States Navy training camp . Hunt issued forged documents from CIA's Central Undercover Division .
 Hunt and the CIA trained a small band of mercenaries under Colonel Carlos Castillo Armas . Armas was a Guatemalan military officer who had escaped from prison after an unsuccessful coup against Arbenz in November 1950 . The CIA-engineered Guatemalan coup took place in Honduras .
 On June 17, 1954, Armas and his band of mercenaries crossed the Honduran border into Guatemala . Armas crossed into Guatemala from Honduras into Guatemala.
 Hunt and the CIA organized American jets and pilots to strafe and bombard Guatemala City, the capital of Guatemala City . For several days, Hunt organized American planes and pilots . Hunt and CIA organized several days of bombing .
 The CIA-financed “rebel army” mercenaries numbered fewer than two hundred armed men, a ‘shadow army’ at best . The ‘rebel’ army was a “shadow army,” at best, according to CNN.com .
 The CIA propaganda campaign was designed to make the Guatemalan people and government believe supporting Arbenz was hopeless . Yet, the government and people in Guatemala believed it was hopeless, the CIA said .
 A CIA-funded and operated clandestine radio program recorded by the CIA in Miami pretended to be the “Voice of Liberation’s’ broadcasting from within Guatemala, spreading false reports about legions of rebel soldiers who never existed defeating government troops in fierce battles that never happened .
 The campaign was designed to make Arbenz and his government appear to be an “instrument of Moscow” and “a pawn in the Communist propaganda campaign” as the government complained to the U.N. Hunt and Bernays designed the campaign .
 In an emergency session of the Security Council held at the request of Guatemala, only the Soviet Union supported Guatemala . The Soviet Union did not support Guatemala in the 1980s . Guatemala was the only nation to support Guatemala .
 Lodge family had investments in the United Fruit Company . The Lodge family, including Henry Cabot Lodge, had investments with the company . The company was founded in 1903 .
 On June 25, 1954, Arbenz resigned and went into exile in the Mexican embassy in Mexico . He resigned from his post in 1954 .
 Carlos Castillo Armas returned to Guatemala City aboard a U.S. embassy airplane in 1954 . Armas was the first person to return to Guatemala from the United States embassy in 1954. Armas died in a plane crash in Guatemala City .
 One hundred thousand cheering Guatemalans gathered at the palace balcony to usher him into power . Guatemala's president took office in a landslide victory .
 On July 8, 1954, a Guatemalan military junta elected Carlos Castillo Armas to power . In August 1954, Armas suspended all civil liberties . Armas was elected to power by the junta .
 Within a week of taking power, the Armas government arrested four thousand people accused of participating in communist activity . Within four months, some seventy-two thousand Guatemalans were registered as Communists .
 Land appropriated in nationalization efforts was taken away from the peasants and returned to the United Fruit Company . Land taken from peasants was taken from them by the company . Land was taken back to the U.S.
 Former CIA director General Walter Bedell Smith became a director of the United Fruit Company . He served in World War II as Eisenhower’s chief of staff in Tunisia Campaign and during the invasion of Italy .
 Within three years, the U.S. soured on Armas . Armas: "Within three years" Armas' career had been in decline .
 On July 26, 1957, President Armas was assassinated at around 9:00m., as he and his wife prepared to enter the dining room of the Presidential Palace .
 Two bullets fired, one of which severed his aorta and killed him instantly . Two bullets were fired . One of the bullets was fired .
 The assassin, identified as twenty-year-old Romeo Vasquez Sanchez, was said to have committed suicide immediately . He used the same rifle he had used to kill Armas .
 Romeo Vasquez Sanchez was a member of the Presidential Palace Guard when he committed the assassination . Yet, somehow, he managed to rehabilitate himself sufficiently to have been a part of the Palace Guard .
 The parallels between Romeo Vasquez Sanchez and Lee Harvey Oswald are obvious . The parallels are obvious between the two men, who were both assassinated .
 Both were ex-military who left the service expressing distinct sympathies for Communist Russia . Both ex-soldiers left the military expressing strong sympathies with the Communist Party .
 Romeo Vasquez Sanchez was described by the Guatemalan government as a Communist fanatic who was expelled from the army only six months before he assassinated Armas . Yet somehow somehow somehow he was still allowed to join the Presidential Palace Guard .
 The Presidential Palace Guard would have been a sufficiently elite military unit to require a background check before they were hired . The Palace Guard is a military unit that would have to undergo background checks .
 Waldron and Hartman note that both men were ex-military who killed a president with a rifle . Waldron, Hartman and Waldron are both former military officers who killed the president . Both men were former military men .
 There were both described as Communist nuts who conveniently left behind diaries rambling in Communist propaganda .
 There is no photographic evidence proving either Romeo Vasquez Sanchez or Lee Harvey Oswald were the assassins who pulled the trigger . No photographic evidence .
 There were no eyewitnesses in either case and both men have gaps and questions in their alibi timelines . Both men were arrested and charged with attempted murder .
 Both assassins were dead and buried a short time after the assassinations, avoiding a prolonged time for grief or for unanswered questions to surface . The assassins were killed and buried short after their assassinations .
 In neither case has any written record been released of any government interrogation . Not in Oswald’s case of interrogation by Dallas Police, FBI, and/or Secret Service after his arrest . Neither case has been released in either case .
 Romeo Vasquez Sanchez and Lee Harvey Oswald made perfect patsies . Authorities openly proclaimed their guilt before trial and their deaths made sure neither would have the opportunity of a trial to counter the accusations .
 The fact that Armas was assassinated just four days after trying to close a casino owned by an associate of U.S. mob figure Johnny Roselli received little coverage by the international press . Armas tried to close the casino belonging to a casino run by Roselli and Carlos Marcell
 The sting involved a then-fifty-six-year-old prisoner named Jack Van Laningham . The sting took place in the 1970s in prison .
 He was serving an eight-year sentence in Texarkana for bank robbery . He was from Tampa and was serving eight years in prison .
 In March 1985, Van Laningham managed to befriend Marcello and work cooperatively in an FBI undercover operation . The operation was directed by FBI agent Thomas Kimmel with the goal of finding out how he controlled his criminal organization from prison .
 CAMTEX evolved beyond taping the Texarkana phones to placing a bug in a transistor radio for Van Laningham to place in the private prison cell he shared with Marcello . The bug was placed in a private cell in the prison cell Van Lanedham shared with
 In the course of their conversations, Marcello confessed to Van Laningham the role he played in the JFK assassination .
 Marcello explained to Van Laningham that his hatred of the Kennedy family traced back to the early 1960s, when then-Attorney General Robert Kennedy had Marcellon deported to Guatemala . Marcella was dropped and left to his own devices to survive to survive .
 Marcello, born in Tunisia, North Africa, had obtained false documentation claiming he had been born in Guatemala . He obtained false documents claiming he was born in the country .
 Marcello managed to make his way back to the United States through Florida . In an arduous journey, aided by pilot David Ferrie, he managed to fly back to Florida .
 Ferrie and Oswald were photographed together at the New Orleans Civil Air Patrol in 1955 . Ferrie was a leader and Oswald was a teenager when he was a teen .
 Marcello told Van Laningham that David Ferrie introduced him to Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans . Ferrie had introduced him with Oswald, who had been with Oswald in the city of New Orleans, New York .
 Oswald and Marcello met at various locations in several subsequent meetings before Oswald left New Orleans for Dallas . Oswald was in New Orleans at the time of the first meeting with Marcella .
 Marcello also claimed to have set Jack Ruby up in the bar business in Dallas . He claims to have also set up Jack Ruby in the Dallas bar business .
 Van Laningham told the FBI that Marcello knew Jack Ruby was a homosexual and understood Ruby was paying off the corrupt police in Dallas . Ruby was also known to be a homosexual, VanLaningham said .
 Marcello claimed Ruby came to visit him in New Orleans regularly in order to report on what was happening in Dallas . He claimed Ruby visited him regularly in the New Orleans area .
 A federal judge found Van Laningham’s reliability sufficiently credible to authorize extraordinary surveillance of Marcello while he was in prison, including putting an FBI bug in a transistor radio he bought in prison to share with him . The judge also found that he was credible enough to authorize
 Oswald worked in Marcello’s downtown bookmaking network as a runner . His cousin Dutz Murret worked as a longtime bookie, working out of a mob-owned restaurant in the French Quarter .
 Davis questioned if Oswald was being unwittingly manipulated by the Marcello organization to play the role of the patsy in the plot to assassinate the president . Davis questioned whether three months before the JFK assassination if Oswald had been unwittingly manipulated .
 Davis reported Ruby was a frequent visitor of Civello and his partner Frank LaMonte at their Italian import business in Dallas . Davis suspected the business was a drug import business whose real purpose was importing narcotics . Ruby visited the business at the time, Davis reported .
 Davis further reported the FBI deliberately suppressed evidence of the relationship between Ruby and Civello from the Warren Commission . Davis said the FBI intentionally suppressed evidence from the commission .
 Chicago gangster Sam ‘Mooney’ Giancana confessed to his younger brother, Chuck, how he had gained mob power . The Story of the Man Who Controlled America is based on the book "Mooney" and "The Story of Mooney"
 As part of the confession, Sam Giancana revealed his role in the JFK assassination . The confession was part of a confession to the FBI that led to the assassination .
 Guatemalan president says he's looking forward to a similar situation in Dallas . He says the two countries will meet in the U.S. next week .
 Ruby demonstrated extreme loyalty to the CIA during the planning for the Bay of Pigs invasion . Ruby worked with the CIA in the planning of the invasion, according to the former CIA director .
 Giancana asserted Oswald had been a spy for the U.S. government in the Soviet Union . Oswald was trained to speak fluent Russian, he said . Oswald had worked for the United States government in Soviet Union, he claimed .
 Giancana scoffed at the idea that Oswald was a Communist sympathizer . He said the Warren Commission’s argument Lee Harvey Oswald supported Fidel Castro was a Fidel Castro supporter was incorrect . The former CIA operative said Oswald was not a supporter of the Castro regime .
 Ruby did the job, knowing it was better to be executed in the electric chair for having committed murder than suffering a death being tortured by the mob for failing to carry out an order . Ruby did not want to be tortured by mob for not carrying out order .
 Oswald linked up with Giancana's representative in Dallas, Jack Ruby, at Ruby’s Carousel Club, where Oswald also reestablished contact with David Ferrie . Oswald reestablished contact with Ferrie at Ruby's Carousel club, where he also re-established contact
 Roselli traveled to Dallas on Giancana’s orders, coordinating with Ruby in preparation for the assassination . Roselli also traveled to the Dallas area to coordinate with Ruby, who was killed in Dallas .
 Giancana claimed it was early spring 1963 when he and his CIA associates made the decision to finalize plans for the elimination of the president . Giancrano claimed the decision was made by CIA associates in spring 1963 .
 Tippit failed to carry out his part in the plan, but also knew too much about the conspiracy . Roscoe White took over the plot to kill him, but it fell to him because he knew much more .
 Giancana claimed Tippit not killing Oswald was “the only screwup” in the entire plan to assassinate JFK . Roscoe White and Lee Harvey Oswald had crossed paths before .
 They were both stationed at the Marine Corps Air Station in El Toro, California, in 1957 . That same year, they both sailed to Japan on the USS Bexar .
 Oswald and Roscoe White crossed paths in the marines . There is no evidence they knew each other at the time . Oswald and White were not known each other .
 Roselli, like Giancana, came up in the mob as a hit man for Al Capone in Chicago . Roselli was a hitman for the mob in Chicago, Chicago, and later worked for the mafia .
 When Giancana advanced to head the Capone mob, Roselli became his “eyes and ears” in Las Vegas and Los Angeles . Roselli was his ‘eyes and ear’ in Los Angeles and Las Vegas . He was also the ‘eye and ears
 Going back to the Eisenhower administration, Roselli had been the primary mob contact in the CIA plot to assassinate Fidel Castro . The plot continued through the Kennedy administration, with Roselli being a mob contact .
 As part of this plot, Roselli had involved both Giancana in Chicago and Santo Trafficante in Tampa Bay . The plot was part of a plot to get the FBI involved .
 The plot to assassinate Castro was directed within the CIA by James Jesus Angleton’s Executive Action program . The program was implemented through the Italian Mafia under Chicago mob boss Sam “Mooney” Giancana .
 Robert Maheu, the secondin-command under Howard Hughes, introduced Roselli to Harvey Harvey . Harvey was Harvey's first publicist .
 Maheu had been second-in-command to Guy Bannister when he was an FBI agent in Chicago . He was second in command to Bannisters when he worked for the FBI in Chicago, Illinois .
 When he fled to Chicago in 1922, after committing his first mob murder, he changed his last name to Roselli, in honor of the Italian Renaissance sculptor Cosimo Roselli . He fled to avoid any possible association with the anarchist Ferdinando Sacco who became infamous in the
 Known as ‘Handsome Johnny,’ Roselli joined the Capone mob in 1925 . He was ordered to relocate in 1925, after skipping bail in a federal narcotics case . Roselli moved to Los Angeles in 1925 after skipping a federal drug case .
 Roselli welcomed Joseph P Kennedy, the patriarch of the Kennedy clan, to Hollywood in 1926 . Roselli spearheaded the mob entrance into the movie industry, welcoming Joseph Kennedy to Hollywood .
 In the early 1950s, Roselli helped the eastern mob to establish a foothold in the emerging gambling industry in Las Vegas . Roselli was a key figure in the 1950s .
 In the 1960s, after Castro closed the casinos in Havana run by mobster Meyer Lansky, a CIA operative recruited Roselli to find mob assassins to participate in a planned CIA assassination of Fidel Castro .
 In carrying out this assignment Roselli was responsible for introducing Maheu to Sam Giancana in Chicago and Santo Trafficante in Tampa .
 Roselli intervened at the request of Joseph P Kennedy to cover-up a marriage that a youthful John F Kennedy had entered into unwisely . Roselli went so far back with the Kennedy family that he had intervened in the marriage .
 At the request of JFK’s father and the instructions of Sam Giancana, Roselli had completely wiped all legal documents from the public record that attested to the matrimony . Roselli wiped out all legal records of the marriage .
 The clean slate placed JFK back on his father’s political agenda, planning for JFK to be elected president . JFK's father planned for JFK's election as president in the fall .
 In 1975 the Senate Select Committee to Study Government Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, better known as the Church Committee, named after chair Sen. Sen. Church .
 Frank Sinatra introduced to JFK in Las Vegas on February 7, 1960, at the Sands Hotel . Judith Campbell was the woman who introduced JFK to Sinatra .
 J Edgar Hoover made clear to the President that the FBI was aware of the affair he was having with Campbell . Hoover stressed the FBI had also documented Kennedy was sharing his mistress with Sam Giancana .
 Robert Kennedy was also aware of the affair after one of his investigators tracking racketeers’ phone calls came across the relationship . The Hidden History of the Kennedy Years, revealed that one of Robert Kennedy's investigators tracked racketeers' phone calls .
 Mob-style killing suggested he was about to break the mob code of omerta, requiring silence on all mob related matters . Around midnight, he was shot once in the back of his head, once in his mouth, and five times under his chin, in a mob-style
 The mob decided JFK had to go, and it was Roselli who would have to take care of the problem . Roselli let Kennedy into the club by ushering Kennedy into Hollywood in the 1920s .
 Joseph P Kennedy experienced a disabling stroke on December 19, 1961, at the age of seventythree . John F Kennedy and his brother, Robert, lost a major protector .
 After years of professing his innocence, Roselli finally confessed to his lawyer his involvement in the JFK assassination . Roselli was convicted of JFK assassination in 1968 .
 This first shot supposedly went through the windshield of JFK’s limousine and hit him in the throat . JFK's limo was hit by a bullet that supposedly hit JFK in the neck .
 Roselli claimed the second shot hit JFK in the back and the third shot hit Connally . Connally was hit by the first shot, the second hit hit JFK . Roselli claims the third hit was the first .
 Johnny Roselli’s legless body was found stuffed in a fiftyfive-gallon oil drum, floating in Dumfoundling Bay near Miami, Florida, in 1976 .
 Roselli completed two rounds of testimony before the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Roselli had been testifying before the committee .
 His murder prevented him from being called a third time to testify about the JFK assassination . He was killed in November 1963 .
 Charles Nicoletti was murdered gangland style in Northlake, Illinois, in 1977 . Nicoletti had three .38 slugs pumped into the back of his head while sitting in his Oldsmobile in the parking lot of the Golden Horns Restaurant in the restaurant .
 On the same day Nicoletti was murdered, George de Mohrenschildt supposedly committed suicide . On the day of Nicoletti's murder, he was accused of killing himself .
 At the time of their deaths, de Mohrenschildt, Roselli, Nicoletti, and Nicoletti were all scheduled to testify before the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Giancana was scheduled to speak before the Church Committee when he was killed .
 The murders of Sam Giancana, Johnny Roselli, and Charles Nicoletti remain unsolved open cases . The murders are still unsolved today .
 Mob lawyer Frank Ragano wrote Mob Lawyer after the deaths of Jimmy Hoffa and Santo Trafficante . He disclosed some remarkable information about the JFK assassination .
 Hoffa knew Ragano was flying that day to New Orleans to meet Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante . Hoffa wanted Ragano to deliver the message .
 Ragano explained to Marcello and Trafficante that Hoffa had a favor he wanted the two mob bosses to do . Ragano told the mob bosses the favor was a favor Hoffa wanted for them .
 Ragano reported their initial reaction was so icy he felt he had intruded into a minefield he had no right to enter . Ragano felt he was intruding into a 'minefield' Ragano said he felt it was an 'incident'
 Ragano concluded Marcello and Trafficante were uniquely capable of arranging the murder of a president . Ragano: Marcella and Trafficantes were uniquely able to arrange the murder .
 They had the motive, means, and opportunity to have JFK assassinated, though it was impossible to develop conclusive evidence that would prove their guilt . The JFK assassination team had the opportunity to kill JFK .
 The House Select Committee also discussed various threats Hoffa had made regarding both John and Robert Kennedy . JFK had been made aware of the threats, the committee said .
 The House Select Committee concluded Lee Harvey Oswald, much like Jack Ruby, had contact with organized crime, specifically with Marcello and Trafficante . In direct contrast to the Warren Commission, the committee concluded Oswald had contacts with crime .
 The bad blood between the mob and the Kennedy family that led to the JFK assassination traces back to the 1957 McClellan Committee hearings . The hearings were named after the chairman, Arkansas Democratic Sen. Sen. John McClellan .
 The committee was officially constituted as the Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor or Management Field . The committee has been officially constituted since 1999 .
 The initial focus of the committee was to investigate organized crime’s penetration into the labor union movement, specifically the mob penetration of the Teamsters Union . The committee was formed in response to organized crime's penetration into organized crime .
 The hearings are best known for the conflict that developed between Jimmy Hoffa, the infamous Teamster Boss from Detroit who took over the Teamsters after Dave Beck resigned in disgrace, and the committee's chief counsel Robert Kennedy .
 On the committee was freshman senator from Massachusetts John F Kennedy . Kennedy was on the committee for the first time .
 In 1957 two reporters for the Portland paper the Oregonian won a Pulitzer Prize for a series of articles exposing the infiltration of organized crime into the Teamster Union in Washington State and Oregon .
 The source of the Lambert-Turner articles involved hundreds of hours of wiretaps . The Elkins family bribed and extorted their way into control of the Teamster’s Union in northwest .
 The rub came after organized crime gained control of the Teamster’s Union in Portland . Gangsters involved moved to take over the Elkins family's lucrative crime empire involving bootlegged liquor and gambling .
 The Elkins family, rather than concede a portion of their profits and control of the crime syndicate to the eastern mobsters, had decided to fight back . Fighting back meant exposing themselves to criminal prosecution and the likely loss of their syndicate operations, the family says .
 Stevenson preferred Kennedy to be his vice presidential running mate . Estes Kefauver had come to national prominence as chairman of the Senate Special Committee to Investigate Crime in Interstate Commerce .
 The Kennedy family realized the importance of the media, especially television, in gaining national political prominence . After being forced to concede to Kefauver in 1956, the Kennedy family decided to focus on the media .
 Kennedy family seized upon Lambert-Tumer articles as evidence new labor racketeering hearings could be held to investigate Teamsters . Kennedy family wanted to duplicate what Kefauver had accomplished .
 Kennedy family quickly realized the importance of the exhaustive wiretapping done by the Elkins family . The Kennedy family later realized the significance of the wiretapping .
 If these tapes had not existed, the Kennedy family might never have gone forward with the McClellan Committee hearings . The tapes may have prevented the hearings from going forward .
 The Kennedy family could never afford the wrath of organized labor if the evidence of organized crime penetration of the Teamsters was not certain . Kennedy family would never afford to be afraid of the backlash .
 The union movement would not oppose public hearings, provided the Kennedy family limited the investigation to organized criminals who had taken over the Teamsters Union . The Kennedy family was careful to distinguish that the target of the investigation was not the union itself .
 The consent of the unions at the time was critical, given the extent to which the railroad unions cooperated with the Teamsters . The consent was critical given the cooperation of the railroad .
 Before interstate highways truck trailers “piggy backed” on railroad train flat cars for transit across the nation . Then they were picked-up by Teamster Union truck cabs for local delivery .
 Kennedy family realized the mob takeover of the Teamster Union involved a move by the eastern mobs to muscle into the territory of the western mobs . The Kennedy family believed the move was part of a plan to muscle in the union territory .
 The western mobs were largely Protestant, as evidenced by the Elkins family . The western mob was largely Protestant .
 At stake was the future development of what was expected to be a highly lucrative gambling industry, originally developed in Reno and Las Vegas by the Elkins mob . The Elkins family crime empire was in the Pacific Northwest .
 Joseph Kennedy controlled the importation of Scotch liquor into the U.S. going back to the days before Prohibition . Kennedy had never comfortably been accepted by the eastern mobs even though he was Catholic .
 Joseph Kennedy encouraged his sons to develop a partnership with the Elkins family to launch the McClellan hearings as a springboard to advance JFK’s presidential ambitions . JFK was rejected largely because he was of Irish descent, not Italian, because of his ethnicity .
 Elkins began his testimony to the McClellan Committee on the opening day of the hearings, February 26, 1957 . Elkins' testimony was the first to be heard by the committee on February 26 .
 He was outraged by their self-aggrandizing tactics and prodded by the Oregonian, he squealed . Then, outraged by them, he said, "I'm not sorry for what I've done."
 Kennedy admitted Elkins was reluctant to talk the first time they met, but in subsequent meetings, Elkins talked freely . Kennedy said Elkins had been reluctant to speak first time Kennedy met him . Kennedy: "It's a good thing you can talk to me"
 Elkins warned the Kennedys that going after the Teamsters might cost them their lives . Elkins: Going after the teamsters may cost them lives. Elkins said going after them might cost their lives.
 Despite the risk, all four committed to working together to expose the organized criminals who had penetrated the Teamsters Union .
 Elkins assisted Robert Kennedy in running a complete background check . Elkins disclosed to the Kennedy family details that had not before been shared with anyone outside the family .
 Robert Kennedy documented that Elkins had worked with military intelligence during World War II . The nature of that work was never fully disclosed . Robert Kennedy also documented .
 Jim Elkins was one of the three or four best witnesses the Committee ever had . Nevertheless, Elkins' testimony was the best witness the Committee had ever seen .
 We checked his story up and down, backward and forward, inside and out . Because his background was so unsavory, we checked his background down to the basics .
 "He would answer the question but tell me not to use the information. Later, as we came to know each other better, he would answer it but not use it . He would tell me later, as well, that he didn't use it, but he would later tell me
 Elkins was more important to the Committee than he did with any other witness . Elkins feared the Committee would have difficulty understanding him .
 Kennedy wrote that he “needed to know the story almost as well as did’t, so that I could clarify some of his complicated answers . Kennedy: “I needed to know some of the answers almost as much as did I did.” Kennedy wrote .
 This was confirmed by a note found in 1986 in the correspondence collection of the JFK Library at Columbia Point in Boston . The note was found in a correspondence collection at JFK Library .
 On December 17, 1957, Elkins posted a Christmas card to Robert Kennedy and his family . The card was addressed to the Kennedy offices in the Senate Office Building . Elkins: "It's a Christmas tradition. It's a tradition of sending Christmas cards to Kennedy's office"
 A personal handwritten note written by Colleen Elkins, J B. Kennedy, addressed to Robert and Ethel Kennedy and family . Colleen had watched the television show Person to Person .
 John L McClellan’s Select Committee investigating labor racketeering,” Newsweek commented, crediting Elkins with a phenomenal memory . Elkins was a member of the committee investigating labor rations .
 Without Elkins, there might have been no indictment of Teamster vice president Jimmy Hoffa . Elkins' role in indictment of Hoffa was key to indictment .
 The Elkins family continued to advise Attorney General Robert Kennedy in his war on organized crime . The family interpreted the war as having been ordered by the Kennedy family patriarch, Joseph Kennedy, to even the score and get revenge for perceived slights . The Kennedy family had suffered at the hands of
 The Kennedy war on organized crime rankled the eastern mob, given the effort the Giancana family and Chicago mayor Richard Daley went to in order to deliver, both legally and illegally, the critical votes in Cook County that JFK needed to win .
 The eastern mob felt betrayed that the Kennedy family did not have more respect and appreciation for the mob efforts taken to make sure JFK became president . The family felt betrayed by the mob's efforts to get JFK to the presidency .
 The Elkins family joined the Kennedy family in the grudge match between Robert Kennedy and Jimmy Hoffa . Robert Kennedy was assassinated by Hoffa in the 1970s .
 Robert Kennedy and Jimmy Hoffa hated each other in part because they were small men with an irrepressible determination to prove how tough they were . Kennedy and Hoffa were both so very much alike, they were both small men .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Clark Mollenhoff reported that at the arraignment of Jimmy Hoffa for having McClellan Committee papers in his possession . Kennedy and Hoffa got into a friendly debate, arguing with each other who could do the most push-ups, although neither actually
 Elkins explained to JFK the details of the hit, that it was planned to be done from a tall building by a shooter armed with a high-powered rifle with a scope with the intent to shoot JFK in a motorcade . Elkins told JFK the hit was planned for a tall
 The top Elkins family consigliere flew to Portland, Oregon, in 1968 to warn Robert Kennedy an assassination attempt had been planned on him in Los Angeles during the California presidential primary . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 during the presidential primary in California .
 RFK was warned that when the shooting started a small-caliber handgun discharged from the rear would be used to kill him . RFK had been warned a small caliber handgun would be fired at RFK in the event .
 RFK advised the assassin being a person who was supposedly there to protect Robert Kennedy . RFK was advised that the assassin was supposed to be a man who supposedly protected him . The assassin was killed in the June 1968 assassination .
 The Elkins family consigliere urged Robert Kennedy to postpone his planned return to Los Angeles . Robert Kennedy was scheduled to return to the U.S. from Los Angeles on Saturday .
 Elkins family warned Robert Kennedy to fire his bodyguards and hire new ones . Robert Kennedy's bodyguards warned him to return to Los Angeles to be there for the primary results .
 The car he was driving was pushed off the road by another driver who was never apprehended or identified . The driver was never identified or apprehended .
 Elkins reportedly died of massive chest injuries suffered when he collided with the steering wheel of his car . Elkins was reportedly pronounced dead at the scene of the crash .
 Representatives of the Portland crime czar were sent to Arizona to view Elkins’ body . Representatives from the Portland Police Department were sent there to view the body of Elkins . Police say Elkins was actually deceased when he died .
 At the time of his death, Elkins was free on a twenty-thousand-dollar bond . Elkins had been free on bail at the time .
 He was facing indictments in Portland, Oregon, for possession of a firearm, conspiracy to commit a felony, possession of dangerous drugs . He was also facing several counts of receiving and concealing stolen property .
 Howard Hunt and David Phillips were veterans of the CIA’s 1954 Guatemala campaign . Hunt and Phillips were both veterans of that campaign . Phillips: Hunt and Hunt were both CIA veterans .
 CIA-ENGINEERED COUP D’ETAT in Guatemala going back to 1954, set the stage both for the Bay of Pigs and for the JFK assassination . The Secret War Against Castro, 1981, is published in 1981 .
 The Bay of Pigs typically is considered a Kennedy administration initiative . The historical record demonstrates the CIA undertook the planning for the invasion during the last year of the Eisenhower administration .
 The original plan was to provide Vice President Richard Nixon with an ‘October Surprise’ that Nixon could use to defeat John F Kennedy in the 1960 presidential election . The original idea was to give Vice President Nixon an 'October Surprise'
 The idea was that the American public would rally around Vice President Nixon taking the lead in an effort to support a popular uprising of Cuban patriots invading Cuba from the United States in order to rescue their homeland from Communism .
 The plan was to allow the American public to see Richard Nixon directing the U.S. military in support of the Bay of Pigs invasion from within the White House . Nixon was behind the invasion of the Cuban Islands in 1961 .
 Nixon would score a knockout blow over Kennedy as the American public saw Nixon using his superior foreign policy expertise to depose Castro via a popular uprising in Cuba stirred by the invasion . The American public would see Nixon's victory in Cuba as a victory over Kennedy .
 Nixon’s plan to win the 1960 election was disrupted when insider sources tipped-off the Kennedy campaign that the Bay of Pigs invasion was planned for the last weeks of the 1960 presidential campaign .
 In March 1960 President Eisenhower approved a plan to train a group of Cuban exiles to invade their homeland . The Cuban people and various elements of the Cuban military would support the invasion .
 The goal was to overthrow Castro Castro and establish a non-Communist government favorable to the U.S. The goal of overthrowing Castro was to establish a new non-communist government . The U.N. mission was based in Cuba .
 Richard Bissell was the CIA deputy director for plans who had successfully developed the Lockheed U-2 spy plane program . Bissell spearheaded the plan within the CIA to invade Cuba that ultimately became the Bay of Pigs fiasco .
 Eisenhower approved Bissell’s plan to invade Cuba, the CIA set up training camps in Guatemala . A small army was prepared for an amphibious assault landing and guerrilla warfare .
 E Howard Hunt was selected to train the Cuban invasion army in Guatemala . Hunt trained Cuban invasion forces in Guatemala in the 1950s and 1960s . Hunt was chosen to train Cuban invasion troops in Guatemala.
 Hunt's plan to invade Cuba was a copycat of his plan to overthrow Arbenz in 1954 . Hunt leaves no doubt that the plan was a direct copycat . Hunt left no doubt in his statement that he planned to invade the country .
 Hunt’s principal assistant was a Cuban-American named Bernard “Macho” Barker . Barker had worked for years for the CIA station in Havana, Cuba .
 Baker and Hunt chose then-twenty-seven-year-old Manuel F Artime to head the provisional government . Artime was then-27-years-old when the government was overthrown .
 Artime, a Jesuit-trained psychiatrist, had joined Castro’s forces in the Sierra Maestra . Artime had served as a regional agricultural official after Castro ousted Fulgencio Batista . Castro ousted Batista in 1959 .
 Artime fled to Miami after becoming disillusioned with the number of anti-Communist friends who were being executed by Castro even though they had supported the revolution . He fled to the U.S. after becoming disillusioned with Castro .
 Bernard Barker later turned up as one of the burglars apprehended in the break-in of Larry O’Donnell’s Democratic National Committee offices in the Watergate complex . Barker was arrested in the raid on the DNC offices in June 1972 .
 Artime figured into the many plots to assassinate Castro that Robert Kennedy advanced in the Kennedy administration . Artime later figured into many plots, including the assassination of Fidel Castro .
 The Kennedy plan was to replace Castro with the commander of the Cuban army, Juan Almeida, another Castro supporter who reportedly turned against the revolution after Castro took power .
 From Cuba, the provisional government would broadcast to the world a declaration that it was a government-in-arms, making an appeal for aid in overthrowing Castro . The government would then broadcast a declaration of support for Castro's overthrow .
 A sizable contingent of United States Marines waiting offshore in the United States aircraft carrier Boxer was ready to land on the island once the provisional government was established and had a chance to appeal to the U.S. for assistance .
 The CIA trained Cuban exiles in Guatemala and utilized agency covers in the United States that included businesses and individuals who shared rentals with organized crime and right-wing paramilitary organizations .
 CIA director Allen Dulles visited JFK at the family compound at Hyannis Port on Cape Cod on July 23, 1960 . Dulles briefed JFK on the Eisenhower administration’s anti-Castro efforts .
 This put the Kennedy campaign on notice that the invasion of Cuba was possibly an October Surprise, an event to effect the election . The Kennedy campaign was put on notice by the Cuban invasion .
 Kennedy camp became paranoid as rumors out of Miami talked about the creation of a CIA-sponsored invasion force . Cuban exiles were rumored to be part of the force, but Kennedy camp was paranoid .
 JFK said the U.S. must strengthen the non-Batista democratic anti-Castro forces in exile and Cuba itself . JFK made the statement on October 20, 1960, on the eve of the fourth presidential debate .
 The statement stopped short of endorsing a U.S. government-sponsored invasion of Cuba . JFK was trying to pre-empt the aggressive rhetoric on Cuba, positioning himself to claim credit for the idea .
 The Kennedy campaign had correctly calculated that Nixon’s training as a debater would induce him to take the opposite approach . The campaign argued that Nixon was being irresponsible in suggesting a U.S. military invasion of Cuba .
 President Eisenhower arranged for Kennedy to receive regular briefings by Allen Dulles on CIA covert activities around the world . Nixon acknowledged in Six Crises that he knew President Eisenhower had arranged for him to receive briefings .
 Nixon read the headlines in the newspapers, he could hardly believe his eyes . Nixon was shocked by the headlines he had read in the papers .
 Nixon asked aides to find out if Allen Dulles had briefed Kennedy specifically on Cuba . CIA had been training Cuban exiles in Guatemala for the purposes of an invasion .
 Dulles briefed Kennedy on the impending Cuban invasion . Within a half hour, Nixon discovered Dulles had briefed Kennedy about the invasion .
 Nixon’s reaction was rage, not at Dulles for informing Kennedy, but at Kennedy for exploiting this highly sensitive information for political advantage . Kennedy exploited highly sensitive material for political gain, Nixon said .
 Kennedy, with full knowledge of the facts, was jeopardizing the security of a U.S. foreign policy operation, he says . "I thought that Kennedy ... jeopardized the security" of the operation .
 Nixon was enraged that the idea of providing Cuban exiles cover training was actually his idea . Kennedy exploited classified information Dulles had shared with him about U.S. training activities .
 If Eisenhower and Nixon were successful with the Cuban invasion, Kennedy could claim they were simply implementing a plan Kennedy himself was the first to advocate publicly . Kennedy could say he was simply implementing the plan he was first to propose publicly .
 He had been planning the operation, the arms, ammunition, and training for the Cuban exiles, for six months before the campaign had gotten under way .
 Nixon's program was Nixon’s program, but now he could not say a single word about it . Nixon was Nixon. He could not talk about it. It was Nixon .
 'I was in the position of a fighter with one hand tied behind his back. Consequently, under Kennedy’s attacks and his new demands for ‘militant’ policies, I was . in the . position of being a fighter, he said. I was in
 He had to “attack the Kennedy proposal to provide such aid as wrong and irresponsible because it would violate our treaty obligations,” Nixon explained . Nixon had to attack Kennedy’s proposal as “wrong and irresponsible”
 JFK effectively blocked the October Surprise by exposing it, JFK says . By taking the aggressive position on Cuba, JFK effectively prevented it from happening .
 Kennedy’s stratagem may well have been critical to preserving JFK’�s chance to beat Nixon in 1960, but it ultimately backfired . The strategy ultimately failed in 1960 .
 Once JFK was elected president, he suddenly became vulnerable to Bissell and the CIA, who blackmailed him over Cuba . The CIA blackmailed JFK over Cuba, and he was blackmailed by Bissell .
 JFK's hard-line stand against Cuba during the campaign was nothing more than a stratagem to get elected . If JFK as president did not keep good on his campaign promise to support the Cuban exiles, Bissell and the CIA would leak to the public .
 JFK committed himself to following through with the plan shortly after taking office, with no assurance the plan would work . JFK blocked Nixon from executing the CIA covert plan to invade Cuba .
 JFK approved the Bay of Pigs operation despite serious reservations the plan had any chance of success . JFK approved it despite serious doubts the plan would be successful .
 Two days after JFK became president, the CIA began pushing him to move against Cuba . The CIA was pushing JFK to act against Cuba two days after he became president .
 CIA director Allen Dulles stressed the U.S. had only two months “before something had to be done about” the Cubans being trained in Guatemala . Dulles: “Something must be done” about Cubans training in Guatemala.
 To abandon the invasion would make Kennedy look like an appeaser of Castro, he says . It would appear as if Eisenhower had approved the plan and JFK dropped it, he adds .
 Even his adviser Arthur Schlesinger and the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Senator William Fulbright agreed with the decision .
 There was little likelihood the invasion would succeed even with direct U.S. military support . There was no assurance the invasion . The invasion would trigger a popular uprising .
 The CIA knew JFK would never go along with direct U.S. military involvement . The only plan with any chance of success was to promote an invasion plan the CIA knew would fail . The plan was to force JFK’s hand to approve the B-26 air attacks and approve
 JFK called Dean Rusk and told him to cancel a dawn aerial attack by the entire exile force of 16 B-26s . The attack was canceled, leaving Castro with airplanes to use in strafing the invading exiles on the ground .
 JFK refused to allow the United States jets from USS Essex to provide air cover on April 17, 1961 . The incident occurred on the USS Essex, a submarine from the USS Enterprise .
 Destroyers USS Eaton and USS Murray moved into the Bay of Pigs in the face of fire from Cuban tanks on shore . They evacuated from the beaches the retreating soldiers of the invading Brigade 2506 of paramilitary Cuban exiles .
 Within days of becoming president, he realized how little power he truly had . President Obama realized he had little power in the White House .
 The CIA had played him, disregarding his expressed concern that the U.S. not be involved militarily and only support an invasion by Cuban exile patriots trying to take back their country for democracy .
 JFK fired Bissell and Dulles in a threat to break the CIA up into a thousand pieces . JFK threatened to break up the CIA into thousand pieces in order to get the CIA out of the CIA .
 JFK's impulse to destroy the CI[A was one JFK never followed to completion, a mistake that contributed to his loss of his life . Unfortunately, that impulse was not carried out, and it was a fatal mistake .
 Howard Hunt, Bernard Barker, and Frank Sturgis—were also involved in the planning of the invasion of Cuba . Howard Hunt and Bernard Barker were also involved .
 Nixon became closely involved with the CIA and Mafia when he helped plan the Guatemala coup . Nixon was closely involved in the Eisenhower administration, dating back to the Eisenhower .
 He continued those relationships when he called on the CIA and Mafia to kill Castro . He continued his relationships with the CIA, Mafia and the CIA .
 JFK assassination researcher Lamar Waldron has documented that Nixon received a $1 million Mafia bribe from Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante . The bribe was part of a deal to release Jimmy Hoffa from prison, which occurred less than four months before the first Watergate break-in .
 These men were veterans of the Eisenhower administration plots and had worked Nixon in the past . Nixon's administration has been accused of Watergate conspirators . The White House says the president's administration is working on the Watergate plot .
 G Gordon Liddy has long maintained that the Watergate burglary was motivated by the desire to wiretap a telephone in the Democratic National Committee headquarters that top Democratic officials and their political friends were using as part of a call girl ring . Liddy maintains that the burglary motivated by a desire for a
 Haldeman and President Richard Nixon in the Oval Office on June 23, 1972, from 10:04m. to 11:39m. Nixon's White House was in the midst of Watergate scandal in 1972 .
 He was looking for a way to justify telling then-FBI acting director Patrick Gray to back off, he says . He says he was trying to find a way of justifying telling Gray that he had been wronged .
 Nixon: Of course, this is a— Hunt will—that will uncover a lot when you open that scab there’s a hell of a lot of things . Nixon: "We just feel it would be very detrimental to have this thing go any further, that this involves
 Nixon recommended having the CIA instruct the FBI to stop investigating Watergate on national security concerns . Nixon also recommended that the FBI be allowed to investigate the Watergate scandal .
 Nixon’s references in the Watergate tapes to “the whole Bay of Pigs thing” suggested the Watergate burglars were also involved with the JFK assassination . Haldeman, in his 1978 book, The Ends of Power, argued that Nixon's references to ‘the whole
 When you get in these people when you ... get these people in, say: “Look, the problem is that this will open the whole, the whole Bay of Pigs thing, and the President just feels that” without going into the details ... don’t, don
 In a separate conversation with Haldeman in the Oval Office on June 23, 1972, from 1:04m. to 1:13m., Nixon returned to the Howard Hunt theme . And, ah because these people are plugging for, for keeps and that they should call the
 "It’s very bad to have this fellow Hunt, you know, it's—‘’“’�he knows too damn much, and he was involved, we happen to know that. And I would just tell them that it’d be
 If it gets out that the CIA is involved in the Cuban thing, that it's a fiasco, it’s going to make the FBI—the CIA—look bad . And if it's out, it's likely to blow the whole Bay of Pigs thing, which would be
 In the later years of Haldeman’s life, he repudiated the “Bay of Pigs meaning the JFK assassination” statement, attributing it to the invention of his ghostwriter, Joseph DiMona .
 By 1990 Haldeman was repudiating much of what he wrote in The Ends of Power, he was preparing to be released from prison on parole . By 1990 he had repudiated much of the book he published as he was getting out of prison .
 Nixon’s seemingly out-of-context comment forced Watergate inquiries to circle back to the invasion plans against Cuba . The plans began under Richard Bissell at the CIA when Nixon was vice president under Eisenhower . Nixon was Vice President of the CIA under President Eisenhower .
 Hunt was beginning to demand as much as one million dollars in hush money . Nixon was concerned at how many dark secrets would be exposed if Hunt began to talk . Hunt was demanding as much of a million dollars .
 The FBI suspected the Nixon White House had begun to solicit one million dollars from the Teamsters to keep the imprisoned Watergate burglars quiet . The White House was accused of soliciting $1 million from the teamsters .
 Nixon’s extreme tactics suggest there was a deeper secret behind the Watergate break-in, that the Bay of Pigs plotters, including Howard Hunt, were also Watergate burglars and very possibly participants in the JFK assassination . Hunt was also a Watergate burglar .
 Howard Baker, vice-chairman of the Senate Watergate hearings, famously asked about Watergate . Howard Baker was asked about the White House's involvement in the Watergate scandal .
 Perhaps this question should have been asked of Richard Nixon about not only the Watergate break-in, but also about the JFK assassination . Richard Nixon should have asked about Watergate, JFK assassination, Nixon said .
 Nixon knew E Howard Hunt was involved in the coup d’état in Guatemala in 1954 and the staged political assassination that followed in 1957 . Hunt was also involved in a staged assassination in 1957 that followed the coup in Guatemala . Hunt also was behind the staged assassination of President Richard Nixon
 Nixon may have been keenly aware of the evidence that suggested E Howard Hunt was involved in the Bay of Pigs and the various plots to assassinate Castro . Then, too, Nixon may also have been aware of evidence that suggests Hunt had been involved in JFK assassination .
 E Howard Hunt had just been indicted some months before for his role in the Watergate affair . Hunt was prohibited from traveling . Hunt had been banned from traveling after being indicted for his part in Watergate .
 Assassination researcher Harrison Edward Livingstone, believes Dorothy Hunt was carrying White House hush money to pay off Cuban exiles . Hunt's involvement with Hunt stretched from the Bay of Pigs through the JFK assassination to Watergate .
 Witnesses say two hundred FBI and Defense Intelligence Agency officials took over the crash scene immediately after the crash . Witnesses to the crash say the FBI and DIA came in and took over .
 The FBI had primary jurisdiction in possible cases of sabotage, including airline crashes . William Ruckelshaus, the acting director of the FBI, explained to the Washington Post on June 14, 1973 .
 On December 19, 1972, Nixon moved former CIA agent Alexander Butterfield to serve as the head of the Federal Aviation Agency . Butterfield was a CIA agent .
 Butterfield had been secretary to the Cabinet . Butterfield revealed to the Senate Watergate Committee that he had been responsible for maintaining for Nixon a secret audiotaping system in the White House .
 Dwight Chapin, Nixon's appointments secretary and dirty tricks supervisor, was made an executive in the Chicago headquarters office of United Airlines . Chapin was Nixon’s appointments secretary .
 Marita Lorenz set off a firestorm of speculation with a story that involved soldier-of-fortune Frank Fiorini, also known as Frank Sturgis, as well as E Howard Hunt and the various CIA-mob plans to assassinate Castro . Lorenz is a self-proclaimed
 Lorenz testified to having been involved with E Howard Hunt and Frank Sturgis in the CIA training provided to Cuban exiles in the Everglades in Florida after the Bay of Pigs attack . On May 31, 1978, in sworn testimony before a closed session of the House Select Committee
 Frank Sturgis, Pedro Diaz Lanz, Alexander Rorke, Orlando Bosch, Guillermo and Ignacio Novo were key players in the CIA assassination unit known as Operation 40 . Jerry Patrick Hemming was a key member of Operation 40, the CIA's assassination unit
 E Howard Hunt was known as “Eduardo,” and that his role in the group appeared to involve periodically bringing Frank Sturgis large quantities of cash delivered in an envelope . Hunt also testified that Hunt brought large amounts of cash to Frank Strugis .
 Lorenz testified in a private meeting with several of the Operation 40 players in September 1963 . Frank Sturgis led the group as they studied street maps of Dallas that he laid out on a coffee table .
 Lorenz placed Oswald at the meeting, saying that at the conclusion of the discussion, Sturgis folded up the maps and put them in his pocket . Lorenz says Oswald was placed in the meeting and said he folded them up .
 Frank Sturgis, Lorenz and the Novo brothers left Orlando, Florida, a week before November 22, 1963, in a two-car caravan . Lee Harvey Oswald was in the second car, a car containing Oswald; Petro Diaz Lanz, the former chief of the Cuban
 She testified that on the trip they rotated drivers and stopped to eat only at drive-in roadside restaurants . She testified she was traveling with a group of men and women .
 The group drove nonstop over two days from Orlando to Dallas, Texas . They checked into adjoining hotel rooms in a hotel outside Dallas . The group is staying in a Dallas hotel .
 Frank Sturgis took rifles and scopes that had been wrapped in green waterproof paper, with blankets thrown on top, from the trunk of his car . She testified that once the group had settled into the two adjoining hotel rooms, Frank Strugis took them from his trunk .
 Sturgis placed the rifles and scopes between the two twin beds in his hotel room . The rifles were placed between the beds in the hotel room.
 Lorenz said she recognized three or four automatic rifles, but she didn't know the specific makes . She said she did not pay attention to the rifles or scopes, except to notice the rifles were equipped with slings .
 She testified that Jack Ruby showed up at the hotel to have a private discussion with Frank Sturgis . Ruby ignored Oswald during this visit, she testified . She testified in court .
 She claimed she had acted as a decoy in several such missions previously staged in Florida and adjoining states . She claimed to have acted as decoy .
 Lorenz: Why a CIA-supplied operation needed to steal weapons from an armory, Lorenz did not explain . Lorenz says the operation stole weapons from the armory .
 After a few days in the hotel, Lorenz began to feel homesick for her daughter and wanted to go home . Lorenz said she wanted to return to her native New Zealand .
 She testified that Frank Sturgis took her to the airport in Dallas and she flew home to Miami on November 19 or 20, 1963 .
 Lorenz says Joseph Kennedy financed Castro with the expectation that if Castro managed to depose Cuban president Batista, Kennedy would be able to take control of the Havana nightlife and destroy mobster Meyer Lansky's influence .
 Teamster Union boss Jimmy Hoffa and Bill Bresser, a labor union boss in Cleveland, Ohio, made money selling guns to both sides . Santo Trafficante, Jack Ruby, and Frank Fiorini/Sturgis were among the gun runners providing weapons to Castro in his
 Gaeton Fonzi, a lead investigator for the House Select Committee on Assassinations, ultimately concluded that Lorenz’s story was unreliable . He successfully urged the committee to ignore the account when it could not be independently corroborated .
 Marita Lorenz figured into an important libel case where Lane set out to prove Hunt had been in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . Lorenz would have become just another weird footnote to the JFK assassination investigation except she figured into a key witness .
 Former CIA officer Victor Marchetti accused E Howard Hunt of having been in Dallas on November 22, 1963, and of having played a role in the JFK assassination . Hunt was accused in 1978 of being in Dallas in 1963 and of playing a part in the 1963 assassination .
 Marchetti achieved notoriety in 1974 by publishing a heavily redacted book entitled The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence . Marchetta had achieved notoriety by publishing The CIA .
 Mark Lane took the case on appeal because the case offered him a chance to apply the knowledge he gathered in two decades he had then spent studying the JFK assassination . Lane, even though he disagreed with the Liberty Lobby, took the appeal because he had studied the assassination .
 A critical point in the retrial was reached when Hunt, under crossexamination by Lane, was forced to admit his children were never fully convinced Hunt was in Washington, D.C., as he had always claimed .
 Lane asked Hunt about his testimony in the first trial of the Liberty Lobby case, on December 16, 1981 . Lane: Hunt testified in the trial of Liberty Lobby, which took place in December 1981 .
 And that you were being persecuted for reasons that were unknown to you, he said . "You were being persecuted for reasons that weren't known to you," he added .
 Hunt had produced several explanations of the day JFK was assassinated, including a claim he had stopped to get Chinese food on his way home from the office . Hunt said he stopped to buy Chinese food .
 Hunt’s coworker at the CIA said he could not recall seeing Hunt at work between November 18, 1963, and sometime in December 1963 . Hunt's coworker said he was not at work at the time of the incident .
 On August 20, 1978, Joseph Trento and Jacquie Powers, reporters for the Wilmington Sunday News Journal, wrote an article very similar to the Marchetti article, claiming a secret 1966 CIA memo placed Hunt in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . The article was published in the Wilmington
 He claimed when the tramp pictures were made public, he had to ‘remind’ his children he was never in Dallas that day . He claimed he was only in Dallas when the pictures surfaced .
 Each time a new allegation asserting Hunt had been in Dallas on the day JFK was assassinated was made, his children, even as adults, demanded to know if it was true . Lane got Hunt to admit that each time new allegations were made, each time they were true, Hunt said .
 In a unanimous decision, the jury agreed with the Liberty Lobby and decided against the plaintiff E Howard Hunt . The jury decided against Hunt .
 Jury foreman: “The evidence was clear The CIA had killed President Kennedy . The jury foreman, Leslie Armstrong, told reporters ‘The evidence is clear’ The president was killed by the CIA .
 Gaeton Fonzi wrote that meeting Cuban exile Silvia Odio played an important role in his conviction that a conspiracy was involved in the JFK assassination . The House Select Committee on Assassinations investigator said meeting Odio was an important part of his conviction .
 In 1963 Odio was a member of the Cuban Revolutionary Junta, known as JURE . Both her parents were then political prisoners of the Castro regime .
 She said two of the men appeared to be Cubans, although she also thought they had characteristics associated with Mexicans . She said she thought the men were Cubans .
 The third man, an American, was introduced to her as “Leon Oswald,” she said . She was told he was interested in the Cuban cause . The man was introduced as ‘Leon Oswald’
 The next day, after the meeting in her apartment, Leopoldo called her and asked her what she thought of the American . She further told the Warren Commission that the next day she was asked what she felt about the American president .
 Leopoldo describes the American in more detail . Odio replied, “I didn’t think anything,” when asked what he thought .
 "He was kind of nuts. That was more or less," he says . "That was more than less," the author says .
 Leopoldo also told Odio that this Leon had been a marine and he was interested in helping the Cubans . Odio also said this Leon was a Marine and he had expressed interest in helping Cubans.
 Sylvia Odio recognized the man who came to her house as Leon Oswald . She recognized him as Lee Harvey Oswald on November 22, 1963, on television .
 The Warren Commission rejected Odio’s testimony largely because the dates deemed most likely for the suspect visit were the same dates the Commission placed Oswald in Dallas . Odio's testimony was rejected largely because of the dates of Oswald's visit to his apartment .
 The Warren Commission discounted the possibility that someone was using the Oswald identity to create the impression Oswald had visited Mexico in the time period of late-September 1963 . In so concluding, the Warren Commission concluded that the possibility of someone using Oswald identity was unlikely .
 Oswald had visited Cuban and Russian embassies in Mexico City in late-September 1963 . Despite extensive United States intelligence surveillance of both embassies, no United States government agency has released a photograph .
 The Commission requested the FBI to conduct further investigation to determine the validity of Mrs. Odio's claim . The FBI has been asked to investigate the possibility of a woman's identity .
 Fonzi, after locating Sylvia Odio and conducting extensive research, wrote a special report for the House Select Committee on Assassinations . The report was published by the House of Representatives on Tuesday .
 The House Select Committee was unable to reach a conclusion regarding Oswald’s motives, assuming the visit had come from Oswald himself . Oswald's visit to the U.S. may have been from Oswald .
 The House Select Committee also could come to no definite conclusion regarding the precise date of Oswald's visit to Dallas . Oswald might have been in Dallas on those dates, the committee says .
 Fonzi: Sylvia Odio was telling the truth . "Fonzi was concerned, as far as possible, that she was telling truth," he says . "As far as Fonzie was concerned," he said .
 John Hunt, the son of E Howard Hunt, began making public the deathbed confessions of his father . John Hunt made the confessions on his deathbed confession .
 If the deathbed confession is true, Hunt had been lying since 1963 and was not in Washington D.C. on November 22, 1963, and did have something to do with JFK’s murder . Hunt has been lying about his involvement in JFK's murder .
 Hunt's deathbed confession could be his last effort to come to grips with the truth, or perhaps his first effort to gain notoriety by confessing his guilt when it was too late to bring him to justice . Hunt is believed to have confessed to the crime on his deathbed .
 Hunt’s deathbed confession is not to solve the case, but to confirm the CIA's involvement from the beginning of the JFK conspiracy . Hunt's confession also highlights the failure of the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee on Assassinations to investigate thoroughly the CIA role in the JFK
 Hunt implies he played a role in the JFK assassination, but that he was not the first team on the field . Hunt may have had organizational responsibilities but more qualified players had been assigned the operational roles . Hunt implies that he played in the assassination but not first team .
 Hunt claimed Vice President Lyndon Johnson enlisted the help of Cord Meyer in the CIA to prepare the operational plan and organize the team of coconspirators . Hunt claimed the CIA helped prepare the operation plan .
 Hunt had fingered LBJ as the prime mover in the JFK assassination . Hunt had previously said LBJ was the prime suspect in the assassination .
 Life magazine would have little to gain pressing ahead with the Bobby Baker scandal . LBJ in the White House would not have a chance to press ahead with a scandal .
 LBJ could have reasonably calculated a grieving nation would rally behind him as JFK’s successor . JFK's successor was LBJ. LBJ's successor. JFK died in 1963 . LBJ: "A grieving nation will rally behind his successor"
 LBJ had ample motives to remove the sitting president . LBJ shared with many other powerful people, including Allen Dulles, who equally had come to want to see JFK’s presidency end .
 E Howard Hunt explained Meyer was another person with motive since John F Kennedy had been having an affair with his wife, Mary Pinchot . Hunt also explained Meyer had motive for his actions .
 A then-young JFK spotted Pinchot on the dance floor at Choate Rosemary Hall, in Wallingford, Connecticut, where JFK attended prep school . JFK had attended the school where he was a student .
 JFK returned to Choate to attend the Winter Festivals Saturday Night Dance . JFK attended the dance that weekend .
 JFK tapped her date, William Attwood, on the right shoulder to cut in so he could dance with Mary . JFK tapped Attwood on the shoulder to get her on the floor .
 The incident occurred when JFK was spending his brief time as an undergraduate at Princeton, before his father had him transfer to Harvard . JFK's father later had him transferred to Harvard instead of Princeton .
 JFK’s relationship with Meyer, however, did not become intimate until many years later, after Jack was in the White House . JFK and Meyer's relationship became more intimate after JFK was president .
 Mary Pinchot met Cord Meyer, a Yale graduate, in 1944, when he was a Marine Corps lieutenant . She met Meyer in 1944 when she was in the Marine Corps . She says she and Meyer met in 1944 .
 Meyer distinguished himself in combat during World War II . He lost an eye from shrapnel wounds suffered in the Pacific when a hand grenade rolled into his foxhole on Guam and exploded in his face .
 Cord emerged from World War II determined that those who died in combat, including his twin brother, would not have died in vain . Cord's twin brother was killed in combat in the Battle of the Pacific War .
 The couple split apart in 1958, two years after their middle son, nine, was killed in an auto accident . Michael was nine-year-old Michael, who died in an accident outside their home .
 Mary Meyer consulted Timothy Leary about JFK . Mary Meyer wanted Leary’s advice about how to guide him on a psychedelic journey .
 Mary Pinchot’s sister, Antoinette, better known as ‘Tony, married Ben Bradlee, the managing editor of the Washington Post . Mary’Pinchot's sister, also known as "Tony," is the sister of the late Washington Post editor
 He is best known for publishing Watergate stories investigated by Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward . The Watergate stories were published by Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein .
 JFK was a U.S. Senator from Massachusetts . The Kennedys’ and Bradlees’ homes were literally across the street from one another in Georgetown .
 In those years, the Kennedys and Bradlees were close friends, prominent Georgetown socialites, and frequent dinner companions . In the 1960s and '60s, the Bradlees and the Kenneds were frequent dinner partners .
 Mary Pinchot reconnected with Georgetown after she divorced Cord Meyer . She moved into a studio behind the Bradlees’ home in Georgetown, determined to focus her energies on her emerging career as an artist .
 Hunt had discussed Cord Meyer’s role in the assassination not only in his deathbed confession, but also in his 2007 book, American Spy . Cord Meyer was a high-level CIA operative whose wife was having an affair with John F Kennedy, Hunt wrote .
 Allen Dulles recruited Meyers to the CIA in 1951, placing him under Frank Wisner in what was then known as Operation Mockingbird, a CIA operation in which journalists were secretly paid by the CIA to report on world affairs with a CIA perspective . Meyers was recruited by Dull
 Both JFK and Mary Meyers had a love interest in Mary, but also had contrasting views about foreign policy . JFK and Meyers were both married at the start of the 1960s .
 Meyer believed JFK's view of foreign policy was dangerously set on pre-World War II ideas of U.S. national interests . Meyer believed that JFK’s view was set in pre-WWII ideas of United States national interests. Meyer said JFK's views were dangerously set in
 JFK was suspicious of the CIA based on his experience in Cuba and, as we will see in the next chapter, with his experiences with the CIA in Laos and Vietnam . The next chapter of this chapter will focus on JFK's experiences in Vietnam and Laos .
 Meyer aligned with Dulles and believed in an internationalist “one-world government” view that transcended nationalism . Meyer was the son of former President George W. Bush .
 Cord Meyer would have been ripe for LBJ to recruit into organizing a JFK assassination plot . Cord Meyer and LBJ would have had a rivalry between them .
 In what police judged to be an apparent rape attempt, Meyer fought for her life, only to be killed by two bullet shots, one to the head and the other to the heart, both fired at close range .
 Raymond Crump, an African-American, was arrested near the murder scene . Within minutes of the assault, Crump was arrested . Crump is an attorney representing the victims .
 Raymond Crump was found guilty of murder in the death of Mary Meyer . The jury failed to find any gun or forensic evidence linking Crump to either the murder scene or the body and clothing of Meyer . Crump has been acquitted .
 Peter Janney accused the CIA of murdering Pinchot and setting Crump up to be the patsy . Janney says Crump was the CIA's victim, and the CIA set him up as Crump .
 She encouraged the Bradlees to go to Mary Meyer’s home to recover her diary . She encouraged them to return the diary .
 When Ben and Tony Bradlee got there, they found high-ranking CIA official James Jesus Angleton inside . Angleton was a CIA official who worked for the CIA .
 Ben Bradlee realized they had not searched Mary’s studio . He and his wife returned to the house, only to run into Jim Angleton again .
 After Angleton left, Bradlee and his wife found the diary and took it home with them . According to Ben Bradlee, the diary was found in Angleton's home .
 They claimed they found a few phrases that confirmed the relationship between Mary Meyer and JFK, and that they were stunned . They said they were shocked to learn of the relationship .
 Still, there is a second, more sinister version of what happened to Mary’s diary . Mary's diary was found in the garden of Mary's home in the 1930s .
 Author Peter Janney argued that Ben and Tony Bradlee could not have recovered Mary's diary because Angleton recovered Mary’s diary on the night of her murder .
 Janney wrote that the Bradlees were unable to find the diary the night of Mary's murder . Anne Truitt called Angleton to tell him where in the house to find it, she wrote .
 Janney: Angelton returned to Mary's home a second time on the night of her murder and found the diary . Janney’s reconstruction of events: After getting the phone call from Anne Truitt, Angelton went back to the home .
 It strains credibility to believe that a mature woman such as Mary Pinchot would have confided intimate details of her relationship to JFK to a diary .
 Angleton was not interested in Mary because of Mary’s affair with JFK or because of what Mary might have written in her diary about that love interest, he says .
 Angleton was interested in Mary and her diary because of what Mary knew and might have written about Angleton himself . Angleton wanted to know what Mary wrote about him because of his interest in her diary .
 Author C David Heymann, author of The Georgetown Ladies’ Social Club, asked Meyer six weeks before his death if he thought he knew who killed Mary . Meyer was a member of the Georgetown Ladies' Social Club . Heymann: Meyer asked Meyer some weeks before he died if he
 Mary knew her husband and Angleton were close from the beginning of her marriage to Cord Meyer . Both men shared literary ambitions, as both men in their earlier years shared literary ambition .
 Angleton also had reason to know Lee Harvey Oswald, for nearly a year before Oswald’s name surfaced as the likely suspect in the JFK murder case . Angleton, as we shall see in the next section, also knew Oswald, as well as Lee Harvey .
 James Angleton directed counterintelligence for the CIA from 1954-1975 . Angleton was a well-educated and highly literate individual . He was a highly educated individual .
 Most intelligence professionals who knew Angleton respected his intelligence . Angleton edited a literary journal that published the works of cummings and Ezra Pound . He was a fierce loyalty to the CIA .
 Angleton appears to have become involved in the JFK assassination primarily to cover-up the agency’s involvement . Angleton is believed to have been involved to cover up the CIA involvement in the assassination .
 Angleton is typically not named as a coconspirator in planning the JFK assassination but clearly appears in the narrative when he was assigned after JFK’s death to be the CIA liaison to the Warren Commission . Angleton was assigned as CIA liaison after JFK's death .
 False defectors were double agents that “defected” to the Soviet Union with the intention of acting as undercover assets or spies . False defectors were ‘double agents’ that ‘defected to the . Soviet Union’
 In the CIA, an important part of Angleton’s job involved recruiting soldiers among the United States military who were intelligent enough to learn Russian . Angleton's job was to convince the Russians they were disgruntled idealists disillusioned with the U.S. and eager to adopt a
 Angleton most likely managed Oswald through the process of defection and engineered Oswald’s return to the U.S. the moment his return met the needs of the Agency . Even if Angleton had not recruited Oswald to defect, Angleton likely managed the process .
 As early as October 1960, the Department of State undertook a project to identify and research all Americans who defected to the Soviet Union, to Soviet bloc nations, or to Communist China .
 Robert B Elwood wrote to Richard Bissell, the CIA’s then-deputy director of plans . Bissell began planning the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba under the Eisenhower administration .
 Elwood wanted to identify all CIA assets that as former U.S. military had participated in the “false defector’s program . Elwood said he wanted to find out who had been involved in the program .
 The assignment to follow through at the State Department fell to Otto F Otepka, deputy director of State Department Office of Security . Otto F. Otepaka is the deputy director for the State Dept. of Security.
 Oswald was likely targeted and recruited by the CIA shortly after he joined the Marines in 1957 . Oswald was a top player in the CIA “false defector’s program .
 Walker, the Justice Department evidently also got involved in the Oswald file . Walker: "The Justice Department got involved" in the case . Walker says the case is "not just one of many"
 Justice Department asked Dallas Police not to pursue, investigate, or arrest Lee Harvey Oswald in the matter of Oswald supposedly having fired a shot at Gen. Gen. Eisenhower . Oswald supposedly had shot at Eisenhower, but the Justice Dept. asked not to investigate .
 Walker urged the House Select Committee on Investigations to look into this extraordinary intervention that he believed had to trace back to Robert Kennedy . Walker: The extraordinary intervention had to be traced back to the Kennedy .
 Pacepa had good reason for perceiving everything Oswald did resulted from Oswald being a KGB asset, and the CIA may have assumed Oswald was a CIA asset . Conceivably, as we saw in chapter 4, as well as a trained Soviet bloc intelligence officer, a trained KGB officer like
 The CIA could not afford the U.S. public to know in the aftermath of the JFK assassination when the Warren Report was issued in 1964 . This could be a key part of the deep secret the CIA kept from the public .
 In his deathbed confession, E Howard Hunt identified a small group of people from within the CIA that Cord Meyer recruited into the assassination plot . Hunt also identified a group of CIA agents that Meyer recruited .
 Hunt placed Morales below Cord Meyer but with a direct line to the contract killers on the grassy knoll . Morales was placed in the organization chart designed to describe the plot . Hunt placed David Morales below Meyer in the organizational chart .
 Hunt placed CIA agent William Harvey on the same level as Morales, but off the side, on the side of Morales .
 David Morales had a dark Latin Latin, possibly even Mexican or Indian appearance . David Morales may have been Hispanic or Native American .
 He first showed up as El Indio in the CIA training of guerillas for the staged “invasion” of Guatemala in 1954 . He first appeared in the training of Guerillas in the staged invasion of Guatemala .
 Morales bragged of killing people for the CIA in Vietnam, in Venezuela, and in Uruguay, among other places . Fonzi notes Morales brags of killing for the U.S. in Vietnam and Uruguay .
 JMWAVE operated under the guise of Zenith Technical Enterprises, Inc, a front company created as a cover for covert operations against Cuba . Zenith was a front cover for the covert operations JMWaVE staged against Cuba. Zenith is a front-setter for the
 Fonzi described an all-night drinking session during which Morales flew off the handle at the mention of JFK’s name . Morales was arrested on suspicion of drug possession in the 1970s .
 Morales started yelling about what a wimp JFK was and talking about how JFK was responsible for the men who died in the Bay of Pigs operation . Morales then started yelling that JFK was a coward .
 Morales stopped, sat down on the bed and remained silent for a moment . Morales sat down and sat down for a few minutes before speaking again . Morales: "I don't know what I really want to do"
 Harvey, like Morales, was involved in the CIA staged coup d’état in 1954 that overthrew the government of Jacobo Arbenz in Guatemala . Harvey and Morales were both members of the CIA and Guatemalan rebels .
 Harvey is the head of ZR/RIFLE, the operation assigned to eliminate foreign political leaders . Harvey also directed Task Force W, a group appointed to oversee JMWAVE operations . Harvey is a former CIA director of the assassination operation .
 Harvey drew up policies and oriented the execution of the Cuba project for all CIA foreign stations, as well as for CIA operatives who worked in embassies in countries where Cuba had strong diplomatic representation . The Plot to Kill Kennedy and Castro was published by the CIA .
 Harvey could definitely be a person of interest, as he was a strange character hiding a mass of hidden aggression . Harvey could be someone of interest in the case .
 The Corsican assassins were involved in the Marseilles drug connection known as the ‘French Connection . A memo from Harvey advocated hiring Corsicans because of their expertise and proficiency as contract hit men .
 Hunt claimed Cord Meyer recruited David Phillips, the CIA operative who had played a major role in the propaganda campaign overthrowing the Arbenz government in Guatemala in 1954 . Hunt also claimed that Phillips recruited an American journalist who worked for the CIA .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that Phillips, assuming the identity of Maurice Bishop, worked with Antonio Veciana, the Cuban exile leader who established Alpha 66, in 1959 . Phillips assumed identity of the mysterious Maurice Bishop .
 JFK ordered that Veciana and other leaders of Alpha 66 should be arrested and placed in confinement in Florida . When Alpha 66 attacked a Soviet ship on March 23, 1963, JFK ordered them to be arrested .
 House Select Committee investigator Gaeton Fonzi believed was the Southland Center, a forty-two-story office complex built in Dallas in the late 1950s . Veciana met Bishop in the lobby of a large downtown office building in the Dallas area .
 Veciana told Fonzi he was certain the man with Bishop that day had been Oswald . Veciana believes Oswald was the long-gun shooter .
 Fonzi was convinced anti-Castroism was the unifying theme within the CIA that served as the trigger to the CIA’s decision to participate in the JFK assassination . The CIA was involved in the assassination .
 He was skeptical that Oswald actually made his controversial trip to Mexico, believing instead that the CIA staged the entire sequence of events in Mexico by using a CIA operative to assume the Oswald identity .
 Phillips was CIA station chief in Mexico City at the time of Oswald’s visit . He says Oswald visited Mexico City in the early 1950s and early 1960s .
 David Atlee Phillips was the man who assumed the Maurice Bishop persona . He said he was certain he would have assumed the role of Maurice Bishop . Phillips said he is certain he will continue to play the role .
 In September 1979 Veciana was ambushed on his way home from work in an apparent assassination attempt . Veciana died in September 1979 after being ambushed by a gunman in a car crash .
 Veciana survived, but after the attack he refused to discuss his work with Alpha 66 . Veciana was attacked by a group of Alpha 66 members, but survived .
 Tippit was also suspected of having been a shooter in the JFK assassination . He is believed to have been the shooter in JFK's assassination .
 White also served in the same marine platoon with Oswald in Japan and later in the Philippines . White and Oswald served in same platoon in same unit .
 Roscoe White and Lee Harvey Oswald were candidates for having been recruited into the CIA when they were marines . Both men were recruited by the CIA during their time in the marines .
 Former marine sniper Craig Roberts argued that Roscoe White was recruited by William Harvey to participate in ZR/RIFLE under the codename Mandarin . As discussed in chapter 2, he argued that William Harvey recruited White to participate .
 In his 1994 book, Kill Zone, Roberts noted that Roscoe White had access to the Dallas police uniform and badge on November 22, 1963 .
 The address is approximately ten blocks to the east of Dealey Plaza on Elm Street . It is located about 10 blocks from Dealey plaza on Elm St.
 Edsel automobile featured on its hood an oversized mock fifty-caliber machine gun . Edsel was customized as an advertising vehicle . The distinctive Edsel car was customized for advertising purposes .
 From the vantage point of having jumped on top of the car, White may have been the shooter who hit JFK’s neck . White jumped onto the car and shot JFK in the neck .
 Honest Joe’s Pawn Shop vehicle was driven in the motorcade route the day of the assassination . There is ample testimony in the Warren Commission hearings about the vehicle .
 Jean Hill and Mary Moorman were on Elm Street directly across from the concrete monument when JFK was shot . Hill and Moorman reported observing the Honest Joe’s vehicle .
 Hill recalls talking to a uniformed policeman of the Dallas Police Department on the sidewalk near the main entrance to the Depository building . Hill recalled talking to the officer on the street near the entrance of the building in Dallas .
 Hill noticed an automobile circling the area, FBI report of her interview notes . Hill noticed “an automobile circling’s area,” FBI report says .
 Millican was standing on the north side of Elm Street about halfway between Houston Street and the triple underpass . Millican gave testimony to the Dallas County Sheriff's office that he was standing .
 Millican contradicted Jean Hill in claiming the Honest Joe’s vehicle drove off five or ten minutes before the JFK motorcade came by . Millican said the HonestJoe’�s car drove off before JFK arrived . Jean Hill said Millican was in the car at the time
 "He gets write-ups in the paper, free advertising about different things he loans money on, like artificial limbs and things like that," he says . He says .
 Sorrels thought mentioning Honest Joe to Ruby to Ruby would break the ice because Ruby was also Jewish . Ruby was Jewish .
 Ruby explained to Sorrels he had been emotionally upset by the JFK assassination . Ruby did not want Jackie Kennedy to have to go through the ordeal of Lee Harvey Oswald’s trial . Ruby said he did not think Jackie Kennedy would have to endure the trial of Oswald .
 He stated the car was brightly painted and carried slogans advertising his pawnshop . The pawnshop owner said it was bright painted and advertising his shop .
 Police permitted him to drive on the route used by President John F KENNEDY’s Motorcade .
 Rubin Goldstein claimed he was parked on Pacific Avenue, one block from the parade route, when President KENNEDY was shot . Goldstein admitted that he knew Jack Ruby, according to FBI report .
 Ruby purchased equipment from him several years prior to the JFK assassination . Goldstein told the FBI that Ruby purchased some equipment . Ruby purchased the equipment from Goldstein .
 Goldstein insisted he was not a personal friend of Jack Ruby and that he had no other business dealings with Ruby since Ruby bought the equipment from him . Goldstein insisted that he did not have any dealings with Jack Ruby .
 Sorrels suspected Goldstein and his Honest Joe vehicle were involved in the assassination . Almost immediately after the assassination, Sorrel had suspected Goldstein .
 Assassination researcher Jones Harris had the relevant frame from the Nix film enlarged . The frame was enlarged to show that the film was used in the assassination .
 A man appears to be standing on the running board of the Honest Joe vehicle, with a weapon in his hands, shooting at JFK as the limo passes on Elm Street .
 Sorrels admitted he visited Honest Joe’s store on the afternoon of November 22, 1963 . Harris interviewed the man shortly after the assassination .
 Harris believes Sorrels was well along the way to solving almost single-handedly the JFK assassination . Harris believes he may have been able to solve the mystery of the assassination .
 Harris is convinced Sorrels was in the process of implicating both Goldstein and Roscoe White . Harris insists the shooter fired from the running-board of the Honest Joe vehicle visible in the early versions of the film .
 Sorrels was largely taken off the case after the FBI began assuming jurisdiction over the investigation . The FBI took jurisdiction of the investigation into the case . Sorrel's case was taken into account by the FBI .
 Secret Service agent was in charge of the Dallas district of the U.S. Secret Service . Jack Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald in Dallas, Texas, on Sunday .
 If Sorrels had been given enough time, he would have located James P Hosty Jr., the FBI agent in charge of Oswald’s case in Dallas, so as to begin probing Oswald's relationship to the FBI prior to the assassination .
 Beverly Oliver was a performer in Jack Ruby’s Carousel Club . She also turned out to be the long-unidentified “Babushka Lady” and an eyewitness to the JFK assassination .
 She positively identified Roscoe White on the grassy knoll in the immediate aftermath of the shooting . She took photos of the JFK limo as it traveled along Elm Street in Dealey Plaza .
 In her book, Nightmare in Dallas, Oliver describes running across Elm Street to join the people running up the grassy knoll as JFK’s limousine sped under the triple underpass . Oliver: “I was there to join people running around Elm Street as JFK's
 As she ran up the steps heading to the concrete pergola monument, she felt scared . "I felt scared," she said . "As she ran ... I felt scared"
 Her heart was pounding, her hands were perspiring, and her stomach was in knots . Her stomach was also in knots as she waited for her daughter's return to the hospital .
 The man she knew as “Geneva husband” walked across the steps in front of her . That’s when she describes encountering the man she was known as ‘Geneva’
 Oliver reported that Jack Ruby had hired Geneva White to be a hostess at the Carousel Club . Geneva relied on her husband to pick her up after work . Jack Ruby was a nightclub hostess .
 The officer seen in the Hughes film in the railroad yard behind the fence is wearing a Dallas Police Department uniform . The officer is conspicuously seen not carrying a gun and not wearing a cap .
 Viewing the Hughes film, Oliver identified Roscoe White as the Dallas Police officer seen in the film . The officer is seen standing in the railroad yard behind the picket fence on the grassy knoll .
 Roscoe White’s son, Ricky White, claimed to have found a military footlocker belonging to his father . Ricky White's son Ricky White said he found the footlockers after his father's death .
 Ricky claimed to have found a handwritten diary in which his father supposedly admitted to shooting JFK . Ricky claimed it contained never-before-seen photos of the assassination and Lee Harvey Oswald . Ricky also claimed that he had never seen photos of Oswald .
 Ricky later went to sell the footlocker when he discovered that the diary and photos were missing . Ricky later discovered that he had lost the diary, photos .
 A year later, Ricky White claimed to find a metal artillery powder canister in his grandmother’s attic . It contained Roscoe White's service papers and his dog tag, as well as three messages .
 Former Marine sniper Craig Roberts claims to have seen the messages . He verified that the number in the top right-hand corner of each was identical to Roscoe White’s Marine Corps serial number .
 Roberts insists he has personally inspected the three messages and believes them to be authentic . The format, content, and composition of the messages exactly as he would expect, given his extensive military experience as a sniper .
 Richard Nixon was in Dallas, Texas, on November 23, 1963, when JFK was assassinated . Nixon did not want the American public knowing he was there at the time .
 L Fletcher Prouty, the real-life model for the “Mr X” character played by Donald Sutherland in Oliver Stone’s 1991 movie, JFK, notes Nixon told three different stories designed to cover up the truth that he was in Dallas at the very moment JFK
 In the first version, Nixon claims he was in the air when Kennedy was shot and a man told him the news . The first version of this version of Nixon's version of the story is incorrect . Nixon says he was on the air at the time of Kennedy's death .
 A woman came screaming out of a house, and when Nixon rolled down the window of a taxi, she told him JFK had been shot in Dallas . Nixon was traveling in a taxi to Dallas, Texas, when JFK was shot .
 Nixon was there representing outside counsel to work with Harvey Russel, Pepsi-Cola’s general counsel .
 The Dallas Morning News printed a picture of Nixon staying in the Baker Hotel at 1400 Commerce in downtown Dallas . The Baker Hotel is six blocks from the spot where JFK was assassinated .
 The newspaper reported Pepsi-Cola rented the entire third floor of the hotel for their “convention” that included a suite for actress Joan Crawford . Joan Crawford, attorney Richard Nixon, and various rooms for Pepsi executives .
 When Nixon entered the room, the Don Ragon Band was playing “April in Portugal,” a song Nixon said was his wife’s favorite . Nixon said his wife's favorite song was April in Portugal . Nixon: "I'm not afraid to say goodbye to my
 The newspaper further reported that Nixon and Crawford sat ringside in the Empire Room during the dinner show and drew tremendous applause .
 The Pepsi meeting in Dallas was interrupted by the announcement JFK had been shot . Pepsi meeting was interrupted on November 22, 1963, by the news .
 With that deeply disturbing news, the convention session Nixon was attending broke up . Nixon was at the convention when the session ended up breaking up .
 Nixon returned to his hotel room and was driven later that afternoon to Love Field by a Pepsi-Cola official named DeLuca . Nixon was driven to the airport by an official from the Pepsi company .
 Nixon convinced Chicago mayor Richard Daley had stolen enough votes at the order of Kennedy family boss Joseph P Kennedy, Joseph Kennedy and Sam Giancana to tip the narrow balance of the presidential election away from Nixon . In 1960 Nixon was convinced by Chicago mayor Daley that Chicago crime boss Sam
 By the time of the JFK assassination, Giancana had abandoned JFK, feeling betrayed by Bobby Kennedy’s war against the Italian and Jewish mobs in the east . The mob felt betrayed by JFK's war against Italians and Jews in the East .
 Giancana maintained the JFK assassination had taken months to mastermind . Dozens of men were involved, planning the assassination hit for several cities, including Chicago, Tampa/Miami, Los Angeles, and Dallas .
 Giancana claimed that ultimately JFK had to be lured to Dallas because Dallas afforded the best opportunity for a successful assassination . JFK was lured to the city of Dallas because it was the best place to kill him, Giancrano said .
 Giancana insisted the JFK assassination was a joint mob-CIA action . He said it was done with the approval and complicity of both Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon . The JFK assassination took place in 1968 .
 Giancana claims Dallas mayor Earle Cabell made sure security along the motorcade in Dallas was lax at best . The mayor's brother is the brother of former CIA deputy director Charles Cabell . He also claims the mayor made sure that security was lax .
 Charles Cabell also had a grudge with JFK because he was one of the CIA officials JFK forced to resign in January 1962 after the Bay of Pigs invasion . JFK forced Cabell to resign from the CIA after the invasion of Cuba in 1962 .
 Oswald was marked to play the role of the patsy in the conspiracy . Tippit were part of the conspiracy, with Oswald having been marked to be the 'patsy' Oswald . Oswald was not aware of his involvement in the assassination .
 Spies coordinated with field operatives via state-of-the-art walkie-talkie telecommunications equipment . The equipment was only available only to government spooks .
 Spotters with unseen field communications gear reported the progress of the JFK limo to alert sniper teams positioned for action . Spotters were positioned along the motorcade route to alert snipers .
 The best shooters were reserved for final shots planned to occur as the limo approached the sweet spot of the kill zone, along Elm Street . The final curve of the street into the triple underpass was the final curve .
 He hated the Kennedys as much as anybody, and he wasn't about to help Bobby find his brother’s killers . "He wasn’t going to help him find the killers," he said .
 “T remember saying that the CIA frequently did things he didn’t know about, and he was unhappy about it.” “I remember saying he frequently did . Things he didn't know about. He was unhappy with it,” says LBJ. �
 He told me he believed he believed the CIA had arranged to have Diem and Trujillo bumped off . He said he believed Diem had been bumped off by the CIA .
 In the final months of his life, he spoke with friends about his own death with a freedom and frequency that shocked them . In his final months, friends said he spoke freely about his death with freedom .
 Senator George Smathers said, “I don’t know why it is, but death became kind of an obsession with Jack.” —Senator George Smithers, quoted in James W Douglass, JFK and the Unspeakable, 2008 .
 Alan Seeger graduated from Harvard in 1910 and volunteered for the French Foreign Legion before the U.S. entered World War I . Seeger's poem first seems to prefigure his own death .
 Seeger was killed on July 4, 1916, at Belloy-en-Senterre, France, attacking a French position . Seeger died in front of a French line .
 I’ve a rendezvous with Death At midnight in some flaming town, When Spring trips north again this year this year, And I to my pledged word am true, I shall not fail that rendezvous .
 He suffered from Addison’s disease and had a degenerative back ailment that plagued him for life . He was diagnosed with Addison's disease and suffered from back problems .
 Kennedy’s charismatic appeal rested heavily on the image of youthful energy and good health he projected . Kennedy was known for his youthful energy, good health and youthful appeal .
 Jack could be seen occasionally during the middle of a meeting calmly taking a syringe and injecting himself into his thigh, passing the needle straight through his pants . He performed the act without comment, not breaking a sentence .
 Dallek said JFK’s medical ailments in a strange way contributed to his demise . JFK's medical ailments may have contributed to the death of JFK, he said . JFK died in 1963 .
 He wore a corset-like back brace every day, and after an initial shot hit him in the back, the corset held him upright, positioning him perfectly for the final fatal headshot .
 Jack’s preoccupation with death may have been due to the fact that he knew he would almost certainly become a cripple in old age, confined to a wheelchair . Jack knew he was almost certainly going to be a wheelchair-bound man in his life .
 JFK was told that an assassination plot was underway, that he would be shot by a high-powered rifle from a tall building . JFK took the information stoically . Jack took the news stoically.
 Rather than take extraordinary precautions to protect his safety, he commented matter-of-factly that sometimes a person has no choice but to do what they must do . Rather than taking extraordinary precautions, he said that sometimes people have no choice .
 Jack Kennedy was not optimistic about the possibility of an assassination attempt in November 1963 . News from South Vietnam did not permit Jack Kennedy to view the potential of an attempt in a fateful manner .
 JFK thought he might be assassinated, and soon, became all too real a prospect for JFK to dismiss . Suddenly, the prospect of JFK's assassination soon became a real possibility . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 The emotional impact of the realization of his impending death finally hit JFK uncharacteristically hard . JFK's final moments on the radio show were the most emotional moments of his life .
 President John F Kennedy was deeply disturbed to learn that South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem and his younger brother had been arrested and killed by the South Vietnamese army . President Kennedy was less than three weeks away from his assassination .
 The victims were victims of a CIA-engineered coup led by South Vietnamese Maj. Maj. Gen. Hoang . They were the victims of the CIA-backed coup in Vietnam .
 The moment JFK heard Diem had been killed, JFK knew he had signed his own death warrant . JFK knew the CIA had most likely signed Diem's death warrant, he said .
 Ambassador Lodge sent a cable from Saigon to the White House describing the death of Diem and Nhu . Washington time, Ambassador Lodge was in Saigon at the time of death .
 National Security Council staff aide Michael V Forrestal handed the message to JFK in the Cabinet Room of the White House as a crisis meeting was about to begin .
 Kennedy “leaped to his feet and rushed from the room with a look of shock on his face,” as described by General Maxwell Taylor who was attending the meeting . Kennedy was reading the cable, reading it, and then “shocked” by his shock .
 Taylor attributed Kennedy’s reaction to his belief that any change of government in South Vietnam would be carried out without bloodshed .
 JFK had specifically ordered the CIA not to assassinate Diem in a coup d’état . JFK had ordered that Diem not to be assassinated by the CIA . Even more precisely, JFK ordered that JFK not to kill Diem .
 JFK knew Diem could be assassinated despite his orders, JFK knew he, too, could be . JFK knew that Diem had been assassinated despite orders . JFK also knew he could be killed if Diem was assassinated .
 He suspected the same people in the CIA who had disregarded his instructions to Ambassador Lodge were capable of plotting directly against him as well . He suspected that the CIA could plot against him .
 Schlesinger commented he had not seen JFK so depressed since the Bay of Pigs crisis . He said JFK was depressed by the crisis at the time .
 JFK taped a message on the Diem assassination for future historians . JFK taped the message on Monday, November 4, 1963, for historians . The message was taped on the night of the assassination .
 Over a ten-year period, he’d held his country together, maintained its independence under very adverse conditions . While became increasingly difficult in the last months, nevertheless .
 Diem and his brother placed themselves at risk by agreeing to surrender to forces loyal to General Minh . Diem's brother placed himself at risk for surrendering to Minhors forces .
 In exchange for the trust Diem and his brother placed in JFK, they were brutally killed . They were brutally murdered in exchange for their trust in JFK .
 Captain Nguyen Van Nhung assassinated Diem and Nhu with a pistol at point-blank range in an armored personnel carrier . The pair were en route to a South Vietnam military base and then out of the country . Nhung then finished the job off with a bayonet .
 The Diem murder was especially ironic due to the fact that the CIA positioned Diem to head South Vietnam after the Geneva Agreements of 1954 partitioned Vietnam and after the defeat of the French at Dien Bien Phu . Diem was assassinated by the CIA at the end of
 Ngo Dinh Diem established his nationalist credentials in the early 1930s when he resigned his position as Vietnam’s Interior Minister . Diem was Vietnam's Interior Minister in the 1930s . He resigned from his post in 1930s to become Vietnam's Prime Minister .
 Living in the United States in the 1950s, he won over key U.S. legislators who began to see him as the best hope for anti-Communist leadership in Vietnam .
 By mid-1954, there was ample precedent for the CIA to take a lead role in Vietnam . The CIA had already been involved in the Vietnam war .
 Emperor Bao Dai invited Diem to form a government to replace that of the Francophile courtier Prince Buo Loc . On June 18, 1954, at the direct encouragement of the CIA, the Vietnamese emperor invited the government to form .
 It calculated that the overthrow of Diem committed Washington to Saigon more deeply . It was calculated that Diem's overthrow would commit Washington to Vietnam more deeply.
 JFK found it impossible to dismiss the warning from the Elkins family . After the assassination of Diem, JFK found himself unable to dismiss it .
 November 2, 1963, was coincidentally the day Chicago police arrested a wellarmed Thomas Arthur Vallee on suspicion of planning to assassinate the president . The arrest occurred the same day as the arrest of Vallee, who was wanted to kill President Richard Nixon .
 Treasury Department official ordered Chicago Police Lieutenant Berkeley Moyland to forget his encounter with Thomas Arthur Vallee . Moyland was ordered to forget the encounter with Vallee, a Treasury official .
 The Secret Service Agent in Charge, Maurice Martineau, ordered his Chicago agents to forget their investigation of the four-man sniper team . The four man sniper team was shot by a sniper in Chicago .
 “The Dallas assassination was allowed to happen, unimpeded by the intelligence community’s knowledge of its forerunner,” wrote James W Douglass in 2008 best-selling book, JFK and the Unspeakable .
 Intelligence about the Chicago assassination plot never surfaced beyond Chicago . Yet, curiously, the intelligence about the plot did not surface beyond Chicago.
 Kennedy, on being briefed about the danger in Chicago, decided to cancel the trip . Kennedy's trip was canceled after he was briefed on the danger .
 White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger announced to the press that JFK had decided to cancel his scheduled visit to Chicago . Salinger implied concerns over Vietnam were the reason .
 The White House never specifically attributed the Diem assassination as the reason for canceling the Chicago trip, nor did it make public the intelligence information about the arrest of Thomas Arthur Vallee .
 It didn't matter that Chicago failed, reasoned Douglass, because Dallas followed a similar pattern . Douglass: It didn’t matter that Dallas failed, because it did . It was a pattern of failure, he said .
 Haldeman discusses State Department cables that E Howard Hunt had in his safe at the White House . Hunt had cables that he kept in safe at White House, including those from Hunt's office .
 Haldeman admits there were many indicators along the way that the investigation of the Watergate burglary was only the tip of the iceberg . The Watergate burglary broke out in 1972 .
 Hunt admitted to forging CIA cables linking JFK to the Diem assassination under questioning from committee counsel Samuel Dash . Hunt said in testimony to the Senate Watergate Committee that he forged the documents .
 Hunt established that his analysis of authentic State Department cables indicated “a gap” in the sequence leading up to the Diem assassination . Hunt: “A gap’s been found between Diem and Diem,” is indicated in the cables .
 Charles Colson, who served in the White House as special counsel to President Nixon from 1969 to 1973, is exposed as playing a central role in the Watergate cover-up . Hunt’s testimony presented below is part of a segment of the testimony .
 There was every reason to believe, on the basis of an accumulated evidence of the cable documentation, that the Kennedy administration was implicitly, if not explicitly, responsible for the assassination of Diem and his brother-in-law .
 To create, to fabricate cables that could substitute for the missing chronological cables . The cables could be used to replace the chronological cables in the future .
 He indicated to me that he would be probably getting in touch with a member of the media, of the press, to show the cables . He indicated he would probably get in touch .
 Lambert was suspicious of the authenticity of the cables, based in large part on the advice from the surviving members of the Elkins family that the document had been falsified and that JFK had nothing to do with ordering the Diem assassination . Lambert was skeptical of the document's authenticity, based
 E Howard Hunt had been working on classified papers while in the White House . Haldeman, John Erlichman, counsel and Domestic Affairs assistant to President Nixon, handed to Gray two legal-sized manila folders that contained copies of classified papers .
 Dean explained the files had “national security implications or overtones,” but that they had nothing to do with the Watergate burglary or investigation . Dean said they had no connection to the Watergate investigation or Watergate .
 Before putting the files in the fire, he opened one and saw that it contained what appeared to be copies of “top secret” State Department cables .
 Had there been proof JFK had ordered the Diem assassination, E Howard Hunt would never have needed to forge State Department documents . Hunt forged documents in the hope of convincing Hunt to forge documents .
 That Hunt broke the law to create falsified State Department documents underscores the explosive nature of the Diem assassination, even in 1972 and 1973, ten years after the JFK assassination . Moreover, that Hunt broke a law to make falsified documents underscores how explosive it was .
 Watergate investigation involves possibility that the “plumbers unit” in the White House fabricated and stole yet unseen documents that would tarnish the record or the character of JFK and his two brothers . One of the tantalizing aspects of the Watergate investigation is the possibility of the ‘pl
 Nixon’s purpose very possibly was not just to change the historical record regarding the Diem assassination, but to make sure no evidence existed that could implicate him in the JFK assassination . Nixon's purpose may be to ensure that there is no evidence that implicates him in JFK assassination
 Nixon feared Hunt knew enough about the JFK assassination to implicate him . Hunt was the prime suspect in the assassination of JFK . Hunt died in 1968 at the hands of President Nixon . Hunt is believed to be the only person to know about the assassination .
 Nixon feared he might do it if he got a good deal for trading off the information . Hunt implicated himself, even if in revealing the truth Hunt implicated him .
 Hunt knew the full extent of the CIA’s involvement in the JFK assassination, Nixon knew it too . Hunt is certain that if Hunt knew it, it would have been Nixon .
 President Kennedy faced with escalating Soviet military involvement supporting the Pathet Lao, a Communist nationalist group in Laos engaged in a civil war seeking to overthrow the Royal Laotian Government . In the first 100 days after taking office, Kennedy faced escalating Soviet involvement .
 On March 23, 1970, JFK held a press conference in the then-new State Department auditorium . JFK held the press conference at the new State Department Auditorium .
 He spoke against a background of three maps of Laos illustrating the advance of the Russiansupported Pathet Lao . Laos is now a relatively small part of Laos .
 JFK: 'For JFK, for JFK, the problem remained of justifying the intervention against Communism in Laos if we were resolved to reject intervention against Cuba in Cuba'
 McArthur advised strongly that the United States should never again fight a land war in Asia . He said indigenous military forces could subsist for days on a pocketful of uncooked rice, while the U.S. military required extensive bases and forward supplies .
 McArthur added that if we intervened in Southeast Asia, the U.S. must be prepared to use nuclear weapons, should China enter in force .
 The lesson of the Korean War was that fighting a limited warfare war fought with conventional troops and conventional weapons was a risky strategy . The lesson was that the war was fought in limited warfare was fought using conventional forces and weapons was risky .
 When the Korean War was being fought, China was still more than a decade away from developing its own nuclear war capability . China was more than 10 years away from having its own own nuclear capability .
 China could enter the war at any moment with thousands of fresh troops at precisely the right moment, calculating to overwhelm United States troops . U.S. troops are fighting at near exhaustion in the bitterest of winter conditions .
 Combat in Southeast Asia promised to be even more difficult than combat in Korea . The South Korean military said it would be difficult for the U.S. to engage in combat in Southeast Southeast Asia .
 In Korea, China was still forced to rely on regular army troops to secure victory . China still relies heavily on regular troops in order to maintain victory .
 In Laos or Vietnam, combatants fighting against the U.S. included a shadow army . The shadow army could easily blend back unseen into the village and countryside . In Laos and Vietnam, the shadow army was invisible to villagers .
 Even when regular North Vietnamese troops entered the war, the North Vietnamese were fighting in their own country, in terrain they knew and understood . Even when North Vietnamese forces entered, they fought in the country's own terrain .
 In Laos and Vietnam, U.S. troops were vulnerable to defeat in what was asymmetrical combat against an enemy that could be organized loosely as guerilla insurgents . In Laos, Vietnam, the United States was at risk of defeat in combat .
 War in Laos and Vietnam was as much about controlling the infrastructure of the local communities as gaining or losing territory in a conventional sense . War in Vietnam and Laos was more about controlling infrastructure than gaining territory .
 In the peasant civil war typically fought in Southeast Asia, fighters lived where they fought, often with only a pocketful of uncooked rice to sustain them . In the past, fighters in the region lived in the pockets of rice to survive .
 Insurgent guerilla fighters entered and exited the field of battle as often as not unseen, if not necessarily unsuspected . They are typically without the niceties of uniforms or a formal command structure .
 The Laos crisis ended when the Russians stepped down and Khrushchev decided to negotiate . The crisis ended in Laos when the Russian president stepped down .
 Kennedy ordered the corps of American military advisors in Laos to discard civilian clothes and put on their military uniforms . The corps of U.S. military advisors turned into a Military and Advisory Group authorized to accompany Laotian troops into combat .
 JFK was not willing to commit U.S. military forces, but he was willing to . commit military advisors . In Laos, JFK was willing not to commit United States military forces .
 JFK had developed a limited warfare theory for Southeast Asia that would rely upon military assistance and foreign aid, not combat troops . With Laos, JFK had begun to develop a limited war theory .
 As Kennedy reflected on Laos, he resolved he would not make in Vietnam the mistake he had avoided in Laos . Kennedy resolved to not make the same mistake in Vietnam .
 JFK came to the conclusion he would not make the mistake Truman had made in Korea . As he studied Vietnam, JFK decided not to make the same mistake he did in Vietnam .
 JFK had no intention whatsoever of committing to Vietnam regular U.S. troops, as he had also refused to commit in Laos . JFK refused to participate in the Vietnam war .
 JFK was on his way to the Dallas Trade Center to give a luncheon address . JFK was assassinated on the day he was assassinated . JFK never gave the speech .
 The “Unspoken Speech” contained a strong statement of Kennedy’s determination to support our allies and to fight back Communism worldwide, not through the direct intervention of U.S. military forces . This, the ‘Unspoken speech’ was a strong and clear
 With this speech, JFK would have expressed a clear policy preference for providing military aid to nations such as Vietnam, rather than committing troops . JFK's speech would have indicated a clear preference for military aid, not committing troops to Vietnam .
 JFK was constantly pressured by the military to ramp up the U.S. military presence in Southeast Asia . JFK was pressured by military over Laos and Vietnam .
 Edward Lansdale presented to him the same proposal he had developed for Eisenhower . Lansdale's proposal was the same as Eisenhower's proposal for Eisenhower's .
 Howard Hunt in the CIA saw benefits to Lansdale’s thinking in covert coups, such as what the CIA engineered in Guatemala in 1954 and 1957 . Hunt was one of those who saw benefits of Lansdale's thinking .
 Landsdale recommended to JFK a direct U.S. military intervention in Vietnam . Landsdale had recommended the same to Eisenhower in 1954 when the French faced defeat at Diem Biem Phu .
 JFK worried that no direct U.S. military intervention in a region like Southeast Asia could succeed, regardless how many troops were sent or what type of arms they had . The indigenous population was ready to fight and die for their own freedom .
 JFK felt he could test the resolve and the ability of the citizens of a nation like Vietnam to help them win in a war against indigenous Communists supported by China and Russia . JFK offered a wide range of financial assistance, military training, and sophisticated military equipment .
 It proved that strategic bombing achieved no true military advantage unless there were Strategic targets to bomb, especially fuel and chemical production sites . The bombing of fuel and production sites proved that it was necessary to bomb .
 Yes, the ‘rolling-thunder’ effect of massive B-52 raids would be frightening . Yes, yes, the "rolling thunder" effect of such a raid .
 On the day JFK died, the U.S. had fifteen thousand American military advisors in South Vietnam . JFK had decided to send the same number of advisors to Vietnam in 1961 .
 Kennedy told Mansfield that while he was in agreement, a pull out was not possible until 1965, if JFK were reelected . Mansfield said that if he was reelected, he would not be able to pull out until 1965 .
 Maxwell Taylor ordered the withdrawal of one thousand U.S. military personnel by the end of 1963 and the bulk of United States military personnel in 1965 . The withdrawal was part of a plan to withdraw troops from the United States from the U.K. in 1964 and 1965 .
 On Labor Day, 1963, at Hyannis Port, JFK had a relaxed interview outdoors with Walter Cronkite . Cronkites was inaugurating a new CBS television news program that day .
 Kennedy was careful to set the stage for explaining why a military withdrawal from Vietnam was beginning to make sense to him . Kennedy answered directly, careful to explain why a withdrawal from the Vietnam war would make sense . Kennedy: "It's not just a war, it's a war. It
 The document was a public statement of policy recommendations received from Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, Gen. Gen. John McNamara and Gen. George W. Eisenhower .
 Secretary McNamara and General Taylor reported their judgment that the major part of the U.S. military task can be completed by the end of 1965 . There may be a continuing requirement for a limited number of United States training personnel .
 U.S. program for training Vietnamese should have progressed to the point where 1,000 military personnel assigned to South Vietnam can be withdrawn . Even though Kennedy made public on October 2, 1963, he kept secret that he agreed with the recommendation .
 The draft allowed for maritime operations against North Vietnam, but only by the government of South Vietnam . The draft was prepared by JFK national security advisor McGeorge Bundy for JFK’s review .
 Johnson realized South Vietnam really had no navy of any consequence . Johnson changed this, realizing South Vietnam had no naval power .
 Johnson allowed U.S. naval vessels involved in missions against North Vietnam . Johnson allowed American naval vessels to be involved in Vietnam missions .
 OPLAN 44 specified attacks be undertaken by fast patrol boats manned by South Vietnamese sailors, with the support and preparations undertaken by Americans . This resulted in what was called OPLANN 44, specifying attacks be carried out by South Vietnam sailors .
 Included in the mission specification were United States destroyers offshore North Vietnam monitoring enemy actions through electronic surveillance . U.S. destroyers were operating in the area .
 Three North Vietnamese torpedo boats attacked the U.S. Navy destroyer Maddox on August 2, 1964 . The incident became known as the Gulf of Tonkin Incident . North Vietnam torpedo boats were attacked by the United States Navy .
 North Vietnamese launched a torpedo attack on the Maddox . The total damage done to the ship consisted of one bullet through the hull . The Maddox survived the attack .
 LBJ leveraged the incident into the congressional resolution known as the Gulf of Tonkin resolution . The resolution was subsequently utilized as constitutional authority for allowing the president to wage the Vietnam War .
 JFK's body lay in state for public viewing in the Rotunda of the Capitol . LBJ’s first Vietnam meeting as president was held in the White House at 3:00 m.m. November 24, 1963 .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk was in attendance at the meeting in the White House . The meeting was also attended by National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, CIA Director John McCone, and Ambassador Lodge .
 John Newman in his 1992 book, JFK and Vietnam, reported that LBJ made several dramatic statements about the course of the Vietnam War . Newman: LBJ's statements were made about the Vietnam war .
 Newman argued the most tragic consequence of JFK’s assassination was the subsequent escalation of the Vietnam War . Newman argued that the escalation of Vietnam War was the result of JFK's assassination .
 Kennedy concluded that he could not win reelection in 1964 if he served up the argument the U.S. should withdraw from Vietnam . Kennedy concluded, unfortunately, that he couldn't win reelection if he did .
 Former vice president Nixon was already calling for bombing North Vietnam as a strategy to win the war . Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater, JFK’s most likely presidential challenger in 1964, would gain perhaps decisive political advantage in painting JFK as ineffective .
 JFK correctly concluded that a retreat from Vietnam could not happen unless he was reelected in 1964 . JFK also concluded correctly that a return from Vietnam would not happen if he won re-election in 1964, Newman says .
 Madeleine Duncan Brown claims to have been a mistress to LBJ who bore him a son out of wedlock . LBJ's son was born in a birth birth to a girl who was in a relationship with LBJ . Duncan Brown's daughter was also a child .
 In her 1997 book, Texas in the Morning, Brown describes attending a party at the home of Texas oilman Clint Murchison on Thursday, November 21, 1963 . The night before JFK was assassinated, Brown attended the party .
 Hunt, lawyer and former World Bank president John J McCloy, Houston construction company entrepreneur George R Brown, and philanthropist and former Dallas mayor Robert L Thornton .
 She described how LBJ arrived unexpectedly just as the party was breaking up . She said he arrived at the end of the party just before it was over .
 In a final meeting with the coconspirators, including Richard Nixon and J Edgar Hoover, apparently confirmation of the attempt to be made the next day on JFK’s life was given .
 The problem with this spectacular revelation is that it is unlikely to be true . It is not the first time it has been true that the president has been accused of being a paedophile .
 JFK and LBJ attended a testimonial dinner honoring Texas Congressman Albert Thomas held in the Houston Coliseum on November 21, 1963 . The two men attended the testimonial .
 JFK and the presidential party including LBJ left the head table to travel to Dallas . William Manchester in his 1967 book, The Death of a President, noted it was after 9:30m. when JFK left the table to go to Dallas.
 Air Force One and the other two airplanes touched down at Carswell Air Force base in Fort Worth . Manchester noted it was 11:07m. ET when the presidential party touched down . Manchester notes that Air Force 1 and the others touched down shortly after 11 a.m.
 JFK and Jackie went immediately to retire for the night in Suite 850 . LBJ entertained guests in the hotel’s Will Rogers Suite .
 It's difficult to imagine how LBJ slipped away from Fort Worth, drove to Dallas, showed up while guests were still at the Murchison estate, and returned to Fort Worth . LBJ was the president of Texas and Texas .
 Dallas newspapers noted he was out late in the evening dining with actress Joan Crawford at a wellknown Dallas dinner nightclub . Nixon and Crawford were both visible guests at the Pepsi-Cola convention .
 Madeleine Brown may well have been an LBJ mistress, but her claim that LBJ was the father of her son was called into question . Her son Stephen failed to appear in court because he failed to turn up in court .
 Madeleine also did permanent damage to her own reputation when she was convicted of fraud in 1988 for forging the will of a relative, only to have the conviction reversed on appeal in 1994 because of a procedural error . Her conviction was reversed in 1994 due to procedural error, but she was
 It is highly possible LBJ had some advanced warning that a plot to assassinate JFK was in the works . It is also possible some wealthy Texans on the radical right might have provided funds to make sure LBJ would be president sooner rather than later .
 The idea of a grand cabal meeting for a celebratory preassassination party at the home of a wealthy Texas oil family on the eve of the JFK assassination lacks solid documentary proof and strains credibility . Yet, the idea of the meeting of a . wealthy oil family in Texas lacks solid
 In November 1963, LBJ’s political future was threatened by a scandal involving a Senate page . Bobby Baker was the secretary to Lyndon Johnson when he was Senate Majority Leader . The scandal involved Baker and LBJ .
 After LBJ became vice president, Baker continued as his personal secretary and close private advisor . Baker continued to serve as LBJ's personal secretary until he was vice president .
 Baker was deriving an annual gross income of $3. million at a time when his compensation from the Senate was under twenty thousand dollars a year . The crux of the Bobby Baker scandal involved a vending machine company, Serve-U Corporation, from which Baker was .
 Serve-U Corporation had links to Texas oil millionaire Clint Murchison, as well as mobsters Sam Giancana and Meyer Lansky . The company had ties to mobster Sam GianCana and mobster Meyer Lanski .
 The company derived most of its earnings by placing vending machines in aerospace companies dependent upon the government for contract work .
 The "Quorum Club" is a hostess affair Bobby Baker helped create . Baker was involved in the scandal involving what was known in Washington as the “Quorum club’s” hostess .
 The Quorum Club was run out of the Carroll Arms Hotel near the Senate Office buildings on Capitol Hill . The club is now owned by the President of the United States .
 The ‘Q Club’ operated to provide call girls to prominent lobbyists and influential members of Congress . Baker positioned centrally, ready to advance his career politically and financially by trading on sex and power .
 The Bobby Baker scandal broke wide open with a Life magazine cover story published on November 8, 1963, only three weeks before JFK was killed . The scandal was published in Life magazine's Life Magazine cover story .
 Life featured a front-page photograph of Bobby Baker in a costume with his mask lifted to show his laughing face at an unspecified Washington masquerade party . That issue of Life magazine featured a photograph of Baker in an unspecified costume .
 The second page of the article featured a full-page photograph of a smiling LBJ with his arms around the shoulder of Bobby Baker . The photo was taken on the second page .
 The photograph was taken in the office of Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield . Mansfield was shown in the part of the photograph that continued past the magazine fold to adjoin the photo .
 Baker was half owner of the Carousel motel and nightclub in Ocean City, Maryland . Baker also had interests in a law firm, a travel agency, an insurance agency, and a Howard Johnson motel .
 Baker's wife, Dorothy, and five children ages ten to one, with the youngest named Lyndon Baines Johnson after the thenSenate majority leader, moved into the $124,500 Washington home a short walk from where LBJ lived .
 Life exposé escalated in seriousness when Life's associate and Pulitzer Prizewinning journalist William Lambert sought out George P Hunt, the magazine’s managing editor, to explain that the nine-person investigative team had expanded the inquiry to look into how LBJ acquired his fortune .
 Lambert asked for permission to expand the investigative team to pour over LBJ’s entire financial picture . Lambert wants to expand his team to look at LBJ's entire financial history .
 Lambert wanted to know how LBJ had managed to accumulate millions in personal net worth when he had been on the public payroll ever since he got out of college . Lambert: LBJ's net worth is estimated at $1 billion .
 Life had assigned a nine-member team to investigate Bobby Baker . The article disclosed that Life magazine had assigned nine members to investigate Baker .
 Life magazine made clear that everything about Bobby Baker led back to Lyndon Johnson . Life magazine said everything about Baker led to LBJ . Baker was a prominent critic of the president .
 Robert A Caro, the Pulitzer Prize-winning biographer of LBJ, noted that following the publication of this second article, Wheeler and Lambert scheduled a meeting with Hunt .
 The Bobby Baker scandal and the political future of LBJ were very much at the center of attention . The two Life magazine articles appeared as JFK was preparing to leave for Texas .
 John Kennedy knew Lambert well enough from the McClellan hearings to appreciate that Lambert was like a bulldog, in that he was loathe to let go of a story once he sank his teeth into it .
 Lambert was at the pinnacle of his career, able to leverage the magazine’s immense popularity and prestige to provide his investigative journalism with a stage nearly unequalled in the world of publishing at the time .
 Lambert was on track to use the same dogged investigative research methods he had used in Portland, Oregon, to put the organized crime penetration of the Teamsters Union onto front pages of newspapers across the nation . Now, with the increasing backing of the magazine’s managing editor, Lambert was
 Life magazine's Bobby Baker was a well-connected, powerful, and wealthy Bobby Baker . Life magazine was a popular magazine in the 1930s and '60s . The magazine was used to help bring down the vice president of the U.S.
 The first suspect would have to be the president’s brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy is the president's brother and the attorney general .
 Bobby Kennedy’s enmity for LBJ was impossible to overestimate . From the Los Angeles Democratic National Convention in 1960 where Jack beat out Lyndon for the presidential nomination, to the end of his life, Bobby Kennedy had a bitter rivalry with LBJ .
 Elkins to bring down Dave Beck and go after Jimmy Hoffa was a Casual word or two in a coffee shop in Portland, Oregon . Elkins: "I'm not afraid to go after Dave Beck. I'm embarrassed to say that I'm not sure if I'm going to
 Lambert and Turner wrote for the Oregonian, and Senate crime hearings that springboarded Jack to national status . That led to hundreds of hours of wiretaps, a Pulitzer-Prize series of stories that led to national acclaim for Jack .
 Elkins game on his own, dropping comments in casual with the goal of putting Lambert on the trail of Baker . Elkins drops comments on Twitter with the help of Lambert . Baker's comments put Lambert in the hunt for Baker .
 RFK was ready to spoon feed leads to Lambert, acting as a “deep throat” source willing to hand over information from within the Justice Department and FBI . RFK calculated the story would necessarily lead to LBJ’s downfall .
 What worried Robert Kennedy was that Jack might have settled to keep LBJ on the ticket a second time . The Kennedy family was worried that a scorned LBJ would most certainly cause a political uproar .
 Robert Kennedy figured that the LBJ lion’s roar would be a lot tamer with the Bobby Baker thorn placed painfully in the lion's paw . Robert Kennedy thought that Bobby Baker's thorn would be much tamer .
 LBJ was aware after the first article was published, Life magazine was gunning for him . LBJ knew he was going to be targeted by Life magazine after the article .
 LBJ’s political instincts demanded he protect himself. Rather than sit idly by waiting for the disclosures to ruin his political career, LBJ decided to protect himself . LBJ: "Rather than sitting idly on the sidelines, he chose to take his own life."
 Kennedy administration took pains to keep from the public the assassination plots that had been stymied in Chicago and Tampa, Florida . LBJ was aware the talk of assassinating Kennedy was in the air in 1963 .
 Lady Bird Johnson can be clearly seen in the open car following JFK’s limo . The famous photograph was taken by Associated Press photographer Altgens .
 Many observers have suspected LBJ knew the motorcade was entering the pre-determined kill zone . LBJ ducked down as his car turned the comer in order to stay out of the crossfire .
 Robert Caro reported in his 2012 book, The Passage of Power, that JFK convened the first major planning session for the 1964 campaign in the Cabinet Room at the White House in 1963 . JFK DECIDES TO DUMP LBJ . Caro: JFK DECIDE TO Dump LBJ
 Not invited was Vice President Lyndon Baines Johnson or any member of his staff . President Lyndon Johnson was not invited to the event .
 The meeting also included intense speculation over whether LBJ would be on the ticket . The primary reason he was chosen in 1960 was that he would be influential in winning southern states and Texas .
 Even with LBJ on the ticket in 1960, Jack Kennedy won Texas by fewer than fortyeight thousand votes of the approximately 1. million votes cast . Kennedy won the state in 1960 .
 Arthur Schlesinger Jr. dismissed the notion that dumping LBJ was seriously considered at the campaign strategy meeting . Schlesingers Jr. said he was not serious enough to dump LBJ at the time .
 Kennedy knew and understood Johnson’s moodiness in the Vice-Presidency, but he considered him able and loyal .
 Evelyn Lincoln said she wrote down word-for-word what Jack said about LBJ in her diary . She used those notes when writing her 1968 book, Kennedy and Johnson . He wrote that in his conversation with her, she repeated the conversation .
 Diem decision weighed heavily in JFK’s decision to withdraw from Vietnam, given his conclusion that the nation was in such internal turmoil there could be no confidence the people in South Vietnam were sufficiently motivated to fight for and win their own freedom .
 JFK was concerned that when Life magazine got finished investigating and reporting on LBJ, a large segment of the voting public would now see LBJ to be nothing more than a corrupt politician who had enriched himself at public expense .
 Kennedy had not yet resolved how best to explain these decisions to voters, so not to give impetus to a Goldwater candidacy from the conservative right . Kennedy's decision to run for the presidency in 1964 was a major mistake .
 CIA documents confirm for the first time that a professional assassin was apprehended in Dallas on November 23, 1963 . The documents were released in response to a 1976 Freedom of Information Act request . The CIA released documents 632—796 confirming for first time the assassin was captured .
 Michel Mertz is a world-renowned Corsican hit man with a long history as an accomplished assassin . He has ties to the French Connection drug trade stretching from Southeast Asia to Marseilles, France .
 In January he received mail from a dentist named Alderman living at 5803 Birmingham, Houston, Texas, Texas . In January, Alderman wrote to the dentist in Houston .
 "They would like a check of our files with indications of what may have been passed on to the French," says the BBC .
 The obvious assumption would be that Jean Souetre should have been placed at the top of the list of suspects in the JFK assassination . The obvious assumptions would be made about the suspect . The presumption is that he should be placed on the list .
 If not a shooter, the possibility remains this Corsican assassin was in Dallas to observe, oversee, or perhaps even to direct and supervise the shooters hoping to catch JFK in a cross fire .
 The document suggests the “Mr Papich” mentioned in the document may have been a CIA asset working in the legal attaché’s office as a surveillance operator, or simply as a liaison for the United States embassy .
 The OAS, or Organization de l’Armée Secrétée, was a right-wing extremist group opposed to French President Charles de Gaulle . The group engaged in acts of terrorism and assassination and engaged in terrorism .
 O’Leary and Seymour argued that finding the CIA document implicated the OAS as one of its members, Jean Rene Souetre, was in Dallas the day JFK was assassinated, only to be captured and deported by U.S. authorities .
 The CIA never shared the information with the Warren Commission, the CIA never revealed it to the public . The Warren Commission never revealed the information to the CIA .
 Mary Ferrell, the renowned archivist of assassination material, found the CIA document in early 1977 . Ferrell described it as one of the poorest documents she had encountered, virtually looking like a copy of a carbon copy .
 Hunt found independent documentation that the FBI knew Roux was visiting acquaintances in Fort Worth on November 22, 1963, and left the U.S. on December 6, 1963 . Roux left the United States at Laredo, Texas, at the end of the year .
 Michel Roux had spent three years in the French Army in Algeria before deserting . Roux spent the rest of his life in Algeria . He spent the last three years of his three-year career in the army .
 Dentist Lawrence Alderson says FBI followed him for several weeks after JFK assassination . Alderson insists FBI began following him immediately after the assassination and followed him .
 Finally, the FBI asked for an interview to discuss his relationship with Jean Souetre . The FBI has asked for the interview to talk about the FBI's relationship with him .
 Alderson was a first lieutenant in the United States Army stationed in France . He met Souetre as a captain in the French Air Force . Alderson told the FBI that he was in the U.S. Army in France when he met the man .
 Alderson told Hurt the FBI said agents “had traced Souetre to Dallas a day before the assassination and then lost him,” adding the FBI was certain either either either JFK killed JFK or knew who had done it .
 Souetre argued that Mertz was in the United States at the time of the Kennedy assassination . Souete argued that it was Mertertz, using Souetrre’s name, who was in U.S. at time of assassination .
 Souetre claimed the reason Mertz was let go and deported from the United States was because he worked at the same time both for the Marseille heroin crime syndicate and for SDECE, French intelligence service . MERTz was apprehended in Dallas, Texas .
 Souetre explained that at that time, the United States Mafia, and particularly crime bosses Carlos Marcello, Sam Giancana, and Santo Trafficante, all of whom ran vast heroin distribution networks, got their product from Antoine Guerini .
 The murder of Diem in the coup d’état staged by General Minh with the help and encouragement of the CIA was widely attributed to a decision made by JFK . JFK had given explicit orders that Diem was not to be killed, even though JFK had made explicit orders
 Nhu imported opium into Vietnam from the Laotian poppy fields with assistance from Air Laos Commerciale, a small charter airline managed by Indochina’s Corsican gangster Bonaventure ‘Rock’ Francisci . Air Laos commerciale was managed by Corsican
 Conein, by the way, was widely reported to have carried forty-two thousand dollars in cash as a means of encouragement for the South Vietnamese generals planning the Diem overthrow . The Diem regime was overthrown by Diem's regime .
 McCoy noted there is a natural attraction between intelligence agencies and criminal syndicates . McCoy noted that there is an important attraction between the two organizations .
 Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, and the U.S. military industrial complex all had the motive to see JFK forcibly removed from office, even if that meant that he was assassinated .
 Organized crime and the CIA had their own motives for seeing JFK dead . The CIA, organized crime, and organized crime were also involved in JFK's killing .
 This equation had the makings of a good coup d’état, aimed at putting LBJ in office, escalating the Vietnam War, and ramping up the Southeast Asian heroin trade . This is the result of a successful coup d'état .
 LBJ and Richard Nixon would permanently put an end to the career of a hated rival who already had bettered both of them . LBJ: "I'm glad to have a friend who helped me get the job done"
 Organized crime stood to make billions in operating the French Connection drug trade with impunity . The expectation was that Robert Kennedy would back off the Justice Department’s war on organized crime the moment Jack Kennedy was no longer in the White House .
 The military industrial complex stood to make billions producing the new generation of weapons required to fight a prolonged ground war in Vietnam . General generals giving out contracts prepared for their industry homes in retirement .
 LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex lacked the operational capabilities to pull off a covert plan as audacious as a coup d’état effected by assassinating the president .
 What LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex lacked in operational capabilities, the CIA and organized crime made it up for in spades . The CIA, organized crime and the CIA made up for what LBJ lacked in .
 The CIA and organized crime could look to the politicians and the military industrial complex for funds to pull off the operation . Organized crime could also look to politicians for funds .
 LBJ and Richard Nixon had never pulled off an operation, but when it came to funding a political campaign, both were experts . Nixon and LBJ were experts at funding campaigns, but they were experts in politics .
 CIA and organized crime operatives had successfully worked together before and could be counted upon to do so again . What putting LBJ in the White House before he left Dallas required was the implementation of a complex criminal plot by a top team .
 E Howard Hunt put LBJ at the top of his deathbed organizational chart for the JFK assassination . But that did not mean LBJ wrote the operational plan for the covert action .
 The CIA mobilized Cuban exiles who had worked with the CIA since the Bay of Pigs was first being planned under the Eisenhower administration . To put the organizational plan of the coup d’état together, the CIA mobilized the exiles .
 Michel Mertz was walking the streets of Dallas the day JFK was murdered . That a trained assassin such as Michel was on the streets the day of JFK's murder can hardly be taken as coincidental .
 The coordination of a complicated crossfire required expert management . Even if Mertz pulled no triggers that day, the coordination of the crossfire had to be masterful .
 Mertz had a curriculum vitae that stretched back to his days picking off Nazis for the French Resistance . He was a French Resistance member who picked off the Nazis in the 1940s .
 E Howard Hunt in his deathbed confession so humbly characterized his own role in the JFK assassination . LBJ, the military industrial complex, and Richard Nixon were not necessarily relegated to the role of “benchwarmer” Hunt said .
 Nixon was in Dallas when JFK was killed, meeting with his financial ties to industry and his campaign financiers based in Texas . Nixon met with industry and Texas-based donors on the day of the assassination .
 In Dallas, Nixon reconnected with Howard Hughes, the eccentric multimillionaire . Hughes' fortune traced back to the Texas and the Houston Tool Company . Nixon: "It's a good time for the Texas"
 In 1957, Howard Hughes lent Donald Nixon, Richard’s brother, some two hundred thousand dollars to bail out his failed hamburger ‘drive-in’ joint in Whittier, California .
 Bobby Baker had extensive tentacles into Texas, too, having finagled along with LBJ the lucrative award of the F-111 fighter plane to General Dynamics . General Dynamics, a company headquartered between Dallas and Fort Worth, won the plane .
 Before he left Texas on November 22, 1963, Nixon knew that those who financed his presidential run in 1960 would finance him again, as soon as the time was right . Nixon left Texas in November 1963, leaving Texas .
 Even if LBJ was not the ‘mastermind’ of the JFK assassination, the point of the coup d’état was to put LBJ in office . The point was to get LBJ into office, even if he wasn't the "mastermind" of
 The campaign by investigative journalists like William Lambert and Life magazine to expose the rampant corruption at the core of Bobby Baker and LBJ’s politics eased off as soon as JFK died . LBJ took the oath of office from longtime friend and judge Sarah T Hughes aboard Air Force One .
 LBJ could stop worrying that JFK might replace him and start worrying about picking his own 1964 vice presidential running mate . November 22, 1963, marks the end of LBJ's presidency . LBJ was running for president in 1964 .
 Congressman Albert Thomas gave LBJ the wink of the eye as he lowered his right hand from just having taken the oath of office . Though his head was turned from the camera, LBJ did not miss the wink .
 LBJ perfected the coup d’état by being sworn in as president before Air Force One lifted off to return to Washington . With a grieving Jackie still at his side, LBJ was sworn in by LBJ .
 LBJ signaled to the Pentagon there was no need to worry about the withdrawal of one thousand U.S. military advisors . From his first Vietnam War planning session as president even before JFK’s body was placed to rest at Arlington Cemetery, LBJ had signaled to Pentagon .
 LBJ likely to win a landslide victory in 1964 as the successor to a martyred president, the military industrial complex felt comfortable waiting until 1965 before ramping up the Vietnam War to provide the hundreds of thousands of troops needed to beat the North Vietnamese .
 Everything was fine, as long as the nation concluded Lee Harvey Oswald as the lone-gun nutcase nutcase assassin had acted alone . The nation concluded Oswald as a lone gun-mad assassin .
 The CIA interpreted ‘plausible deniability’ as a green light to assassinate local leaders, overthrow governments, and lie to cover up any trace of accountability . “A cover-up is like a magic trick.” —James W Douglass, JFK and the Un
 JFK had an uncanny ability to cause almost irrational anger and hatred in very powerful men that should never have been enemies in the first place . Once you understand how it was accomplished, you can never be fooled by it again, says Lisa Pease .
 The Kennedy family lived an outrageous lifestyle of social privilege despite the lack of a storied pedigree . The family of the Kennedy family is known for their outrageous lifestyle .
 Joseph Kennedy made a fortune in a series of fast and fortunate deals that years later would be outlawed . Family patriarch Joseph P Kennedy made fortune in series of deals that were later outlawed . Kennedy died at the age of 92 at the time of his death .
 President Roosevelt appointed Joseph Kennedy to be the first head of the Securities and Exchange Commission . Kennedy was arrested for stock fraud, but was not charged with it . Roosevelt appointed Kennedy to head the SEC .
 Joseph Kennedy became incapacitated after becoming incapacitated . The patriarch’s ability to keep his sons out of trouble came to an end when he was incapacitated.
 Even Johnny Roselli, the mobster who introduced Joseph Kennedy to Hollywood, ultimately turned on the brothers . The mobster helped John and Robert Kennedy try to eliminate Castro .
 Declaring war on organized crime and on the CIA at the same time had disastrous repercussions, especially because JFK failed to achieve his objectives in each .
 Robert F Kennedy broke the back of organized crime in the United States . Mobsters would have had a much harder time planning revenge after Kennedy's assassination .
 Had JFK closed down the CIA and fired all its employees, embittered operatives would have had a much more difficult time undertaking an assassination plot . Embittered intelligence operatives would probably have a much harder time undertaking a plot .
 Organized crime felt betrayed, believing JFK owed his 1960 presidential victory to fraudulent votes delivered in Chicago in part by the Giancana organization . Organized Crime felt betrayed by JFK's 1960 presidential win over fraudulent votes .
 The CIA felt the Bay of Pigs invasion would have succeeded if only JFK had committed the U.S. military to save the Cuban exiles being slaughtered on the beach . The CIA said JFK had resolved to commit the United States military to protect the exiles .
 The unfortunate truth is that by leaving in place dangerous mobsters who felt betrayed and an ever-treacherous CIA that felt endangered, JFK left relatively undamaged the two enemies most capable of developing and funding an operational plan to bring about his demise . JFK left in place the two
 Organized crime and the CIA have worked together since the Guatemala coup d’état in the 1950s . Neither would be blamed for the president's assassination for which neither would be responsible .
 Allen Dulles was a key member of a family that had helped world leaders achieve prominence since before Hitler . The patina of Kennedy charm ran thin for men such as Dulles, who had helped .
 LBJ, Richard Nixon, Allen Dulles, and the military industrial complex could provide the financial support for a CIA/mob plan . While not capable of playing operational roles in the JFK assassination, each of these enemies could provide financial support .
 Each had access to Texas oil millionaires and other financiers on the political right willing to provide the funds needed to carry out such an operation . The operation was carried out with the help of Texas oil billionaires and Texas politicians .
 LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex wanted to send troops to Vietnam . LBJ and Richard Nixon wanted to go to Vietnam, but didn't want to send them .
 The day JFK removed Allen Dulles from directing the CIA was the day JFK signed his death warrant . JFK removed Dulles as director of the CIA from the CIA . Dulles had been in charge for more than 30 years .
 Even removed from the CIA, Dulles was more than capable of organizing the coup d’état from behind the scenes . The coup d'état is where he was truly most comfortable .
 LBJ appointed Allen Dulles to the Warren Commission . It should come as no surprise that LBJ picked Dulles for the commission . Dulles was appointed by LBJ to serve as secretary of state of state .
 The Warren Commission assigned all the blame for JFK’s assassination to Lee Harvey Oswald, the operative chosen by the CIA to play the role of patsy . This completed the circle, positioning Dulles so he could make sure the Warren Commission assigning the blame .
 Allen Dulles had a deep motive to see JFK killed that stemmed not simply from revenge, but more importantly from ideology . Dulles' motive to kill JFK was not simply revenge, it was ideology, but revenge .
 Allen Dulles came to hate everything JFK represented, as did Richard Nixon . Dulles and Nixon both hated JFK, but Dulles did not hate everything .
 Dulles and Nixon were Cold War warriors who embraced the idea the U.S. needed to maintain a large, well-funded, clandestine intelligence agency . The agency is capable of covert operations abroad to ensure our freedom at home .
 The CIA was formed at the end of World War II . They agreed that this agency needed the authority to plan invasions of foreign countries, launch coups d’etat and assassinate foreign leaders .
 The CIA had to lie to the American public that funded it. Because the missions were covert, the CIA must have lied to the U.S. public .
 Eisenhower appointed John Foster Dulles secretary of state and Allen Dulles CIA director . Eisenhower had turned over the key components of U.S. foreign policy to a team of brothers with a sordid history .
 The Dulles brothers were presented to the nation as loyal and patriotic Americans, with the compliant press never probing the key role the Dulles family played in assisting Hitler to come to power .
 The Dulles family continued to make sure Nazi intelligence assets were employed by the U.S. and Western Europe . Instead of being prosecuted as war criminals after the war, they continued to work for the United States and Western European allies .
 In this clandestine history of the United States, the Bush family also rose to prominence . The Bush family is one of the most prominent figures in American history .
 Psychologist E Martin Schotz interpreted Isaac Don Levine’s 1959 book, Mind of an Assassin, which analyzed the motivates of Communist Ramon Mercader for assassinating Marxist revolutionary Leon Trotsky . Mercader was assassinated by the Communist Communist Party .
 Schotz suggested that in Levine’s book, Kennedy could be substituted for Trotsky and Dulles could be replaced for Mercader . Schotze suggested that Kennedy could replace Trotsky and Mercader in Levine's book .
 The American power is an amalgam of a temporal state and a political religion . The U.S. power is a state of temporal and political religion, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is in the nature of a military order in which the government authorities and the anti-communist party priesthood are one supreme source of faith and strength . The government and anti-Communist party priests are a "supreme source" of faith .
 Bush and the Dulles brothers were among a small group of Americans working hard to finance Hitler’s rise to power in Germany . Bush and Dulles were among those who helped finance Hitler's rise in power .
 Bush traces back to these investment banking firms founded in the 1920s, and specifically to the Harriman family . Bush traced back to the family's investment banking firm, which was founded in 1925 .
 On August 6, 1921, Prescott Bush married George Herbert Walker’s daughter, Dorothy Walker . This was convenient because Bush married Walker's father-in-law, who was Bush's father in-law .
 George W Bush and his son, President George W. Bush, date back to a prominent Wall Street investment firm . The patriarchs of the family worked together at the firm .
 Allen Dulles spent five years in the U.S. diplomatic corps before earning a law degree from George Washington Law School in 1926 . Dulles, however, earned his law degree in 1926 after serving in diplomatic service .
 Allen then joined Sullivan & Cromwell where his older brother was already a partner . Allen joined Sullivan and Cromwell from his brother's law firm .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt ordered Union Bank closed after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and the subsequent declaration of war by Nazi Germany on the U.S. on the United States . Union Bank was closed by Roosevelt .
 Zyklon-B gas was the gas used to kill Jews in concentration camps . It was made by German company Ers. Farben during World War II . The gas was used in the concentration camps by the Nazis .
 Allen Dulles rescued out of prison camp Nazi intelligence director Reinhard Gehlen in 1945 . OSS founder and director General William Donovan rescued Gehlen from prison camp .
 Gehlen had been responsible for Nazi military intelligence on the Eastern Front, including the Soviet Union . Under Hitler, Gehlen was responsible for German military intelligence . Gehlen died in 1945 at the hands of the Nazis .
 Gehlen fit perfectly into the plan Dulles had developed to decline prosecuting Nazi intelligence assets so they could be employed by the U.S. Gehlen was a perfect fit for Dulles' plan to decline prosecution of Nazi assets .
 Dulles wanted Gehlen and the Nazis to advise the newly forming CIA and to be re-employed as the backbone around which an anti-Soviet, anti-Communist intelligence network could be formed to work undercover throughout Eastern Europe .
 Gehlen and six of his aides were flown to Washington by Eisenhower’s chief of staff, Gen. Gen. Eisenhower . DiEugenio reported that by September 1945, Gehlen had been flown to D.C.
 Gehlen’s Nazi intelligence organization was transferred under his control to work in Eastern Europe until Germany was reorganized . As a result of high-level discussions in Washington, Gehlen was able to transfer his organization .
 In 1949 Gehlen signed a contract to work for the CIA for five million dollars a year . Gehlen was paid $5 million a year by the CIA . In the 1950s Gehlen had a contract with the CIA worth $10 million .
 Gehlen was appointed advisor to the German chancellor on intelligence in 1950 . Gehlen worked for the High Commissioner of Germany John McCloy of the 1950s .
 Allen Dulles and John McCloy both ended up being appointed to the Warren Commission . Note also that both Dulles, McCloy and Dulles were appointed .
 The Guatemalan plots of 1954 and 1957 set a model for the Bay of Pigs invasion and JFK assassination . The plots were two of a series of CIA actions aimed at dominating resources in the Third World for United States business interests .
 President Eisenhower authorized Operation AJAX to overthrow Prime Minister Mohammad Mossadegh in Iran in 1953 . Operation AAX overthrew Mossadeigh after he moved to nationalize Iranian oil interests . Eisenhower authorized the operation to overthrow Mossadgh .
 In a coup d’état staged by the CIA, Mossadegh was deposed, the oil interests were returned to the disposal of the U.S. and British petroleum corporations . The Shah was returned to power in Iran in the 1970s .
 The threat of Communism drew CIA attention and intervention from 1957 through JFK’s thousand days in office . The CIA was finally successful in engineering a coup in 1965 . Still, nothing better illustrates the chasm between the way the Dulles brothers saw the postwar world .
 Kennedy saw the potential of working with Sukarno to position him in a leadership position among the “non-aligned nations” of the Third World . Kennedy saw a potential leader in the non-aligned world .
 In 1965 the CIA engineered another coup and placed President Sukarno under house arrest . The CIA engineered a coup in 1965 to oust Sukarna from power .
 Estimates are that as many as five hundred thousand Indonesians were killed in the massacre . The vast majority of those killed were Muslim and many of those slaughtered were Christian .
 DiEugenio argued that one of JFK’s largest splits within the Eastern Establishment was that JFK was for Third World nationalism . DiEugeneio argues that JFK's ties to the Third World were that he opposed Third World nationalistism .
 JFK’s father, Joseph P Kennedy, the patriarch of the Kennedy clan, was never accepted by the largely Catholic and Jewish eastern mob . As noted in chapter 5, JFK's father was not accepted by Eastern mob .
 Joseph P Kennedy’s pacifism as U.S. ambassador to Great Britain in the years prior to the start of World War II put him at odds with United States financial interests supporting the Nazis as enemies of Soviet Communists .
 JFK was moving away from a confrontational model of how he wanted to wage the continuing Cold War . JFK's first term progressed, moving from confrontational to non-confrontational .
 He learned in the Bay of Pigs not to trust the CIA and the military industrial complex, he says . He learned to distrust the CIA in the 'Bay of Pigs'
 Kennedy refused to use the United States military in both Laos and Vietnam . Kennedy rejected the Eisenhower-era notion of the ‘domino’ theory that a victory for the Communists in any Third World country would inevitably spread Communism .
 Kennedy understood that no country could experience freedom unless the people of that country were willing to fight for themselves . Kennedy understood no country can experience freedom without the people being willing to do so .
 He understood that Communism in Laos or Vietnam would be different than Communism in China, as Communism in . China was different from Communism in Russia, he said . He also understood that . Communism in Vietnam was different .
 Even if all these nations were Communist, nationalism in each country would still be the dominant characteristic . nationalism is still a dominant characteristic in each of the nations .
 JFK could deal with Sukarno as a Third World nationalist seeking to free itself from the shackles of European colonialism . JFK could also deal with the dictator as a third World nationalist .
 JFK’s nemesis, Allen Dulles, could only see Communism in terms of black and white . Dulles was JFK's nemesis. Dulles' nemesis: "I’m not sure what I’ve done since I was a Communist. I�
 Dulles and those of his era were comfortable building the CIA around Nazis like Reinhard Gehlen . Eisenhower and Nixon were comfortable with Gehlen's Nazis . Gehlen was a Nazi collaborator .
 JFK seriously questioned whether the U.S. needed the CIA at all . JFK, in sharp contrast, seriously questioned if the CIA needed to exist . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 JFK was distrustful of the CIA as he was of the military industrial complex in its totality . The CIA was a major ally of the U.S. in the Cold War, but JFK was wary of covert action .
 In foreign policy, LBJ made a natural Cold War warrior, anxious to exert American might and will into the Third World . LBJ's determination to roll back Communism wherever it popped up, he said .
 When you have them by the private parts, their hearts and minds will follow, LJB liked to say . LJB said: "When you have . them by . their private parts ... they will follow"
 This quotation would have made JFK uncomfortable, both for its statement of force and for its denial of the principle that no people can be free unless that people exerts a right to self-determination, an extension of statehood politics JFK understood as an essential condition of freedom . The quotation would
 Bush was in the CIA decades before he became CIA director under the presidency of Gerald R Ford in 1976 . Bush was CIA director in the 1970s under Ford's administration .
 George W. Bush was in Dallas on November 22, 1963, despite his claims to the contrary . Bush was there in Dallas, Texas, despite claims that he was not in Dallas .
 George Bush, president of Zapata Off-Shore Co., was speaking for the American Association of Oilwell Drilling contractors on November 21, 1963, at the Sheraton-Dallas Hotel .
 Spokespersons for Bush suggested the reference might be to a different George Bush . Spokesmen for the former president suggested that Bush might be a different Bush .
 Vice President Bush denied any involvement with the CIA before President Ford named him CIA Director in 1975 . Hart replied that Vice President George W. Bush denied that he had any involvement in the CIA .
 FBI Special Agent Graham Kitchel wrote a memo to the FBI’s Houston bureau, dated November 22, 1963, the day of the assassination . Kitchel was a Houston FBI agent who worked for the FBI in the late 1960s .
 Tyler is a small town about one hundred miles to the southeast of Dallas . Tyler is one of a few hundred miles from Dallas, Texas .
 Others have claimed Bush made the call to Kitchel to establish an alibi . Others have said the Dallas Morning News claimed Bush would be at the Sheraton-Dallas on Thursday night, November 21, 1963 .
 Russ Baker, author of the 2009 book, Family of Secrets, argued the real point of the call was “to establish for the record, if anyone asked, that Poppy Bush was not in Dallas when Kennedy was shot.”
 By telling the FBI in a phone call that he was planning to go there, he created a misleading paper trail . The paper trail suggests that his stay in Dallas was many hours after the assassination, rather than the night before .
 Bush has been vague about where he was when he first learned JFK had been shot . The moment is a moment virtually every American old enough to remember has fixed distinctly in their mind .
 Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon both made the Vietnam War a centerpiece of their presidential administrations . The Vietnam War lasted until the fall of Saigon on April 30, 1975 .
 The Vietnam War was not a war the U.S. could win, if fought the way the military industrial complex wanted the war to be fought . The war was fought in the way it was fought by the military .
 On August 2, 1990, some one hundred thousand Iraqi troops invaded Kuwait, starting what became known as the Gulf War . The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait was the first Gulf War of its kind .
 The crisis in the Persian Gulf offers a rare opportunity to move toward an historic period of cooperation . The crisis is as grave as it is, but it also offers a chance for cooperation, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 An era in which nations of the world, East and West, North and South, can prosper and live in harmony . An era of harmony in which the world can prosper, North, South and East can prosper .
 A hundred generations have searched for this elusive path to peace, while a thousand wars raged across the span of human endeavor . A thousand wars have raged across a thousand generations of human endeavour .
 Today that new world is struggling to be born, a world quite different from the one we’ve known . The new world was born in a new world, and it's struggling to cope with it .
 A world in which nations recognize the shared responsibility for freedom and justice is a shared responsibility . A world of nations must recognize the responsibility of freedom, justice, says President Obama . The U.S. has been accused of war crimes in the past .
 Leaders from Europe, the Gulf, and around the world understand that how we manage this crisis today could shape the future for generations to come, says President Obama . He and other leaders from Europe and the Gulf understand that .
 George W Bush and his son have followed in the footsteps of LBJ and Richard Nixon .
 Millions of Americans who were politically aware when JFK was assassinated mark that day as a turning point in the history of this nation . The day of JFK's assassination was a 'turn point' in the nation's history .
 The protests of the Vietnam War and the resistance to the draft radicalized a generation of Americans . The protests were the result of the protests of a generation .
 Baby Boomers raised in the Eisenhower era came of age during the presidencies of LBJ and Nixon . The baby Boomers were raised during the Eisenhower-era .
 Much that has transpired since World War II needs to be written in a secret history of the U.S. history . With Nixon, Watergate, and the subsequent disclosures of the Church Committee, we now see that much that has occurred since WWII needs a secret .
 The Taylor Committee Investigation of the Bay of Pigs was established by JFK under the direction of Gen. Gen. John Taylor . In a recently released classified evaluation of the Taylor Committee, JFK established the CIA to investigate the attack .
 Maxwell Taylor, CIA historian Jack B Pfeiffer was particularly critical of CIA Director Allen Dulles . Maxwell Taylor was critical of Dulles' CIA Director .
 Pfeiffer noted in blunt language after Dulles appeared before the Taylor Committee, that he was “headed for the elephants’ burial ground,” thanks to Robert Kennedy’s denigration of him and the CIA, and due in no small part to the �
 The 1954 CIA-engineered coup d’état in Guatemala was one of the most successful coups d'état ever staged in Guatemala .
 The Dulles brothers concocted a scheme where the Schroeder Banking Corporation financed United Fruit to take control of the International Railways of Central America . United Fruit relied upon most of the existing railroad tracks in the region to ship Guatemalan bananas to market in the U.S.
 The president of the Schroeder bank remained a member of the IRCA board through 1954 . The bank president remained a board member until 1954 .
 Clay Shaw, also known as Clay Bertrand, was a member of the boards of both Permindex and CentroMondiale Commercial . New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison entered into his JFK assassination investigation when he established that Clay Shaw was involved .
 Clay Shaw was head of the International Trade Mart in New Orleans . coincidentally, the speech JFK never gave was at a luncheon scheduled to be held at the Dallas Trade Mart . The speech was at the luncheon at the New Orleans Trade Mart.
 Permindex was used by the CIA to shuffle funds covertly to fund assassinations . Allegations were published in a newspaper in Rome, Paese Sera, on April 23, 1961, .
 An authentic declassified CIA document verifies that Mertz had been in Dallas on November 22, 1963, and that he was apprehended and deported by United States authorities . All this may seem farfetched .
 DiEugenio argued one of Kennedy’s largest splits with the Eastern Establishment was that he was a proponent of Third Word nationalism . Kennedy was a member of the Third Word nationalist movement, DiEgenio argued .
 Eugenio argues that Clay Shaw’s two agencies, the International Trade Mart and its sister organization, International House, were early advocates of globalism . This, he argued, is not the case of Clay Shaw, who was an advocate of globalistism .
 International House was founded by the Rockefeller Foundation and spread worldwide . International House is based in New York City, New York .
 David Rockefeller III served as trustees of International House . David served as chairman of the executive committee . William Rockefeller III also served as trustee of the house .
 John McCloy, formally president of the World Bank, was chairman of the board of International House in the 1950s and 1960s . McCloy was also chairman of board of the International House .
 John McCloy, along with Allen Dulles, served on the Warren Commission . Once again, recall that McCloy and Dulles were both on the commission .
 DiEugenio believed Clay Shaw was very close to cracking the JFK assassination case wide open . Garrison’s prosecution of Clay Shaw is beyond the scope of this book .
 When the answer turns out to be “all of the above,” it turns from identification of the players to political context in which these players worked together .
 It's not enough to conclude the operational plot to assassinate JFK involved the CIA working in concert with organized crime . The CIA and organized crime were involved in the assassination of JFK, JFK's widow says .
 LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex all had motives for seeing a coup d’état carried out in the U.S. So, too, it is important but not sufficient to note LBJ and Richard Nixon had motives .
 "What is important is that all these actors shared a common belief in clandestine government operations," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In the postwar world, the Dulles brothers exemplified the intermixture of law, investment banking, foreign policy, and covert intelligence operations . In the post-war world, they were exemplified by the inter-military inter-commissioned world .
 The shared principle was that foreign policy covert operations conducted by intelligence agencies under the principle of “plausible deniability” were justified, as long as the result was to create a “New World Order . Even if creating that new world order meant lying to the American people,
 The JFK assassination was to apply the covert operations model to domestic politics . The model was originally designed as a foreign policy tool, but it could be applied equally in domestic politics, says Julian Zelizer .
 JFK probably would have survived into a second term in office had only he agreed to go along . JFK would have been able to get his second term as president if he had agreed to do so .
 All it would have taken would have been to green light the U.S. military to send in the air force and possibly the marines to invade Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . The operation was justified in the cause of saving the brave Cuban exile “freedom fighters”
 JFK could have planned to explain to the world how his decision to commit United States troops to Vietnam was fulfilling the promise he made in his First Inaugural Address to defend freedom around the globe .
 The CIA shared a belief with LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex that even if U.S. military action failed in Cuba or Vietnam, as it had in Korea, it would be good for business and the United States .
 The New World Order view was comfortable employing the United States military to preserve U.S. business interests, as had been done when overthrowing Mossadegh in Iran and Arbenz in Guatemala . Again, the point is that the New World order was comfortable .
 Bush did not blink when waging war with Iraq, fully realizing United States oil interests in Kuwait were being preserved . U.S. oil interests were being kept in Kuwait .
 JFK used ideologies of nationalism and self-determination to analyze Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam . It was clear he felt U.S. military involvement was not required in none of these conflicts .
 JFK cared about U.S. business interests, but not necessarily to the point of going to war . JFK cared for United States business interests but didn't necessarily to go to war, he said .
 Bush made clear with his “New World Order” speech to Congress on September 11, 1990, was that the use of the U.S. military to protect business interests was especially justified when backed by an international coalition . Bush: The use of United States military to . protect
 U.S. policy makers increasingly look to international organizations such as the United Nations, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund, when formulating United States policies .
 JFK did not spend much time worrying about going first to the United Nations before deciding whether or not to commit United States troops to Laos or Vietham . JFK respected international organizations .
 By 1974, it was clear JFK was right about Vietnam, while nearly every calculation made by LBJ, Richard Nixon, and the military industrial complex turned out to be wrong . Somehow, ironically, the internationalization of U.S. policy has proceeded apace .
 JFK was killed because he saw U.S. military action in shades of gray, where the Dulles brothers saw only black and white . In the final analysis, JFK saw the United States military action on a gray line .
 JFK might yet have lived into a second term, but once he called out organized crime and the CIA, threatening to destroy both, he needed to succeed . Still, despite this, JFK might still have lived in second term .
 LBJ and Richard Nixon stood the most to gain from a JFK assassination . But they could do nothing about that resentment without the operational capabilities offered by CIA leaders and organized crime bosses .
 Before he was finished, Robert Kennedy fired every member of the Dulles family he could find working in the federal government . Kennedy also fired the family members of the government .
 All three equivocated when asked where they were when they first heard JFK had been shot . Bush is also suspect, if only because he said he was not there at the time .
 Not providing a forthright answer to this question is a sign of a guilty conscious at a minimum, topped with a desire to hide the truth . Not providing an answer to the question is an act of guilt or a cover-up, it says .
 E Howard Hunt denied until the end of his life that he was in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . Hunt had a cover story for explaining why he might have been in Dallas that day . Hunt was never in Dallas, Texas .
 Richard Nixon had the chance to confer with one or more of the coconspirators in Dallas . Nixon also met with those wealthy individuals who had helped finance his political career .
 Evidence suggests the shooters were selected from a combination of Cuban exiles and mob hit men . The evidence suggests the shooter was selected from combination of ex-Cubans and mob hitsmen .
 Top suspects for having participated as shooters would include Frank Sturgis, Roscoe White, and Sergio Arcaha Smith . Top suspects would include Sturgs, White, Smith and Smith .
 E Howard Hunt played a direct role in both the Guatemala coup d’état in the 1950s and in the Bay of Pigs invasion . Hunt was likely involved in planning the operation . Hunt also played a role in the Guatemalan coup d'état . Hunt is believed to
 Corsican assassin Michel Mertz was in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . He was most likely with a mission to oversee and manage the shooters . Corsican assassins were likely to be in Dallas to oversee the shooting .
 When it came to coordinating mob involvement in JFK assassination, Johnny Roselli was in charge . Roselli organized the mob's involvement in the JFK assassination .
 The consequences of this conspiracy are immeasurable, if only because a group of traitors successfully flouted the constitution and got away with it . The consequences were immeable, the consequences of the treasonous conspiracy, says Julian Zelizer .
 Those who have suspected JFK’s assassination was a conspiracy are about to be proven right . After fifty years of abuse, JFK's assassination will be proven to be a conspiracy, says author .
 History will need to be rewritten to condemn those responsible as traitorous criminals . History must also be rewritten for those responsible for the deaths of those responsible .
 Justice can be served by setting the historical record straight, says author . Justice can't be served simply because so many of the involved parties have already died, he says .
 All Americans have a responsibility to demand the full truth from the U.S. government now . If we do not want to see this history repeated, all Americans should ask for the truth .
 To do less would be to further dishonor the memory of John Fitzgerald Kennedy, the 35th President of the United States .
 Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, July 23, 1964, Vol. Hearings . Hearings on the assassination of JFK were held before the Commission of Investigation into the assassination .
 Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, March 20, 1964, Vol. Hearings . Hearings on the assassination of JFK were held in March 1964, 1964 .
 Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, Vol. Hearings . Hearings on the assassination of JFK were held by the Commission on President Kennedy .
 Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, June 2, 1964, Vol. Hearings . Hearings on the assassination of JFK were held before the Commission of Investigation into the assassination .
 Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, April 21, 1964, Vol. Hearings . Hearings on the assassination of JFK were held by the Commission on President Kennedy in 1964 .
 Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, page 113. Hearings before the Commission on President Kennedy are on page 113 of the Hearings .
 Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, May 13, 1964, Vol. Hearings . Hearings were held before the Commission of Investigation into the assassination of JFK .
 Vincent P Guinn, House Select Committee on Assassinations, Sept. 1978, Vol. Vol. of 1978 . Guinn was a member of the House of Representatives. Guinn is the author of the book, "The Assassination of President George W. Bush"
 Apologists and Critics of the Lone Gunman Theory: Assassination Science and Experts in Post-Modern America,” loc.cit .
 Bracketed parentheses inserted for clarity; rounded parentheses rounded parentheses in original . Bracketized parentheses inserted in original.
 Pierre A Finck, Physician, U.S. Army, told the Warren Commission Hearings, Vol. 1 . Finck was a physician for the Army and served in the Army in the United States .
 John Bowden Connally, Jr., Jr., Warren Commission Hearings, April 21, 1964, Vol. 1, 1964 . Connally testified before the Warren Commission in 1964 . Warren Commission hearings were held at the White House .
 Craig Roberts, Kill Zone: A Sniper Looks at Dealey Plaza, page 5. 95 Craig Roberts was a sniper sniper in the area . He was killed in September 1968 . Roberts was the first sniper to shoot down the White House .
 JFK assassination suit was filed in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 . JFK assassination case was filed against JFK .
 Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, at page 558. Hearings before the Commission on President Kennedy are on pages 558 and 558 .
 Charles James Carrico, Warren Commission Hearings, March 30, 1964, Vol. 1, 1964 . Warren Commission hearings were held at the Warren Commission .
 Robert Nelson McClelland, Warren Commission Hearings, March 25, 1964, Vol. 1 . Warren Commission hearings were held at the Warren Commission's headquarters in 1964 .
 Marzani & Munsell Publishers Inc., 1964 (page 103), page 103, italics in original . The author's first novel, "The Walking Dead," was published in 1964 .
 John and Robert Kennedy, the Plan for a Coup in Cuba, and the Murder of JFK , page 704—707, at page 705 . John and . Robert Kennedy planned a coup in Cuba to kill JFK .
 How the CIA Framed Oswald, page Introduction, concluding paragraphs, no pagination given . No pagination provided .
 Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, February 10, 1964, Vol. Hearings . Hearings on the assassination of JFK were held by the Commission on President Kennedy .
 Lee Harvey Oswald in the Far East (CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2008), page 77. Oswald was assassinated in 1945 . Oswald was the leader of the White House of the Army in the Philippines .
 The Man Who Really Knew Too Much ” The Assassination Chronicles: Inquest, Counterplot, and Legend , page 558. ”
 The Lopez-Hardway Report, 2003 Release (Ipswich, MA: Mary Ferrell Foundation Press, 2006), pages vi-vii. The Lopez Hardway Report was released in 2003 .
 FBI Director Hoover to White House and Chief of Secret Service, Nov. 1963 . Hoover was Hoover's first director of the FBI in Washington, D.C. Hoover was in charge of the Secret Service at the time .
 In the book, the second sentence is a footnote, referenced by an asterisk and placed at the bottom of the page in smaller type . The book is available in the U.S.
 A Report to the Public from an FBI Agent Involved in the Official JFK Assassination Investigation (Chicago: Independent Publishers Group, 2012), page 98.
 Card from Elkins Family, postmarked Dec., 1957, from Portland, Oregon, 6 pages . Elkins family was sent to Elkins home in 1957 .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy Library, Columbia Point, Boston, Massachusetts, sent copies of the book to the Kennedy Library .
 The Hidden History—Nixon, the Mafia, and the CIA (Berkeley, CA: Counterpoint, 2012), is published by David Gergen .
 One Woman’s Extraordinary Tale of Love and Espionage in the CIA , pages 4-5, at page 5. One Woman's Extraordinary . Tale of love and espionage .
 The CIA Conspiracy to Murder John F Kennedy, Mary Pinchot Meyer, and Their Vision for World Peace , page 133 . The CIA conspiracy to murder John F. Kennedy was revealed in a book called The Kennedy Conspiracy to Kill .
 The Love Story of Madeleine Brown and President Lyndon Baines Johnson is published in the book "Madeleine and LBJ" Madelein Brown's biography of LBJ is published at the request of President Johnson .
 The Shocking Truth about the Role of South Vietnam and the French Mafia in the Assassination of JFK is on the cover of The Kennedy Assassination .
 Aristocracy, Fortune, and the Politics of Deceit in the House of Bush , page 37. Aristocracy .
 The September 30th Movement and Suharto’s Coup d’Etat in Indonesia , page 13.9 . Page 13. 9.9 is a reference to the September 30 movement .
 The CIA-MAFIA War Against Castro and the Assassination of J.F.F-K. , page 83. J.K. was assassinated by the CIA-Mafia war against Castro .
 A Biography of Eleanor, Allen, and John Foster Dulles and Their Family Network , page 473. The Dulles family network is based in Washington, D.C.