 For other uses of this article, including electronic redistribution, please contact us. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details .
 January 2001 Features Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis by Steven J Brams Theory of Moves .
 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis is not well modelled by this game . While ostensibly a game of Chicken, the Cuban crisis is in fact not well modeled .
 Players can only rank outcomes but not attach numerical values to them . The games that will be analyzed may not always exist . They may not be available for analysis .
 The Cuban missile crisis was precipitated by a Soviet attempt in October 1962 to install medium−range and intermediate−range nuclear−armed ballistic missiles in Cuba that were capable of hitting a large portion of the United States . Classical Game Theory and the Missile Crisis 2 Game theory and the Cuban missile
 Nikita Khrushchev of the Soviet Union extracted from President Kennedy a promise not to invade Cuba . Classical Game Theory and the Missile Crisis 3 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis seem to indicate that the eventual outcome was a compromise .
 The U.S. blockades Cuba and the S.U. withdraws its missiles, the U.K. pulls out its own missiles . The S. and Cuba are at odds over what happens .
 If the United States were to defect by changing its strategy to airstrike, play would move to , improving the payoff the U.S. received . If the S.U. were to change its strategy by changing strategy to maintenance, play moved to , giving the S.-U. a
 If the Soviets maintained their missiles, the U.S. preferred an air strike to the blockade . The United States would have preferred a strike to a blockade .
 Theory of Moves and the Missile Crisis 5 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis are consistent with Alternative, since the United States prefers to but not to in Chicken .
 Theory of Moves 6 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis countermoves to these moves, counter−countermoves, and so on . TOM extends strategic analysis of conflict into the more distant future .
 A player will not move from an initial state if this moves leads to a less preferred outcome, or returns play to the initial state, making this state the outcome . A player cannot move from a state to a more preferred outcome .
 Rule l differs drastically from the corresponding rule of play in standard game theory, in which players simultaneously choose strategies in a matrix game that determines its outcome . Rules of Play 7 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis .
 If they do not remain, they still know what payoffs they would have collected had they stayed, they can make a rational calculation of the advantages of staying or moving . If you do not stay, you can make rational calculation .
 U.S. prefers to the survivor at − namely, − the answer to no. Because United States prefers to survivor at least, the answer is no. No.
 This, of course, is exactly what happened in the crisis, with the threat of further escalation by the United States, including the forced surfacing of Soviet submarines as well as an air strike . The U.S. Air Force estimated it had a 90 percent chance of eliminating all the
 Like any scientific theory, TOM's calculations may not take into account the empirical realities of a situation . Applying TOM may not be the same thing as a scientific theory . TOM is a tool that can be applied to a situation in order to solve problems .
 In the second backward-induction calculation, it is hard to imagine a move by the Soviet Union from state 3 to state 4, involving maintenance of missiles after their withdrawal and an air strike .
 Plus is part of the family of activities in the Millennium Mathematics Project, which also includes the NRICH and MOTIVATE sites .