 To its neighbors, friendship, and the cooperation of men who respect each other, is friendship . To its neighbor, friendship is friendship and cooperation, and to its neighbors .
 The question emblazoned across the cover should have been preceded by a warning to readers to sit before they read further . The question should be preceded by warning that readers should sit down .
 Foreign Policy is published by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, a prestigious, left-leaning, and often thoughtful foreign-policy voice in Washington .
 The Carnegie Endowment was once headed by Alger Hiss, the communist spy who served the Soviet Union during Josef Stalin’s Red Terror . It is rarely noted by the left-leaning Washington establishment that Hiss was a communist spy . Hiss served as a spy during Jose
 The sophisticated set in Washington considers it inappropriate, impolite, and, of course, a form of McCarthyism, to make reference to this inconvenient fact concerning the endowment . It is inappropriate, says the sophisticated set of Washington .
 FP's cover of the cover of this week's edition of this month's issue of FP magazine . Hiss .
 I had an eerie feeling his ghost was back at the endowment running its publications, maybe with his wife and partner Priscilla again behind the typewriter . I had a eerie feeling he was back .
 FP aims to be unpredictable and to challenge its readers, and this question was posed in a debate format with differing perspectives, plus an accompanying on-line forum . 77 percent of respondents surmised that, yes, Fidel was good for Cuba .
 FP scares up the usual suspects to pay homage to the dictator’s personal trinity of “free health care, collectivism and wealth redistribution . Whether Fidel was good for Cuba is not a matter of debate, even if it scares up usual suspects .
 Fidel’s failures are too numerous to recount, beginning with his 48-year postponement of elections or the tens of thousands of murdered victims or the countless dead at sea who tried to escape from an island prison forced to ban boats . Fidel's failures include the deaths of tens of
 Of course, the best evidence for resolving the debate would be a simple poll of everyday Cubans . If only such polls were permitted, such polls should be permitted, he says .
 If Fidel Castro had his way in October 1962, Cuba would literally have ceased to exist . Fidel Castro would have left Cuba in 1962 . Cuba would have been the last nation of Cuba . Cuba is now the only nation in existence .
 That, however, was not the sum total of missiles that would have been launched . That would have included missiles from the U.S.
 The United States would have launched on Cuba, and also on the Soviet Union . The U.S. would have also launched on Cuban territory . The Soviet Union and Cuba would have been launched .
 In response, the Soviets would have launched on America from Soviet soil . In response to the attack, the U.S. would launch a missile on America .
 Under the terms of their NATO and Warsaw Pact charters, the nations of Western and Eastern Europe would also start firing . The nations of NATO and the Warsaw Pact nations would also fire .
 Once the smoke cleared, there would be hundreds of millions dead, possibly more than more than a billion, with Western civilization in its death throes . Western civilization would be in its final throes, with more than 1 billion dead .
 Given his way, Fidel Castro would have precipitated the greatest slaughter in human history . Fidel Castro's Cuba has been a model for the U.S. since the Castro era .
 Fidel didn't care, and neither did his comrade Che Guevara, a cult hero to Hollywood and to college students brainwashed in anti-Americanism . Fidel didn’t care, nor did his comrades Che Che, who is now a cult cult hero .
 Fidel and Che were ready for martyrdom, with Cuba the eternal triumphant symbol of the glorious fight against capitalism and American imperialism . Che and Fidel were ready to martyrdom . Cuba is a symbol of Cuba's struggle against capitalism .
 Khrushchev quickly realized he was dealing with a lunatic and better immediately bring the missiles home . The missiles were fired from the Soviet Union's missile range in the 1960s .
 Ronald Reagan and the Fall of Communism’s “Ron Reagan and Communism” is professor of political science and executive director of the Center for Vision & Values at Grove City College in Pennsylvania . The book will be published by John Sutter, professor of the political science at Grove
 There's one extra <p> hard-coded on the * template after the comments for spacing purposes . There's also an extra hard-coding on the template after comments .