 With the best will in the world you cannot, with one kind of equipment, fight another kind of war . We might try to do so, but with the best of the world, we cannot, but we might try so, .
 The immediate relevance of these words was not grasped, even by the speaker himself . "I'm not sure how much of this is relevant," he said .
 In the interim, the crisis that unfolded in Cuba was to test to the limit his hypothesis of escalation . In the meantime, the situation in Cuba has been a test of his hypothesis .
 Home and others are exploring the tensionresolving capabilities of the UN itself . To prevent a process he had warned as nigh inevitable, it also prompted the UN to explore the tension resolution capabilities .
 The UN had a high profile throughout the public phase of the crisis prompted by the American discovery that the Soviets had deployed long-range missiles on the island . Its activity was downplayed in subsequent accounts .
 The local nature of the conflict, which the Soviets had every interest in emphasizing, has been downplayed by their American counterparts . Similarly, the U.S. has downplayed the importance of the Soviet-Russian conflict .
 Shortly after this visit, the Americans began planning what became what became the Bay of Pigs episode of April 1961 . The Americans were planning what would become known as 'The Pigs'
 Castro’s government had unsuccessfully sought the sympathy of the UN Security Council against U.S. threats since July 1960 . The Americans prompted the Organisation of American States the previous month to declare Communism incompatible with the Western Hemisphere .
 Home was one of the statesmen to follow Home to the General Assembly podium during the 17th Assembly meetings that autumn . Cuban President Dorticós. was Cuban President of Cuba .
 The Soviets fraudulently claimed not to have any such bases outside their own territory . After all, the Soviets claimed they had no such bases .
 The Soviets boasted that their missile capacity was such that they did not need them . Satellite pictures obtained by the U.S. from 1961 onwards had indicated the hollowness of such claims . But satellite pictures obtained in 1961 onwards indicated such claims were wrong .
 The Americans did not publicly reveal their discovery to the public or the world until 22 October . The U.S. government did not release the discovery until that date .
 Acting Secretary-General of the UN learnt of the missiles from his military adviser, the Indian General Indar Jit Rikhye, on 20 October . U Thant, the Acting Secretary of General, learnt of missiles from the Indian general .
 The British Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan, was not officially notified until late the following evening . Harold MacMillan's government did not know until late that evening .
 The United States representative at the UN, Adlai Stevenson, sought to refute for the fourth time the Cuban allegations . In the interim, on 16 October, exercising his right of reply to Dorticós, the U.S. Representative at the United States .
 He drew attention to the flood of Soviet weapons and technicians into Cuba . Castro’s avowed intention to subvert Western Hemisphere governments, he said .
 American warnings of the Soviet military build-up in Cuba had already elicited unanimous support – even from the normally neutralist Brazil and Mexico – at the OAS on 2 October 1962 .
 The crisis was staged as a confrontation between Kennedy and Khrushchev, with Cuba serving as the setting for the contest . The crisis in Cuba was then played out as a showdown between the two sides .
 Both at the time and subsequently, the story of these days has been told – especially from the American side – as one of brinkmanship and blinking between an implacable and a more malleable protagonist . The story of the U.S. and Russia's relationship with Russia has
 The gradual way in which details of the events of October 1962 subsequently emerged reinforced the apparent gladiatorial nature of the crisis and diminished the significance of other dimensions . Details of events subsequently emerged were gradually revealed .
 Early revelations such as Theodore Sorensen’s ghost-written and misleading presentation of the crisis in Thirteen Days, 13 emphasized the crisis as a stand-off between Kennedy and Khrushchev . Early revelations, such as the ghost-writing and misleading .
 This interpretation shaped subsequent analyses, reaching an apogee in Dino Brugioni’s Eyeball to Eyebal . It also impacted on British reflections on their experience of these events .
 Stung by contemporary allegations of lack of influence Macmillan used his memoirs primarily to demonstrate his extensive contacts with Kennedy during the crisis . MacMillan's memoirs are published by the British government .
 Historians have obscured the important role ascribed to the UN in British attempts to reduce tensions . This historiography has obscured the importance of the UN's role in reducing tensions in the region .
 Macmillan at least makes extensive reference to the UN, unlike most American memoirists and commentators . The UN is a major UN agency in the United Arab Arab countries .
 A careful reading of his chapter on the crisis, ‘On the Brink’, suggests that there was another central character to the drama, since his pages are populated by repeated references to U Thant .
 Acting Secretary-General came to office on 3 November 1961 in difficult circumstances . He was the first acting secretary-general to hold office in 1961 .
 The Congo civil war had claimed the life of Dag Hammarskjöld – killed in an air crash just outside Ndola in September 1961 – and over-stretched its finances . The Soviet bloc refused to provide funds towards UN operations there .
 U Thant had to supervise a bond issue to address immediate financial problems . The bond issue was meant to address the country's immediate financial difficulties .
 Russian demands for what they called a Troika arrangement meant they were unwilling to see Hammarskjöld replaced except on an interim basis . Meanwhile, Russia is demanding an interim arrangement with the United States .
 U Thant was Burmese's ambassador to the UN part of the Burma's delegation to the conference of neutral countries in Belgrade in September 1961 . He represented the Burmies in the 1960s when they took part in the conference .
 Accounts of the Congo crisis rightly ascribe to the latter a central role in the crisis . But accounts of the crisis wrongly ascribe it to the former president of Congo .
 A Canadian appreciation the Foreign Office’s U.N. Department clearly found perceptive observed, We doubt if he would ever respond to Soviet charges in the forthright manner adopted by Hammarskjold, writes .
 Instead of Hammarskjöld’s talent for inventive problem-solving, U Thant was deemed likely to favour delicate diplomacy . The French diplomat was born in Paris .
 Hammarskjöld was the more overtly activist interpreter of his office, using Article 99 to bring the Congo crisis to the Security Council in May 1960 . In the crisis of October 1962, arguably it was U Thant's capacity for delicate diplomacy that was more needed .
 It was hoped that making his appointment permanent would defeat the Troika proposals . Because of his neutralist background, it was hoped it would defeat Troika .
 The Americans told their British counterparts that he was campaigning vigorously . The Americans clearly thought that he did .
 British diplomats were more inclined to note his references to homesickness . British diplomats, however, were more likely to note the references .
 He skilfully manoeuvred himself into being unanimously elected as SecretaryGeneral on his own terms on 30 November 1962 . U Thant was not as reluctant a holder of that office as he sometimes made out .
 He was, however, self-effacing in a way which might explain his low profile in accounts of Cuban crisis .
 President Obama avoided all references to Cuba in his acceptance speech . Indeed, aware of the continuing Russian hankering after the Troika arrangements, he diplomatically avoided all reference to Cuba .
 Sir Patrick Dean expected to concentrate on responding to Afro-Asian criticisms of Southern Rhodesia and Oman . Instead, they are expected to focus on the Venezuelan revival of border claims .
 Home spent much of his speech warning of the confrontation with a Communism bent on imposing its will upon the world . Most of the speech was in reference to the border clashes between China and India which were to flare to full-scale war on 20 October .
 Foreign Secretary responded to the same audience of his Soviet opposite number, Andrei Gromyko, on 22 September 1962 . This was the context for the Foreign Secretary’s only mention of Cuba .
 Gromyko, he warned, before preaching self-determination for Cuba, should look to the failure to allow it within his own country, or amongst satellite countries such as East Germany . East Germany. Cuba .
 Home focused on the prospects for agreement with the Soviets on banning nuclear tests, and on the recent settlement in Laos . More positively, he said: "I think we can work together to ban nuclear tests"
 Cuba was much more central to the latter was, however, apparent both from his speech and from his reiteration of its themes in his press conference of 13 October . Cuba is much more important to the Cuban people than Cuba is, however .
 A British delegate observed, ‘The Communist speeches all make Cuba their main propaganda theme’ The suggestion that there might be ulterior motives behind this rhetorical offensive was apparently not suspected .
 This is despite the similar concentration in Soviet propaganda outlets . This is not the same concentration of propaganda outlets in the Soviet Union .
 A number of known Communist front and fellow-travelling organisations wrote to the Foreign Office condemning American aggression .
 Britain-Cuba Committee rebuffed request for a delegation to the Prime Minister from the hitherto unknown Britain and Cuba Committee . This culminated in a request for an unknown delegation to be made to the PM on 11 October .
 The British did not fully share American concerns about the Cuban regime . That more notice was not taken of these developments may be because of the British concern about the regime .
 Home asked Dean Rusk, the U.S. Secretary of State, how the British might help .
 Rusk inquired if Britain could apply the rules on trading with the Soviet bloc against Cuba . Rusk asked for Britain to apply the same rules on trade with Soviet bloc .
 On 1 October in Washington, Kennedy tried to persuade Foreign Secretary to join the American trade embargo . The embargo began in October 1959 . Kennedy went further in trying to persuade the Foreign Secretary .
 The British were, in any case, of the view that there was no point in raising domestic political problems through an unprecedented peacetime embargo when their exports to Cuba were already minute .
 The issue was deemed unlikely to be inscribed for more detailed discussion in the General Assembly’s committees . This issue was therefore deemed unlikely of being inscribed for discussion .
 Such processes, often culminating in critical plenary resolutions, could be embarrassing before the bar of world opinion, as the British were found over Southern Rhodesia .
 Inscription and resolution, however, did not materially change anything . Inscription was not materially changed anything .
 The Russians might be addressing Cuba in other ways does not seem to have occurred to the British delegation . The British delegation did not appear to have noticed that the Russians might have been addressing Cuba other ways .
 The Soviets had made little headway in the General Assembly in what, so far, was seen as a successful session . Instead, it was noted on 18 October that the Soviets had failed to make significant progress .
 Russians were up to something was nevertheless widely suspected . That was widely suspected, but it was still widely suspected.
 Khrushchev intended to repeat his performance in 1960 at the General Assembly in November . They had hoped to repeat the performance in November once the American mid-term elections were out of the way .
 As Godber pointed out in the First Committee as the Cuban crisis reached its height, this initiative was also problematic, he said .
 Macmillan's insistence on the need to be able to verify the other side’s activities throughout 1962 continued to stymie progress on the Test Ban . This mistrust, and consequent insistence on . the . need to . verify the . other side's activities throughout . 1962
 It was assumed that if Khrushchev was coming again he would want similarly dramatic suggestions to put forward . But he did not want such dramatic suggestions put forward.
 The best guess the British could come up with was either a renewal of calls for a World Trade Conference or new proposals on the ongoing East/West confrontation in Berlin .
 It was only once the crisis broke that the idea that Cuba was likely to be central to Khrushchev’s theme was grasped . The idea of Cuba being central to the theme of the Soviet Union was grasped only once it broke .
 A paper by the Foreign Office’s Northern Department in February had offered suggestive insights into Soviet thinking . The main field of conflict with Communism was now in the Third World, it was noted .
 That the Soviets might also seek to shore up their outpost of Cuba with nuclear missiles did not, however, occur to the authors of the book . The book's authors did not anticipate that the Soviet Union might also try to shore-up their outpost with missiles .
 The ceaseless Soviet bloc repetition at the UN that Cuba required protection against U.S. aggression was seemingly designed to provide rhetorical covering fire for this deployment . The United States is deploying Cuban troops to Cuba .
 Tass reported on 11 September 1962 that the Cuban government had no intention of interdiction . The statement was presented in Tass in 1962 .
 In this first act of the Cuban crisis, before the Americans were even fully aware of its nature, the UN was being used by the Russians as a stage on which to set out their case . The Russians were using the UN to set up their case before the U.S. was
 Khrushchev was seen as an inveterate improviser by Western observers, such as the British ambassador to Moscow, Sir Frank Roberts . The Soviet leader was seen to be inveaterate improvisation .
 His earlier comments to Mikoyan about publicly revealing them in a way which redressed the nuclear balance in favour of the Soviets, prevented an invasion of Cuba and put the Americans ‘in their place’ suggests how he sought to use the trailed UN appearance .
 Gromyko's 22 September speech was presumably intended to set the scene for Khrushchev’s arrival . He might also have picked up on the two themes of the speech, which was probably intended to .
 The folly of such an idea was also highlighted in Khrushchev’s later speech to the Supreme Soviet Soviet . The folly was seen as favoured by many senior American figures .
 Khrushchev undermined the force of such arguments, which were both inimical to Cuban security and to the peaceful co-existence he proclaimed as one of Lenin’s great legacies .
 By the time Gromyko spoke, the Americans were well-aware of the Russian military build-up in Cuba .
 Overflight photography on 29 August confirmed eight surface-to-air missile sites on the island . The island is believed to have been at risk of being hit by a missile attack .
 Gromyko reiterated defensive intentions in Cuba in his meeting with Kennedy . The options consisted of diplomatic action, military action or interdiction through some kind of blockade .
 Each posed diplomatic issues with allies as well as with Khrushchev . As Kennedy recognised, each posed diplomatic problems with allies .
 Limited attention has been given to how to sell any action before world opinion . Limited attention was given to selling any action to world opinion before world view .
 By 20 October consideration of such issues was largely confined to the – as it turned out, well-founded – assumption that OAS support would be readily obtained for a blockade, thereby demonstrating compliance with Article 2 of the UN Charter .
 Rusk suggested that the UN might have a more direct role in the crisis . Rusk then suggested that it might also have a role in helping the UN .
 UN observation teams could be used to freeze the nuclear missile capability in Cuba, Italy and Turkey, he says . The UN observation team could also be used in Cuba and Turkey .
 He was fixated on removing the Soviet missiles from Cuba, and had already indicated his willingness in a National Security Council meeting on 20 October to also remove American missiles from Italy and Turkey .
 The UN's prime function for the next stage in the crisis in the President's eyes was therefore as the arena in which the appeal for removal of the Soviet missiles would be made . The UN’s prime function is to make the appeal to remove Soviet missiles from the country .
 A limited quarantine on military shipments into Cuba was announced two days later . On 20 October Kennedy decided that the first step towards that aim was a limited quarantine .
 Ormsby-Gore felt sure that it would take too long and lead nowhere . He wrote to the President for guidance on the President's intentions .
 This was because the obvious alternatives were an American coup de main or an international conference . This was the obvious alternative to a coup de de main, or a major conference .
 Both are fraught with danger, the latter being potentially open-ended and putting Berlin into play . Both were fraught with risk, and the latter was potentially open to play .
 Earlier that afternoon, Kennedy met with his old friend, OrmsbyGore, in Washington, DC . Kennedy: "I'm glad to see you back," he said .
 The quarantine would be easier to sell to world opinion and less likely to have repercussions in Berlin than the alternative of air strikes .
 Stevenson was summoned to brief the Acting Secretary-General at 4.30pm on Sunday 21 October . Stevenson will brief the acting secretary-general at the time .
 At 10.00pm he urgently requested the chairman of the UN Security Council – which under its monthly rotation was the combative Soviet representative, Valerian Zorin – to convene a meeting at which he tabled an emergency resolution on Cuba . At that moment, the comb
 UN resolution called for dismantling and removal of Soviet missiles under article 40 of the UN Charter . UN observer corps supervised by UN observers, removal of quarantine as soon as this process was completed, and for the convening of American/Soviet talks .
 Because of the dubious legality of the U.S. operations, Home noted to Dean, UN authority would be particularly useful .
 The Soviets argued a breach of the UN Charter right of all countries to organise their lives in their own ways and protect their own security . The Soviets in particular argued that it was a breach .
 The Americans were portrayed as hypocritically objecting to Cuban defence, whilst they had themselves previously refused Soviet proposals that all foreign military bases around the world should be dismantled .
 At a State Department briefing for the ambassadorial group of Britain, France and West Germany on 22 October, it was pointed out that this was a false analogy .
 The deployments had been in response to the nearby menace of Soviet missiles, at the request of the host governments at the NATO Council in December 1957 .
 Stevenson points out that the U.S. deployment had not been clandestine, as in Cuba . Stevenson: "The United States deployment was not clandestine" The United States deployed the weapons in Cuba, Stevenson says .
 Cuban representative says Americans imposed quarantine without first seeking UN sanction . Dr Mario Garcia Inchaustegui, the Cuban representative, told the Security Council that the U.S. had presented it with a fait accompli .
 Zorin presented his own draft resolution calling for an end to the quarantine and American interference in Cuba . He called for talks between the Soviet Union, America and Cuba to remove the threat of war . His call for the immediate withdrawal of U.S. forces was followed by Zor
 The Indian delegate argued three days later that the People’s Republic needed to be admitted to the UN in order to check the aggression his country was then suffering . The Americans once again secured the retention of the Chinese seat for the Nationalists .
 The UN had by then become the obvious public arena for a war of words between East and West over Cuba . The UN was by then becoming an obvious public .
 In ExComm there was a mood that the Americans had seized the initiative . The Americans were in the mood that they were seizing the initiative.
 Dean, in contrast, felt that the Soviets were skilfully using the UN to their advantage . Dean said that the UN was being used to help the Soviet Union .
 Zorin’s statement cleverly emphasized the right of every country to defend itself, he said . He noted that the United States failed to seek prior approval for its actions from the Security Council .
 Kennedy only signed the executive order at 7.00pm Washington time on 23 October as the Security Council were meeting . Having awaited OAS support from the OAS, Kennedy delayed signing of the order .
 The quarantine came into force at 2.00pm Greenwich mean time the following day . Quarantine came into effect at 2pm Greenwich Mean Time .
 Algerian and United Arab Republic delegations at the UN called a meeting on the evening of 23 October of some 40 non-aligned countries to draft an alternative to the United States resolution .
 Dean anticipated that this would urge an end to the quarantine and the convening of talks by the Acting Secretary-General, leaving the missiles in place .
 U.S. needed to build their case by releasing photographic evidence of missile sites, he said . The US needed to release photographic evidence, he added .
 There was a risk of neutral delegations at the UN proving as sceptical as the British press . There was also a risk that neutral delegates could be sceptical .
 The doubts and hostility even of right-wing newspapers like the Daily Telegraph appalled the United States ambassador, David Bruce .
 American intelligence officer Chester Cooper – at the prompting of Macmillan’s private secretary, Philip de Zulueta – released sanitised versions of the pictures that evening in London . The Pentagon subsequently-rescinded authority of the Pentagon .
 Newsweek reputed to embarrass U.S. Defense Secretary, Robert McNamara, at a press conference over his refusal to release material to the American media . The Newsweek representative appeared on British television in time for the press conference .
 The Security Council was due to meet again at 9.00am on 24 October, with Dean down to speak . Dean is due to speak at the end of the day .
 Foreign Office advised to stick to a short intervention, stressing provocation of the Soviet moves .
 A Ghana/UAR resolution was prepared, to be tabled when the Security Council re-convenvened at 6.00pm . The resolution urges U Thant to confer directly with ‘the parties directly concerned’ to address the crisis .
 Both the United States and the Soviets tried to discourage this development . Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union were trying to discourage it .
 This mattered as long as the authority of a UN resolution was seen as desirable . This mattered in the case of the UN resolution, it was thought to be desirable . The UN resolution is now seen as a key part of the world's history .
 To pass a resolution in the Security Council required seven votes . To pass such a resolution, the resolution would have needed seven votes to pass .
 The Americans have already indicated their intention to use this procedure . The Americans had already indicated they intend to use it this time .
 This had been relatively easy for the West in the early 1950s, but with the greatly increased UN membership of 1962 it was more of a challenge . The West had been able to get around the world in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Macmillan made clear his doubts this would work in his first message to Kennedy of the crisis . He made clear he doubts it would work with Kennedy in first message .
 The Americans have done a certain amount by way of briefing friendly and non-aligned delegations about the missile sites . But they still have a long way to go if they are to convince a good majority to vote in their favour in the event that the debate is carried from the Security Council
 The Security Council re-convened later that evening . U Thant’s intervention was rendered nugatory by the intervention . The U.N. Security Council was adjourned that night .
 U Thant despatched to Kennedy and Khrushchev messages urging a standstill on both shipments and the quarantine for two to three weeks to allow negotiations .
 President Obama has appealed to Dorticós to stop construction work on the sites . After much American pressure, he also added an appeal to the city's mayor to stop work .
 Stevenson challenged Zorin to acknowledge that missiles had been deployed in Cuba before, as Dean had suggested, theatrically providing the photographic proof . This proved to be the most dramatic visual moment of the crisis .
 This focused the crisis on the existence and potency of those missiles, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The crisis focused on the fact that missiles were available .
 Debate on draft resolutions had been overtaken by U Thant's initiative and Stevenson's revelations . The debate had been over-run by Stevenson’s revelations .
 The various committees of the General Assembly quietly continued their work with minimal reference to Cuba . Cuba is still a major source of Cuban influence in Cuba .
 Polish delegate told the First Committee that there was no reason why American aggression should deflect their ongoing search for agreement on a nuclear test ban . The Polish delegate said the U.S. aggression should not deflect their efforts to reach an agreement .
 The focus of UN activity in the crisis shifted from the Security Council to the Secretariat . Cuba ceased to be actively discussed at the UN after the crisis .
 He had focused world opinion on the standoff rather than their problem of how to remove the missiles . Very publicly, he had . focused world . opinion .
 By this stage Macmillan had realised the drawbacks posed by an international conference . The conference was held at the end of the 1950s in London .
 Home raised the idea of a conference with Ormsby-Gore on 24 October . Home, however, raised the . idea of the conference .
 The ambassador declined to raise the idea . Anticipating U.S. reactions, the ambassador declined .
 It is important to be clear on the role Home saw such a conference playing . It is also important to remember the role the conference played in Britain .
 Home’s emphasis was on it paving the way to tackling other important matters, such as disarmament . Whilst potentially useful in resolving the crisis, it was also important to tackle disarmament.
 Polish ambassador invited himself to see Foreign Secretary earlier that day . However, that it might also be used as a propaganda tool was apparent .
 Home rebuffed this obvious invitation, instead merely observing that if a conference was desired it was for one of the two protagonists to propose it . Home: 'If you want a conference, it's for you to ask for it'
 Leader of the Opposition, Hugh Gaitskell, pushed for Macmillan to intervene directly . Rodzinski seemed keen to encourage.
 Rodzinski had ended his interview with Home by raising alarm about what would happen when the U.S. started stopping Russian ships . Rodzinski raised the possibility of stopping Russia's ships in the future .
 McNamara expected the first intercepts to occur at noon the following day . That morning in Washington, Washington, McNamara was in Washington . McNamara said he expected intercepts would occur the next day .
 U Thant sent a further message to each leader urging them to avoid confrontation around the quarantine line . Following back-channel suggestions from Kennedy, after the Security Council meeting of 25 October, U. Thant decided to send the message .
 By the time of Macmillan’s Cabinet meeting at 2.45pm on 25 October, some ships known to be carrying interdicted material were still on-course or halting, others were diverting .
 Work on the three Intermediate Range and six Medium Range missile sites continued apace . All the latter would likely be operational within two days, PM said .
 Observations from the British embassy in Havana confirmed this evidence garnered from continuing U.S. surveillance flights over Cuba . Observations were made from the continuing United States surveillance flights .
 Neither the embassy nor the British in general were informed of the locations of the sites until 27 October . This material, passed to Washington, provided additional intelligence about the situation on the island .
 There meanwhile remained, as Home pointed out at the same Cabinet, the problem of the UAR/Ghanaian resolution . The UAR and Ghanaian resolution is still unresolved .
 Earlier that day he had tried to explain to the UAR ambassador the flaws in trying to tackle the crisis through a resolution which required the removal of the quarantine but left the missiles in place .
 Egyptian took the view that difficult as it was for Kennedy to accept Soviet missiles in Cuba, it was much more difficult for Khrushchev to accept their removal . The Egyptian said it was difficult to accept the removal of Soviet missiles .
 This misconceived view of both the crisis and the role of the UN in tackling it had to be modified if the issue was really to be addressed . The UN's role in tackling the crisis in Syria must be modified to address the issue, says David Cameron .
 The remaining in-bound Russian cargos had to be inspected and the missiles already in place dismantled . Home was able to end the quarantine and resolve the crisis, under the scrutiny of the UN .
 The following day U Thant telephoned Rusk and obtained American assurance that if he could get Soviet and Cuban agreement to an UN verified standstill then the United States would hold off invasion . The next day the U.S. assured Rusk that if the Soviet-Cuban
 Marchant, to wonder if ‘neutral diplomats already here’ might be an acceptable alternative . Marchant also wonders if 'neutral diplomats' already here might be acceptable alternatives .
 Foreign Office’s U.N. Dept. Brown of the Foreign Office had doubts about the plan .
 Rusk indicated that decision on whether or not to bomb them would have to be taken in the next two to three days . This was because the British, French and West German ambassadors were briefed in Washington on 25 October that suspect Russian ships were heading home .
 Kennedy told Ormsby-Gore the following morning that they could not give U Thant long to conclude his negotiations . The French president was in the midst of negotiations with the government .
 The Russians in Europe had been asking questions about trading missiles in Cuba for those in Italy or Turkey, the French representative said .
 This seems to have happened via discreet and deniable approaches via French or Italian diplomats . This seems, however, to be done via discreet approaches .
 Foreign Office’s Northern Department does not seem to realise that this might reflect a Soviet search for an exit strategy, instead dismissing these developments as attempts to find chinks between the U.S. and their allies .
 Macmillan’s message to Kennedy on the morning of 25 October referred only to UN inspection in Cuba .
 Talks initially made little progress as Zorin had not received instructions from the government . Talks initially began as talks initially made no progress .
 In ExComm, Rusk presciently expressed doubts that the other side would welcome UN inspectors . Rusk: "I don't think that any of these countries would welcome inspectors"
 The kind of standstill U Thant had initially envisaged of two-three weeks for negotiation was no longer acceptable and it was stressed to Stevenson that instead the missiles had to be rendered inoperable . Stevenson: "Instead the missiles have to be turned into missiles that are inoper
 U Thant was pessimistic about the chances of Castro allowing access for the necessary verification . This line contrasted with what he had told Zorin earlier, which he said was pessimistic .
 Acting Secretary-General had intervened prompted by non-aligned concerns about the quarantine, and on that he remained focused .
 With Zorin he concentrated not on missiles already on the island but those en route . He was looking to get the Soviets to suspend interdicted shipping in return for suspension of quarantine .
 Red Cross offered to assist with policing shipping if quarantine was lifted . U Thant suggested to Zorin that the Red Cross might assist in policing the shipping . Macmillan was more focused on the missiles on Cuba when he talked again with the President late in October .
 Khrushchev proposed to dismantle offensive weapons in Cuba in return for a guarantee that Cuba would not be invaded, tightened in a second message by linkage with the quid pro quo of American withdrawal of ballistic missiles in Turkey . At the time neither seems to have been fully aware of Khrush
 Kennedy’s hints at such developments led the Prime Minister to enthuse about Cuban inviolability . Kennedy's hints led the PM to say he was concerned about the country's inviolable status .
 This had been raised by the Acting Secretary-General himself earlier that afternoon with Stevenson . Stevenson had raised the issue with Stevenson earlier that day .
 It was also raised with the Americans via the KGB operative Alexander Fomin in Washington that afternoon . Fomin also raised the issue with the U.S. via a KGB operative .
 Macmillan put forward the idea of U Thant leading an inspection team to Cuba to address the problem of verification .
 Some Soviet ships were still heading for the quarantine line, despite assurances to U Thant . They would have been even more concerned had they known that .
 Dean was also told to make use of two ideas that they knew, from OrmsbyGore’s report of a Rusk briefing for the ambassadorial group, were acceptable .
 Cuba would immediately grant the Cubans the security they claimed they needed without the missiles . One of these would be the inviolability of Cuba, which would grant them security they needed .
 An implicit theme in British diplomacy throughout the crisis, this became more and more an explicit goal, this now became more than a goal . The British government became increasingly explicit in its approach to Syria .
 The other was the Brazilian proposal in the UN’s First Committee for a Latin American nuclear-free zone . The Brazilian proposal was the other was proposed by the First Committee .
 Acting Secretary-General renewed his appeal for an end to work on the sites during negotiations, this time directly to Castro . The previous day under U.S. pressure, he had already been under American pressure renewed his call for a stop to work .
 Khrushchev felt positive about Castro’s likely reaction to the Cuban invasion of Cuba . Kennedy was impressed by the messages which had just passed between the principals .
 'Some allegedly neutral delegations who are seeking compromise at almost any price' he felt it was important for U Thant to press on .
 Dean noted that the Acting Secretary-General shared his view that Turkey would complicate matters . Dean said that the acting secretary-general shares his view of Turkey .
 Going himself to Cuba to try to break the log-jam, in the manner of Hammarskjöld’s trips to the Congo, does not seem to have occurred to U. Thant .
 Later that afternoon he saw Raúl Roa Garcia, the Cuban foreign minister, in Cuba . Later that day he visited the Cuban government again .
 Ormsby-Gore received a generally positive response from Kennedy when he put the idea of U Thant going to Cuba to the President that morning . Castro invited him to Cuba as long as the US desisted from aggression including the quarantine .
 Macmillan followed up the messages to Dean by transmitting to Ormsby-Gore his response to Kennedy’s alarming message of the previous evening . Kennedy had sent his message to the Prime Minister .
 The Soviets agreed to halt imports of ballistic missiles and work on the sites and to make the weapons inoperable . This suggested a standstill for negotiations while negotiations were ongoing .
 Macmillan suggested in turn that the U.S. should agree to lift the quarantine and not take any action against Cuba during the standstill, all under UN supervision .
 Khrushchev indicated that the quarantine would be lifted and Cuba assured against invasion once Soviet weapons were removed and shipping halted under UN safeguards .
 He did not reveal to the Supreme Soviet that he had also been reassured by a clandestine offer to remove the American missiles from Turkey . The offer was also offered to remove American missiles .
 The idea of thisis trade had been sympathetically discussed trongly endorsed by the BBC and much of the British Sunday press, though not the British government .
 At 1.15pm on 28 October the message came through that Khrushchev had agreed to dismantle and remove the offensive weapons . That it actually happened was deliberately concealed from America’s allies .
 Home and Rusk sent each other congratulatory messages tinged with relief . Rusk and Home were relieved to have won the game .
 OrmsbyGore found the latter and his colleagues had been ‘so preoccupied with the immediate problems that had been facing them that they had as yet no clear idea’ as to the next moves .
 U Thant was asked to address disarmament issues during the crisis . The ambassador replied by looking ahead to addressing the disarmament issue .
 President Mikoyan felt betrayed by the Soviet Union in 1960s . Having been assured of Soviet support, he felt betrayed, he said . He said: "I'm not going to go to war with the West"
 The missiles in Cuba remained a problem, with neither the British embassy nor American overflights detecting evidence of dismantling . U.S. overflights detected no sign of dismantling the missiles .
 U Thant was invited to view one of the missiles in Cuba while in Cuba . For obvious reasons they would not let UN observers view the missiles .
 Kuznetsov pressed for immediate suspension of quarantine at a Security Council lunch hosted by Zorin on 30 October . The Russian minister also pressed for suspension of the quarantine .
 Acting Secretary-General made better progress with the commanding Soviet general, Issa Pliev . Meanwhile, in Cuba, the acting secretary-general met with the Soviet general .
 Pliev told U Thant he received the order to dismantle at noon on 28 October and started work at 5.00pm that day . Pliev said he began dismantling the structure at 5:00pm on October 28 .
 They also observed that work continued on the Il28s and SAM sites . They also noted that work was still ongoing on the I28s .
 The latter were deemed defensive, but the bombers, though essentially obsolete, in U.S. eyes had to go . The bombers were deemed essentially obsolete in American eyes .
 Progress on verification, however, was complicated by Castro’s intransigence . Castro was critical of the verification process, but he says it was necessary .
 Americans asked the British to break off diplomatic relations with Cuba in November 1962 . The request was swiftly turned down by the Americans . This prompted the U.S. to request the UK to break diplomatic relations .
 The Soviet despatch of Mikoyan to Cuba suggested that Castro would come round . As a later Foreign Office memorandum pointed out, the Foreign Office pointed out .
 Castro certainly needed the massive aid received from Russia, aid which would render any economic sanctions pointless . Castro needed the aid received by Russia .
 He dined with the U.S. delegation and repeatedly demanded implementation of the five points, as well as an end to the quarantine . That same evening, he dined on the United States delegation .
 The Americans would not concede until the ICRC inspection regime came into force . The ICRC inspectors would not be allowed to enter the country without permission .
 John McCloy was appointed by Kennedy to lead the US side of the negotiations at the UN . He seized upon the suggestion that the US warships could come close to Soviet vessels to see the missiles being transported home .
 Cuban oil bound for the island was embargoed for the second time in the crisis . Such arrangements obviated the need for ICRC inspection .
 Castro wrote to U Thant accepting the decision by the Soviets to withdraw them . After pressure from Khrushchev, however, on 19 November Castro accepted the decision .
 The Americans stepped down security levels and formally ended the quarantine . This marked the final end of the crisis for the Americans . It was not, however, the end for the Russians .
 It was only on 22 November that Mikoyan persuaded Castro that the Luna tactical nuclear missiles, which had not been detected by the Americans, could not be given to the Cubans on the grounds that there would not be a Soviet base there to manage them .
 The removal of the Il-28s, however, was also not the end of the crisis for him . The aircraft were also removed from the Russian air force .
 Acting Secretary-General was concerned about the emotional state of Cuban leader . Like Mikoyan, he was concerned that the emotional State of Cuban President was concerned .
 The Cuban delegate repeated the threat that U.S. warplanes in Cuban airspace would be shot at . In the First Committee on 16 November, the Cuban delegate said the threat was repeated . In November, Cuban delegates threatened to shoot at US warplanes .
 The risk that Castro would launch a nuclear Armageddon was something Mikoyan took it upon himself to avoid through his tense and eventually successful four hour meeting with Castro on 22 November .
 Acting Secretary-General privately sympathised . U Thant had told him in Cuba that there was no prospect of the five points being adopted by the Security Council .
 Stevenson suggested an inspection regime for the Cuban exile camps to assuage the Cuban premier . On 12 November he suggested to Stevenson that the inspection regime be implemented .
 Castro wrote to U Thant reiterating his demand for the five points . Castro complained that the United States had reneged on the agreement not to invade on the pretext that Cuba had not allowed international inspection .
 There remained an unresolved issue of the Security Council resolutions . This became a continuing refrain. The Security Council resolution is still unresolved .
 U Thant returned from Cuba determined to avoid early meetings at which these might again emerge . He returned from the Cuba trip determined not to return to Cuba .
 He was avoiding meetings at which disagreement over his position might be raised . He was also avoiding meetings where disagreement might be discussed .
 Mahmoud Riad, the UAR delegate who was that month’s Security Council chairman, tried repeatedly to get the Russians to agree to elect U. Thant . U.AR delegate tried to get Russia to agree on election of U.Thant .
 Russian attempts to bully U Thant into antiAmerican line he expected from Afro-Asian delegates . Such agreement was complicated by the animosity between Zorin and the Acting Secretary-General throughout the crisis .
 Inchaustegui’s letter of the same date, unsurprisingly, disagreed and continued to raise the five points . ‘I’m not happy with this,’ he said. ‘‘I'm not happy.’
 In his end of session report Dean was full of praise for U Thant’s effective intervention in the crisis . In his response two days later all U Thants could do was seek to reassure the Cubans, who continued to complain of American-sponsored incursions .
 Khrushchev felt that the crisis was unlikely to build to a crescendo at the UN . Instead, he felt the crisis instead ensured that the Russians were relatively ineffective during the 17th Assembly .
 Dean did not reflect on his own role in the crisis, merely complaining that Stevenson seemed to receive more information in a more timely fashion from Washington than he himself did from London .
 During that session the UN was a site for issuing and amplifying Soviet propaganda . The UN was used to issue and amplify Soviet propaganda during the session .
 The purpose of this rhetorical offensive does not seem to have been suspected by Western delegates or U Thant . The purpose for the rhetorical offensive was not suspected .
 The discovery of the missiles was revealed on 22 October, the UN’s role changed . However, once the discovery was revealed the UN's role changed.
 Neither the quarantine nor Security Council resolutions would actually resolve the crisis, however, would actually solve the crisis .
 The UN dimension of the crisis moved to a third stage with U Thant’s letters of 24 October . The letters effectively ended debate in the Security Council, effectively ending debate .
 These letters responded to non-aligned pressure and called merely for a standstill . These letters were written by the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 The need to amend this unfortunate effect and prevent a non-aligned coalescence behind such unsatisfactory solutions was thereafter a constant of British attitudes towards the crisis . The need for such a change in British attitudes to the crisis was a constant, British attitudes .
 Dean’s concerns about the deleterious effect of Khrushchev's demand for the removal of American missiles from Turkey reflected this anxiety about non-aligned attitudes, hence his encouragement of U Thant to focus on Cuba .
 The British were well-aware from their experiences in the Fourth Committee that Russian propaganda was directed at the non-aligned . After all, the British were aware of their experiences from the Fourth .
 There was sedulous promotion of the Soviets’ peaceful intentions . Not least, there was a promotion of their peaceful intentions.
 During the crisis this was, British diplomats felt, deliberately played up with both neutral and Western legations around the world . British diplomats said this was deliberate played up by neutral and western legations .
 It was often Khrushchev rather than Kennedy who was regarded in neutral countries in the immediate aftermath of the crisis as a statesmanlike man of peace .
 Non-aligned voting with the USSR increased during the 17th Assembly . The Soviets sought to win the cold war through propaganda rather than military action .
 In that sense Khrushchev largely achieved his goals in the UN during the crisis, as well as preserving Castro and secretly getting the American missiles out of Turkey and Italy . In the UN, Khrushche achieved his goal in that sense .
 This included undermining the case for preventative nuclear war put forward by American military figures even after the formal end of the Cuban crisis .
 Despite noting the Soviet concentration on Cuba in the opening weeks of the 17th Assembly of the UN, the British did not pick up on its significance .
 Home and Dean’s concern at United States failure to seek UN approval for quarantine . Nevertheless, they were acutely aware of its propaganda dimensions, not least amongst the non-aligned .
 Non-aligned delegations want to end quarantine without tackling missiles . They are aware of the growing importance of the non-aligned at the UN .
 The need to steer any response by the Acting Secretary-General to such moves was immediately grasped by Home Secretary General . Home Secretary Theresa May has been tasked with steering the response to the situation .
 U Thant’s intervention was made clear by his opening intervention on 24 October . That there was such a need for such intervention, he said in his intervention .
 As Macmillan rightly observed, this sent ‘a very dangerous message’ because it failed to provide for the verifiable removal of the missiles . As well as the removal of missiles, this is a 'very dangerous message'
 As Home had pointed out to Rodzinski earlier that day, some form of UN inspection was needed .
 Portrayals of U Thant as an ‘unsung mediator’ have failed to acknowledge the extent of the extent that he was responding to pressure from others . Portrayal of U. Thant’s role as a mediator has been criticised by some .
 This might have met their fears, but would not have satisfied the Americans . This would have satisfied them, but not satisfied the U.S.
 Macmillan and Home, via Dean, sought to steer U Thant into a role which offered a verifiable solution for both sides . MacMillan and . Home, . therefore sought to . steer U. Thant . into a . role which . offered a . verifiable
 By 27 October this solution, for the British, involved observable inoperability of the missiles on the one hand, and the inviolability of Cuba on the other, in both cases under UN safeguards .
 U Thant acquired an invitation to Cuba to negotiate such matters . These safeguards underpinned the United States note verbale which secured the basis of a solution .
 British modified Acting Secretary-General’s ‘dangerous message’ and steered U Thant towards playing a role as mediator . By such processes, the British modified the Acting . Secretary of the . Acting Secretary . General’�s message was modified by the British
 Dean praised U Thant’s handling of the crisis, but he himself deserves praise for his unsung part in shifting the Acting Secretary-General’�s approach . Dean praised the acting secretary-general for his role in the crisis .
 The role U Thant was encouraged to play reassured those non-aligned countries suspicious of the United States, while providing an outcome which would satisfy both the Americans and Russians, if not the Cubans .
 Dean helped to ensure that this local conflict did not develop into the conflagration Home had warned the UN General Assembly of on 27 September 1962 . Dean thus helped ensure that the conflict in Syria did not become a conflagrant .
 The Essence, the Puzzles and the Missile Crisis’ International Relations’ . International Relations International Relations 26/3 , p.4.4 .
 Ramsbotham to Sir Patrick Reilly, 15 February 1962, enclosing ‘The Aims of Western Policy towards Russia and the part Britain can plan in attaining them’, esp. and 33. paras.