 He was the youngest person elected president and is among one of the most glamorous and popular presidents in U.S. history . He was among the youngest people elected president .
 President Kennedy was middle-of-the-road on domestic issues and conservative on foreign policy . He spent much of his time womanizing, he says .
 President Obama nominated Byron White to the United States Supreme Court, who turned out to be pro-life . Byron White is a former Supreme Court nominee who is pro-choice .
 Kennedy sent military forces into Vietnam and was somewhat hawkish against communist Cuba . As to foreign policy, Kennedy also sent troops into Vietnam . Kennedy was hawkish on Cuba .
 In Congress the Conservative Coalition blocked nearly all of his domestic programs, so there were few changes in domestic policy, while the civil rights movement gained strength . In Congress, the conservative Coalition blocked most of his programs .
 In 1961 he sent CIA-trained Cuban exiles into an ill-prepared attack on Castro's Cuba . This inexperience caused a national humiliation in 1961 when he sent them into attack .
 Kennedy's supporters blamed Eisenhower and the CIA for the fiasco . JFK inherited the plan, but Kennedy took the blame himself . Kennedy's backers blamed Eisenhower for the disaster .
 Nikita Khrushchev had built the Berlin Wall as the Soviets escalated the Cold War regarding the status of Berlin . Nikita predicted that Kennedy's response would be weak .
 Khrushchev went too far in 1962 when he sent nuclear missiles into Cuba aimed at the U.S. mainland . The missiles were aimed at Cuba, but were not aimed at America .
 For the first time since Pearl Harbor, the U.S. was vulnerable to a major attack by an enemy power . Washington and New Orleans were attacked in the War of 1812 . The United States is vulnerable to an enemy attack .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev reached a compromise whereby the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba publicly, while Kennedy secretly removed obsolete American missiles from Turkey aimed at the Soviets . The two sides also agreed that America would never invade Cuba .
 The Warren Commission concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in assassinating JFK . A majority of the population believed that he was part of a conspiracy, though a majority believed he was .
 "The Warren committee accepted that the same bullet killed Kennedy and gravely wounded Governor John Connally. Although, among many contradictions, there are many contradictions," the committee accepted .
 Kennedy was an indifferent student until the war in Europe focused his attention . He was indifferent at private schools and Harvard College, but focused on the war .
 As second son in the powerful Kennedy Family, he was marked for intellectual career as a writer or journalist . His older brother Joseph was slated for politics by their manipulative father, Joseph P Kennedy .
 In September 1941, Kennedy attempted to join the U.S. Army but was medically disqualified due to his chronic lower back problems . Kennedy was also medically disqualified from joining the Army in September 1941 .
 He then joined the United States Navy and attended officer training school . He then went on to join the U.S. Navy .
 His older brother's death in combat during World War II, combined with his heroic war record as skipper of the PT-109 in 1943, set the stage for his political debut as a Congressional candidate in 1946 . JFK's older brother died in combat in WWII, and JFK's heroic
 JFK's return to the city restored the family's traditional power base among the large and powerful Irish-American community in Massachusetts . The father had abandoned Boston in frustration .
 Many liberal Democrats, led by Eleanor Roosevelt, distrusted JFK primarily because they could never forget the father's break with Franklin Roosevelt or the family's support for McCarthy . JFK's father was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy voted against the 1957 Civil Rights Act and opposed to the 1963 March on Washington by Martin Luther King where King made his famous ‘I Have A Dream’ speech . Kennedy was a member of the Democratic Party and the White House .
 The March on Washington was organized by A Phillip Randolph, who was a black Republican . Randolph was a member of the NAACP and a prominent black Republican in Washington, D.C.
 Martin Luther King was jailed by local Democrats two weeks before the election in Atlanta following a non-violent protest . Not until the presidential election of 1960 when John Kennedy intervened for the release of King, who was jailed, did majority of Blacks begin voting Democratic en bloc .
 His brother, Robert Kennedy, was furious as to the call with King, and felt it could cost them the election given the promise of three Southern governors not to support John Kennedy if he showed support .
 Andrew Johnson ended Republican Reconstruction reforms and paved the way for Jim Crow laws and segregation era . Andrew Johnson, the president of the Civil War, was assassinated in 18th century . Johnson's assassination ended Reconstruction reforms .
 Adlai Stevenson allowed the delegates to choose the vice-presidential nominee in 1956 . Kennedy sought the position but was narrowly defeated by two-time primary rival Estes Kefauver of Tennessee .
 By 1960, Kennedy was the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination to face Richard M Nixon . The biggest question mark is whether his Catholic base of support would be outweighed by anti-Catholicism of the sort that hurt Al Smith in the 1928 race .
 Fear of Tammany-like bossism had faded away with the demise of most big city machines . Prohibition was no longer an issue, and fear of bossism faded away .
 The Kennedy juggernaut defeated Hubert Humphrey, a fellow liberal, in the West Virginia primary . The state was so much poverty and so few Catholics that party leaders believed they had a winner .
 Kennedy's religiosity consisted of nominal attendance at Sunday Mass . He excited tens of millions of Catholics who saw his election as president as confirmation of their full recognition as true Americans . Kennedy's election was confirmed to be confirmation of his full recognition of their .
 He was forced to pay ransom of $53 million in food and medicine in exchange for 1,113 prisoners and 76 other exiles being held in Cuba . Weeks after his memorable inaugural address sounded the tocsin for vigorous anti-communism .
 The Cuban missile crisis reversed Kennedy's image of ineptness in foreign policy . His quiet, escalation of military involvement in Vietnam set the stage for the whirlwind reaped by his successor .
 JFK faced confrontations with segregationist Democrats, especially Governors George Wallace of Alabama and Ross Barnett of Mississippi . Martin Luther King led the civil rights movement in the South, led by King, in the 1960s .
 Robert Kennedy allowed the FBI to wiretap MLK Jr's phone on a trial basis due to suspicion that Dr. Dr. King Jr. had been involved in a civil rights scandal . Dr. Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Wallace was a leader of segregationist southern Democrats . The June 1963 confrontation in Alabama was nonviolent . Wallace did back down, but the event boosted his visibility as a segregationist .
 Kennedy's assassination by self-proclaimed ""Marxist""Lee Harvey Oswald in November, 1963, was a stunning shock to all Americans . Lee Harvey Oswald was a self-described "Marxist"
 To deflect attention from its ties to Oswald, the Soviet Union fabricated a disinformation campaign to blame the assassination on U.S. conservatives . The Soviet Union faked the assassination to blame conservatives for the assassination .
 Agents passed the forged letter anonymously to unwitting U.S. conspiracy theorists . It appeared in a self-published assassination book, and a Dallas newspaper even claimed that a handwriting expert declared it to be genuine . The forged letter was passed anonymously to the United States .
 The book was positively reviewed by Victor Perlo in New Times, which was a KGB front at one time printed in Romania, according to Lt. Lt. Perlo . The KGB-run newspaper was one of the world's KGB front outlets .
 Mark Lane's Rush to Judgment alleges Kennedy was assassinated by a right-wing group . Lane's bestseller Rush To Judgment is based on the assassination of Kennedy in 1966 . Lane says Kennedy was killed by a group in the U.S.
 Oswald's strong Communist ties were downplayed, and instead, the conservative city of Dallas was made the guilty party . Oswald's ties to the Communist Party was downplayed and instead of the city's .
 The Catholic community took his assassination hard, and immediately elevated JFK to a sort of sainthood status . Catholic community celebrated that he had liberated them from second class citizenship .
 Reports of JFK's affairs fascinated the public, but failed to break the myth that if JFK had lived, his second term would be a story of political triumphs restoring people's faith in government .
 Kennedy was arguably a moderate; his policies appeal to both conservatives and liberals . Kennedy's policies appealed to both sides of the spectrum .
 President Obama offered symbols for the liberals while following a conservative course in foreign and domestic policy . He apparently offered symbol for the liberal while following conservative course .
 To be a liberal in the days when Kennedy was in politics, 1946–63, meant supporting the programs of the New Deal . After his death Kennedy's legacy was picked up by liberals, and there is a vague notion .
 On most of these points Kennedy was largely on the conservative or moderate side . Kennedy was on the right side of many of these issues .
 Kennedy explicitly exempted any such movements dominated by ""external" forces, thereby shutting the door on renewed diplomatic relations with Fidel Castro's Cuba . Kennedy also exempted any movement dominated by 'external' forces, meaning Communist .
 On domestic issues, a pilot program for food stamps for low-income Americans was launched in 1961 . The program is now a national experiment in the United States .
 Social Security benefits and food distribution to poor Americans was increased . Free school lunches were also increased, including free food distribution .
 In 1961, Kennedy signed Executive Order 10925, which required affirmative action by government contractors as both applicants and employees . Kennedy signed the order in 1961 .
 In June 1963, Kennedy signed the ""Equal Pay Act"" which was to close the so-called wage gap based on sex . The act passed with overwhelming bipartisan support . Thereafter, in June 1963,. Kennedy signed .
 These tax cuts heralded by many conservatives as landmark since they, like all other tax cuts, brought economic growth . Many conservatives say the tax cuts are heralded as landmark . The tax cuts have been hailed as a landmark by conservatives .
 Kennedy planned deficit spending to promote growth but was hesitant to the displeasure of his more liberal advisers . Kennedy was reluctant to spend more on deficit spending because of his liberal advisers' opposition .
 Liberals argue that he'd support raising the top income tax bracket rate today . Liberals argue he would support raising it today's top tax bracket rates .
 As a senator, Kennedy voted mildly on civil rights legislation . He supported then Senate leader Lyndon Johnson's move of having Eisenhower's 1957 Civil Rights Act sent to the Senate Judiciary Committee .
 Crime was a signature issue for Kennedy, and on taking office he promised a crackdown on organized crime . On dealing with unemployment, he never proposed New Deal-esque programs but instead had a package that was acceptable to conservative Republicans .
 Kennedy increased the number of military advisers and special forces in Vietnam . This helped set up the full military combat commitment made by his successor, Lyndon Johnson .
 Kennedy was very friendly towards Republicans and appointed some to positions in his cabinet, namely Robert S McNamara . Kennedy appointed some of his cabinet members to be Republicans .
 Jacqueline Kennedy was the former Jacqueine Lee Bouvier, later Jacqueline Onassis . Jacqueline was Jacqueline's first wife, Jacqueline, who later married Jacqueline .
 Both Lincoln and Kennedy were elected the President of the United States in '60 . Lincoln and JFK were both elected the president of the U.S. in 1960s .
 Ballard, Robert. Time Feb., 1961 . Report to the American people on the BERLIN CRISIS, JULY 25, 1961 .
 Clarke, Thurston. The Inauguration of John F Kennedy and the Speech That Changed America . The speech that changed America was the speech that Kennedy made .
 JFK's World War II U.S. Navy service was PT-109 and PT-59 Freedman, Lawrence . JFK's Navy career spanned six decades . JFK served in the Navy during the war .
 The Shocking Truth About the Role of South Vietnam and the French Mafia in the Assassination of JFK""", shows that JFK came from a globalist family but did not oppose the elites until he was going to be exposed by CIA Vietnamese drug operations Parmet, Herbert. Parmet
 David Pietrusza, David.60: LBJ vs. LBJ: How the Assassination of John F Kennedy Shattered American Liberalism . How the assassination of John. F Kennedy shattered American liberalism .
 Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr. A Life of John F Kennedy highly critical assessment of his character flaws by conservative historian .
 John F Kennedy, Jr. was assassinated in 1968 . He was the first president of the United States . Kennedy died in 1968 at the age of 65 .