 Ireeeived a message from Washington early in the morning asking if I was going to be in London today and tomorrow . Iree: "It's not clear whether I'm going to go to London today or tomorrow"
 I teg** to get telephone call, and messages transmitted through three separate Embassy chunels . indicating that something unusual was astir in Washington . The embassy in Washington, D.C. was alerted to the situation .
 There 1 was to be briefed on what would later be required of me, before the plane went on to Paris and other destinations . I was briefed on . what would . later be . required of . me, he said . There was a briefing on what was later required of him,
 A telegram that followed mystified me slightly by naming as one of the passtngers on the plane Dean Acheson . The telegram named him as a member of the staff at the White House .
 Archie Roosevelt and Archie Roosevelt motored out to the airfield, near Kewbury, for more than two hours . Archie Roosevelt was the airman who flew the plane to the base in the 1930s .
 The Soviets were developing a missile potential in Cuba that would be useful for offensive purposes . They told us there had been a great commotion for several days in Washington .
 Many missiles were already to place, and a large number of airplanes, including twin-engine bombers, were ready to fly . In fact, many missiles had already been put in place .
 The dangerous thing about this capability was that medium-range ballistic missiles, with a range of 1100 nautical miles, could reach as far as Washington, and southward bwyond the Panama Canal . The moat dangerous thing was that .
 The intermediate RBM's. with a range of 2200 nautical miles could blanket the U.S. with the exception of an area near Seattle, as well as an area deep into Latin America . The intermediate . RBM’s. could blanket . the United States,
 In fact, the abandonment of his campaign tour on the grounds of having a cold was a pretext for returning to Washington to face this unexpected development . The abandonment of a campaign tour was the pretext for his return to Washington .
 The intelligence^^BM ascertained by high attitude reeonnaisance photography . The validity of the validity of this photo is not in doubt .
 I was instructed to see the Prime Minister tomorrow afternoon at four o'clock, while Acheson is to brief General de Gaulle and the NATO Council later that day . Dowling is to report the affair to the British Prime Minister .
 At midnight tomorrow the President is going on the air to declare how he intends to handle the crisis . The President will announce his plans for the crisis at midnight tomorrow .
 It appears there has been violent contention at home ■»«*** What should be done? What should it be?
 Some advocated the hard line of wiping out the bases and equipn *nt, but a temportoing policy seems to have won the day . It is rather unclear as to what this consists of. but the President's talk will serve as to .
 Chet Cooper and myself returned to London about three The^lane went on to Paris, and then to Bonn. Chet . Cooper and himself returned to England about three weeks later .
 I was also told I would he he furnished with a draft of the President's proposed speech, so that Ma cm ll ll l an could consider it and communicate any ideas it evoked from him to the President .
 Cooper and myself went down to Admiralty House, but had not yet received the promised draft draft . Cooper and himself went down but were still waiting for the draft draft to arrive .
 I had a long discussion wife the PM attended also by Lord Home, and Philip de Zulueta . Lord Home was also there to discuss the PM's role in the UK .
 Latter accepted validity evidence evidence existence of offensive capabilities and considered situation grave . Latter accepted evidence evidence exists existence of existence offensive capabilities . considered situation serious .
 Both British officials speculated about Soviet reaction to any embargo . They thought K might retaliate wife embargo against American aeeees to Berlin .
 Or he might repty by some form of harassment our foreign 1 especially Turkish, bases, bases . Or perhaps he might . Or he may repty . Or maybe he might. Or he . might . repty ourselves .
 They suspected K might suggest meeting with President and drag matter out . They suspected he might suggest . meeting with . President and dragging matter out.
 In absence knowledge contents of speech such conversation was hypotbjtticaL Primin wttl consider text . Immediately upon receipt and comment shortly thereafter .
 Several calls to the Department o btained the reply: "Things had become fouled op. and they could not understand why we had not received the text" Several calls were answered by the Department of Transportation who said things had 'became fouled'
 FinaUy suggested that the private channel between MacmiUan and Kennedy be used . In desperation, we suggested that a private channel be used, Finauy said .
 A copy of the speech was promised for delivery to us before noon today . The speech was done, and about seven o'clock tonight we had to receive it .
 This has been a messy affair, ill coordinated; which is surprising, in view of its serious and dangerous nature . Thus far, this has bean a messy as respects this Embassy, affair, is ill coordinated .
 I had an engagement to lunch with Ken Galhraiih today, but he was suddenly called away, under inatnictions to return to India at once, where the difficulties between the Chinese and the Indians have erupted into war . He was called away from the engagement in India at
 Reginald H Pettus. of Charlotte Court House, came to see me this afternoon, with his daughter . He said: "Reginald Pettus of Charlotte . Court House"
 Al Wells called Al Wells regarding the Cuban affair . Prime Minister telephoned me, saying be bad just had a telephone conversation with the President, and indicated that the British Government would go along with us .
 There was a demonstration in front of the Embassy office building on Grosvenor Square, protesting against the SECRET MZfr a delivered at midnight . Thf^PM was warm and friendly, as he MMMv earlier in the day. and said we would be discussing these
 British morning papers did net have time for editorial comment, nor will there be much such until tomorrow morning .
 The Queen entertained in honor of Laurie and Isabel Norstad, and their daughter, Mrs. E and 1 lunched at Buckingham Palace . The Norstads were joined by the Queen at the palace .
 The other guests were Lord Mountbetten, the Homes, Antonia and Hugh Fraser . Hugh Fraser was also at the party .
 There was the usual excellent Palace food, with aasflHMMt 8°°* 1959 Moselle. There was also excellent food .
 I sat between the Queen and Antonia Fraser, the former of whom displayed a lively interest in the Cuban imbroglio . The Queen sat between Antonia and the Queen, both of whom showed interest in Cuban affairs .
 The Embassy was picketed all day by placard carriers aaasjgsjg such signs as Cuba si, Yankees no. and Cuba si . The Embassy is in New York City, New York, New Jersey .
 Eugene Kinnaly, Administrative Assistant to Speaker John McCormack, came with a friend to see me this afternoon . Eugene T Kinnaly is a former Speaker of the House of Representatives . Kinnaly was a member of the Speaker's staff .
 He had been associated with the legislative branch for almost 45 yerrs . He had many stories, some of them droll, about happenings In the House of Representatives .
 I have long considered having him paint my portrait, since 1 must leave one behind when I quit this poet . I have also considered leaving him behind when he quits this poet.
 The son of Sir Edwin Lutyens, the son of the famous architect, is a friend of the architect . He is an old friend of Mr Lutyen, who is a former colleague of the late Sir Edwin .
 Hugh Gaitskell and George Brown were to be briefed on Cuba by Chet Cooper . Joan Koch de Gooreynd was called to Archie Roosevelt's house to talk about Peter .
 Fleming I having Sir Stewart Menzies ft* been Chief of MJ6 during the war, de Gooreynd. took umbrage at this, saying it wee the first Ume the identity of his Chief had ever been disclosed . consider this an inaccurate statement, since it
 Joan Koch de Gooreynd s*ld Petered already gone to the hospital, where he would remain for two months . Joan Koch had already gone into the hospital .
 She did not speak of an operation, so 1 begin to suspect he mj.y be slightly pff hid rocker .
 The crowd attempted to br«* through the plate glass doors of the ground floor, but were repuisea by the Police . Crowd attempted to get through the doors but were re-evacuated by police .
 The Police Force was augmented by officers brought In from parts of London . The force was augmented with officers brought in from other parts of the capital .
 The Metropolitan Police Dirtrict appears in person, called away from a dinner Wdaridges . The Commaadan appears in the series .
 Non-Com heading our U.S. Marine personnel, for the esceUeat way in which TFasydW handled matters last night .
 Some hours later we received a reply, which 1 communicated to Philip de Zulueta . Philip's reply was a reply to a reply sent by the author of the book .
 Our people were generally agreeable to the draft passage proposed by the Prime Minister . The draft passage was proposed by Prime Minister David Cameron .
 He was to go to see Page Smith immediately after lunch to discuss the Cuban episode .
 This afternoon, 1 opened the Embassy orientation course, by exhorting them to be good boys and girls, worthy of their privileges .
 TIME-LIFE will spend the next 18 months reporting from around the world . In the latter, he plans to visit almost every country in the world, and make recommendations as to how reporting might be improved .
 President Kennedy made it clear to me that he had become very concerned about the Soviet supplies of offensive weapon, to Cuba in recent weeks . IS$7 & Draft passage for th« ph.. mi,!,,., . tot<lmeHt m 0ctobar 2B l
 The U.S. had known for some time the location of a number of surface to air missile sites in Cuba . These missiles, even though carrying nuclear warheads, may be regarded as of a defensive nature .
 At least eight ballistic missile sites have been identified in Cuba . Very recently, at least eight have been definitely identified in the country .
 Normally .a*h such site has four launchers and each launcher has two missiles . Each launcher has four missiles and each missile has two launchers . Normally such sites have four launchers .
 Report: From all American intelligence sources confirm that at least 30 missiles are already pre 3 ent in Cuba . Report: Report, from all American . intelligence sources, confirm that . 30 missiles already . already in Cuba, according to U.S. intelligence sources .
 MRBM missiles, with their range of over a thousand miles, could reach a large area of the United States including Washington and nearly the whole of Central America and the Caribbean including the Panama Canal .
 Intermediate range missiles have an operational range of 2200 nautical miles . Intermediate range ballistic missiles have a range of around 2200 miles .
 All these missiles are designed to carry and must be presumed to carry nuclear bombs . The missiles are believed to be capable of carrying nuclear warheads .
 Russia baa supplied Cuba with 1L 28 aircraft, of which over twenty have been definitely identified . In addition, Cuba also received over twenty of the aircraft .
 The United States believe that there are at least five thousand Soviet military personnel already on the island . It is interesting to note that the Soviet Union do not appear to have denied the presence of these missiles in Cuba .
 Mrs. Mildred Dilling Dilling Ooreen and Mrs. Brabourne Harding were married in 1920s . Mrs. Harding was the first lady to be married to the Harding family .
 Marines told not to use pistols even if they are attacked, says Meade . Meade: 'Under no circumstances are they to use pistol even if attacked'
 We have sent to Frankfort for a supply of tear gaa. with and would expect it to repulse any attempt by rioters to penetrate above the first floor of the building. We have also sent to the German capital to provide tear gas .
 I do. however, want to reconsider whether for the protection of the cede room we should not. as a last resort, open fire. I do not. however . I do . however, . want to . reconsider whether we should . open fire . We should not as a
 Chet Cooper returns to Washington this morning . Thursday, October 25, 1962 . Thursday Thursday . Thursday. Thursday .
 In the aftermath of his I viait we are still having repercussions from the release of some of the air reconnaisanee pictures to the London newspapers . We are still dealing with the repercussions of the release from some of these pictures .
 Mike Forrestal called me from the Operations Room at the White House to inquire into which photograph* had been shown . Forrestal: "After midnight two days ago, [Forrestal] called me to ... ask if the photo had been taken"
 It seems there was a question as to whether the release in the U.S. should not be simultaneous . The release of the film in the United States was also a question .
 As a result of a misconstruction of what occurred, Bill Clark, our PAO, has now been referred to in the Washington Post as the ""errant USIS Officer in London"" who made a mistake .
 Buss Wiggins, of the Post, is coming to see me this afternoon, and 1 shall straighten it out with him . Wiggins, a reporter for the Washington Post, will straighten up with him. Wiggins is a good reporter and a good writer .
 Mm. of whet he told me to the Pr-ident, ffs I had beard it directly »y1f from Mac let the matter rest .
 The unique identification numbers assigned to the documents are listed m the top ngnt-hand corner of the microfiche header .