 The lessons of the Cuban missile crisis occupy a central place in U.S. foreign policy and international relations theory . Reading the Lessons Correctly RICHARD NED LEBOW .
 For policymakers, the crisis confirmed a number of tenets about the utility of power in a nuclear world . It also confirmed the ways in which relations with the Soviet Union should best be managed .
 Theoreticians have thoroughly examined the case for generalizations about crisis decision-making, bargaining theory, and the role of nuclear weapons in foreign policy .
 In recent years, a burgeoning revisionist literature has challenged the prevalent view that the crisis represented a necessary and successful response to a Soviet challenge of vital American interests .
 Kennedy has been charged with overreacting to the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy charged with provoking a confrontation with Moscow for domestic political reasons .
 Most of this literature is highly polemical and thus of little analytical value . Unfortunately, most of it is of little value, and most of this is polematic .
 "His Finest Hour Now" raises some interesting questions about the policy implications of the crisis . CNN's John Sutter talks about the crisis in Iraq .
 The Nature of International Crisis is published by John Defterios . He is currently finishing a study of Soviet and American misconceptions of nuclear strategy .
 The scholarly literature is open to the same kind of challenge as its policy counterpart . It's open to a challenge as the policy counterpart, Dr. Andrew Hammond says .
 The literature has also created dogma or confirmed it when such confirmation may have been unwarranted based on the evidence . The literature also has also confirmed or confirmed dogma when it is wrong .
 Two striking examples of this are the deeply entrenched and related beliefs in the efficacy of deterrence and in the ability of political leaders to steer their states through the shoals of nuclear crisis .
 Soviet policy before the missiles were discovered has been interpreted as consistent with the former belief . The success of Kennedy and Khrushchev in resolving the confrontation is often offered in support of the latter .
 Since such dogmas have important policy implications, the subject has more than just academic interest . The subject of dogmas is important policy matters, especially for policy makers .
 President Kennedy responded to reports that the Soviet Union was secretly deploying missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy issued a series of stern warnings to Moscow in 1962 .
 Less than a week later, on September 13, he used a press conference to commit himself to action . He said he would take action if his warning was not heeded .
 President Kennedy's warnings were also communicated to Moscow through private channels in order to reinforce their salience and to dissuade the Soviets from interpreting them as mere campaign rhetoric . President Kennedy also communicated the warnings to Moscow .
 On September 4, Attorney General Robert Kennedy told Anatolii Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador in Washington, that his brother would not tolerate the introduction of offensive weapons into Cuba .
 The November congressional elections would in no way inhibit the president's freedom of action abroad . Theodore Sorensen repeated the message to Dobrynin, adding that in his judgment, the November elections would not inhibit his freedom .
 Ambassador Dobrynin called on Robert Kennedy to relay a confidential promise from Chairman Khrushchev that the Soviet Union would not create any trouble for the U.S. during the election campaign . Ambassador Dobynin: "The United States was not going to be in danger"
 On September 11, the Soviet government issued a statement in response to Kennedy's warnings . Kennedy's warning came on September 11 . The Soviet government responded by issuing a statement of support .
 Khrushchev and Foreign Minister Anastas Mikoian made the statement . The statement denied that there was any need for the Soviet Union to shift its retaliatory weapons to Cuba in order to defend it .
 He denied emphatically to Chester Bowles that his government had any intention of putting missiles into Cuba .
 The Soviet statements, both public and private, appeared to indicate Soviet recognition of the nature and the gravity of the U.S. warning . I I I
 Kennedy believed Moscow understood and respected U.S. strategic and political interests in Cuba . Moscow's assurances to Kennedy can only be interpreted as assurances .
 Sorensen noted that this message did not reach President Kennedy until after he became aware of the missiles in Cuba on 16 October . The message was sent to the White House by President Kennedy .
 The Soviet Union acknowledged these vital interests and announced a strategy that entailed no basic conflict . It was announced that the Soviet Union would not engage in conflict with Russia .
 This would also seem to be a model case of communication, or signalling, between the superpowers . This seems to be an example of signalling, or communication, between superpowers.
 All responses indicated that the Soviets understood the signal and accepted the message . The message was received by the Soviet Union .
 In retrospect, it is evident that Moscow had decided sometime in June to put missiles in Cuba . Moscow decided to do so in June, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Their assurances to the contrary were designed to lull the Kennedy administration into inaction until the missiles were actually deployed . Their assurances were supposed to lull into inaction .
 A bewildering array of hypotheses has attempted to explain Soviet policy in the Cuban missile crisis . The Soviet state of Soviet policy has been described as 'strategic ambiguity'
 Remarkably, practically all of these explanations start with the premise that Khruschev behaved rationally, writes David Frum . Frum: "Khruschev acted rationally"
 Simple deductive logic suggests four generic explanations for Soviet policy that are congruent with rational decision-making . Theories include Soviet policy in the 1980s and '90s .
 These assume that Khrushchev was deliberately misled by Kennedy . They also assume that the gains justified the risks; that the risks justified the costs; and that the costs justified the gains .
 Explaining the Cuban M4issile Crisis (Boston: Little, Brown and Co. Co., 1971), 42. The Cuban crisis was the Cuban response to the Cuban missile crisis .
 His arguments are the least convincing of all the various explanations of U.S. and Soviet behavior . Space precludes treating his arguments, which, in any case, are not convincing .
 They accepted the risk because they expected to reap considerable political and strategic gains if the missiles were not detected until they became operational . They accepted this risk because of the risks of being detected .
 Adam Ulam, who adopted this viewpoint, has conjured up a possible payoff . Ulam: "Adam Ulam has a lot to do, and it's a good thing"
 He argues that Soviet leaders in the spring of 1962 ""were seized with an irresistible desire"" to solve the most grueling dilemmas of Soviet foreign policy . The book is published by Simon Tisdall .
 The introduction of nuclear-tipped missiles into Cuba was a ""bold stroke"" to resolve all at once the German problem, the China problem, and the difficulties associated with Soviet strategic inferiority . The introduction was a 'bold stroke' to resolve the problems of Germany and China .
 Once in Cuba, the missiles would become negotiable, their removal conditional upon the United States meeting Soviet conditions on the German peace treaty and other pressing international issues . The U.S. would have to meet conditions to remove the missiles .
 Part of the price the Americans would pay for the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba could well be the withdrawal of their protection from Formosa, China .
 This would add an almost irresistible incentive for the Chinese at least to postpone their atomic ambitions .
 Moscow counted not only on the Formosa concession but on the general ""atmosphere"" created by their proposal to bring the Chinese around . He speculated, however, that Moscow counted .
 Khrushchev "must have thought" the Americans would actually be grateful to him for his gambit, he said . He also reasoned that Khruschev's gambit would resolve the German problem, remove the threatening prospect of China having nuclear weapons .
 Admittedly, the entire scheme rested on the ability of the Soviets to install their missiles in Cuba without being detected by the Americans . The Soviets were able to install the missiles without detection by the American .
 To sustain the thesis that expected gains balanced expected risks, he must postulate a potpourri of incentives that strain the reader's credulity, with regard to their realism and to the likelihood that Soviet leaders would consider them as a coordinated package .
 The Soviet decision to put missiles into Cuba could also be considered rational if Moscow acted in full knowledge or expectation of the consequences . Gains that Justify the Costs that justify the costs could also justify the decision .
 Moscow sought the objective that Moscow sought from the outset . This would mean that the actual outcome of the crisis more or less represented the objective of Moscow .
 He insisted his government had information that the U.S. was preparing another assault on Cuba . He sent in missiles in order to extract a no-invasion pledge from President Kennedy .
 It was clear at a very early date that Khrushchev's motives were more or less precisely as he describes them, he says . It's clear that most sensitive observers were aware of his motives, he writes .
 In the West too much was made of his humiliation in being forced to withdraw his missiles, says Putin . Putin's 'humiliating' in the West, he says, but too much is made of him being humiliated .
 The Chinese exploited this up to the hilt, and so did Khrushchev's adversaries at home . The Chinese exploitation of this exploit was exploited by the Chinese, and by the Soviets .
 President Kennedy's assassination was for him a profound and very personal misfortune . And he achieved an understanding with President Kennedy, whose assassination was . President Kennedy .
 Khrushchev allegedly sought to end the Soviet Union, but there is a discrepancy between the means and the end . The end of the Soviet-era Soviet Union was not the end that he allegedly sought .
 The Soviet Union sent Cuba at least 42 Ilyushin-28 bombers and an equal number of missiles . Cuba also sent 42 Soviet-made bombers and a total of 42 missiles .
 Each missile launch pad had launch pads for four missiles and storage facilities . The latter were costly fixed installations . Each launch pad was equipped with storage, fueling, and control facilities .
 Critics of Khrushchev's explanation find it difficult to believe that all of this was put into place with the avowed purpose of being abandoned shortly thereafter . Critics of the explanation find this difficult .
 The nature of the weapons systems that were introduced also casts doubt on Khrushchev's testimony . Second, the nature of these weapons systems also casts a doubt on his testimony . The weapons systems were introduced in the 1960s also cast doubt on the testimony .
 Between them, they could target almost any important population center or military installation in the United States . Between them they could attack almost any major population center, military installation .
 Khrushchev's pledge not to invade Cuba was not his goal, a less formidable strategic force would have been preferable . A less formidable force for example, one capable of hitting Miami or even parts of the southeastern United States -would have been preferred in every respect .
 The Soviets could have attained this capability with a limited number of MRBMs, which were semimobile missiles that were less vulnerable than IRBMs and easier to deploy without detection . The Soviets were able to achieve this capability by using a limited amount of MRMs .
 Khrushchev's efforts to portray the crisis as something of a Soviet victory . Other world leaders-notably communist leaders-concluded otherwise .
 The Chinese, Albanians, and, of course, the Cubans pointed out the utter meaninglessness of verbal assurances given by capitalist adversaries . The Chinese and Albanians pointed out that the assurances were not true .
 As a result of the Cuban fiasco, the Soviet Union lost prestige and influence within the communist camp . Soviet leaders were particularly anxious to reassert their authority in order to counteract centrifugal forces .
 An Analysis of Soviet Calculations and Behavior,"" World Politics 16 : 365. 365. " World Politics" is a daily look at world politics .
 In all likelihood, the missile crisis was one of the contributing causes of his subsequent downfall . The missile crisis may have contributed to the downfall of President Obama .
 Khrushchev could not have been expected to foresee with precision all of these costs . It is difficult to believe that he and other members of the Kremlin inner circle could have been completely blind to them .
 Kennedy made every effort to allow Khrushchev to save what face he could something that could not have been predicted with any degree of confidence in advance . In this regard it is important to remember that Kennedy .
 Had Kennedy chosen not to seek Khrushchev's humiliation, the embarrassment and loss of prestige suffered by the Soviet leader and his country would have been greater still . Kennedy chose to seek humiliation rather than embarrassment .
 The price of the Soviet withdrawal of its missiles from Cuba was simply too great for Khrushchev knowingly and willingly to have accepted it in advance . The price was too high for the Soviets to pull missiles from the country, says historian John Avlon .
 Some analysts suggest Khrushchev's objective was a more far-reaching trade-off . For this reason, some analysts have suggested a more wide-reaching deal .
 Speculation has centered on missile trade involving Cuba and Turkey . Speculation also centered on withdrawal from other foreign military bases threatening to Soviet Union .
 These trade-offs would have resulted in a more favorable payoff for the Soviet Union . They are open to the criticism that the means were disproportionate or inappropriate to the ends .
 There is no evidence that the Russians ever considered any of these exchanges as their objective . Leaving the Cuba-Turkey deal aside, there is no indication that they ever considered these exchanges .
 Even the Cuba-Turkey trade, which was mooted by Khrushchev and other officials during the crisis, seems more a belated effort to make the best possible bargain in a bad situation .
 Khrushchev's perception of U.S. resolve and willingness to take risks may have been distorted by cultural and political differences . Kennedy's view of the Soviet Union and the United States could have distorted his perception of American resolve .
 Khrushchev's miscalculation begins with attempting to deny the credibility of Kennedy's several warnings . Kennedy's warnings were not enough to justify his miscalculations .
 Khrushchev would have assessed the meaning of some of the words he used . They do this by analyzing the political context in which he would have considered the words .
 Kennedy's personality; his record in office; and his peculiar characteristics of American electoral politics . Kennedy's biography and record are examined in a new book, "The Kennedy Years"
 Americans display an extraordinary interest in the personal characteristics of their leaders . Americans are curious about their leaders' personal characteristics .
 This seems attributable to their belief that the personality and character of the president have a decisive influence on national policy . This seems to be attributable to the belief that they believe that the president has a decisive role in national policy.
 Americans assume that others view their political system in a similar light . Americans naturally assume that other Americans view their politics in similar light. But they do not have the same view .
 For a number of American analysts, a natural starting point for understanding the events that led to the crisis is examining the personality and character of John F Kennedy .
 There is a surprising consensus among American students of the crisis that Khrushchev underestimated Kennedy . He believed the president was the kind of man who would shy away from hard decisions, students say .
 Khrushchev viewed Kennedy as weak, inexperienced, and irresolute . The judgment was fortified by Kennedy's comparative youth, his handling of the Bay of Pigs fiasco, and his performance in Vienna in June 1961 .
 The Soviets were operating on an incorrect image of their opponent and were genuinely surprised when Kennedy reacted as firmly as he did . Nearly everyone who has examined the Cuban missile crisis argues that the Soviets were wrong .
 The gravamina laid before Kennedy are his youth, performance at the Vienna meeting with Khrushchev, and the fiasco of the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy's youth and performance at Vienna meeting are his top three reasons for his success .
 Abel offered no justification for his conclusion but presumably might argue that Khrushchev, a relatively unsophisticated man of peasant stock, found it difficult to believe that someone young enough to be his son could stand up to him in a test of will . Abel offers no justification but might
 If Kennedy's age bothered Khrushchev, it may have been for the opposite reason . Kennedy was the prime minister of the '60s .
 Young are notorious for their rashness and willingness to take risks that their elders might abjure . Rightly or wrongly, the young are famous for taking risks that they might not take .
 Khrushchev might have viewed a young president as less predictable, less compromising, and overly concerned with proving his virility and making a reputation for himself . He might have been less predictable and less compromising .
 French leader hinted that immaturity had led him to overreact to the presence of Soviet mfissiles in Cuba . While officially supporting the president during the crisis, he said he had overreacted .
 Khrushchev himself seemed concerned that Kennedy would underestimate him because of his advanced age . Kennedy seemed to be underestimating him because he was an advanced age, according to reports .
 Reston had the opportunity to observe Kennedy ten minutes after his final session with Khrushchev . Reston observed Kennedy after his last meeting with the Soviet Union leader . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Three and a half years later, he described his recollection of this encounter with a woman . He described his encounter with the woman as 'a very strange thing'
 He had tried, always, to be calm and rational with Khrushchev, to get him to define what the Soviet Union would and would not do . He had been bullied and threatened him with war over Berlin, writes .
 We will have to know much more about that confrontation between Kennedy and 32 Abel, Missile Crisis, 37 .
 James Reston also speculated that Khrushchev might have been influenced by Kennedy's age . Reston, admittedly on the basis of no evidence, also speculated on no evidence that Kennedy was influenced by his age. Reston: "Krushchev's age may have been affected by Kennedy
 Khrushchev had studied the events of the Bay of Pigs . He would have understood if Kennedy had left Castro alone or destroyed him . But when Kennedy was rash enough to strike at Cuba but not bold enough to finish the job, he decided to take action .
 The communist decision to put offensive missiles into Cuba was the final gamble of this assumption, author says . The communist government's decision to launch offensive missiles was the last gamble .
 Reston was careful to describe his analysis as unconfirmed speculation . Reston is careful to say his analysis is unconfirmed .
 Reston's account of the Vienna summit is the only one that suggests weakness on Kennedy's part . Reston says Kennedy's account is only one of his accounts of the summit in which he was weak .
 All eyewitness accounts indicate only plain speaking with neither man giving any ground . As Robin Edmonds has observed, all the eyewitness descriptions of the actual conversations between the two leaders seem to be very similar .
 Schlesinger, Sorensen, Salinger, and Salinger all provide rather full accounts of the summit .
 Schlesinger reported that afterwards the president asked Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson if it was always like this. Thompson . The president asked ambassador if it had always been like this .
 Kennedy told journalists of Khrushchev's demands and of his own determination not to give in . Kennedy said he was determined to stand firmly by refusing to back down .
 The Reston-Abel thesis is also questioned by Pachter, Collision Course, 64 . Reston's thesis is controversial, and the reston's is controversial .
 He argued that Khrushchev would not have conducted his subsequent offensive in Berlin so cautiously if he had underestimated Kennedy at Vienna . He said he would have done so if he'd underestimated Kennedy in Vienna .
 Khrushchev himself, however, confirmed their accounts in his own memoirs . The former Soviet leader's memoirs were published by the Soviet Union .
 His descriptions of the Vienna talks mesh nicely with the portrayals of Schlesinger, Sorensen, and Salinger . So do so do his recollections of Kennedy's performance in the play .
 He was impressed by Kennedy's grasp of international issues and above all by his frankness, he said .
 Eisenhower found Kennedy a refreshing change from Dwight D Eisenhower, even though their policy positions were barely distinguishable . Kennedy and Eisenhower's policy positions on Germany and Berlin were hardly distinguishable, he said .
 Kennedy, he reported, wanted him to agree to respect the political status quo in the Third World . Khrushchev insisted it flew in the face of reality and was unacceptable to a good communist .
 Kennedy was taken aback by Khrushchev's vehemence . Kennedy parried the chairman's verbal thrusts with skill and conviction . Kennedy was seen as a firm but thoughtful leader . The two men are still in complete agreement .
 The third and most common charge raised against Kennedy is that his refusal to commit U.S. troops to the faltering Bay of Pigs invasion undermined his credibility in Khrushchev's eyes . Kennedy was accused of refusing to commit American troops .
 The ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion attempt of April 1961 may have demonstrated the depths of U.S. hostility toward Castro . It may also have suggested to Soviet leaders that United States reluctance to engage its own forces directly in military action against Castro was also a factor .
 The fact that the United States had attempted, even though ineffectually, to overthrow Castro, both increased Castro's desire for Soviet military assistance and made such assistance seem legitimate to many third countries . At the same time, the fact that U.S. had attempted to topple Castro made
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco was only one of several possible interpretations of Kennedy's resolve and Khrushchev's perception of it . However, it is one of a few interpretations of the impact of the fiasco on Kennedy's .
 There is at least as much reason to believe the Bay of Pigs should have enhanced the Soviets' perception of Kennedy's resolve to face any challenge from Cuba in the future .
 The failure at the Bay of Pigs, for which Kennedy took full personal responsibility, had made Cuba the political Achilles' heel of the administration . Cuba was a political liability for the Kennedy administration .
 Public opinion polls reveal frustration and anger at Castro's durability and the growth of Soviet influence in the Caribbean . The Cuban leader's durability is seen as a factor in the Cuban crisis .
 During the blockade, he reported, his brother asked him why they were risking war with the Soviet Union . His brother asked why they would risk war with Russia, he said .
 His argument could have been that the Kennedy administration was reacting to the provocations of domestic critics, that these statements were aimed at Republican opponents rather than at the Soviet Union . The administration would find some way to accommodate a Soviet fait accompli .
 Kennedy reiterated and clarified his commitment through private channels, which he was hardly likely to have done if his real audience had been the American electorate . These arguments ignore the fact that Kennedy reiterated his commitment in private channels .
 Campaign oratory would not have been backed up by extensive naval and aerial reconnaissance . The Cubans and Russians knew about, something they knew about .
 Kennedy was highly specific about the nature of his commitment to the nation . Above all, Kennedy said, "I am committed to the United States," he said .
 He almost certainly would have avoided specifics in a campaign promise that he had no intention of honoring . He would have been careful not to give specifics .
 President Obama said he would not tolerate missiles capable of striking at the U.S. Instead, he took great care to state unequivocally and in public, he said .
 Ambassador Dobrynin and Moscow experts on U.S. politics dismissed Kennedy's pledge as a meaningless campaign promise . It remains very difficult to believe that Ambassador Dobynin and experts on the United States were so ignorant and misinformed about American politics as to dismiss Kennedy's promise .
 It seems more likely that their advice was not solicited or that it was ignored . It seems likely that they were not soliciting or that they ignored .
 A full-blown international crisis on the eve of a national election was bound to assist the president at the polls, thus giving him a political incentive to expose the missiles . Of course, the opposite and probably more realistic conclusion might also have been drawn -that a . more realistic . more
 He acknowledged that public opinion is critical to the outcome of elections . While denying that elections made any real difference in policy, he acknowledged public opinion was critical .
 Khrushchev reported that he knew perfectly well that any endorsement from the Soviet Union would serve as a disadvantage for a candidate . The Soviet Union endorsed a candidate in the 1960 election .
 Americans tried to use the Soviets to try to influence the election's outcome . This fact did not stop the Americans from trying to affect the outcome .
 White House asked to release U-2 pilot Gary Francis Powers just before election day . White House says it was asked by the White House to release Powers . Powers was the pilot of the U.2 .
 Two presidential candidates are both trying to cash in on an improvement in relations . Now is not the time to do it because the two presidential candidates both want to cash-in .
 If we give the slightest boost to Nixon it will be interpreted as an expression of our willingness to see him in the White House, says historian Richard Nixon . "If we give Nixon a boost we will be interpreting it as a sign of support for him," he says .
 "Let's hold off on taking the final step of releasing Powers. Therefore, let's hold on," says Powers .
 He said Nixon was not really the sort of man he deliberately appeared to be at election rallies . He said he did not deliberately appear to be a candidate for president at rallies .
 Once Nixon is in the White House he'll take a position of preserving and perhaps even improving relations with the U.S. I'm sure I'm absolutely certain he'll ... preserve and perhaps improve our relations .
 Kennedy encouraged Khrushchev to believe that he would do so again, some analysts say . Kennedy "faltered" once, some say . Some analysts say that because Kennedy 'faltered' once, he encouraged him to do it again .
 People who undergo one humiliation generally do their best to avoid a repeat of that experience . One need have no knowledge of U.S. politics, only of human nature, to realize that .
 They are sometimes driven to the point of overreaction to guard against it, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Some analysts believe that the Bay of Pigs damaged Kennedy's credibility in a different context - to explain the Soviet strategic buildup in the 1960s and 1970s . Some of the analysts who believe this is a different argument use this same argument to explain this .
 The Soviets acquired a potent strategic arsenal in order to ensure that they would never have to back down again out of weakness . They reason that, having been humiliated in the missile crisis, they acquired a powerful strategic arsenal .
 If this principle holds true for one superpower it should be equally applicable to the other, it should also apply to the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 There is also no reason to believe that Soviet leaders should have been any less sensitive than U.S. leaders to the implications of a bruised ego . Soviet leaders were more sensitive than American leaders in the 1980s .
 Russian history might even have been expected to make them aware of the problem . Russian history in the twentieth century might have made them particularly aware .
 All Russian schoolchildren learn that World War I began because their country mobilized instead of acquiescing in Austria-Hungary's destruction of Serbia . The war began because Russia mobilized against Serbia's Serbia .
 Russia did so because five years before it had been humiliated by Austria-Hungary in the Bosnian annexation crisis . Five years before the annexation crisis, Russia had already been humiliated in the Balkans .
 To suffer a second such defeat in the Balkans, Russian leaders reasoned, would not only risk revolution at home but would be tantamont to renouncing their empire's status as a great power . Russian leaders believed that a second defeat at home would risk revolution and renounce their status as
 Analysis to this point has attempted to show that Kennedy's youth, the Vienna summit, and the Bay of Pigs cannot convincingly be invoked to explain Khrushchev's miscalculation .
 There exists no real evidence to support the contention that these factors led Khrushchev to question Kennedy's resolve . Kennedy was the prime minister of the late 1960s .
 arguments to the reverse effect -that these considerations should have enhanced Soviet respect for Kennedy's resolve -are equally if not more compelling on the face of their logic . Moreover, arguments that these considerations . should have increased Soviet respect . are equally compelling .
 The other set of possible explanations for Soviet miscalculation, those based on the distorting effects of political and cultural differences, have not been developed into full-fledged arguments by the authors who incline towards them .
 With one exception, they have been mooted in passing without further elaboration . The idea has been floated in the past without elaborating on it .
 Wohlstetter, ""Cuba and Pearl Harbor,"" 21, also suggests that since Khrushchev had issued and then retracted ultimatums on Berlin, he expected that Kennedy could do the same with regard to Cuba . Wohstetter: "Cuba, Pearl
 The marginal appeal to U.S. analysts of cultural and politica tions for Soviet miscalculation is both striking and significant . It is the marginal appeal of American analysts to the Soviets for their miscalculations .
 The American predeliction, already noted, to explain poli in terms of personalities involved . It almos ly reflects the American predeiction to describe pols as individuals .
 The avowed goals lysts are to put themselves in Khrushchev's shoes and to see the world through his eyes . However, the avowed . goals lyst are to . put themselves into Khrush . shoes and see the . eyes of the world's first prime minister .
 Marxist theory would suggest not, since it minimizes the role of the individual in history and stresses instead the decisive influence of class . Marxist theory stresses instead of individualism, class is decisive influence .
 Class differences, not personal idiosyncracies or free will, determine political differences among policymakers, say experts . Class differences are said to be factors in political differences between policymakers .
 Leaders from the same class background can be expected to behave in more or less the same way . Leaders from same class backgrounds should behave in a similar way, says Simon Tisdall .
 Khrushchev and his colleagues would have analyzed foreign policy from different perspectives than their American counterparts . The world views were conditioned by Marxism, they would have considered the question of an adversary's resolve .
 Too much can be made of the operational distinctions between the Marxist and liberal analysis of foreign policy formulation . Too much, of course, can be said of the differences between Marxist .
 Khrushchev was not so much an ideologue to ignore the differences among American leaders . Western analysts are not altogether insensitive to the influence of impersonal economic and social forces on a leader's policies .
 It would be fatuous to deny that these different perspectives do exist and have affected the ways Soviet and American policymakers view the world . But it would be a fool to deny these different views do exist .
 Many American analysts reveal a certain cognitive innocence in explaining Soviet miscalculations in Cuba . John Kennedy's character is the subject of many questions, including the Kennedy character .
 They can be charged with projecting their own cultural bias onto the Soviets . They can fairly be charged . of interpreting Soviet policy in terms of it, he says .
 Kennedy as an individual made on Khrushchev appears to derive from another source, one that has more disturbing implications . Attention to the impression that Kennedy as a individual made . appears to have been made by another source .
 James Reston and Elie Abel were responsible for focusing attention on Kennedy's youth, his performance in Vienna, and his handling of the Bay of Pigs operation . Reston did not conceive this emphasis on their own .
 Abel recounted the story of visiting the president in observation by de Gaulle that the United States, never having lived with direct threats to its security, overreacted to the Soviet placement of missiles in Cuba . At a book and author lunch, Abel recounts the story .
 The implicit argument here is that Khrushchev, as a European, failed to realize American sensitivity on this point . The implied argument is that he didn't realize U.S. sensitivity .
 He told Kennedy of his interest in writing a book about the president's first year in office .
 Kennedy speculated he might have to run the supreme risk to convince Khruschev that conciliation did not mean humiliation . Kennedy speculated that the time might come when he would have to convince him to take the risk .
 Khrushchev believed that the U.S. was too timid to risk nuclear war and too concerned with legalisms to justify any distinction between our overseas missile bases and his . He believed that once confronted with the missiles we would do nothing but protest .
 The Kennedy administration's postmortem of the crisis strengthened their view that Khrushchev had acted so brazenly because he had doubted American resolve . Kennedy administration postmortem strengthened the view that he had acted brazenly .
 "In a general sense the decision obviously represented the supreme probe of American intentions," the judge said . The decision was made in a "general sense"
 A faction in Moscow had long been denouncing the government's ""no win"" policy . The Americans were too rich or too soft or liberal to fight, Moscow thought .
 The leaders of the world's most powerful nation faced down the Chinese in Korea and the Soviets in Berlin . They were fearful that their adversary had no respect for their resolve .
 The ostensible causes for their concern were Kennedy's failure at the Bay of Pigs and his acceptance of the Berlin Wall . The Bay of the Pigs failed to win over the Soviet Union and the West .
 Some members of the administration traced the problem even further back to this week . The administration has been criticized for its handling of the situation .
 John McCone says the U.S. led the Russians into that frame of mind by a series of things it had done or failed to do . Elie Abel has relayed the opinions of McCone, a Kennedy intimate .
 More bizarre still is the degree of ""selective attention" revealed by the comments of Kennedy and his inner circle . More bizarre is the level of 'selective' attention' shown by Kennedy .
 U.S. felt constrained to tolerate Soviet initiatives, like the Hungarian invasion and the Berlin Wall . Granted, there had been some major Soviet initiatives that the United States felt constrained .
 Foreign policy successes in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia stretched back to the opening days of the cold war . But there was also a series of foreign policy successes that stretched back from the Cold War .
 The most recent of these had been in Berlin where, according to most observers, American steadfastness had made Khrushchev back down . U.S. stood firm in the face of the world's most recent stand-off .
 Horelick and Rush declared that the USSR could discover the West's will to resist only by testing it . The USSR could not resist the West, they said .
 During the course of the Berlin campaign and probably by the end of 1961, the Soviet leaders became 68 Sorensen, Kennedy, 724. During the . course of . the Berlin . campaign, probably by . the . end of the . 1961 campaign, the . Soviet leaders
 They acted as if there had been one failure after another between the Bay of Pigs and the missile crisis . The US government acted as though the crisis had been a failure, the president said .
 Taking their cue from the Kennedy administration, they overlook the success of Berlin in favor of the ""failure"" of Cuba, they say .
 Khrushchev's gamble was reasonably conceived, says critics . They cite this ""failure"" and Kennedy's alleged weakness in Vienna to justify it . They also cite this "failure" in Vienna as proof .
 The most disturbing aspect of this ""courage and commitment"" thesis is the tautological nature of its confirmation. "The most disturbing part of this."" thesis is that it is that of courage and commitment, not courage .
 According to the thesis, Kennedy projected his own feelings of inadequacy onto the nation's bargaining reputation . Kennedy was deeply affected by his humiliation at the Bay of Pigs, the thesis says .
 Khrushchev's missile ploy, which was open to a variety of possible interpretations, was then taken by him as a clear confirmation of his worst forebodings . The missile ploy was taken as a confirmation of the worst of the Soviet Union's worst fears .
 Kennedy's view of the matter spread to the journalists around him, who adopted it in their analysis of the crisis . Kennedy's views spread to journalists around the world, including the journalists .
 Academic analysts accepted it uncritically because it helped explain behavior that otherwise would have appeared irrational . Academic analysts in turn accepted it unprovokedly .
 The 'courage and commitment' thesis has become one of the most entrenched shibboleths of the confrontation . Without a shred of hard evidence to back it up, the thesis has never been proven .
 The thesis has provided the justification for the most enduring policy lesson of the crisis . In turn, the thesis has been provided by the thesis of the policy lesson .
 The corollary to belief that questionable resolve invites challenge is the belief that unquestioned resolve deters it . For example, the president of the U.S. Senate in New York City has been accused of corruption in the past .
 This belief encouraged subsequent policymakers to view every foreign upheaval as a possible test of American will . This belief has led to the belief that every foreign event is a test of America's will .
 It provided the most important strategic incentive for intervention in Vietnam and the willingness of more recent U.S. leaders to take up the ""Soviet challenge"" in Africa and the Persian Gulf .
 It has helped to enshrine as dogma what Barton Bernstein calls the ""potentially fatal paradox""- the belief that the U.S. might have to go to war to affirm the very credibility that is supposed to make war unnecessary .
 In other words, they acted in accord with either Soviet national interests, their own political interests, or a combination of the two . The Soviets acted with either national interests or political interests in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev and those around him accepted the risks associated with introducing Soviet missiles into Cuba . Starting from this premise, they elaborate one of four generic explanations to explain why .
 Analysts' failure to reconstruct Khrushchev's behavior is not due to lack of imagination or diligence, writes David Frum . Frum: Khrushov's failure is not to blame for his failure to explain his actions . Khrushova: The failure is to explain Khrush
 The problem lies instead with the assumption of rationality, which simply cannot be reconciled with Khrushchev's policy, writes David Frum . Frum: "The problem lies . The assumption of rational thinking is not reconciled"
 An alternative explanation should be based upon the assumption that Khrushchev had no plausible reasons for questioning Kennedy's commitment to keep offensive weapons out of Cuba . An alternative theory should accordingly be based on the assumption .
 Instead of trying to explain away the credibility of Kennedy's warnings, an alternative explanation should show why and how Khrushchev convinced himself that he could successfully put Soviet missiles into Cuba .
 This is also a formidable analytical obstacle, but one that may prove less difficult to overcome . This may be less difficult than that of others, but it may be easier to overcome.
 The present author's comparative research into international crises suggests a hypothesis that might clarify the mystery of Soviet policy in the Cuban missile crisis .
 The origins of thirteen ""brinkmanship"" crises -confrontations in which a state challenges an important commitment of an adversary in the expectation that the adversary will back down- were studied to determine why policymakers pursued policies that risked war .
 The finding was that almost without exception, these crises could most readily be traced to grave foreign and domestic threats . Leaders believed that such threats could only be overcome through an aggressive foreign policy, the study found .
 The most important external threat was the expectation of a dramatic shift in the balance of power . The most significant external threat is the expectation that a dramatic change in the power balance was possible .
 In seven of the 13 cases, brinkmanship was preceded by a widely shared perception among policymakers that a dramatic, unfavorable shift in the balance of power was imminent . In seven cases, the perception of a shift in power was not imminent .
 Brinkmanship in these cases was conceived as a forceful response to acute and impending danger, as a means of preventing or even redressing the shift in the balance of power before time ran out and such a response became unrealistic . Such a response to such an impending danger became unrealistic, such
 In four of the cases -Korea , Bosnia , July , and Arab-Israeli domestic political instability or the frangibility of the state itself appeared instrumental in convincing leaders to provoke a confrontation .
 They resorted to the time-honored technique of attempting to offset discontent at home by diplomatic success abroad . The British government has been accused of trying to cover up discontent with the U.S.
 The political weakness of leaders as distinct from the instability of the political system as a whole provided a third incentive for brinkmanship . Individual leaders sought success abroad in order to buttress their domestic positions .
 Political weakness can also lead to confrontations because leaders feel too insecure to oppose policies they know are risky or otherwise ill-conceived . Political weakness also leads to confrontational confrontations in the United States .
 One or the other of these manifestations of political weakness appears to have played a role in the origins of ten of the brinkmanship challenges . One of the ten challenges is the President of the United States .
 A fourth incentive for brinkmanship is associated with intraelite competition for power . Israel has a history of brinkmanship in the past .
 This was a primary cause of three brinkmanship crisis and probably a secondary cause of several others . This was likely to be the primary cause for several other brinkmanship crises in the world .
 A bureaucratic subunit or political coalition can engineer a confrontation with a foreign power in the expectation that it will enhance its domestic influence or undermine those of its adversaries . A confrontation can be engineered by a political coalition in the hope of boosting domestic influence .
 Intraelite competition can also induce actors to pursue policies calculated to advance their domestic interests . These policies have the side effect of provoking a crisis with another state . Int Israel can also provoke a crisis if these policies provoke a conflict with another .
 The Fashoda crisis is an example of the former and the Russo-Japanese crisis in Korea of the latter . The crisis is similar to that of the Russian crisis in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The expectation that an adversary would back down when challenged has often proved unwarranted . In practice, the expectation of an adversary backing down is often unwarranted, it has proved .
 Most brinkmanship challenges were initiated without any good evidence that the adversaries in question lacked the resolve to defend their commitment . Available indications most often pointed to the opposite conclusion. The cases revealed that most of the cases were initiated .
 Morocco, Bosnia, Rhineland, Munich, Munich and Berlin - did leaders of those countries have compelling reasons to suspect that their adversaries would back down . In only five cases-First Morocco , Bosnia , Bosnia, and Bosnia - did the leaders of the state challenging a commitment have compelling
 In two cases states had to drop their challenge because of opposition they encountered . Even so, in two of these cases, the challenge was dropped because of the opposition they faced .
 These findings indicate that a vulnerable commitment is not a precondition for brinkmanship . The findings show that vulnerable commitment isn't a pre-emptive commitment .
 What counts is the initiator's perception that a vulnerable commitment exists exists, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 When policymakers became convinced of the necessity of achieving specific foreign policy objectives, they became predisposed to see these objectives as attainable, they say .
 The study documented this assertion in the July , Korea , and Sino-Indian crises .
 In all three confrontations, political leaders felt compelled to pursue aggressive foreign policies in response to strategic and domestic political imperatives . The U.S. has a history of aggressive foreign policy .
 "They convinced themselves that they could achieve their objectives without provoking war," they said . They convinced themselves they could do so without provoking a war, they said. They said .
 They knew the extent to which they were powerless to back down, they expected that their adversaries would have to do so . They knew that they knew they would be powerless if they didn't back down .
 Some leaders took comfort in the illusion that they would emerge victorious at little cost to themselves if war developed . Some leaders also took comfort that they could emerge victorious if war broke out if it developed .
 German, American, and Indian policymakers maintained these beliefs, despite much evidence to the contrary both before and during the crisis, despite evidence .
 "They resorted to elaborate personal and institutional defenses to avoid coming to terms with this information," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Kaiser Wilhelm II and those around him used denial to discredit reports that Britain would intervene in continental war . Kaiser Wilhelm I and those . around him . used denial . to discredit . reports that . Britain . would intervene .
 Dean Acheson, Jawaharlal Nehru, and their respective advisers resorted to denial to discount the possibility that their policies would provoke Chinese military responses . The Chinese military response to the U.S. is expected to be a major concern in the future .
 On an institutional level, denial took the form of structuring feedback channels to filter out dissonant information and reinforce preconceived notions of political leaders . Denial was a form of structure to filter information out of the public, and to reinforce the preconceived notion of leaders .
 In such a closed environment, events did little to disabuse policymakers of their unrealistic expectations . In such an open-minded environment, it's not surprising that the world has unrealistic expectations of the government .
 These cases point to the pessimistic hypothesis that policymakers with the greatest need to learn from external reality are the least likely to do so . Policymakers should learn from the external reality, authors say .
 The Cuban missile crisis appears to conform, at least in part, to this pattern . It was the first time the U.S. launched a missile attack on Cuba .
 By all accounts, Soviet leaders had strong incentives to put missiles into Cuba . The U.S. had strong even compelling incentives to do so, according to reports .
 The most widely accepted interpretations of their action attributed Soviet policymakers' action to their need to redress the strategic balance . The most commonly accepted interpretations were that Soviet policymakers wanted to redress their need for a balance .
 The Kennedy administration decided in the autumn of 1961 to tell the Soviets that it knew that their first-generation ICBM had proven a failure . As well known, the Kennedy administration .
 This was done in the hope of moderating Khrushchev's bellicosity over Berlin . This was hoped to moderate the belliceness of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The U.S. realized the full extent of Soviet vulnerability to a first strike . However, it put the Soviets on notice that the United States was aware of its vulnerability .
 Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba is said by many analysts to have been conceived of as a ""quick fix" to compensate in the short term for Soviet strategic inferiority . Many analysts believe the deployment of Cuban missiles was intended as a quick fix .
 The other cases of brinkmanship revealed a multiplicity of motives on the part of the initiator . The case is not the only one of many brinkmanship in the world .
 Graham Allison has suggested that the missiles could have been perceived as the solution to a number of different problems faced by influential groups within the Soviet hierarchy . Graham Allison says the missiles may have been seen as a solution to some of the different problems .
 The missiles promised to achieve strategic goals inexpensively, freeing more funds for the industrial sector . The missiles will be used to boost the country's economic growth .
 If the ploy was successful, it would also give Khrushchev more ""chips" to play in negotiations over Berlin . If successful, the ploy could also give the Soviet Union more 'chips'
 An aggressive policy promised to advance Khrushchev's political interests and those of his supporters, who must certainly have felt the need for a major success after the failure of their two Berlin offensives .
 A powerful coalition may have developed in favor of putting missiles into Cuba, Allison suggested . Political leaders and bureaucrats may have envisaged the move as the solution to their particular problems, she said .
 Khrushchev and those around him felt the need to deploy Soviet missiles in Cuba . They also had a need to believe that they could do so successfully, says historian John Avlon .
 Many of the explanations that have been offered to account for Moscow's misjudgment are better understood as rationalizations that may have been invoked by Soviet leaders to justify their decision and to dispel anxiety they may have harbored about the risks it entailed .
 Subsequent to making their decision, they can have been expected to have become even less sensitive to information that suggested their policy would not succeed . Subsequently to making such a decision they can't have become less sensitive, they should have been more sensitive to the information .
 The timing of the Soviet decision is probably very important in this regard, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 All the available evidence points to the decision having been made sometime in the late spring or early summer of 1962, before any of Kennedy's warnings . The decision was made in the spring or summer of that time .
 They had secured Castro's approval for the missiles . They had shipped men, building materials, and weapons to Cuba, and were well advanced with the construction of the actual missile sites .
 To have backed down would almost certainly have endangered relations with Castro . Castro has a history of not backing down from Cuba .
 If word of the fiasco leaked out, as it almost certainly would have, the Soviet Union would have also lost face with China . The Soviet Union had already charged Moscow with undue timidity .
 A withdrawal would have caused a serious conflict within the Soviet leadership . In addition, a withdrawal would also have led to a serious internal conflict .
 Khrushchev would have been pilloried by his enemies for embarking upon a harebrained scheme and then losing nerve in the course of its execution .
 Khrushchev could easily have reasoned that all of this might have been sufficient to result in his loss of power . The incident occurred in the early 1950s and 1960s .
 Kennedy said he meant what he said held out the prospect of a full-fledged confrontation with the U.S. But he must have realized that to persevere, he would have faced a confrontation . Kennedy: "To persevere" is to survive .
 They become emotionally aroused and preoccupied with finding a less risky but nevertheless feasible policy alternative . They become obsessed with looking for a safer policy alternative, they say . They say they want to find a 'less risky but nonetheless feasible' alternative .
 If they conclude that it is unrealistic to hope for a better strategy, they will terminate their search for one, despite continuing dissatisfaction with the available option . If, after further investigation, they . conclude that . it is . unrealistic to . hope for better strategy .
 This results in a pattern of ""defensive avoidance,"" characterized by efforts to avoid fear-arousing warnings . This is also known as "frightening avoidance" by some .
 Soviet leaders, being no more or less human than the rest of us, may well have responded to their decisional dilemma by ""bolstering"" the policy to which they were committed .
 If so, they could easily have exaggerated to themselves the positive conseqences of successfully deploying their missiles in Cuba . The U.S. could easily exaggerate to themselves .
 President Obama would have minimized the chance of any serious U.S. reaction . At the same time, they would have made every effort to reinterpret or discredit information that suggested otherwise .
 Ambassador Dobrynin was known by reputation as a man reluctant to challenge the prevailing orthodoxy in Moscow . He watered down the impact of the private warnings he received from members of the Kennedy administration so as not to offend .
 Soviet leaders could have maintained their comforting illusions until reality rudely intervened in the form of Kennedy's announcement of the blockade . Kennedy's decision to announce the blockade of the Soviet Union was a surprise surprise .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send your photos of the best of your friends and family to the gallery .
 Graham Allison has speculated that the fact that Kennedy's warnings came after the Soviet commitment may have had some effect on Soviet perception of them . Graham Allison believes Kennedy's warning came after Soviet commitment .
 Others build their case from data that are equally supportive of quite contradictory inferences . Some of these inferences are quite contradictory, and some are quite quite contradictory .
 All, including the present author's own explanation, lack evidential support . All of the author's explanations, including his own, have no evidential evidence .
 They are, at best, clever speculations about Soviet behavior consistent with the few established facts, they say . But they are not the best theories about the Soviet behavior .
 American analysts' lack of knowledge extends to just about every aspect of Soviet decision-making in the Cuban missle crisis, it would have been relatively easy to demonstrate .
 The Cuban missile crisis took place almost twenty years ago and that has been extensively studied . If this is true of Cuba, how much truer it is of more recent Soviet initiatives, it's also true of Soviet initiatives in the past .
 In effect, imaginative analysts can readily devise an explanation consonant with their own intellectual or ideological orientation . "Inventive analysts" can devise a solution to their own ideological or intellectual orientation, he says .
 When these interpretations gain sufficient acceptance, they can be used to validate academic dogmas or actual foreign policies . When those interpretations gain enough acceptance, these interpretations will be used in the future .
 Kennedy's ""courage and commitment"" thesis was a result of his courage and commitment . Such a process occurred with Kennedy's thesis, Kennedy wrote .
 Moscow's projection of influence into Africa and its invasion of Afghanistan may be a repeat of what happened in Africa . It may be happening again with regard to interpretations of Moscow's influence in Africa and Afghanistan, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski and Richard Pipes recommended policies based on what these developments ""reveal"" about Soviet goals and risk taking . Those who recommended policies should show more respect for the tenuous nature of Soviet foreign policy, he says .
 Khrushchev may have lacked plausible reasons for believing that Kennedy would fail to act in defense of his commitment, authors say . None of the authors discussed here were prepared to consider that Khrushvic may have had plausible reasons to believe Kennedy would not act .
 Khrushchev, like so many national leaders before and since, engaged in wishful thinking . He convinced himself that what he wanted to happen would despite the evidence to the contrary .
 The present author aside, only Howard Dinerstein has advocated this interpretation . Howard has been critical of the book .
 The assumption of rationality on Khrushchev's part is all the more puzzling given the prevailing assessment of his personality . The assumption is all more puzzling than the view of the former leader's personality .
 It should be seen in the same light as his bluff about the potency of Soviet strategic forces, his Berlin challenges, and his virgin lands program . The bluff was a bluff, he said, but it was also a bluff .
 Western analysts are in the odd position of defending the behavior of a Soviet leader, who the Soviets themselves ridicule for his lack of judgment . Western analysts have to defend the actions of a man who the Soviet leaders themselves ridicule .
 Philosophers of science have observed that scientists tend to fit data into existing frameworks even if the framework does not do justice to the facts . Scientists tend to use existing frameworks to try and find new ways to solve problems .
 According to Thomas Kuhn, the several fields of science are each dominated by a ""paradigm,"" an accepted body of related concepts that establishes the framework for research . Kuhn: "Paradigm" is a body that establishes a framework for scientific research .
 The paradigm dictates the kinds of facts and explanations that are to be ignored because they are outside the paradigm or not relevant to the problems the paradigm has defined as important . It also dictates the kind of things and explanations not to ignore .
 Paradigms condition investigators to reject evidence that contradicts their expectations, to misunderstand it, to twist its meaning, to make it consistent, to explain it away, to deny it, or simply to ignore it . Investigators reject evidence .
 Since 1950, deterrence theory has been widely accepted by political scientists . Deterioration theory is widely accepted in political science .
 Individuals or states who employ deterrence identify their interests and commit themselves to their defense . Individuals or . states . employ deterrence identifies their interests, commit themselves . to the defense .
 By demonstrating their ability and willingness to do so, they attempt to convince others that it is not in their interests to challenge these commitments, they say . By demonstrating that they are capable and willing to do this, they will be able to do it, they hope others will not challenge them
 When these efforts succeed, the commitments in question are said to be credible . When these commitments are made, it is said to have been credible, says CNN.com .
 Deterrence theory is based on the premise that policymakers behave in terms of a rational calculus that maximizes payoffs and minimizes costs . Policymakers are supposed to behave in a rational way to maximize payoffs, minimize costs .
 It assumes credible commitments will not be challenged unless an adversary does so deliberately to provoke a conflict . It therefore assumes that credible commitments won't be challenged by an adversary .
 When deterrence ""fails,"" analysts do not blame the theory, but the policymakers who attempted to implement itsomehow they did not succeed in imparting sufficient credibility to their commitment, they say .
 Perhaps this explains what has happened with regard to the Cuban missile crisis .
 Analysts, working within the dominant paradigm, have gone to great lengths to make the case consistent with the theory . Analysts have gone on to argue that the theory is consistent with that .
 Deterrence is the major intellectual and policy bulwark against nuclear war . Deterrence has been a major policy tool for the U.S. since the Cold War began .
 It is based on the comforting assumption that nuclear adversaries are so horrified by the devastating consequences of nuclear war that they will behave prudently toward one another . It is a comforting assumption .
 The definition and communication of truly vital commitments can be expected to function as a reasonably efficacious strategy of conflict avoidance . For this reason, the definition of these commitments can function as an effective strategy .
 To recognize that the one acute thermonuclear crisis to date was brought about by the leader of a nuclear superpower- perhaps by the entire inner circle of its foreign policymaking elite- would call into question the most fundamental assumption of deterrence .
 Many investigators have sought to lay the onus for Khrushchev's miscalculation at Kennedy's feet . Kennedy's actions undercut the credibility of his commitment, investigators have said .
 Analysts have attempted to preserve intact the theory of deterrence and with it their emotional composure . By doing so, analysts have tried to keep the theory intact .
 Students of the crisis have exaggerated Kennedy's skill in managing the crisis . Cuba has been used to shore up emotional defenses against nuclear war, he says .
 As this author has tried to demonstrate elsewhere, analysts have studiously ignored the ""group think"" and other deviations from ""open decision-making"" that in fact characterized Kennedy's management of that confrontation .
 Leaders can still act cooly and skillfully when subjected to the kind of stress generated by a nuclear crisis, experts say . Their interpretations are reassuring because they imply that leaders can act coolly and skillly when under stress .
 One of the first serious analyses of the Cuban missile crisis was Albert and Roberta Wohlstetter's Controlling the Risks in Cuba, published in 1965 . They contended that Khrushchev's and Kennedy's performance provided a stunning counterexample to the pessimistic predictions of nuclear
 The crisis had come about because of miscalculations that were both understandable and correctable, they said . They also propagated the view that the crisis had been caused by miscalculation that were understandable .
 The attempt by the analysts to deny the strong strain of irrationality that runs through even the most momentous policy decisions will not make such a war any less likely . Unfortunately, the attempt by . analysts to . deny the . attempt to deny . the strong . strain of . irrationality