 The Cuban Missile crisis was the crisis-point of the Cold War . The Cuban Missiles Crisis, 1962, was the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Kennedy’s promise to be tough on Russia led to space race, arms race and nuclear testing . American funding of anti-Communists in Vietnam and Laos .
 In 1960, Castro made a trade agreement with Russia, whereby Cuba sent sugar to Russia, in return for oil, machines and money . Castro made the deal with Russia in 1960, in exchange for sugar, oil, money and other things .
 In 1960, the U.S. stopped trading with Cuba . This frightened the Americans more, and in 1960 they stopped trading . The Americans were frightened by this, and it frightened them even more .
 CIA encouraged, funded and transported an attempt by anti-Castro Cuban exiles to invade Cuba in 1961 . The Bay of Pigs was an attempt to overthrow Cuban President Castro Castro's regime .
 Castro asked for – and Russia publicly promised – weapons to defend Cuba against America . In September 1961, 1961, Castro asked Russia to provide weapons for Cuba .
 U2 spy-plane took pictures of a nuclear missile base being built on Cuba in 1962 . The base was being used to build nuclear missiles .
 Kennedy’s advisers told him he had 10 days before Cuba could fire missiles at targets in America . Kennedy's advisers said he had to wait 10 days to launch the missiles in Cuba .
 The film Thirteen Days shows the tension of the Cuban Missile crisis . The film has historical inaccuracies in the detail and its portrayal has been questioned .
 I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to stop and dismantle this secret, reckless and provocative threat to world peace . The world's first lady calls on him to "stop and dismantle" the threat of nuclear weapons .
 Take each of the causes of the Cuban Missiles crisis, and explain how it caused the crisis . Take each cause of the crisis, including the Cuban missile crisis .
 U2 spy-plane takes pictures of Missile bases in Cuba . Experts tell Kennedy he has 10 days before they are operational . Kennedy: "I have 10 days to go before they're operational"
 Kennedy set up a Committee of the National Security Council to advise him . Kennedy was advised by the committee . Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 B52 nuclear bombers were deployed, so that one-eighth of them were airborne all the time . B52s were deployed in the U.S. during the Cold War . One of the B52 bombers was deployed in Korea .
 Oleg Penkovsky – a Western spy working in Russia – was arrested that night . That night, he was arrested. That night he was accused of spying .
 Secretly, the U.S. government offered to remove missiles in Turkey in exchange for those in Cuba . The United States government offered the deal to remove United States missiles from Turkey, Cuba .
 The Kennedy brothers saw the Russian ambassador, and again mentioned removing the missiles in Turkey . Kennedy brothers met with the ambassador and discussed removing missiles from Turkey .
 Khrushchev sent another letter demanding that Kennedy also dismantle U.S. missile bases in Turkey . Kennedy could not respond to Khrushchchev's request .
 This would stop the missiles getting to the missile bases, but it was not a direct act of war . It was not the first time the U.S. has sent missiles to the bases in North Korea .
 British cartoon of 29 October 1962 shows Kennedy and Khrushchev arm-wrestling for power, sitting on nuclear weapons . Source B This British cartoon was published in 1962 .