 These names are all those of leaders who have used a tota ... an approach to leading a nation . The names of those leaders are all of them .
 Cuba-U.S. ights between Cuba and the United States are non-existent . When it started, why it started and what will happen if it is lifted . What will happen to Cuba-America relations?
 The United States had many investments in Cuba when Fidel Castro and his guerrilla warfare took over Cuba in 1959 . The U.S. invested heavily in Cuba in the early 1950s .
 Law & Government Essays: Fidel Castro's life and times . An essay about the life of Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro is an essay on life and the times he spent in Cuba .
 Che Guevara and the Cuban Revolution in the years 1959 to 1967. The Cuban Revolution itself. .
 "One's importance to anything is always relative and difficult to quantify," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not sure how much I'm important to anything, but I'm sure it's important to the world"
 Fidel Castro took control of Cuba in 1959, his support was enormous, but so were the expectations of him . Fidel Castro was expected to be the most successful leader in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro's popularity was high among the reasons for the Castro regime's downfall . Fidel Castro was popular with the Cuban people and the army . The Castro regime was overthrown by the U.S. in 1953 .
 Another reason for his downfall was underestimating Fidel Castro and the effect Castro had on the people . Another reason is underestimating Castro's effect on people, he says .
 In the beginning of the new government of Fidel Castro made reforms in society and agriculture . Fidel Castro's government made reforms to society, agriculture and the economy .
 Two U-2 surveillance spy planes took flight over Fidel Castro's Cuba on October 14, 1962 . The U.2 surveillance planes were the first to fly over Cuba in 1962 .
 The United States did their routine ... y and carried out by Cuban exiles . After taking numerous pictures of the area, the U.S. did their usual routine .
 The invasion was intended to spark a rebellion that would topple Fidel Castro, who was considered a threat to U.S. interests in the region . The invasion of Cuba was meant to spark an uprising against Castro .
 Area & Country Studies Essays: Causes of Tension Between Cuba and the United States, and The Bay of Pigs Invasion . Bay of the Pigs Invasion was the successful overthrow of the oppressive Batista regime .
 Fidel Castro in 1975 reflects the 19th century Cuban society . What he said above reflects the society of the late 19th Century Cuba . Fidel Castro's words reflect the Cuban society, which he described in 1975 .
 What happened to prompt such a close confrontation a revolution and had changed it government to that of a Communist ideology under the leadership of Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution .
 In 1961 the U.S. sent a group of Cuban exiles on a CIA operation known as the ... d to take Berlin . In the end this did not happen, and Fidel Castro was outraged to know that he had almost been used for Berlin .
 Fidel Castro, a very well known leader, is a man with a lot of power . Fidel Castro is a well-known leader, but he is also a very powerful man . Castro's policies are very specific .
 Fidel Castro threw him out of Cuba in 1958 . He was first elected president under the new document in 1940 .
 In 1952, Batista suspended the constitution, dissolved the congress, and ... nment, promising elections the following year . Batista promised elections following year, promising the next year .
 Raul Castro introduced Ernesto Guevara to Fidel Castro in the summer of 1955 in Mexico City . He joins his crusade to overthrow the dictator Fulgencio Batista ... he Commandant Che Gueva .
 The confrontation left the world in fear for thirteen long days, ... at of destruction and the rapidly growing communist expansion . The world was at risk for thirteen days, with a growing threat of destruction .
 Throughout the 1950's Fidel Castro has built a force of rebellion with one goal-change . Fidel Castro was born in Cuba in 1959 .
 Castro, unlike most communist ... d several sources that seemed to disagree on Castro's immediate family however several of them said Fidel has 6 sons and only ever 1 wife . Several sources said Fidel Castro has only ever had one wife .
 His wife is named Dalia Soto del Valle and his children are named; Fidelito, Angel, Antonio, Alejandro, Alexis and Alex . He has six children with his wife, Dalia, and one with his children, Fidelito .