 Production Manager: Savoula Amanatidis Text Design and Project Coordination: Elm Street Publishing Services, Inc. Elizabeth Fogarty .
 For permission to use copyrighted material, grateful acknowledgment k made to the copyright holders on 290, which are hereby made part of this copyright page . Phoenix Color Corporation For permission .
 If you purchased this book within the U.S. or Canada you should be aware that it has been wrongfully imported without the approval of the Publisher or Author .
 John Sutter: "He gracefully acknowledges having been my student" "We have taught together the Harvard course on conflict that served as the basis for this book," he says .
 President Obama says he has learned as much as he thinks he has from President Clinton . He says he's learned a lot from Clinton administration . Obama: "I have learned at least as much from him"
 He has brought to his study of international conflicts a thoughtful serenity worthy of one of those great American leaders of the end of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth century .
 These are the skills of such authors as Tocqueville, Max Weber, and Raymond Aron . The skills of these authors are such a key to their success in the world .
 These are qualities that are often undervalued in world affairs . They are more necessary than ever in American foreign policy .
 A discriminating and penetrating intelligence has alerted him to the important innovations, which were introduced in the twentieth century into strategic and economic affairs . Yet he has safeguarded him from faddish enthusiasms and fashionable slogans .
 He is a man of deep values and generous beliefs, but also of great discernrnent, detachment, and determination . He is also a great man of discernment and detachment, he says .
 "It IS, in my opinion, the best textbook available to intelligent students of world politics," says David Cameron . "It is, in fact, a best textbook for intelligent students," he says .
 It blends history, political philosophy, political theory, and analysis . It blends perfectly history, philosophy, and political theory .
 Nye and his friend and mine, Robert Keohane, crafted the term "complex interdependence" It distinguishes the world of interstate conflict from that of “complex inter-dependence,” the term crafted by Nye .
 It shows the tensions between the need to fight terrorism, to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and to support democracy against tyrannies . The need to preserve the norms of international law and international legitimacy, it says .
 It shows both the originality and the limits of globalization and of the information revolution, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "It shows that globalization is not the end of the revolution"
 It is wise because of the impeccable mix of humanity, common sense, prudence, and integrity that characterizes a personality so richly successful in writing, in teaching, in reflecting on the variety of human experiences, and in acting as an imaginative, farsighted, and
 State Department, Pentagon, and National Intelligence Council are key policy makers in Washington, D.C. They say they have five years of experience in national security policy .
 Its aim is to introduce students to the complexities of international politics by giving them a good grounding in the traditional realist theory .
 I try to present difficult concepts in clear language with historical examples . Students will gain a practical understanding of the basic vocabulary of international politics .
 Twice in the first half of the 20th century, the great powers engaged in devastating world wars that cost nearly 50 million lives . Twice in 20 years, the world wars cost nearly half a billion lives .
 The second half of the century was wracked by a cold war, regional wars, and the threat of nuclear weapons . The Cold War was a period of tension and regional wars .
 No good teacher can honestly answer such questions with certainty, but we can provide conceptual tools that will help students shape their own answers as the future unfolds . We can provide our students with conceptual tools to help them shape their answers .
 This is not a complete textbook with all the concepts or history a student will need . It is not the only complete textbook for students .
 It is an example of how to think about the complex and confusing domain of international politics . Instead, it is a way of thinking about how to deal with the complex domain of diplomacy .
 It should be read not for a complete factual account, but for the way it approaches the interplay of theory and history . The book is published by Simon Tisdall at the University of Cambridge .
 Historians who believe that understanding comes from simply recounting the facts fail to make explicit the hidden principles by which they select some facts rather than others . Historians must make explicit that they select facts by which facts are selected .
 Political scientists often mistake their mental constructs for reality . Equally mistaken are political scientists who become so isolated and entangled in a maze of abstract theory . Political scientists are often mistaken for reality by abstract theory, they say .
 Only by going back and forth between history and theory can we avoid such mistakes . Only by . going back to . history and . theory can avoid . such mistakes. Only . history can be traced back to the past .
 When combined with the suggested reading and the study questions, it provides the central thread for an introductory course or for individual readers to teach themselves .
 Preface example is an example of one approach to the subject . Alternatively, it can be used as a supplementary text in a course as an xivpreface example .
 The text has been revised and updated to reflect more recent developments on the international scene . It includes the rise of China as a world power, and the growing roles of nonstate actors in international affairs .
 Each chapter’s suggested readings have been updated with new editions and more cunent texts for reference . In addition to the suggested readings, each chapter has new editions .
 "I have learned from all of them, and, I am sure, unconsciously stolen a number of their ideas," he says . He says he's sure he has unconsciously stolen some of the ideas from them .
 Stanley Hoffmann has taught me since graduate days and has been a constant source of inspiration . The same is true of Stanley Hoffman, who has taught him since graduate .
 "I am grateful to him and to Robert Keohane, who has provided so many ideas as well as friendship," she says . She says she is grateful to have been given the opportunity to write a book .
 David Dressier, Charles Maier, and Ernest May helped by commenting on the manuscript .
 Vin Auger, Peter Feaver, Meryl Kessler, Sean Lyn-Jones, Pam Metz, John Owen, Gideon Rose, and Gideon Rose are featured in this week's iReport .
 Veronica McClure was a wonderful colleague in transcribing and correcting my prose . She was a good friend of the author of this book .
 Richard Wood, Dan Philpott, Zachary Karabell, Carl Nagin, Neal Rosendorf, Alex Scacco, and Matt Kohut helped on earlier editions of this week's podcast .
 Sean Misko provided excellent assistance and wise judgment in helping to prepare this edition of this week's edition of The Washington Redskins .
 Marble relief commemorates Athenians who died in the Peloponnesian War . The world is shrinking. Chapter 1 . Chapter 2 . Chapter 3 . Chapter 4 .
 Global Internet communications are nearly instantaneous and transmission costs are negligible . The cost of global Internet communications is negligible .
 An environmentalist in Asia or a human rights activist in Africa today has a power of communication once enjoyed only by large organizations such as governments or transnational corporations . Environmentalists in Asia and Africa today have a power to communicate once only by governments .
 Nuclear weapons have added a new dimension to war that one writer calls “double death’s” meaning that not only individuals die, but under some circumstances the whole human species could be threatened .
 Conditions in remote poor countries such as Afghanistan suddenly become relevant to America and Europe . As the effects of distance shrink, conditions in remote countries suddenly become highly relevant to U.S., Europe .
 Some things about international politics have remained the same over the ages . Yet some other things about diplomacy remain the same . The U.S. has been in touch with the world for more than a century .
 Thucydides’s account of Sparta and Athens fighting the Pelopononu nesian War 2,500 years ago reveals eerie resemblances to the Arab'Israeli conflict after 1947 .
 The world at the beginning of the twenty-first century is a strange cocktail of continuity and change . The world is at the start of the 20th century, the author says .
 Some aspects of international politics have not changed since Thucydides . Some of the world's most important issues still remain unsolved .
 There is a certain logic of hostility, a dilemma about security that goes with interstate politics, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Alliances, balances of power, and choices in policy between war and compromise have remained similar over the millennia . Alliances and balances in power have remained unchanged over the centuries .
 Thucydides never had to worry about nuclear weapons, HIV/AIDS, or global warming . On the other hand, he never thought about global warming or nuclear weapons .
 The task for international relations students is to build on the past but not be trapped by it . International relations students need to understand the continuities as well as the changes, she says .
 We must learn the traditional theories and then adapt them to current circumstances. We must also adapt them, he says . We need to learn traditional theories, he adds .
 The early chapters of this book will provide you with a historical and theoretical context in which to place the phenomena of the information revolution, globalization, interdependence, and transnational actors that are discussed in later chapters .
 I found in my experience in government that I could ignore neither the age-old nor the brand-new dimensions of world politics . I found that in government you could ignore both the old and new dimensions of politics, he says .
 International politics would be transformed if separate states were abolished, but world government is not around the comer . World government would not be around the world government, says David Cameron .
 Nonstate actors such as transnational corporations, nongovernment organizations, and terrorist groups present new challenges to governments . But they do not replace states, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 In fact, rather than vanishing, nationalism and the demand for separate states have increased, says David Cameron . "In fact, despite the fact that nationalism has disappeared, nationalism has increased," he says .
 Armed conflicts occurred in 74 locations around the world . Between the Cold War in 1989 and the end of the 20th century, armed conflicts occurred .
 Seven were interstate wars and nine were intrastrastrastical wars with foreign intervention . Nine were intercontinental wars and one was intrastical . Seven of the wars involved interstate wars, nine involved foreign intervention.
 The world has not always been divided into a system of separate states . The world was not always divided into separate states, it was divided into nations .
 Over the centuries there have been three basic forms of world politics . Three basic forms have been seen in the world's most recent history .
 One government controls most of the world with which it has contact . In a <world imperial system, one government controls the world . One government can control the world's most of it .
 Spain in the sixteenth century and France in the late seventeenth century tried to gain similar supremacy, but they failed . Spain and France failed to achieve a similar supremacy .
 In the nineteenth century, the British Empire spanned the globe, but even the British had to share the world with other strong states . The British Empire was one of the strongest states in the world .
 Ancient world empires were actually regional empires . The Sumerian, the Persian, the Chinese were regional empires. The Chinese, Sumerians, the Sumes, the Persians and the Egyptians were regional .
 They thought they ruled the world, but they were protected from conflict with other empires by lack of communication . The empire was protected from conflicts with other nations by not communicating .
 Their fights with barbarians on the peripheries of the empire were not the same as wars among roughly equal states . Their fights against barbarians were not as easy as those of roughly equal nations .
 A second basic form of international politics is a feudal system, in which human loyalties and political obligations are not fixed primarily by territorial boundaries . A feudal system is not fixed by territorial borders, it is not a territorial system .
 An individual had obligations to a local lord, but might also owe duties to some distant noble or bishop as well as to the pope in Rome . An individual owed duties to local lords or bishops, but also to distant noble and bishop .
 Political obligations were determined to a large extent by what happened to one’s superiors . Political obligations are determined to be determined by what happens to one's superiors, he says .
 If a ruler married, an area and its people might find their obligations rearranged as part of a wedding dowry .
 Townspeople bom French might suddenly find themselves made Flemish or even English . The Flemis is a word of French .
 Cities and leagues of cities sometimes had a special semiindependent status . Cities were often semiindependent cities .
 The crazy quilt of wars that accompanied the feudal situation were not what we think of as modem tenitorial wars . The craziest quilt-and-commodestial wars were not the modem 10itorial warfare .
 They could occur within as well as across territories and were related to these crosscutting, nonterritorial loyalties and conflicts . They could be related to crosscutting and non-territritorial conflicts, the author says .
 A third form of world politics is an anarchic system of states, composed of states that are relatively cohesive but with no higher government above them . The anarchic state is made up of states with little or little government in them .
 Examples include the city-states of ancient Greece or Machiavelli’s fifteenth-century Italy .
 Another example of an anarchic state system is the dynastic territorial state . The state's coherence comes from control by a ruling family . The anarchic territorial state is an example of anarchy .
 Large territorial dynasties reemerged in Europe about 1500, and other forms of international polities such as city-states or loose leagues of territories began to vanish . Large territorial dynasties reemerged about 1500 .
 In 1648, the Peace of Westphalia ended Europe’s Thirty Years’ War, sometimes called the last of the great wars of religion and the first of the wars of modern states . The Peace of 1648 ended Europe's Thirty Years' War .
 In retrospect, that treaty enshrined the sovereign territorial state as the dominant form of international organization . The treaty was signed by the United States .
 International politics is politics in the absence of a common sovereign, politics among entities with no ruler above them . Thus today when we speak of international politics, we usually mean this territorial state system . We define international politics as politics in an absence of any sovereign .
 Think of a Texas town without a sheriff in the daysof the Old West . Think of Lebanon after its government broke down in the 1970s, or Somalia in the 1990s . Somalia in Somalia also had a sheriff .
 Hobbes’s state of nature is not benign; it is a war of all against all because there is no higher ruler to enforce order . Hobbes: "There are no higher rulers in Hobbes' state, and there are no more than just Hobbes." Hobbes
 As Hobbes famously declared, life in such a world tends to be nasty, brutish, and short . Life in Hobbes' world is brutish and brutish: life in a world like Hobbes .
 The result is that legal, political, and social differences exist between domestic and international politics . The result of this is that there are legal differences between the U.S. and Russia .
 Domestic law generally obeyed and if not, the police and courts enforce sanctions against lawbreakers . Domestic law is generally followed by the police, courts and the police .
 International law rests on competing legal systems, and there is no common enforcement . There are no international police to enforce InternatiQual law . International law, on the other hand, rests on a competing legal system, says CNN.com .
 In a wellordered domestic political system, the government has a monopoly on the legitimate use of force . The government has the right to use force in a well-ordered domestic politics, the author says .
 International politics is the realm of self-help, and some states are stronger than others . There is always a danger that some states may resort to force, says Simon Tisdall .
 Domestic and international politics also differ in their underlying sense of community, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In a well-ordered domestic society, a widespread sense of community gives rise to common loyalties, standards of justice, and views of what is legitimate authority . A well-order domestic society is a place for people to live in a community of their own .
 In international politics, divided peoples do not share the same loyalties . "Divided peoples share the most of the world's most powerful powers," says John Defterios . "In the world, divided people are not united," he says .
 In such a world, most people place national concerns before international justice . Most people are concerned about their own country's fate . In the world, this is not the case of justice .
 Law and ethics play a role in international politics, but in the absence of a sense of community norms, they are not as binding as they are in domestic politics . Law, ethics and law are important to international politics .
 Some people speculate that the twenty-first century may see the gradual evolution of a new feudalism, or less plausibly, an American world empire .
 International politics is anarchic in the sense that there is no higher government . International politics will be anarchic, with the exception of a higher government, an anarchic society .
 Political philosophy offers two different views of how harsh a state of nature need be . But even political philosophy offers different views on how harsh nature should be .
 Hobbes, who wrote in a seventeenth-century England wracked by civil war, emphasized insecurity, force, and survival . Hobbes emphasized insecurity and force in his work in the English Civil War .
 John Locke argued that although nature lacked a common sovereign, people could develop ties and make contracts, and therefore anarchy was less threatening . A half century later, John Locke, writing in a more stable England, argued that people could make contracts and develop ties .
 Realism has been the dominant tradition in thinking about international politics for decades . Realism is a form of realism that has been dominant in the world's political discourse .
 Among modern Americans, realism is exemplified by the writings and policies of President Richard Nixon and his secretary of state, Henry Kissinger . Nixon and Kissinger were the two most successful statesmen .
 The realist starts from the assumption of the anarchic system of states, says the realist . He argues that anarchic states should not be a stateless society .
 Kissinger and Nixon sought to minimize the ability of other states to jeopardize U.S. security . Nixon and Kissinger sought to maximize the power of the United States and to minimize other states' ability of . other states .
 Realist says 'the beginning and the end' of international politics is the individual state in interaction with other states . According to the realist, 'the end' is the interaction of individual states with each other .
 The other tradition, liberalism, can be traced back in Western political philosophy to Baron de Montesquieu and Immanuel Kant in eighteenth-century France and Germany .
 A modem American example can be found in the writings of political scientist and President Woodrow Wilson . Wilson's policies can be seen in his writings and policies of the Wilson era .
 Liberals see a global society that functions alongside the states and sets part of the context for states . Liberals see global society as a society that functiones alongside the state . Liberals also see the world as a global community that works alongside states .
 International institutions such as the United Nations create a context in which the realist view of pure anarchy is insufficient . Trade crosses borders, people have contacts with each other, and international institutions like the U.N. provide a context for anarchy .
 Liberals complain that realists portray states as hard billiard balls careening off one another in the attempt to balance power . But that's not enough because people do have contacts across borders and because there is an international society .
 Realists, claim liberals, overstate the difference between domestic and international politics . Realists claim liberals overstate difference between international and domestic politics . 'Realists' overstate differences, say liberals .
 The realist picture of anarchy as a Hobbesian “state of war” focuses only on extreme situations, in the liberals’ view it misses the growth of economic interdependence and the evolution of a transnational global society .
 The “LInseen Vampire” OF War i If there were no other reason for making an end of war, the financial ruin it involves must I sooner or later bring the civilized nations of the world to their senses. The ‘Vampire’
 The burdens of militarism in time of peace are exhausting the strength of the leading nations, already overloaded with debts . The burden of the nation's militarism is exhausting the « i strength » of the world's leading nations .
 Of course, these predictions failed catastrophically in 1914, and the realists were vindicated . The realists had been vindicated by 1914, when the war was over .
 The 1970s saw a resurgence of liberal claims that rising economic and social interdependence was changing the nature of international politics . In the 1970s, liberal claims were made about the changing nature of global politics .
 In the 1980s, Richard Rosecrance, a California professor, wrote that states can increase their power in two ways, either aggressively by territorial conquest or peacefully through trade .
 Japan has used trade and investment to become the second largest economy in the world . It is now a significant power in East Asia and is the world's second biggest economy .
 modem liberals argue that the nature of international politics is changing . Rosecrance and modem liberals say that the change is due to change .
 Some new liberals look even further to the future and believe that ecological interdependence will blur the differences between domestic and international politics . Humans will evolve toward a world without borders, they say, in the future .
 Everyone will be affected without regard to boundaries if the depletion of ozone in the upper atmosphere causes skin cancer . For example, everyone will not be affected if ozone depletion in upper atmosphere is to blame for skin cancer in the future .
 If carbon dioxide accumulation warms the climate and causes the polar ice caps to melt, rising seas will affect coastal states . Rising seas could affect all coastal states, according to the scientists .
 Some problems such as AIDS and drugs cross borders with such ease that we may be on our way to a different world . Some problems like HIV and AIDS may have crossed borders with ease, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 Transnational forces are undoing the Peace of Westphalia, and humanity is evolving toward a new form of international politics . The peace is being unraveled by transnational forces, says the author .
 Iraq showed that force and war are ever-present dangers when it invaded Kuwait in 1990s . Iraq's invasion of Kuwait was the first of its kind .
 Liberals responded by arguing that politics in the Middle East is the exception . Liberals argue that politics is the only exception to Middle East politics . Liberals say politics is not the exception to politics in Middle East .
 Over time, the world is moving beyond the anarchy of the sovereign state system, say experts . Over time they say, they are moving beyond anarchy of sovereign state .
 These divergent views on the nature of international politics and how it is changing will not soon be reconciled, says John Defterios . He says the views on international politics are not soon reconciled .
 Liberals tend to see realists as cynics whose fascination with the past blinds them to change . Both claim the high ground of realism with a small amount of realism .
 A clear-cut answer might be nice, but it would also be less accurate and less interesting . "Clear-cut answers" would be nice but also less interesting, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 The mix of continuity and change that characterizes today’s world makes it impossible to arrive at one simple synthetic explanation . “The mix of change and continuity in the world is impossible to explain,” says author .
 For much of the past century Marxism was a credible alternative for many people . Marxism's predictions of class conflict and warfare caused by problems among capitalist states were widely accepted .
 While dependency theory helped illuminate some structural causes of economic inequality, it lost credibility when it could not explain why, in the 1980s and 1990s, South Korea, Singapore, and Malaysia grew more rapidly than ‘central” countries such as the United States and Europe .
 Fernando Henrique Cardoso was an academic leader among dependency theorists in the 1970s . He turned to liberal policies of increasing dependence on global markets in the 1990s .
 In the 1980s, analysts on both sides of the realist-liberal divide attempted to devise more deductive theories similar to those of microeconomics . Microeconomics is a form of deductive theory .
 Neorealists and neoliberals increased the simplicity and elegance of theory, but did so at the cost of discarding much of the rich complexity of classical realist and liberal theories .
 Constructivists emphasize the importance of ideas and culture in shaping both the reality and the discourse of international politics . Constructivism is a form of art and culture that shapes the world's political discourse .
 They stress the ultimate subjectivity of interests and their links to changing identities . They stress that interests are subject to changing interests and identities .
 There are many types of constructivists, but they all tend to agree that the two major theories are far from being true pictures of the world . We need not just explanations of how things are, but how they become what they are, they say .
 Constructivists have focused on important questions about identities, norms, culture, national interests, and international governance . Constructivism has focused on questions of identity, norms and national interests .
 Neorealists and neoliberals take for granted how the goals that states sought changed over time . Neoreals and neoriberals often forget how states seek to achieve their goals over time.
 Constructivists examine processes by which leaders, peoples, and cultures alter preferences, shape their identities, and learn new behavior . Constructivistists draw on different fields and disciplines to examine the processes of changing people's preferences and behaviors .
 Both slavery in the nineteenth century and racial apartheid in South Africa were once accepted by most states, but later were widely opposed . For example, both slavery and racial segregation in the U.S. were once acceptable, but now opposed .
 The world is full of political entities such as tribes, nations, and nongovernmental organizations, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Only in recent centuries has the sovereign state been a dominant concept . The sovereign state has been dominant concept in recent times .
 Constructivists suggest that concepts such as nation and sovereignty that give meaning to our lives as well as to our theories are socially constructed, not just ‘out there’ as permanent reality .
 Constructivism is an approach rather than a theory, but it provides both a useful critique and an important supplement to the main theories of realism and liberalism . Constructivism provides both an approach and a critique of realism, but also a supplement to liberalism .
 constructivist approaches remind us of what the two main theories often miss . Constructivist approaches are sometimes loosely formulated and lacking in predictive power, but often lack predictive power .
 It is important to look beyond the instrumental rationality of pursuing current goals and to ask how changing identities and interests can sometimes lead to subtle shifts in states’ policies, and sometimes to profound changes in international affairs . As we shall see in the next chapter, it will be important to ask
 Constructivists help us understand how preferences are formed and knowledge is generated prior to the exercise of instrumental rationality . Constructivism is a form of knowledge that is formed prior to instrumental rationality, say constructivists . Constructivistists help explain how preferences and knowledge are formed .
 In that sense, constructivist thought complements rather than opposes the two main theories . Constructivist thought is more likely to be a constructivist than an anti-constructivist .
 We will illustrate the questions of understanding long-term change in the next chapter . We will return to it in the final chapter of this book .
 "I found all of them helpful, though in different ways and in different circumstances," she says . "I was able to get a lot of the answers I needed to get," she adds .
 Sometimes practical men and women wonder why we should bother to bother bother with theories at all . Sometimes practical people wonder why they should bother bother to think about theories .
 The answer is that theories are the road maps that allow us to make sense of unfamiliar terrain . Theory is the road map that allows us to understand unfamiliar terrain, say experts .
 Even when we think we are just using common sense, there is usually an implicit theory guiding our actions . Even though we think that common sense is simple, there are often implicit theories guiding us to action .
 If we are more conscious of the theories that are guiding us, we are better able to understand their strengths and weaknesses and when best to apply them, we will be more aware of them .
 Practical men who consider themselves above theory are usually listening to some dead scribbler from the past, John Maynard Keynes once put it . As a practical men, practical men often listen to dead scribblers, Keynes said .
 In the traditional realist view of international politics, the only significant “actors” are the states . Only the big states really matter, and only the big ones really matter .
 In 1945 there were about 50 states in the world; by the beginning of the twenty-first century, there were four times that many with more to come . By the end of the 20th century there were more than 50 states with more than a million more states .
 More important than the number of states is the rise of nonstate actors, says CNN.com's John Sutter . More important is that nonstate actor actors are in control of the situation, he says .
 IBM is more important to Belgium than is Burundi, a former Belgian colony . IBM is also important to the economy, according to the Belgian government .
 A picture of the Middle East without the warring states and the outside powers would be downright silly, but it would also be woefully inadequate if it did not include a variety of nonstate actors .
 Multinational oil companies such as Shell, British Petroleum, and Exxon Mobil are one type of nonstate actors . Exxon Mobil and Shell are among the nonstate oil companies .
 There are nongovernmental organizations , including the Red Cross and Amnesty International, involved in the violence .
 There are also a variety of transnational ethnic groups, such as the Kurds who live in Turkey, Syria, Iran, and Iraq . Armenians scattered throughout the Middle East and the Caucasus .
 Terrorist groups, drug cartels, and mafia organizations transcend national borders . They often divide their resources among several states . Terrorists and drug cartels often divide resources among states .
 International religious move' ments, particularly political Islam in the Middle East and North Africa, add a further dimension to the range of possible nonstate actors . Nonstate actors could also be involved in the region's religious movements .
 New complex coalitions affect politics of a region in a way that traditional realist views fail to disclose . The question is not whether state or nonstate groups are more important— usually the states are . But how new complex coalition affect politics in a region?
 States are major actors in current international politics, but they do not have the stage to themselves . States are the major players in current world politics, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: U.S. is not alone in the world's political landscape .
 Traditionally the dominant goal of states in an anarchic state is military security . The dominant goal in anarchic states is to have a state that can defend itself from attack .
 Countries today obviously care about their military security, but often care as much or more about their economic wealth . Countries often care more about social issues such as stopping drug traffic or the spread of AIDS, or about ecological changes .
 As threats change, the definition of security changes, as does the military . Military security is not the only goal that states pursue, as is the other goal they pursue, says Peter Bergen .
 CIA World Factbook, 2005. into Canada and capture Toronto again as it did in 1813 . Toronto would be programmed out of relevance by a computer in Texas .
 The agenda of international politics has become more complex as states pursue a wider range of goals . Economic strength has not replaced military security as Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990 . The world has become increasingly complex as countries pursue a range of objectives .
 Some analysts refer to individual human security rather than the security of states . Humanitarian and human rights issues have become more important, and some analysts say that .
 Along with the goals, the instruments of international politics are also changing, says President Obama . "We are changing the way international politics is also changing," he says .
 The realist view is that military force is the only instrument that really matters, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Military force really matters"
 States obviously use military force today, but the past half century has seen changes in its role . The past 50 years has seen a number of changes in the role of the U.S. military .
 Many states, particularly large ones, find it more costly to use military force to achieve their goals than was true in earlier times . The U.S. has been forced to rely on military force more often than it did in the past .
 The ultimate means of military force, nuclear weapons, are hopelessly muscle-bound . One reason is that nuclear weapons are not the only means of force to use .
 Nuclear weapons have not been used in war since 1945 . Although they have numbered more than 50,000, nuclear weapons have been used only once in a war .
 The disproportion between the vast devastation nuclear weapons can inflict and any reasonable political goals has made leaders understandably loath to employ them . Leaders are loath not to use nuclear weapons to achieve political goals .
 The ultimate form of military force is for all practical purposes too costly for national leaders to use in war . It is too costly to have national leaders use military force in war, so they can't afford it .
 In the nineteenth century, European countries conquered other parts of the globe by fielding a handful of soldiers armed with modern weapons . They then administered their colonial possessions with relatively modest garrisons .
 It is difficult to rule an occupied country whose people feel strongly about their national identity . But in an age of socially mobilized populations, it is difficult, says President Obama .
 Americans found this out in Vietnam in the 1960s and 1970s; the Soviets discovered it in Afghanistan in the 1980s . Americans found it out in the 60s and 70s; Soviets did in the 80s and 90s .
 Vietnam and Afghanistan had not become more powerful than the nuclear superpowers . But trying to rule those nationalistically aware populations was too expensive for either the U.S. or the Soviet Union .
 There has been a growing ethic of antimilitarism, particularly in democracies . Over time there has been growing an ethic of anti-terrorism, especially in democracies.
 Such views do not prevent the use of force, but they make it a politically risky choice for leaders, particularly when its use is large or prolonged . Such views make it politically risky for leaders to use force, especially when it is large, prolonged .
 It is sometimes said that democracies will not accept casualties, but that is too simple . It is said democracies will accept casualties but that's too simple, it's not so simple .
 The U.S. was loath to accept casualties in Somalia or Kosovo, where its national interests were less deeply involved . The United States expected some 10,000 casualties when it planned to enter the Gulf War .
 If the use of force is seen as unjust or illegitimate in the eyes of other nations, this can make it costly for political leaders in democratic polities . This can make political leaders costly for them, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Terrorist nonstate actors are less constrained than states by moral concerns, but force is more costly and more difficult for most states to use than in the past . Force is not obsolete, and terrorist nonstate actor is less constrained by moral concern than states, says author .
 U.S.-Japan relations have been strained for years, but have been strong in recent years . Japan is a major ally of the United States in the Middle East . The United States and Japan are the world's largest economies .
 Commodore Perry threatened bombardment unless Japan opened its ports to trade . In 1853, Commodore Perry sailed into a Japanese port and threatened bombardment . Perry threatened to bomb Japan if it didn't allow trade in its ports .
 This would not be a very useful or politically acceptable way to solve current U.S.-Japan trade disputes . This is not the only way to deal with current trade disputes, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 While force remains a critical instrument in international politics, it is not the only instrument . Force is a critical tool in international diplomacy, it's not only an instrument, says David Cameron .
 The use of economic interdependence, communication, international institutions, and transnational actors sometimes plays a larger role than force . Interimmediaries, communication and international institutions play a larger part in the process than force, the author says .
 Military force is not obsolete as an instrument -- witness the fighting in Afghanistan, where the Taliban government had sheltered the terrorist network that carried out the September 2001 attacks on the United States . The U.S. and British have used force to overthrow Saddam Hussein in 2003 .
 It was easier to win the war than win the peace in Iraq, says David Cameron . Military force alone is not sufficient to protect against terrorism, he says .
 Military force remains the ultimate instrument in international politics . But changes in its cost and effectiveness make today’s international politics more complex .
 Some political scientists argue that the balance of power is usually determined by a leading, or hegemonic state . Spain in the sixteenth century, France under Fouis XIV, Britain in most of the nineteenth century, and the U.S. in the twentieth century . The balance of
 Eventually the top country will be challenged, and this challenge will lead to the kind of vast conflagrations we call hegemonic, or world, wars . The top country is challenged by the world's most powerful and dominant states .
 Thucydides is the father of realism, the theory most people use when thinking about international politics even when they do not know they are using a theory . The theory is most commonly used to explain international politics .
 Many of today's leaders and editO' rial writers use realist theories even if they have not heard of Thucydides . Many leaders and editors use realists theories even though they have never heard of them .
 He was a member of the Athenian elite who lived during Athens’s greatest age . He participated in some of the events described in History of the Peloponnesian War .
 One of the things we learn from the Peloponnesian War is how to avoid too simplistic a reading of history . The Peloponian War is a lesson in avoiding simplistic history .
 Sparta was a conservative land-oriented state that turned inward after the victory over Persia . Athens was a commercial and sea-oriented city that turned outward . Sparta and Athens were land-orientated land-based states .
 Athens had 50 years of growth that led to the development of an Athenian empire . In the middle of the century, Athens had a 50 year period of growth .
 Athens formed the Delian League, an alliance of states around the Aegean Sea, for mutual protection against the Persians . Greece formed the league in order to protect itself from the Persian invasion .
 Sparta organized its neighbors on the Peloponnesian peninsula into a defensive alliance with its neighbors . Sparta, in turn, organized its neighbor into a defense alliance with the Greeks .
 States that joined Athens freely for protection from the Persians soon had to pay taxes to the Athenians . States that had joined Athens for protection against the Persian soon had had to be taxed .
 Greece enjoyed a period of stable peace before the second, more significant, Peloponnesian War . The second war was the second war between Greece and Greece .
 This event triggered a series of reactions that led ultimately to the Peloponnesian War . Like a pebble that begins an avalanche, this event triggered reactions that ultimately led to war .
 Large conflicts are often precipitated by relatively insignificant crises in out--of--the'Way places . In Epidamnus, the democrats fought with oligarchs over how the country would be ruled .
 The democrats appealed to the city-state of Corcyra, which had helped establish Epidamnus, but were turned down by the city state .
 They then turned to another city-state, Corinth, and the Corinthians decided to help . The Corinthians then decided to turn to the help of the city of Corinth .
 This angered the Corcyraeans, who sent a fleet to recapture Epidamnus, their former colony . This angered them, and they sent an angry fleet of ships to capture the city . The city is now the site of the first city in the Roman Empire .
 The Athenians, after listening to both sides, were in a dilemma . The bust of Thucydides is a bust of the ancient Greek poet .
 The Corinthians did not want to break the truce that had lasted for a decade . If the Corinthians conquered Corcyra and took control of its large navy, the balance of power among the Greek states would be tipped against Athens .
 The Corinthians sent ten ships with instructions not to fight unless attacked . They launched a small endeavor to scare the Corinthians, sending ten ships .
 The Athenian ships were drawn into the fray more than intended . But deterrence failed, Corinth attacked, and when the Corcyraeans began to lose the battle, the Athenians began the battle .
 The Athenian involvement infuri' ated Corinth, which in turn worried the Athenians . The Athenians' involvement infuriated Corinth .
 Athens worried that Corinth would stir up problems in Potidaea, which, although an Athenian ally, had historic ties to Corinth . In particular, Athens feared that Corinth might stir up trouble in Potids .
 A revolt did occur in Potidaea, Athens sent forces to put it down . Athens sent troops to put down the revolt .
 The Corinthians urged the Spartans to go to war and warned them against failing to check the rising power of Athens . The Corinthians also warned the Spartans not to check their power .
 Megara agreed with Corinth because contrary to the treaty, the Athenians had banned Megara’s trade . Megara, another important city, agreed because of the treaty . The treaty was signed by the city of Corinth .
 Sparta was tom, but the Spartans voted in favor of war because they were afraid that if Athenian power was not checked, Athens might control the whole of Greece . The Spartans feared that if they did not stop the power of Athens, they would control the entire of Greece.
 Sparta went to war to maintain the balance of power among the Greek city-states . Sparta was defeated by Sparta in the battle of Sparta, which ended in a defeat .
 The Athenian mood was one of imperial greatness, with pride and patriotism about their city and their social system, and optimism that they would prevail in the war . The Athenians were optimistic about the war and the future .
 A truce was declared after ten years but the truce was fragile and war broke out again . War broke out after 10 years, but it was fragile .
 Sparta sent two fleets and infantry to conquer Sicily, the great island off the south of Italy . Sicily had a number of Greek colonies allied to Sparta, which had been allied to the Sparta .
 At the same time Sparta received additional money from the Persians, who were only too happy to see Athens trounced . The Persians were not happy with the result, but were happy with their victory .
 Sparta demanded that Athens pull down the long walls that protected it from attack by land-based powers . Sparta was forced to pull down walls to protect itself from attack . The walls were built to protect Athens from attacks by land based powers .
 After recounting the various events in Epidamnus, Corcyra, and so forth, he said that those were not the real causes . He said that the events were not to blame for the deaths of the ancient Romans .
 What made the war inevitable was the growth of Athenian power and the fear this caused in Sparta . The growth of Athens' power caused the fear of Sparta, the author says .
 Pericles, the Athenian leader in the early days of the war, had an interesting answer for his fellow citizens . Pericles was the leader of the Greek city of Pericles .
 Once they had an empire, there was not much they could do about it without even larger risks . Perhaps they should not be where they were, but once they had a empire, they could not do much about it .
 Perhaps the Athenians were carried away by emotional patriotism or anger that clouded their reason . The Athenians may have been carried away with emotion or anger, perhaps even anger .
 Independent action taken by one state to increase its security may make all states more insecure . Under anarchy, independent action taken in one state may make it more insecure. Under anarchy it will make security more secure.
 If one state builds its strength to make sure that another cannot threaten it, the other may build its strength . The other, seeing the first getting stronger, may build itself to protect itself against the first . The first state may see its strength as a way of protecting itself from the first
 The independent efforts of each company to build its own strength and security makes both more insecure . The result is that the independent efforts make both companies more insecure, the author says .
 Neither has acted from anger or pride, but from fear caused by the threat perceived in the growth of the other . Neither acts from anger, pride, or from fear of the others' growth .
 After all, building defenses is a rational response to a perceived threat, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Building defenses is not only a response to perceived threats, says Sutter.
 States could cooperate to avoid this security dilemma; that is, they could agree that neither should build up its defenses and all would be better off . States could agree to build up their defenses and avoid this dilemma .
 Police arrest two men who have small amounts of drugs in their possession, which would probably result in one-year jail sentences . Imagine that somewhere the police arrest two . It would be one year jail sentences for two men with small .
 The police have good reason to believe these two are drug dealers, but they do not have enough evidence for a conviction . The police believe the two are really drug dealers .
 The police know that the testimony of one against the other would be sufficient to convict the other to a full sentence . The police say the testimony would be enough to convict either of the two men .
 Police offer to let each man off if he will testify that the other is a drug dealer . Police say they will let the men off if the other says he is a dealer . The police offer the men a chance to let them off if they agree to testify .
 They tell them that if both testify, both will receive 10-year sentences . They say they will be sentenced to 10 years each if they testify .
 The police figure this way these dealers will be out of commission for 10 years . Otherwise they are both in jail for only a year and soon will soon be out selling drugs again . The police say this way will keep them from selling drugs .
 The suspects are put in separate cells and are not allowed to communicate with each other . They are kept apart from each other in a separate cell .
 He can secure his own freedom by squealing on the other, sending him to jail for 25 years, and go free himself . Or he can stay silent and spend a year in jail, or he can be silent .
 "The best outcome for the individual is to cheat on the other and get to go free," he says . The best outcome is the individual's best outcome, he adds .
 The second best outcome is for both to stay silent and spend a year in jail . The best outcome would be for both the pair to spend the next year in prison .
 Worst of all is to be played for a sucker by staying quiet while the other talks and consequently spend 25 years in jail . Worst is to stay quiet while other talks, you will be jailed for 25 years, she says .
 If each person does what is best for himself, they both wind up with a bad outcome . If each individual does what he wants, it will be bad for him and not him, says CNN.com .
 Choosing the best outcome, freedom, is the expression of a rational preference, but if both independently seek their own best result, they both get a bad result . Choosing freedom is a rational choice, but it is not the result of seeking freedom, it is a result of a
 If the two could talk to each other, they might agree to make a deal to stay silent and both spend one year in jail . The two could both spend a year in prison if they could talk .
 Each suspect could say to himself, “We are both drug dealers.” Continuing with the metaphor in the Prisoner’s Dilemma, each suspect could think to himself: “I am both a drug dealer .”
 The absence of communication and trust encourages states to provide for their own security, even though it may reduce all states to mutual insecurity . Similarly, in international politics, the absence of trust encourages state to provide security .
 The Peloponnesian War 17: “Don’t build up your armaments and I will not build up my armaments, and we will both live happily ever after,” but the second state may wonder whether it can afford to trust the first state .
 In the middle of the century, the Athenians and Spartans agreed they were both better off to have a truce . In the mid-century, the Spartans and Athenians agreed to a truce in order to avoid war .
 Even after the events in Epidamnus and the dispute between Corcyra and Corinth, the Athenians were reluctant to break the truce . The Athenians had been reluctant to do so .
 If Corinth gets control of us first, and you allow our navy to be united with hers, you will have to fight against the combined fleets of Corcyra and the Pelopom nese . If Corinth wins, you'll have to defend against combined fleets .
 The Athenians decided to break the treaty, the equivalent of squealing on the other prisoner . The treaty was a treaty between the two sides of the border . Athenians squealed on the prisoner .
 Ironically, the belief that war was inevitable played a major role in causing it . Inevitability and the Shadow of the Future: War was inevitable .
 Athens felt that if the war was going to come, it was better to have two-to-one naval superiority . Athens felt it was best to have naval superiority rather than one to two naval inferiority . Greece felt it would be better if it had two to one naval superiority than
 "The belief that war was imminent and inevitable was critical to the decision," says President Obama . "I believe that war is inevitable," says Obama .
 Each prisoner knows that if they can trust each other, both should go for second best and cooperate by keeping silent . At first glance, it is best for each prisoner to cheat and let the other fellow be a sucker .
 Whoever cheats can get the reward and whoever trusts is a sucker . Playing a game time after time, people can learn to cooperate, but if it is a onetime game, whoever cheats gets the reward . Whoever trusts is the sucker .
 Political scientist Robert Axelrod played the Prisoner’s Dilemma on a computer with different strategies . Political scientist played the game on different strategies using different strategies. Axelrod: "The Prisoner's Dilemmosis is the most complex problem in the world"
 Players find the total benefit from the game is higher by learning to cooperate . Eventually, players find that the benefit from cooperation is higher than from cooperation .
 "When you know you are going to be playing with the same people for a long time, you can learn to cooperate," says the coach . "You can learn how to cooperate with your friends and family," he says .
 The belief that war is inevitable is so corrosive in international politics, it is corrosive . That is why the belief is that war will never be inevitable, says John Defterios .
 "When you believe war is inevitable, you are very close to the last move," says President Obama . "You're very close" to the final move, says Obama .
 When you get to the last move (which may involve your survival) then you may worry about whether you can still trust your opponent . The game may involve whether you will ever play in this game again .
 If you suspect your opponent will cheat, it is better to rely on yourself . Take the risk of defecting rather than cooperating with your opponent .
 Faced with the belief that war would occur, they decided they could not afford to trust the Corinthians or the Spartans . They decided not to trust Corinthians or Spartans . The Spartans died in battle with the Corinthians .
 It was better to have the Corcyraean navy on their side than against them when it looked like it was the last move in the game and inevitable war . It's better than having the navy on them than having it on them when the game looked like the inevitable war was on
 Thucydides had a pessimistic view of human nature . He stated, “My work is not a piece of writing designed to meet the taste of an immediate public, but was done to last forever .
 His history shows human nature caught in the situation of the Prisoner’s Dilemma then and for all time . The history of this man's life shows that human nature is caught in a Prisoner's Dilemmosis .
 Thucydides, like all historians, had to emphasize certain things and not others, says historian . He says he had to stress certain things, not others .
 Thucydides concluded that the cause of the war was the growth of the power of Athens and the fear it caused in Sparta . The war was fought between Sparta and Athens .
 Kagan says the Spartans feared the rise of Athenian power . He says they also feared a slave revolt . Kagan: The Spartans had a greater fear of a revolt from slaves .
 Athens and Sparta were slave states and feared that going to war might provide an opportunity for the slaves to revolt . Both feared that war might give the slaves an opportunity to revolt against each other . Athens and Spartan states feared that the slaves might revolt against war .
 Kagan says the immediate or precipitating causes of the war were more important than Thucydides’s theory of inevitability admits . Kagan: 'The immediate causes were important'
 Corinth misjudged the Athenian response, partly because it was so angry at Corcyra . Corinth, for example, thought Athens would not fight; Athens did not fight .
 Pericles overreacted; he made mistakes in giving an ultimatum to Potidaea and punishing Megara by cutting off its trade . Pericles made mistakes; he also made mistakes with his actions .
 Those policy mistakes made the Spartans think that war might be worth the risk after all . The Spartans were able to defeat the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 Kagan argues that Athenian growth caused the first Peloponnesian War but that the Thirty-Year Truce doused that flame . The Thirty-year Truce ended the war .
 To start the second Peloponnesian War, “the spark of the Epidamnian trouble needed to land on one of the rare bits of flammable stuff that had not been thoroughly drenched. So to start the war, ‘the spark’ needed
 The war was not caused by impersonal forces but by bad decisions in difficult circumstances . Even then the spark might have been extinguished had not the Athenians provided additional fuel at the crucial moment .
 It is perhaps impudent to question Thucydides, the father figure of historians, but very little is ever truly inevitable in history . The historian says that little is truly inevitable, but history is always unpredictable .
 Human behavior is voluntary, although there are always external constraints . Human behavior can be voluntary, but it is always constrained by external constraints, say experts .
 Karl Marx observed that men make history, but not in conditions of their own choosing, Karl Marx . Karl Marx said that men made history not in the circumstances of their choosing .
 The ancient Greeks made flawed choices because they were caught in the situation well described by Thucydides and by the The Peloponnesian War 19 Prisoner’s Dilemma . Ancient Greeks made mistakes because of the situation .
 The security dilemma made war highly probable, but highly proba^ ble is not the same as inevitable . War is unlikely to be inevitable, but it is highly likely to happen .
 Accidents and personalities make a difference even if they work within limits set by the larger structure, the situation of insecurity that resembles the Prisoner’s Dilemma .
 Some stmctural features of international politics predispose events in one direction rather than another . Some of the world's most important issues are in the form of global politics .
 Security dilemmas and the Prisoner’s Dilemma. That is why it is necessary to understand security . The Prisoner's Dilemmas is a security dilemma .
 On the other hand, such situations do not prove that war is inevitable, such as war, does not mean that it is inevitable . The U.S. has not responded to the situation in Syria .
 There are degrees of freedom, and human decisions can sometimes prevent the worst outcomes, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Cooperation does occur in international affairs, even though the general stmcture of anarchy tends to discourage it . Cooperation is possible, but it is often discouraged by anarchy, the author says .
 It is also necessary to beware of patently shallow historical analogies . It is necessary to also beware of "patently shallow history analogies," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It was often popular to say that because the United States was a democracy and a sea-based power while the Soviet Union was a land-based . America was Athens and the Soviet . Union was Sparta locked into replaying a great historical conflict .
 Ancient Athens was a slave-holding state, wracked with internal turmoil, and that democrats were not always in control . But such shallow analogies ignored the fact that ancient Athens was wracked by internal turmoil .
 "Imagine trying to tell everything that happened in the last hour, much less the entire story of your life or a whole war," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A second-by-second account in which everything was replicated would take as long to tell as it took for the events to happen in the first place . A second by-second accounts of the events would be impossible to tell .
 "To write history, even the history of the last hour or the last day, we must simplify," says President Obama . "We must simplify. To write history. We must simplify"
 What we select is obviously affected by the values, inclinations, and theories in our minds, whether explicit or inchoate . We select what we select based on our values and beliefs, such as inchoic beliefs .
 Thucydides was concerned about how Athenians were learning the lessons of the war . He blamed Pericles and the democrats for miscalculating .
 He stressed those aspects of the situation we have described as the Prisoner’s Dilemma . He therefore stressed those . aspects of . the situation . We have described the situation as the . Prisoner's Dilemmas .
 While these aspects of the war were important, they are not the whole story . Yet, they were important to the U.S. as much as possible .
 Thucydides did not write much about Athenian relations with Persia, or the decree that cut off Megara’s trade, or about the amount of tribute that Others in the Delian League had to pay .
 Thucydides’s history was not deliberately misleading or biased, but it is an example of how each age tends to rewrite history . The questions brought to the vast panoply of facts tend to change over time, says historian .
 The need to select does not mean that everything is relative or that history is bunk, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Good historians and social scientists do their best to ask questions honestly, objectively bringing facts to bear on their topic . Good historians try to ask the right questions honestly and to be objective .
 Students should be aware that what is selected is by necessity only part of the story . But they and their students should also be aware of what they are selected .
 Always ask what questions the writer was asking as well as whether he or she carefully and objectively ascertained the facts . Always ask the writer what questions he was asking and whether he was objective .
 The Rise of China has been attended by uncertainty and anxieties since Thucydides’s explanation of the Peloponnesian War, historians have known .
 The rise in the economic and military | I power of China, the world’s most populous country, will be a central question for Asia and | i for American foreign policy .
 Thucydides points to the power of | I expectations of inevitable conflict . Athens decided to break treaty that led to war .
 Belief in the inevitability of conflict with China could have self-fulfilling effects . Belief in a conflict with the U.S. could have a similar effect on the world .
 Ethics do play a role in interna' tional relations, although not the same role as in domestic politics . Ethics play a key role in international relations, but not as much as domestic politics, says the BBC .
 Moral arguments can also be used rhetorically as propaganda to disguise less elevated motives . Those with more power are often able to ignore moral considerations, says author .
 During the Peloponnesian War, the Athenians sailed to the island of Melos to suppress a revolt . The Athenians were trying to stop a revolt in Melos .
 When Iraq invades Kuwait, or the United States invades Grenada or Panama, the U.S. and the Indonesians suppress a revolt in East Timor, they all to some degree employ similar logic . The Indonesians used similar logic when they suppressed a revolt against East Tim
 In the modem world, it is increasingly less acceptable to state one’s motives as plainly as Thucydides suggests the Athenians did in Melos . But in the modern world it is no longer acceptable to say one's motives .
 Phyllis Schlafly argued that God gave nuclear weapons to the free world . God also gave them to Stalin's Soviet Union and Mao's China, she says . We should wonder why God gave weapons to Stalin’s Soviet Union .
 The basic touchstone for moral arguments is impartiality, the view that all interests are judged by the same criteria . The idea of impartiality is a key to moral arguments, but it is not always the same .
 Two different traditions in Western political culture about how to judge moral arguments . Within this framework of impartiality, there are two different traditions of Western political views .
 One descends from Immanuel Kant, the eighteenth'Century German philosopher, the other from British utilitarians of the early nineteenth century such as Jeremy Bentham .
 As an illustration of the two approaches, imagine walking into a poor village and finding that a military officer is about to shoot three people lined up against the wall . The two approaches are very different and very different .
 The officer says, “Last night somebody in this village shot one of my men.” The officer tells the story of the shooting .
 If only one shot was fired, then at least two of these people are innocent . Perhaps all three are innocent, perhaps all three may be innocent .
 The officer takes a rifle from one of his men and hands it to you saying, “You shoot one of them for me and I’ll let the other two go.” The officer then hands the rifle to you and you shoot it for me .
 You could try to mow down all the troops in a Rambo-like move, but the officer has a soldier aiming his gun at you . You could also try to kill the troops but the soldier has a gun .
 "So your choice is to kill one innocent person in order to save two or to drop the gun and have dean hands hands," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "You can't kill one person to save one person or kill two to save the other person"
 The Kantian tradition that you do things only when they are right would require that you refuse to perpetrate the evil deed . It would require you to commit an evil deed to the right .
 The utilitarian tradition might suggest that if you can save two lives, you shouM do it . If you can kill two people, you should do it, it would be a good thing .
 If you choose the Kantian solution, imagine the numbers were increased . Imagine the numbers would be increased. If you chose Kantian or Kantian, imagine an increase .
 Imagine you could save a city full of people from a terrorist’s bomb . Or imagine you could . Save a city from a terror attack on a terrorist's bomb. Or imagine yourself saving a whole city .
 Good moral argument tries to take all three dimensions into account . Moral argument is not always easily reconciled, but good moral argument takes all three .
 Limits on Ethics in International Relations: Ethics plays less of a role in international politics than in domestic politics for four reasons . Ethics plays a more important role in politics than international politics, for example, in the United States .
 There are cultural and religious differences over the justice of some acts . There are also cultural differences over some of the cases .
 States are abstractions, and although their leaders are individuals, statesmen are judged differently than when they act as individuals . Statesmen will be judged differently if they act in the same way as individuals. Statesmen should not be judged as individuals, says David Cameron .
 Presidents who saved their own souls but failed to protect their people would not be good trustees . Presidents who save their souls but fail to protect people are not good trustees, says CNN's John Sutter .
 During the Peloponnesian War, the Athenians told the leaders of the island of Melos that if they resisted, Athens would kill everyone . The Athenians said they would kill anyone who resisted . Athens told the island's leaders that if the leaders resisted, they would be
 The point is when individuals act as leaders of states, their actions are judged somewhat differently . The point was that individuals are judged differently in relation to their actions .
 A third reason ethics plays a lesser role in international politics is the complexity of causation . The complex nature of causation is the reason for ethics to play a lesser part in international diplomacy .
 The extra dimension makes it harder to accurately predict consequences, experts say . That extra dimension is harder to predict consequences .
 Students voted for a resolution that they would never again fight for king and country . Mindful of the 20 million people killed in World War I, the majority of students voted for the resolution .
 He concluded that democracies were soft and that he could press them as hard as he wanted because they would not fight back . But he concluded that democracy was soft because it was not strong enough .
 In the end, he pressed too far and the result was ^^orld W^ar II, a consequence not desired or expected by those students who voted never to fight for king and country .
 A more trivial example is the “hamburger argument” of the early 1970s when people were worried about shortages of food in the world . The argument was a more trivial argument .
 Many students stopped eating hamburger and felt good about themselves, but they did not help starving people in Africa or Bangladesh one bit . Many students felt good eating hamburgers and didn't feel bad about themselves .
 The grain freed up by not eating hamburgers in America did not reach the starving people in Bangladesh . Those starving had no money to buy the grain because they were hungry .
 The grain was simply a surplus on the American market, which meant American prices went down and farmers produced less . The American market was simply surplus . The grain went down in the U.S. market, causing prices to fall .
 To help peasants in Bangladesh required getting money to them so they could buy some of the excess grain . The money needed to be sent to the peasants to help them buy the grain .
 The students failed to look at the complexity of the causal chain that would relate their well-intended act to its consequences, the students failed .
 The disjunction between order and justice is greater in international than in domestic politics . The institutions of international society are particularly weak, argues the author .
 In fact, sometimes protesters purposefully disrupt order for the sake of promoting their view of justice . "Sometimes, sometimes, sometimes ... justice is a matter of principle," says the author .
 If there is total disorder, it is very hard to have any justice, says David Cameron . Witness the bombing, kidnapping, and killing by all sides in Lebanon in the 1980s or in Somalia in the 1990s, he says .
 In international politics, the absence of a common legislature, central executive, or strong judiciary makes it much harder to preserve the order that precedes justice . In the absence Ethical Questions and International Politics, we ask the questions of international politics .
 Realists tend to be skeptics or state moralists in their evaluative approach . Liberals tend to emphasize a liberal analysis tend toward either the state moralist or cosmopolitan moral viewpoints . Realists are realists in descriptive analysis of world politics .
 The skeptic says that moral categories have no meaning in international relations because no institutions exist to provide order . He says moral categories are meaningless in international politics because no institution exists to provide orders .
 There is no sense of community, therefore no moral rights and duties . In addition to that, there is also no moral duties and duties to be moral, he says .
 If international relations are simply the realm of “kill or be killed,” then presumably there is no choice . That would justify the skeptics’ position, he says .
 If choices exist in international relations, pretending choices do not exist is merely a disguised form of choice . pretending choices don't exist is a disguise form of choosing, says David Cameron .
 To think only in terms of narrow national interests is simply smuggling in values without admitting it, he says . "Smuggling in values is not admitting it," he says. "To think only of narrow interests is to think of national interests"
 The diplomat who once told me, “What is moral is whatever is good for France,” was ducking hard choices about why only French interests should be considered, he says . The diplomat said, ‘What's moral is what's good for the French,’
 The leader who says, “I had no choice,” often did have a choice, albeit not a pleasant one . The leader of the U.S. should be careful to take note that he had a choice .
 If there is some degree of order and of community in international relations, there is room for choices . If it is not constantly “kill or be killed” then there should be choices, he says .
 Anarchy means without government, but it does not necessarily mean chaos or total disorder . Anarchy is anarchy without government . Anarchy does not mean total disorder, but anarchy is anarchy .
 Each is critical to understanding why the skeptical argument is not sufficient . The skeptical argument against skepticism is not enough to overcome skepticism .
 Thomas Hobbes argued that to escape from ‘the state of nature’ in which anyone might kill anyone else, individuals give up their freedom to a leviathan, or government, for protection . Hobbes: Life in the state ofnature is nasty, brutish, and
 Hobbes says insecurity is not so great at the international level as at the individual level . Hobbes: The reason is that insecurity isn't so great in the world as at individual level. Hobbes said .
 Governments provide some degree of protection against the brutality of the biggest individuals taking whatever they want . Balance of power among states provides some degree order, and the balance of power is important .
 Hobbes believed that the existerice of states in a balance of power alleviates the condition of international anarchy enough to allow some degree of order . In othgj-.words, Hobbes . Hobbes. believed that . states in . balance of . power alleviated the
 Liberals point to the existence of international law and customs . Liberals point further to the fact that international law is based on international law .
 Such rules put a burden of proof on those who break them . Even if rudimentary, such rules put the burden on those breaking them .
 Saddam Hussein claimed that he annexed Kuwait to recover a province stolen from Iraq in colonial times . Saddam Hussein said he annexed the province to recover from Iraq's colonial-era province .
 An overwhelming majority of states viewed his action as a violation of the UN charter . International law forbids crossing borders for such reasons, but international law forbids it .
 The 12 resolutions passed by the UN Security Council showed clearly that Saddam’s view of the situation ran against international norms . Saddam Hussein's view of Iraq's situation was that it ran against the international norms, the author says .
 Law and norms did not stop Saddam from invading Kuwait, but they did make it more difficult for him to recruit support . They contributed to the creation of the coalition that expelled him from Kuwait .
 International institutions, even if rudimentary, also provide a degree of order by facilitating communication and some degree of reciprocity in bargaining . International institutions also facilitate communication by facilitating and encouraging communication .
 "The energies and attention of leaders are not focused on security and survival all the time," says Nairobi . "It's important to ensure that the world is safe," he says .
 Cooperation occurs in large areas of economic, social, and military interaction . Cooperation also occurs in areas of social, social and military interactions .
 moral arguments take place in international politics and principles are enshrined in international law . Even though cultural differences exist about the notion of justice, moral arguments exist about justice, international politics .
 Even in the extreme circumstances of war, law and morality may sometimes play a role . Law and morality often play a part in the decision-making process .
 The just war doctrine originated in the early Christian church and became secularized after the seventeenth century . It prohibits the killing of innocent civilians . Just war doctrine was secularized in the seventteenth century .
 Absolute pacifists say that no one should kill anyone else for any reason . Absolute pacifist say that killing anyone else is not a crime .
 Sometimes, however, the failure to respond to violence can also beget more violence . The failure to intervene in violence can lead to more violence, CNN.com reports .
 For example, it is unlikely that Osama bin Laden would have left the U.S. alone if President Bush had turned the other cheek after 9/11 .
 In contrast to pacifism, the just war tradition combines a concern for the intentions, means, and consequences of actions . In contrast, pacifism is concerned about the intentions and means of actions, rather than pacifism .
 It argues that if someone is about to kill you and you refuse to act in self-defense, the result will be that evil will prevail . It argues if someone kills you, you will be killed and you don't protect yourself, it will be evil .
 If one is in imminent peril of being killed, it can be moral to kill in self-defense . Self-defense can be self-defence, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 But we must distinguish between those who can be killed and those who cannot be killed . We need to distinguish between the people who can't be killed, not those who are not .
 If a soldier rushes at me with a rifle, I can kill him in self-defense, but the minute the soldier drops the rifle, puts up his hands, and says, “I surrender,” he is a prisoner of war and I have no right to take his
 In fact, this is enshrined in international law, and also in the United States military code . The U.S. military code is also enshrined .
 An American soldier who shoots an enemy soldier after he surrenders can be tried for murder in a U.S. court . An American solider who shoots a soldier after surrendering can be charged with murder in an American court .
 Some officers in the Vietnam War were sent to prison for violating such laws . Some American officers in Vietnam War officers were jailed for violating laws .
 The prohibition against intentionally killing people who pose no harm also helps explain why terrorism is wrong . The prohibition on Ethical Questions and International Politics 25 also explains why terrorism isn't justified .
 Under just war doctrine, you can fight for freedom, but you cannot target innocent civilians . However, under just war theory, you must not target civilians, says the author of the book .
 Some norms exist even under the harshest international circumstances . Though they are often violated, some norms exist under the harshest international circumstances.
 The rudimentary sense of justice enshrined in an imperfectly obeyed international law belies the skeptics’ argument that no choices exist in a situation of war . It is not the first time the U.S. military has been involved in a war.
 We can reject complete skepticism because some room exists for morality in international politics . We can therefore reject completely skepticism because of morality in politics, we can reject cynicism .
 Morality is about choice, and meaningful choice varies with the conditions of survival . Morality varies depending on the circumstances of survival, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Humans may not live wholly by the word, but neither do they live solely by the sword . The sword is not the only weapon in the world, but the sword is the most powerful weapon in existence .
 Many writers and leaders who are realists in their descriptive analysis are also skeptics in their views about values in world politics . Many writers, leaders and leaders are both realists and skeptics .
 Some recognize that moral obligations exist, but say order has to come first . Some say that order must come first in order for order to live in order .
 The disorder of war makes justice difficult, especially in the nuclear age, says the author of the book . "It's not easy to find justice in the midst of a nuclear age," he says .
 The best way to preserve order is to preserve a balance of power among states, says President Obama . "The best way of preserving order is ... to preserve the balance among states"
 If the U.S. becomes too concerned about spreading democracy or human rights throughout the world, it may create disorder that will actually do more damage than good in the long run . For example, if the United States becomes too focused on spreading democracy, human rights, it will create disorder
 International order is important, but it is a matter of degrees, and there are trade-offs between justice and order, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: International order important but it's a trade-off of degrees .
 Some Americans have urged a break in relations with the Soviet Union . For example, after the 1990 Soviet crackdown in the Baltic republics in which a number of people were killed, some Americans have called for a break .
 In their view, Americans should express their values of democracy and human rights in foreign policy, even if that meant instability and the end of arms control talks . The group says the U.S. should express its values, even though that means instability .
 Others argue that while concerns for peace and for human rights are important, it is more important to control nuclear weapons and negotiate an arms reduction treaty .
 The U.S. went ahead with the arms negotiations, but linked the provision of economic aid to respect for human rights . In the end, the American government linked the deal to respect human rights, not arms .
 The question is not absolute order versus justice, but how to trade off choices in particular situations . Over and over in international politics, the question is how to deal with particular situations, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Realists have a valid point of view, but they overstate it when they argue that it has to be all order before any justice . The realists are overstating it, they say, when they say that it must be order before justice .
 State moralists argue that international politics rests on a society of states with certain rules . But those rules are not always perfectly obeyed, they say .
 The most important rule is state sovereignty, which prohibits states from intervening across borders into each others’ jurisdiction . State sovereignty is the key to state sovereignty in the U.S.
 Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states is related to respect for individuals, says President Obama . The U.S. should respect individuals, Obama says .
 Others argue respect for sovereignty is the best way to preserve order . Others argue more simply that respect for order is best way of preserving order .
 In the last few decades, Vietnam invaded Cambodia, China invaded Vietnam, Tanzania invaded Uganda, Israel invaded Lebanon, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, the United States invaded Grenada and Panama, Iraq invaded Iran and Kuwait . NATO bombed Serbia because of its mistreatment of ethnic Albanians in the
 Determining when it is appropriate to respect another state’s sovereignty is a long-standing challenge . Determinating when it's appropriate is a longstanding challenge, it is difficult to do .
 In 1979, Americans condemned the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in strong moral terms . Americans condemn the invasion of the Soviet Union in strong terms .
 The Soviets responded by pointing to the Dominican Republic, where in 1965 the United States sent 25,000 troops to prevent the formation of a communist government . In 1965, the U.S. sent 25.000 troops . The Dominican Republic was one of the last communist-controlled countries in
 The intention behind the American intervention in the Dominican Republic, preventing a hostile regime from coming to power in the Caribbean, was similar to that of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, the author says .
 In terms of the means used, very few people were killed by the United States intervention in the Dominican Republic, and the Americans soon withdrew .
 In the Afghan case, many people were killed, and the Soviet forces remained for nearly a decade . The Afghan case was similar to that of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in the 1980s .
 In the 1990s, some critics compared the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait with the American invasion of Panama . Some critics have compared the invasion of Iraq to the U.S.
 In December 1989, the U.S. sent troops to overthrow the Taliban in Afghanistan . Imagine the following scene in Afghanistan in December 1979; •) i An Afghan communist leader came to power promoting a platform of greater indepenI dence from the Soviet Union .
 This worried Soviet leaders because an independent regime I on their border might foment trouble throughout Central Asia (including Soviet Central g I Asia) and would create a dangerous precedent of a small communist neighbor escaping .
 Imagine the Russian general in charge of the Soviet invasion force confronting the renegade Afghan leader, explaining why he is about to kill him . I doing these things against the international rules of sovereignty and nonvention .
 By conquering I you, we shall increase not only the size of the size but the security of our empire . So by conquering I . you, I shall increase . the size and security of my empire, I . say .
 "We rule the Central I Asian landmass and you are a border state, and weaker than the others," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "You are stronger than any of the others. You are weaker than others"
 The words are Thucydides’s Melian dialogue with the word China added and Central | I Asia substituted far sea and border state for islands . I Those words are the words of the dialogue with China added .
 In Panama, the Americans put into office a government that had been duly elected but that Noriega had not permitted to take office . The Americans put the government into office in Panama, Panama .
 In Kuwait, the Iraqi government tried to annex the country and caused much bloodshed in the process . The Iraqi government has caused a lot of bloodshed in Kuwait .
 Problems often arise when applying simple rules of nonintervention and sovereignty . Such considerations do not mean that the Panama case was all right or all wrong, but as we will see in Chapter 6, problems often arise .
 Cosmopolitans such as Charles Beitz see international politics as a society of individuals . Beitz argues that international politics is not just about states, but about individuals . He says international politics should be seen as an individual society, not just states .
 When we speak about justice, say the cosmopolitans, we should talk about justice for individuals . We should speak to individuals, they say, not just individuals .
 If realists focused on issues of distributive justice, they would notice the interdependence of the global economy . Cosmopolitans say realists would notice that global economy is interdependent and interdependent .
 Constant economic intervention across borders can sometimes have life-or-death effects, says CNN.com's John Defterios . Constant economic interventions across borders often have life or death effects .
 For example, it is a life-and-death matter if you are a peasant in the Philippines and your child dies of a curable disease because the local boy who went to medical school is now working in the U.S. for a much higher salary .
 Cosmopolitans argue that national boundaries have no moral standing . They simply defend an inequality that should be abolished if we think in terms of distributive justice, they say .
 Realists argue that cosmopolitans’ approach may lead to enormous disorder . Realists include both moral skeptics and some state moralists . The danger in the cosmopolitan approach is that it could lead to huge disorder .
 Taken literally, efforts at radical redistribution of resources are likely to lead to violent conflict . People do not give up their wealth easily, says the author of the book .
 A more limited cosmopolitan argument rests on the fact that people often have multiple loyalties . The idea is that people are loyal to families, friends, neighborhoods, nations, and nations .
 Most people are moved by pictures of starving Sudanese children or Kosovar refugees, for some common community exists beyond the national level, albeit a weaker one . Most people move by images of starving children or refugees .
 Cosmopolitans remind us of the distributive dimensions to international relations in which morality matters as much in peace as in war . Cosmopolitanism is as important as morality in peace, as it is in war, the author says .
 Policies can be designed to assist basic human needs and basic human rights without destroying order . Policies can help assist basic needs and human rights, but not destroy order .
 Cosmopolitan views have been written into international laws such as the international convention against genocide . And in cases of gross abuse of human rights, cosmopolitan views are written in international laws .
 President Clinton has said that one of his worst mistakes was not to have done more to stop genocide in Rwanda in 1994 . The U.S. and other countries have supported African peacekeeping troops in efforts to suppress genocidal violence in Darfur .
 The skeptic makes a valid point about order being necessary for justice . But he misses the trade-offs between order and justice . He says the skeptic is wrong .
 State moralist who sees society of states with rules against intervention illustrates an institutional approach to order but does not provide enough answers regarding when some interventions may be justified . The state moralist sees a society of state with rules on intervention .
 The cosmopolitan who focuses on society of individuals has a profound insight about humanity but runs the risk of fomenting enormous disorder by pursuing massive redistributive policies .
 Most people develop a hybrid position; labels are less important than the central point that trade-offs exist among these approaches . Most people have a hybrid approach, but labels are important less important .
 Because of the differences between domestic and international politics, morality is harder to apply in international politics . morality is more difficult to apply to international politics than in domestic politics, he says .
 Just because there is a plurality of principles, it does not follow there are no principles at all, says David Cameron . But just because there are plurality of principle, it doesn't follow there, he says .
 The answer is to be careful, for when moral judgments determine everything, morality can lead to a sense of outrage, and outrage may lead to heightened risk . When moral judgments decide everything, moral judgments should be taken to account .
 Prudence can be a virtue, particularly when the alternative is disastrous unintended consequences . Prudence is a virtue in the world, especially when it comes to unintended consequences. Prudence has been a virtue for many in the past .
 Each person must study events and make his or her own decisions about judgments and trade-offs, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The enduring logic of international conflict does not remove the responsibility for moral choices . It does require an understanding of the special setting that makes those choices difficult, says David Cameron .
 While the specific moral and security dilemmas of the Peloponnesian War are unique, many of the issues recur over history . Many of the questions recur in history, such as security and moral issues .
 As we trace the evolution of international relations, we will see again and again the tension between realism and liberalism . We will see a tension between an anarchic system of states and international organizations, writes David Frum .
 We will revisit the Prisoner’s Dilemma and continue to grapple with the ethical conundrums of war . The Prisoner's Dilemmosis will continue to be explored .
 We will see how different actors on the world stage have approached the crises of their time and how their goals and instruments vary . We will also see how many actors have tried to deal with crises in their time .
 The study of interrrational conflict is an inexact science combining history and theory . Interrrational conflicts is a study of history and the theory of the conflict .
 In weaving our way through theories and examples, we try to keep in mind both what has changed and what has remained constant . We may better understand our past and our present and better navigate the unknown shoals .
 John Maynard Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, was published by John Keynes . Keynes' theory of employment, interest and money is based on his theory of interest and employment . Keynes, Keynes, also known as the 'general theory of the economy'
 Sales and GNP are different measures, and this somewhat exaggerates the role of corporations . Sales are sales but GNP is different measures and this is exaggerated by corporations .
 James A. Caporaso, James A., ed., “Dependence and Dependency in the Global System,” special issue. special issue . Special issue: Dependency and dependency in the global system .
 International political systems are less centralized and less tangible . International political system is less centralized, less tangible, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The international political system is the pattern of relationships among the states . The international system is patterned in relationships among states .
 "Do not be misled, however, by the institutional concreteness of domestic political systems," says Obama . Do not be fooled by the fact that domestic politics is more complex than political systems .
 The role of the press, public attitudes and some of the unwritten conventions of constitutions are also considered . They also include intangible aspects such as public attitudes, the role the press has in the role of government .
 The important point about any system is that the whole pattern is greater than the sum of the parts, that is the building blocks we defined in Chapter 1 as actors, instruments, and goals . The whole pattern, however, is that it's greater than any system, but that's not
 Systems can create consequences not intended by any of their constituent actors . Systems can also create unintended consequences, such as a result of unintended consequences .
 Every business firm in a perfect market tries to maximize its profits, but the market system produces competition that reduces profits to the break-even point, thereby benefiting the consumer . In a perfect world, profits are maximally maximized, but competition reduces profits, thereby reducing profits .
 The businessperson does not set out to benefit the consumer, but individual firms’ pattern of behavior in a perfect market leads to that effect . Individual firms' patterns in perfect markets leads to the effect of that effect, he says .
 The system produces the consequences, which may be quite different from the intention of the actors in the system . In other words, the consequences of the system are very different from what is intended .
 The international political system can similarly lead to effects the actors did not originally intend . The international system can also lead to changes in the way actors intended .
 In 1917 when the Bolsheviks came to power in Russia, they regarded the whole system of interstate diplomacy that had preceded World War I as bourgeois nonsense . The Bolsheviks regarded interstate diplomacy as 'bourson nonsense'
 They intended to sweep away the interstate system . They hoped that revolutions would unite all the workers of the world and abolish borders . They wanted to abolish borders and abolish interstate systems .
 Transnational proletarian solidarity would replace the interstate system . Transnational protestional solidarity would replace the interstate system. Transnational . solidarity .
 Bolsheviks found that their actions were soon affected by the nature of the interstate system . But the Bolsheviks soon found that they had to adapt their actions to the system .
 In 1922, the new communist state signed the Treaty of Rapallo with Germany . The treaty was signed by the communist state in 1922 .
 It was an alliance of the outcasts, the countries that were not accepted in the post-World War 1 diplomatic world . The alliance was formed of the countries not accepted by the world .
 Josef Stalin entered a pact with his ideological archenemy, Adolf Hitler, in 1939, in order to turn Hitler westward . Stalin entered the pact with Hitler, to turn him westward, in an attempt to get Hitler to the West .
 Soviet behavior soon became similar to that of other actors in the international system . Soviet behavior, despite Trotsky’s initial proclamations and illusions, soon became like that of others in the world .
 The distribution of power among states in an international system helps us make predictions about certain aspects of states’ behavior, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 The tradition of geopolitics holds that location and proximity will tell a great deal about how states will behave . Location, proximity and proximity of states can tell a lot about how they will behave, experts say .
 Half of the military conflicts between 1816 and 1992 began between neighbors . Because neighbors have more contact and points of potential friction, it's not surprising that half of the conflicts began with neighbors .
 Three centuries before Christ’s birth, Indian writer Kautilya pointed out that the states of the Indian subcontinent tended to ally with distant states to protect themselves .
 Machiavelli noted International Systems and Levels of Causation 35 . The same behavior among the city-states in fifteenth-century Italy was seen in Italy .
 There was a great deal of talk about African solidarity in the early 1960s . But the new states soon began to produce a checkerboard pattern of alliances similar to what Kautilya described in ancient India .
 Ghana, Guinea, and Mali were ideologically radical while Senegal, Ivory Goast, and Nigeria were relatively conservative . They were balancing against the strength of their neighbors .
 Another example was the pattern that developed in East Asia after the Vietnam War . Another example of the pattern developed in the region after the war .
 If the Soviet Union were colored black, China would be red, Vietnam black, and Cambodia red . Vietnam would be black, Cambodia red, and China red .
 The United States entered the Vietnam War because policy makers believed in a domino theory . Policy makers believed that one state would fall to communism, leading another state to fall, and so forth . The domino theorists predicted that communism would lead to communism .
 With more foresight, the United States should have realized that the game in East Asia was more like checkers than dominoes . The United States might have stayed out of East Asia, and the game might have been like checker's .
 The checkerboard pattern based on ‘the enemy of my enemy is my friend’ is an old tradition of geopolitics . It helps us make useful predictions in an anarchic situation, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Levels of Analysis Systems are not the only way to explain what happens in international politics . Levels of analysis systems are not only way of explaining what happens to international politics, say experts .
 Explanations at the level of the individual are rarely sufficient because the nature of international politics implies states rather than individuals . Explanation at the levels of individual is rarely sufficient, says the author .
 Too much emphasis on an individual’s intentions may blind us to the unintended consequences of individual acts caused by the larger systems in which individuals operate . Too much of an individual's intentions should be placed on the shoulders of larger systems .
 African leaders' intentions for pan-African unity, such as that of the first president of Tanzania, Julius K Nyerere . We would miss the importance of the effect of the anarchic structure on those new African states, he says .
 In 1991, Iraq’s Saddam Hussein was a critical factor in the Gulf War, as was George W Bush with the 2003 Iraq War . In Iraq, Saddam Hussein has been a key factor in both the Gulf and Gulf War .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev faced the possibility of nuclear war in 1962 . The Cuban missile crisis was the first time the two faced each other in the country's history .
 'Why they found themselves in that incredible position cannot be explained at the level of individuals. But why they find themselves in such a position can't be explained by individual individuals. It is not the only explanation for why they are in such an incredible position, it is the reason for their
 Knowing something about the personality of Kaiser Wilhelm II or Hitler is necessary to an understanding of the causes of World War I and World War II, but it is not a sufficient explanation . Similarly, knowing something about Hitler's personality isn't necessary to understand the cause of WWI and WWII,
 Kaiser Wilhelm fired his chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, in 1890, but that does not mean World War I was brought about primarily by Kaiser Wilhelm . As we see later, it made a difference that Kaiser Wilhelm sacked his chancellor in 1890 .
 This bipolarity I led to a loss of flexibility and.bi^ghtened insecurity . I was bipolar, I said, but I was not bipolar enough . I said: 'I'm not bipolar. I'm bipolar. It's bipolar'
 One of the' new alliances developed around an authoritarian land-based power, the other around a democratic power with . an expansive commerce and culture that held naval supremacy .
 Each side feared that | I the other would achieve a decisive advantage in the conflict that both expected . Each side wanted to avoid a defeat in the war that both had expected .
 Calvinist view of international politics is to assign ultimate cause of war to evil that lies within each of us . For example, we could take a Calvinist approach to international politics and assign it to evil .
 That would explain war as the result of an imperfection in human nature . That would be the case of war as a result of human nature, he says . But that would explain the imperfections of war, he adds .
 But such an explanation does not tell us why some evil leaders go to war and others do not, he says . Such an explanation is not only possible, but why some good leaders go war is also possible .
 Such a theory overpredicts , meaning that while it accounts for some things, it also accounts for too much . The theory is a theory that accounts for a lot of things, but accounts for much more .
 The hands of a stopped clock tell the correct time twice a day, but most of the time they mislead us . The hands tell us that the time is correct, but we often misjudge it .
 Overpredicting also plagues some efforts to explain international politics at the second level of analysis, the nature of the state or society . The nature of society or society is a key factor in explaining international politics .
 “democratic” and “communist,” “capitalist, or whatever. Insert your favorite description for “good” or “bad” It’s ‘democratic’ and ‘communist” --“democratic,
 For example, after World War I there was a great deal of enthusiasm for the belief that the victory of the democracies would mean less chance of war . After that, there were a great number of people who believed that the triumph of democracies would lead to less war .
 Marxist theorists argued that war would be abolished when all states were communist . But obviously there have been military clashes among communist countries . China versus the Soviet Union or Vietnam versus Cambodia .
 The nature of the society, democratic or capitalist or communist, is not a sufficient predictor of how likely it is to go to war . Thus the nature of a society is not enough to predict the likelihood of a war, the author says .
 One proposition suggests that if all countries were democratic, there would be less war . The proposition is based on the fact that all countries are democratic .
 In fact, cases in which liberal democracies have fought against other liberal democracies are difficult to find, say experts . Democracy has fought against authoritarian states in many situations, they say .
 The cause of this empirical finding and whether it will continue to hold in the future is not clear, but it suggests something interesting .
 Interesting explanations often involve an interplay between the state or society, and third levels of analysis . Interesting explanations involve the second (state or society) and third (society) levels, analysis .
 A system-level International Systems and Levels of Causation 37 analysis is explanation from the outside in . The analysis is looking at the way the overall system constrains state action .
 The second level is explanation from the inside out, explaining outcomes by what is happening inside the states . The second is explanation of outcomes by how they are explained by what happens inside the state .
 A good rule of thumb is to start with the simplest approach, for if a simple explanation is adequate, it is preferable . A simple explanation would be better than an explanation of a problem .
 Occam’s razor was named after William of Occam, a fourteenth-century philosopher . He argued that good explanations shave away unnecessary detail . This is called the rule of parsimony or Occam's razor, after William .
 The ability to explain a lot with a little is only one of the criteria by which we judge the adequacy of theories . Parsimony is not the only criteria for a theory to be judged by .
 Because systemic explanations tend to be the simplest, they provide a good starting point . It's a good thing to say: "Systemic explanations are the simplest"
 If they prove to be inadequate, then we can look at the units of the system and add complexity until a reasonable fit is obtained . If the units are inadequate, we can add complexity to the system to make a better fit .
 Some neorealists, such as Kenneth Waltz, argue for extreme parsimony and focus only on structure . Some neoreists argue that structure is more important than structure . Others argue that structures are more important to structure than structure in art .
 Liberals and constructivists argue that Waltz’s concept of system is so spare it explains very little . Liberals say Waltz's concept is too spare .
 Structure of a system refers to its distribution of power, and the process refers to patterns and types of interaction among its units . Structure refers to the distribution of the power and the patterns and interaction among those units in a system .
 Structure and process obviously affect each other, and may vary with the length of the period we examine, but structure is more basic and changes; more slowly than process . Structure changes slowly, more slowly, as a result of process, but it's more basic than structure .
 Economists characterize the structure of markets by the concentration of sellers’ power . Economists say markets are created by the concentrations of sellers' power .
 A monopoly has one big seller, a duopoly two big sellers, and an oligopoly several big sellers . In a perfect market selling power is widely dispersed, a monopoly has a monopoly .
 Political scientists describe as unipolar the structure of an international system with one preponderant power . Similarly, political scientists say unipolar is unipolar .
 In bipolar systems, two major centers of power, either two large countries or two tightly knit alliance systems, dominate politics . In bipolar countries, two large or tightly knit alliances dominate power .
 Multipolar structures have three or more centers of power, says Julian Zelizer . "We speak of a dispersed distribution of power," he says . Zelizer says. "Multipolar structures are dispersed"
 Firms that tried to maximize profits in a perfect market found themselves benefiting the consumer, but that result depended on the structure of the market system . To return to the earlier economic example, the firms tried to maximise profits in an ideal market .
 If the market were a monopoly or oligopoly, the result would be quite different . The result would have been quite different if the market had been a monopoly .
 Large firm could increase profits by restricting production in order to raise prices . The large firm could raise prices by limiting production to raise profits .
 When the structure of the system is known, economists are better able to predict behavior and who will benefit from it .
 Political analysts look at the structure of the international system to predict behavior of states and their propensity toward war . Similarly, political analysts also look at how international system predicts behavior .
 In multipolar or dispersed-power systems, states form alliances to balance power . But alliances are flexible, and alliances must be flexible, experts say .
 In bipolar systems, alliances become more rigid, which in turn contributes to the probability of a large conflict, perhaps even a global war . In bipolar countries, alliances are more rigid and more rigid .
 Athens and Sparta tightened their grip on each other in the Peloponnesian War . This happened in the early years of the war between Athens and Athens . This was the first time the two sides had been at odds .
 It was also true before 1914, when the multipolar European balance of power gradually consolidated into two strong alliance systems that lost their flexibility . The European alliance system lost flexibility before 1914 .
 Predictions about war based on multipolarity versus bipolarity encountered a major anomaly after 1945 . But predictions about war with bipolarity proved to be wrong after 1945.
 During the Cold War the world was bipolar with two big players, the U.S. and its allies and the Soviet Union . No overall central war occurred for more than four decades before the system eroded with the decline of the Soviets .
 Some people say nuclear weapons made the prospect of global war too awful . Others say it made the threat too much of the world's worst war .
 The structure of the international system offers a rough explanation, but this does not explain enough all by itself . Thus the structure of this international system is not enough to explain enough, he says .
 We learn more if we look beyond a system’s structure and examine its process, the regular pattern of interactions among the states . We learn a lot more about a system's structure and process, says author .
 The distinction between structure and process at any given time can be illustrated by the metaphor of a poker game . A poker game can be described as a game of poker .
 The structure of a poker game is in the distribution of power, that is, how many chips the players have and how many high cards they are dealt . Poker players are dealt cards and dealt cards in poker games .
 The process is how the game is played and the types of interactions among the players . The process was how the players interact and how the process is played .
 Players in Prisoner’s Dilemma games can communicate with one another . For example, allowing the players to communicate with each other alters the nature of the game .
 When states communicate with one another and reach mutually beneficial agreements or create well-understood norms and institutions, they add to the repertoire of state strategies and can thus alter political outcomes . So, too, when states communicate, they can add to their repertoire of strategies and thus alter outcomes .
 Most systems exist in a cultural context that involves some basic rules or practices that define appropriate behavior . As constructivist theories point out, most systems are built in cultural context .
 States can challenge those rules or accept them, states can accept them . States can choose whether to accept the rules or challenge them .
 An international system may have either a stable or revolutionary process, depending on the identity and goals of the major states . The international system is a stable but revolutionary process .
 In the eighteenth century, the basic rule of the game was the International Systems and Levels of Causation 39 . The legitimacy of the monarchical state was maintained by the balance of power among monarchies .
 The 1713 Treaty of Utrecht referred explicitly to the importance of the balance of power . The treaty was signed by the Dutchmen in 1713 .
 Frederick the Great of Prussia treated his neighbor, Maria Theresa of Austria, the queen of Austria . He treated her with kindness, kindness and respect .
 Frederick decided he wanted Silesia, a province belonging to Maria Theresa, in 1740 . Frederick decided to take over the province from Maria Theresa . Frederick wanted the province, which was part of Maria Theresa's territory .
 Frederick Frederick had no great revolutionary cause, only a simple goal of aggrandizement . Frederick Frederick was not a revolutionary, but he was a businessman . Frederick had a simple purpose for his life, not to be revolutionary .
 He did not try to incite a popular revolution against Maria Theresa . Instead he appealed to the people in Silesia to overthrow the German-speaking autocrats of Vienna .
 He took Silesia because he wanted it and was careful not to do anything else that would damage Austria or the basic principle of monarchical legitimacy . He took the region because of his desire to have it .
 The prevailing view in France was that all monarchs should be sent to the gallows or the guillotine and that power should emanate from the people . Compare that to the French Revolution half a century later, when the prevailing view .
 Napoleon spread revolutionary idea of popular sovereignty throughout Europe . Napoleonic Wars posed an enormous challenge to both the rules of the game and the balance of power . Napoleon spread this revolutionary idea throughout Europe, and it was a challenge .
 The moderate process and stable balance of the system in the middle of the century changed to a revolutionary process and unstable balance at the end of that century . The stable balance was stable at the beginning of the 20th century .
 We refer to changes like the French Revolution as exogenous to a structural theory because they cannot be explained inside the theory . The French Revolution was an example of an exogenous change in the structure of the French revolution .
 This is an example of how a realist structural theory can be supplemented by constructivist work . This is one example, how a constructivist approach can be used to constructivist theory .
 In addition to changing their goals, states can also change their means . States can change their goals in order to achieve the goals of their goals .
 The process of a system is also affected by the nature of the instruments that states use, such as the instruments used .
 The development of new weapons made World War I a particularly bloody encounter . New weapons such as machine guns made the conflict particularly bloody . Weapons such as the machine gun and machine guns were key weapons in the war .
 Frederick the Great not only had limited goals, he was also limited by his means . Frederick was limited to his means, as well as his limited goals and means . He had a very limited time to fulfill his ambitions .
 Eighteenth-century armies generally campaigned in the summer, when food was readily available or when the treasury had accumulated enough gold to pay soldiers . Soldiers were often from the fringes of society .
 The French Revolution changed the social organization of war to what the French called the levee en masse, or the draft, or what we call the draft . The French revolution changed the way the war was organized .
 As constructivists point out, soldiers’ sense of identity changed as people came to understand themselves as citizens rallied to the concept of a motherland, and there was a feeling that all should participate .
 War was no longer a matter between a few thousand mercenaries who campaigned far away; war now involved everyone . War was now a matter of war now involving everyone. War now involves everyone.
 Large-scale involvement and mass support overwhelmed the old mercenary infantries. This large-scale . involvement . overwhelmed the . old mercenary . infantries . This large . scale involved and mass . support overwhelmed . the old mercenaries .
 The change in the means available to states also helped change the process of the eighteenth-century international system .
 Statesmen regularly judged the European balance to be satisfactory or unsatisfactory on the basis of factors that had little or nothing directly to do with power and its distribution . The rank and status a state enjoyed, its status, its honor and prestige, whether it was considered worthy of alliance, whether
 It helps | I explain how crises could and did arise when the balance of power was not affected or . I threatened, but not threatened, was. I threatened to threaten, but the balance was not . I explained how crises arose when the . balance of . power was . not affected
 It shows how devices other than poweri| I political ones—international laws—are used to make decisions . It's not just a matter of power, but it's a political issue .
 Concert practices, alliances used as devices for restraining one’s ally, were more common than power-political ones such as rival alliances or blocking coalitions . These distinctions help us understand the nineteenth-century origins of the great twentieth-century conflicts .
 By the rule of parsimony, we should first seek a simple structural explanation such as neorealists . Neorealists offer to explain what happened over the course of the nineteenth century .
 Napoleon tried to create French hegemony over Europe at the beginning of the century . He failed to create a French hegemony in Europe .
 His efforts united the other countries in a coalition that eventually defeated France . His efforts unite the other nations in the coalition that ultimately defeated France.
 Had he succeeded, he would have changed the system to a unipolar structure, he said . He would have succeeded in changing the system .
 Revolutionary France changed the process of the system for 20 years and threatened to change its structure . France failed to make the structure of the European interstate system unipolar .
 For realists who emphasize structure, the big change came with the unification of Germany in 1870 . Realists emphasize structure in Germany .
 The nineteenth-century system remained multipolar, but there was a major change in the distribution of power in central Europe . The 19th century system was multipolar but it was still multipolar .
 Germany consisted of 37 states and had been an arena of international politics in which others intervened . Before that, Germany had been part of the world's most populous nation .
 It was located in the center of Europe, which had tremendous geopolitical consequences . Furthermore, it was located right in the central European center . It was also located in Europe's center, and had enormous geopolitical implications .
 From a structural perspective, a united Germany was potentially either too strong or too weak . A united Germany would be either too weak or too strong, says a former German official .
 Germany was strong enough to defend itself against both Russia and France at the same time . Germany was also strong enough enough to defeat either the Russians or the French alone .
 If Germany was not strong enough to defeat Russia and France simultaneously, it might look weak enough to invite the Russians and the French to join together to invade it . Germany could invite the French and the Russians to join forces together in an invasion .
 The newly unified German state in the center of Europe did not produce instability because of its brilliant first chancellor, Otto von Bismarck . But the newly unified Germany state did produce instability .
 Bismarck was such an agile diplomat that he allayed the sense of threat on the part of his neighbors, thus delaying the effects of this major structural change on the system’s political process . From 1870 to 1890, he was able to push through the system's political
 From 1890 on, the alliance systems of Europe grew more rigid, with one alliance centered on Germany and another centered on Russia and France . The alliance became more rigid in 1890s .
 The bipolarity of alliances gradually grew more and more rigid and finally exploded in 1914 . It was the first time the bipolarity was allowed to be allowed to exist in Europe .
 This structural explanation of nineteenth-century change has a strong core of truth, but is not an adequate explanation by itself . This is not the only explanation of 19th century change, but it's a good idea .
 It does not account for the role of an individual such as Bismarck, it does not tell us why the other European states allowed Germany to unify in the first place . Germany's unification was a major factor in unifying the country .
 Perceptions and domestic politics must be invoked to answer those questions . Perceptions of the U.S. should be invoked, says David Frum .
 The bipolarity of alliances took 30 years to develop, and does not allow for the possibly crucial role of individual leadership . The structural explanation says little about why the bipolarity took 30 . years .
 If the kaiser had not fired Bismarck in 1890, perhaps the evolving bipolarity could have been avoided . If the German leader had kept his treasured alliance with Russia, perhaps it could be avoided .
 If Bismarck’s successors hadn’t challenged Britain by launching a naval arms race, perhaps the conflict could have been avoided . Britain's role in the conflict in the World War II could be avoided .
 Although the structural explanation of changes in the nineteenth-century system has much to offer, it is too narrowly deterministic . The structural explanation is too narrow and too narrow to offer .
 It removes the role of human choice and makes World War 1 look inevitable in 1870 in 1870 . It makes it look like it was inevitable in 18th century, says historian .
 As constructivists remind us, we also need to take into account the changes in European culture and ideas that influenced the process of relations, in the nineteenth-century system .
 States’ goals and instruments that altered the incentives for cooperation, say experts . There is a change in state’s goals, instruments and incentives that altered cooperation, they say .
 The ideology of democratization and nationalism grew stronger over the course of the nineteenth century and had a major effect on states’ goals . The ideology grew stronger in the late nineteenth century .
 In the eighteenth century, Frederick behaved in Prussia much as he wanted, not constrained by elected ministers or parliamentarians . In the 18th century, the Prussian king behaved in his own way .
 Democratization adds broader domestic influences to the complexity of international politics . Democratization added broader domestic influence to the complex world of foreign policy .
 Napoleon earned the new ideas across Europe, challenging and fomenting nationalism in other countries . Napoleon earned a new idea across Europe. Napoleon earned his new ideas .
 The Napoleonic Wars may have failed to change the structure of European politics, but they certainly caused profound changes in the process . The Napoleson Wars may not have changed Europe's structure of politics but they changed the world .
 The Austrian Prince Mettemich and his counterparts succeeded in restoring the old order at the Congress of Vienna in 1815 . But beneath a surface of stability were the volcanic forces of nationalism and democracy that erupted in the revolutions of 1848 .
 As the century progressed, both peoples and leaders began to see themselves differently . The world's first major city in modern history was New York City .
 The nationalist challenge to the legitimacy of dynastic rulers led to some strange alliances . Some strange alliances defied the classical balance of power .
 France failed to support Austria when it was attacked by Prussia, a long-term error from the structural point of view . For example, in 1866, France did not support Austria in its attack on Prussia .
 France opposed to Austrian repression of nationalism in the part of Italy that Austria occupied . France was opposed to Austria's anti-nationalist policies in Italy .
 When Bismarck took Alsace-Lorraine from France in the war of 1870, he created nationalist resentment in France that prevented France and Germany from becoming potential alliance partners in the future .
 The new ideologies changed states’ goals and made the process of international politics less moderate over the course of the nineteenth century . As constructivist approaches point out, the new ideologies .
 Application of new industrial technology to military purposes produced massive yet inflexible instruments of war . The application of new . industrial . technology to . military purposes . produced massive . yet . inflexibles .
 Railway mobilization schedules began to play a key role in war by the middle of the century . The ability to get large numbers of troops in one place at one time is key to war .
 Machine guns and trenches made a mockery of the idea of short, sharp, limited wars that Bismarck used so successfully in the 1860s . Near the end of the war, machine guns and trench warfare made it a mockery . Machine guns, trenches and trenches were the main weapons
 Both structure and process help explain the changes in the nineteenth-century international system in Europe and the origins of World War 1 .
 We started with neorealist structure because it is simpler, but found that it provided only a partial explanation . We started using neorealism structure because of it's simpler . We found that structure provided only partial explanation for the structure .
 Constructivist attention to process reminds us not to be blind to social change . Constructivism is a way of thinking that it is possible to think about social change in the future .
 The so-called German problem from the nineteenth century reemerged in debates when East and West Germany were reunified in 1990 . A modern Sequel of the German problem will be shown in a new documentary on the subject .
 Eduard Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union argued that the reunification of Germany would destabilize the balance of power in Europe . Eduard said reunification would profoundly destabilize Europe's power balance .
 Congress of Vienna in 1815 included 37 German-speaking states . As we have seen, the Congress included 37 states .
 Austrians included in German empire because he feared they would dilute Prussian control of new state . He, did not want them included in his new German empire .
 The decline of Soviet power in Eastern Europe in the late 1980s ended the bipolar structure of postwar politics and made possible Germany’s reunification . Germany's reunification was made possible by the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Reunification created new anxieties about the union of 80 million people with Europe’s largest economy located in the heart of the continent .
 He relied on structural realist analysis to reach pessimistic conclusions that the future will be like the past . The structure of the situation is similar to the past, he said .
 International Systems and Levels of Causation 43 The Berlin Wall coming down, 1989 . But things have changed in three ways since then .
 The United States is nearly four times the size of the reunified Germany . At the structural level, the U.S. is involved in Europe and the United States has a strong presence in Europe .
 With the Cold War over, at some point the Americans may turn isolationist and go home . The U.S. has been in the Middle East for more than a decade .
 The process of international politics in Europe has been transformed by the development of new institutions . The new institutions have transformed the continent's international politics, says David Cameron .
 The European Union unites Germany and other European states in a way they were never tied together before . The EU is the largest economic bloc in the world . Germany is one of the biggest economies in the EU, with more than 1,000 countries .
 Changes in popular values have transformed a warfare state into a welfare state . Germany’s domestic politics represent a half century of democracy, writes David Cameron .
 The Germany that caused trouble in the heart of Europe in 1870, 1914, and 1939 was not democratic . The Germany . Germany . caused trouble . in 1870 and 1914, 1914 and 1939 were not democratic, he says .
 So far predictions based on process and domestic change seemed to have fared best . We should pay attention to all three, but not all, but we need to pay attention .
 Neorealism rests heavily on the systemic level of analysis, says that states act similarly because of the international system . Neorealist says states act similar because of international system because of that .
 A state’s position in the system makes it act in a certain way, and states with similar positions act similarly . A state with a similar position will act similarly to a state that is in a similar way, the state says .
 A parsimonious system level of analysis is often inadequate, we must look at what happens inside the units in the system . We must also look at the units inside the system in order to find out what is happening .
 The Peloponnesian War began with a domestic conflict between the oligarchs and the democrats in Epidamnus .
 The domestic politics of Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire played significant roles in the onset of World War I . To understand the end of the Cold War, we must look inside the Soviet Union at the failure of its centrally planned economy .
 Two major theories, Marxism and liberalism, rest heavily on the second level of analysis and the proposition that states will act similarly if they have similar domestic societies . The theory of state-state relations rests on the notion that states act similarly to each other in a similar domestic society .
 To predict foreign policy, these theories look at the internal organization of the state . These theories focus on internal organization .
 Marxism did not do a very good job of explaining the onset of World War 1 . As we will see later, we will be able to find out why Marxism was wrong to blame .
 "It does not fit the experience of the second half of the twentieth century," says the author of the book . "It is not a good example of how the world is changing," he says .
 Communist states, such as the Soviet Union, China, and Vietnam, were involved in military clashes with each other . The major capitalist states in Europe, North America, and Japan maintained peaceful relations .
 The arguments that capitalism causes war do not stand up in historical experience . The arguments against capitalism don't stand up to historical experience, says David Cameron .
 Like others of the Manchester School of British economists, he believed that it was better to trade and to prosper than go to war .
 Cobden: If we are interested in getting richer and improving the welfare of citizens, then peace is best . Cobden says peace is the best way to get richer and improve citizens' welfare . Peace is best, says Cobden .
 In 1840 he expressed the classical view, saying “We can keep the world from actual war, and I trust that the world will do that through trade’s trade .
 A number of books, including a classic by Norman Angell, said that war had become too expensive . The Great Illusion, The Great illusion, said it was too expensive to fight .
 To illustrate the optimism of classical liberalism on the eve of World War I, we can look at the philanthropists of that era . The philanthropists were optimistic about the prospect of war .
 Andrew Carnegie established the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in 1910 . Andrew Carnegie, the steel magnate, established the endowment for international peace in 1910.
 Carnegie worried about what would happen to the money he had given to this foundation after lasting peace broke out . He put a provision in his will to cover this possibility . Carnegie put the money in the foundation to cover the possibility .
 Edward Ginn, a Boston publisher, set up the World Peace Foundation devoted to the same cause . He wanted Carnegie to get all the credit for the forthcoming permanent peace, so he set up it .
 Ginn also worried about what to do with the rest of the money after peace was established, so designated it for low'cost housing for young working women . Ginn was also concerned about what International Systems and Levels of Causation 45 would do .
 Even though bankers and aristocrats had frequent contact across borders, none of this helped stop the European states from going to war with each other .
 Statistical analysis has found no strong correlation between states’ involvement in war and whether they are capitalist or democratic . No strong correlation has been found between capitalist and democratic .
 The classical Marxist and liberal views are opposites in their view of the relationship between war and capitalism . But they are similar in locating the causes of war in domestic politics, and especially in the nature of the economic system .
 The two world wars and the failure of collective security in the interwar period discredited liberal theories . Liberalism Revived in the wake of the Second World War and the collapse of collective collective security .
 Most writing about international politics in the U.S. after World War II was strongly realist in flavor . Most writing on international politics was strongly realism .
 The late 1960s and 1970s saw a revival of interest in liberal theories . However, as transnational economic interdependence increased, the liberal theories were not widely accepted .
 The political strand has two parts, one relating to institutions and the other to democracy . The political part relates to institutions, the part relating to democracy, the other relates to the democracy .
 Liberals argue that trade may lead states to define their interests in a way that makes war less important to them . Liberals say trade is important not because it prevents states from going to war, but because it may lead to a state defining its interests .
 Trade offers states a way to transform their position through economic growth rather than military conquest . Trade is a way of transforming states' position rather than through military conquest. Trade offers countries a chance to grow their economies .
 In the 1930s, Japan thought the only way to gain access to markets was to create a “Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere” which in turn required conquering its neighbors and requiring them to trade . In turn, Japan would then be able to trade with
 In 1939, Eugene Staley argued that part of Japan’s behavior in the 1930s could be explained by economic protectionism at the time . Already in 1939, Staley, a Chicago economist, argued that .
 Staley believed that when economic walls are erected along political boundaries, possession of territory is made to coincide with economic opportunity . Staley said that when . economic walls erected along . political borders, possession . of territory was made to . coincide with opportunity .
 A better solution for avoiding war is to pursue economic growth in an open trading system without military conquest . The U.S. needs to pursue an open trade system without war, the author says .
 In contrast to the 1930s, Japan today has successfully transformed its position in the world through trade . Japan has succeeded in transforming its position through trade, says Mr. Miyamoto .
 Realists say that Japan was able to accomplish this amazing economic growth because somebody else was providing for its security . Realists reply that somebody else is providing for Japan's security. Realists argue that this is not the case .
 Japan relied on the United States for security against its large nuclear neighbors, the Soviet Union and China . The U.S. helped Japan defend itself against its nuclear neighbors .
 Some realists predicted that with the Soviet Union gone, the U.S. would withdraw its security presence in East Asia and raise barriers against Japanese trade . Others predicted that the United States would raise trade barriers against Japan .
 Japan would remilitarize, and eventually there would be conflict between Japan and the U.S. as predicted by theories of hegemonic transition . The United States would eventually become dominant in Japan .
 The most attractive career opportunities in Japan are in business, not in the military, say experts . Japan's most attractive job opportunities in the country lie in the business sector .
 Liberals argue realists are not paying enough attention to domestic politics and the way that Japan has changed as a result of economic opportunities . Liberals argue that the realists don't pay enough attention .
 The liberal economic argument says trade may not prevent war, but it does lead to changes in how states see their opportunities . In turn, it may lead to a social structure that is less inclined to war, the liberal argument says .
 Person-to-person contacts reduce conflict by promoting understanding . It argues that person to person contact reduces conflict by reducing conflict by understanding .
 Such transnational contacts occur at many levels, including through students, businesspeople, and tourists . Such contacts occur in many ways through students and businesspeople .
 After all, bankers, aristocrats, and labor union officials had broad contacts in 1914 . That didn't stop them from killing one another once they put on khaki uniforms .
 The idea that social contact breeds understanding and prevents war is far too simple . Obviously, the idea is far more simple than that of social contact .
 Western Europe today is very different from 1914 . Textbook editors try to treat other nationalities fairly, says historian .
 The images of the other peoples of Europe are very different from the images of 1914 . The image of 1914 is very different than those of 1914.
 A sense of European identity coexists with a sense of national identity, polls show . Public-opinion polls show that European identity and national identity are linked to national identity .
 Transnational society affects what people in a democracy want from their foreign policy . Transnational societies affect what people want from foreign policy, says John Defterios .
 France responded to the reunifica< tion of Germany in 1990 . It is worth noting how France responded .
 Public-opinion polls showed that most French people welcomed German unification . A residue of uncertainty and anxiety remained among foreign policy experts .
 Princeton political scientist Robert O Keohane says political expectations are shaped by expectations .
 "They lengthen the shadow of the future and reduce the acuteness of the security dilemma," says author of the book .
 A peaceful trading i strategy is enjoying much more efficacy than ever before . Institutions reduce the effect of the A Modern Liberal View I . A modern liberal view of the world since 1945 is interesting and different .
 Through mechanisms of 5 industrial-technological development and international trade, nations can transform their P positions in international politics . Nations can do so while other states also benefit from the enhanced trade and growth that economic cooperation makes possible .
 He was careful to say that a state of war does not mean constant fighting, but a propensity to war . Just as cloudy weather means a likelihood of rain, he said . He said that state of state does not means constant fighting .
 A state of peace means a propensity toward peace, and that people can develop peaceful expectations when anarchy is limited and stabilized by international institutions . In the same sense, peace means people develop a propensity to peace, author says .
 Most Western Europeans expect the European Union to last, says CNN's John Sutter . He says they provide a sense of continuity in Europe . Sutter: "Most Western Europeans are optimistic about the future of the EU"
 At the end of the Cold War, many Eastern European governments agreed and made plans to join the European Union . Many Eastern European countries agreed and joined the EU after the war ended .
 Second, institutions provide an opportunity for reciprocity, they say . That affected their behavior even before they eventually joined in 2004, they said . The U.S. joined the party in 2004 .
 If the French get more today, the Italians might get a little more tomorrow . The French get a bit of more today and tomorrow .
 There is less need to worry about each transaction because over time it will likely balance out . Over time, each transaction will balance out, so don't worry about it anymore .
 The institutions of the union provide information on how it is all working out . The institutions provide information to the union .
 In the European Union, bargaining goes on within the Council of Ministers and in the European Commission, and there is also a European court of justice . In the EU, bargaining is carried out within the council of ministers and the EU Commission .
 Institutions create a climate in which expectations of stable peace develop . Thus institutions create an environment for stability in the world, the author says .
 Classical liberals expect ‘peace breaking out all over’; today’s liberals look for islands of peace where institutions and stable expectations have developed . Liberals look for stability where institutions have developed, as well as institutions .
 The political scientist Karl Deutsch called such areas “pluralistic security communities” in which war between countries became so unthinkable that stable expectations of peace developed . Deutsch: Such areas are places where war between nations is so unthinkable it is unthinkable .
 The Scandinavian countries, for example, once fought each other bitterly, and the United States fought Britain, Canada, and Mexico .
 The advanced industrial countries seem to have a propensity for peace . The European Union, the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Organization of American States create a culture in which peace is expected .
 Expectations of stability can provide a way to escape the Prisoner’s Dilemma situations that realists assume . Realists assume that stability is a key to avoiding Prisoner's Dilema situations .
 After the high hopes that greeted European integration in 1992, some opposition arose to further unity . Some opposition arose over disputes over the single European currency, the euro, which came into use in 2002 .
 Countries such as Great Britain feared that ceding further power to the government of the European Union would jeopardize the autonomy and prosperity of the individual nations . Great Britain said it would not give in to the EU's power to further powers .
 Efforts in 2003 and 2004 to develop a new European constitution proved difficult, and in 2005 voters in France and the Netherlands refused to ratify it .
 Britain and others worried that if they opted out of the European Union entirely, countries such as Germany, France, and Italy that opted in would gain a competitive edge .
 The European Union was not becoming a superstate, its institutions helped transform relations between European states . While the EU did not become a super state, it was a model for the future .
 Germany today is a different country than the Germany of 1870, 1914, or 1939 . Germany is no longer the same country it was in 1870 or 1914, 1914 or 1939, it is now Germany .
 It has experienced a half century of democracy, with parties and governments changing peacefully . It has also experienced a 50-year-old democracy .
 Public-opinion polls show that the German people do not seek an expansive international role . German people don't want to seek an international role, polls show .
 liberals are skeptical of realist predictions that fail to account for the effects of democracy . Liberals are skeptical about realist theories that don't account for democratic rights .
 Two former officials of the Reagan administration gave diametrically opposed views at a conference sponsored by the Institute of Peace in 1990 .
 As Immanuel Kant and other classical liberals pointed out, in a democracy the people can vote against war . In a democracy, people can choose not to go to war, says Kant .
 The fact that a country is democratic does not mean its people will always vote against war . But the fact that . a country . is democratic doesn't mean that its people . will always be voting against war, says David Cameron .
 As we have seen statistically, democracies seem to be involved in wars as often as other countries, we need to be aware of the fact democracies are involved in war more often than other countries .
 In ancient Greece, Pericles roused the people of Athens to go to war . In 1898, the American electorate dragged a reluctant President McKinley into the Spanish-American War .
 In 2003, opinion polls and a congressional vote supported President Bush’s calls for war against Iraq . Public opinion later soured as the conflict dragged on .
 Michael Doyle, a political scientist at Columbia, has pointed to a more limited proposition that can be derived from Kant and classical liberalism; namely, the idea that liberal democracies do not fight other liberal democracies . Michael Doyle: Liberal democracies don't fight each other .
 The fact that two democratic states do not fight each other is a correlation, and some correlations involve spurious causation . Some correlation involves spurious causation, such as the fact that democratic states don't fight is spurious .
 Fires and presence of fire engines are highly correlated, but we do not suspect fire engines of causing fires . Fires and the presence of a fire engine is highly correlated in the area .
 One possible source of spurious causation is that democratic countries tend to be rich countries . According to trade liberalism, they are not likely to fight each other, and according to trade liberal policies, they don't fight .
 But that dismissal does not fit with the fact that rich countries have often fought each other . The two world wars were fought in both countries, with the exception of the two world Wars .
 Liberals suggest that the cause behind the correlation is a question of legitimacy . Liberals suggest it is possible that the correlation could be due to legitimacy . Liberal Democrats suggest that a link between the two parties is not legitimate .
 International Systems and Levels of Causation 49 Democilcy and Peace I A coalition for democracy is good for America . Maybe people in democracies think it is wrong to fight other democracies because there is something wrong .
 Democracies, after all, are more likely to be stable, less likely to wage war . Democracies are stable and more likely not war-waging nations .
 Our efforts to help build democracies will make us all more secure, more prosperous, and i more successful as we try to make this era of terrific change our friend and not our enemy . They can provide peoI I I pie with the economic opportunities to build their own homes, not
 Clinton: The survival of liberty in our land increasingly depends on the success of liberty . Clinton: "Liberty in our country increasingly depends upon the success in other I lands" Clinton: Liberty in the U.S. depends on success of freedom in other countries .
 The best hope for peace in our world is the expansion of freedom in all the world, says President Obama . "The best hope" for peace is to expand freedom, says Obama .
 President George W Bush said it is the policy of the U.S. to seek and support the growth of democratic movements and institutions in every nation and culture . The ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world is to end tyranny, Bush said .
 Constitutional checks and balances on making war may work better when there is widespread public debate about the legitimacy of a battle . In addition, constitutional checks and . balances on . making war . work better .
 It is harder to rouse democratic peoples when there is no authoritarian demon like Hitler or Saddam Hussein, says George W. Bush . It's harder to raise democratic people when there are no authoritarian demons like Saddam Hussein .
 Although these liberal theories need exploration via detailed case studies to look at what actually happened to them, they do have promise . Theories need to be looked at in-depth and detailed case-studies to explore what happened .
 If the number of democracies in the world grows, there might be less propensity for war, at least among the democracies, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Some of the new democracies may be plebiscitary democracies without a liberal domestic process of free press, checks on executive power, and regular elections . Some of these democracies may not have a free press or regular election process .
 The warring governments of Croatia, Serbia, and Bosnia were elected . They were elected, though they were far from liberal democracies . Bosnia, Croatia, Bosnia and Croatia are still warring countries .
 Ecuador and Peru fought a border skirmish in 1995 . The same was true of Ecuador and Peruvian border skirmishes in 1995.
 The theorized relation is between liberal democracies and liberal democracies, not all democracies . The relationship is theorized to be between liberal democracy and all liberal democracies .
 The states define their national interests, but that doesn't tell us much about how they define their interests . That statement is normally true, but it does not tell much unless we know how states define national interests .
 Realists say that states have little choice in defining their national interest because of the international system . Realists argue that international system allows states to define national interests .
 A state’s position in the international system determines its national interests and predicts its foreign policies, realists say . So for the realists, a state's position in international systems determines its interests and foreign policies .
 Liberals and constructivists argue that national interests are defined by much more than the state’s position in the international system . They say they have a richer account of how state preferences and national interests form .
 The definition of the national interests depends in large part on the type of domestic society and culture a state has . The definition is based on the state's domestic society, culture and culture .
 For example, a domestic society that values economic welfare and places heavy emphasis on trade, or that views wars against other democracies as illegitimate, defines its national interests very differently from a despotic state that is similarly positioned in the international system .
 Liberals argue that this is particularly true if the international system is moderate, that is if it is not purely anarchic . Liberals argue this is especially true in the case of a moderate international system .
 If institutions and channels of communication provide stable expectations of continuing peace, the Prisoner’s Dilemma may be escaped .
 It's important to know how closely a particular situation approximates the abstract concept of anarchy . Non-power incentives can help shape how states define their interests, says author .
 If an international situation is totally anarchic, if you may be killed by your neighbor tomorrow, then limited opportunities exist for democracy or trade preferences to influence foreign policy . If you may kill your neighbor today, you may have limited opportunities for democracy in the world .
 If the system only partially approximates anarchy because of institutions and stable expectations of peace, then some of these other factors related to domestic society and culture are likely to play a larger role . But if the system is only partially . approximating anarchy, it will likely play a bigger role in
 Realist predictions are more likely to be accurate in the Middle East than liberal predictions in Western Europe . Realist and liberal predictions more likely in Middle East, for example, than in Europe .
 Knowing context helps us gauge the likely predictive value of different theories . Knowing the context of these theories is crucial to understanding the meaning of theories .
 Even states in similar situations sometimes define their interests and strategies differently . Bismarck's, the Kaiser's, and Hitler’s solutions to Germany s security dilemma .
 When systemic differences fail to explain different foreign policies, we tend to look at domestic causes, says David Frum . He says the problem is systemic differences in foreign policy .
 A variety of factors in domestic affairs sometimes make states act similarly . The U.S. has been criticized for its handling of the Korean peninsula .
 Revolutionary leaders often view their predecessors’ foreign policies and even the whole international system as illegitimate . Revolutionary leader often view his predecessor’s foreign policies as illegitimate. Revolutionary leader: "I'm not sure what I'm going on to say"
 Revolutions often create instability in the entire region because revolutionary leaders seek to export their ideology . France and its neighbors in the 1790s, with Russia after 1917, and with Iran and Iraq in 1980 .
 Sometimes the revolutionary state invades its neighbors; sometimes it is invaded . Sometimes the revolution is a state that invades neighbors . Sometimes it's invaded. Sometimes the state is invaded by its own people .
 Poorly integrated countries such as Germany or Austria before 1914 are more likely to project internal problems outward . Germany and Austria were among the worst-integrated countries before 1914 .
 German leaders diverted attention away from social democracy at home to expansion abroad . Germany's social democracy is at risk of losing influence in the Middle East .
 Some countries with poor internal integration, like Myanmar today, turn inward . Myanmar's tendency to find external scapegoats does not always hold true, writes Andrew Keen .
 Analysts say foreign policy can be predicted by looking at the inertia of foreign policy and military bureaucracies . Because bureaucracies have standard operating procedures and do not change quickly, some analysts believe foreign policy will not change .
 The German military bureaucracy resisted changes in its military plans in 1914 . Certainly the German government resisted changes to its plans .
 After its defeat by mobile, irregular guerrilla forces in Vietnam, the U.S. adopted a strategy of high mobility during the Gulf War and won .
 Scholars have sought ways to explain foreign policies by linking the world economy to domestic interests . Scholars in the subfield of international political economy have sought parsimonious ways .
 The different ways that open trade affects labor, landowners, and capital might influence policy in predictable ways, as we shall see in the case of Germany in the next chapter .
 Political coalitions at home can shift as a result of changing international opportunities and pressures . Moreover, political coalitions in the U.S. can shift due to changing international circumstances and pressures, experts say .
 Many variations in foreign policy behavior yield only low-level generalizations . The U.S. has a long history of foreign policy in the world .
 Domestic politics matter, and liberal theories help, but in different ways and at different times, different places . Domestic politics matters, but it matters in different times and different places, says CNN's John Sutter .
 President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia spoke before the U.S. Congress in 1990 . Vaclav was the first Czech president to speak before the United States Congress .
 "I can adjust to this. So this jolting experience of going from prison to standing before you today, I can adjust this," he says .
 Humans sometimes make surprising choices, and human history is full of uncertainties . Human history has a history of uncertainty, and history is unpredictable .
 Controlled experiments do not exist because it is impossible to hold other things constant while looking at the one thing that changes . Controlled experiments don't exist because they are impossible to keep things constant, they say .
 Aristotle said one should be as precise in any science as the subject matter allows . Aristotle said: "Aristotle said one must be as exact in any scientific subject matter as possible"
 International politics involves so many variables, so many changes occurring at the same time that events are overdetermined—there are too many causes, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There are so many causes that it's overdetermined"
 Analysts want to sort out causes to get some idea of which ones are stronger than others . But as analysts, they still want to find out which causes to cause the problem .
 One of the useful tools we can use is mental experiments called counterfactuals . As you will see when we look at World War I in the next chapter, we will look at the war in a different way .
 Counterfactuals are contrary-to-fact conditionals, but it is simpler to think of them as thought experiments to define causal claims . Counterfactions are contrary to the fact conditionals .
 Historians use a more elaborate version of the same procedure to weigh causes . Though often without admitting it, historians use the same method to weigh cause of causes .
 Counterfactual examines how important a particular personality was in comparison to structural factors . In this instance, the use of a counterfactual examined the importance of a person's personality to the society .
 Some political observers speculate that after the A1 Qaeda attacks on September 11, 2001, either man would have responded by using force against the Taliban government that had given haven to the terrorists . But that Gore might not have decided to invade Iraq, where the connection, to the September 11 attacks
 Poorly handled counterfactuals may mislead by destroying the meaning of history, says historian . Counterfactualities may mislead history by destroying meaning, he says . Counterfactsuals are often misunderstood by historians .
 "Once something has happened, other things not equal. The fact is that once something is ... not equal," he said . "The fact is ... other things are not equal"
 Historical events are “path dependent”; that is, once events start down a certain path, all possible futures are not equally probable . We say that historical events are "path dependent"; that is the case that history is not equally likely .
 A useful counterfactual has to be within the reasonable array of options . Plausibility must be within a reasonable range of options, say experts .
 It must be plausible to imagine two conditions existing at the same time, says Simon Tisdall . It must also be possible to imagine that two conditions exist at same time .
 She may say that such a counterfactual is designed to test the importance of military technology, but it makes little sense to imagine twentieth-century technology in a nineteenth-century Counterfactuals 53 setting .
 It is not a fruitful use of counterfactual thinking because of the anachronism involved . Although it might be good for laughs, it might not be a fruitful counterfactorial thinking .
 Each major event exists in a long chain of causation, and most events have multiple causes . Proximity in Time is a chain of events that begin with a single cause .
 The further back in time we go, the more causes that must be held constant, the further back we go . The further . back in history we go the more . causes we must hold constant .
 The closer in time the questioned event is to the subject event, the more likely the answer is yes . The closer the time the question is asked, the closer the answer comes to the answer .
 If Cleopatra’s nose had been shorter, she would have been less attractive to Marc Antony, says Pascal . The history of the Roman Empire would be different, he says .
 If history of the Roman Empire had been different, the history of Western European civilization would have been different . The Roman Empire was one of the world's most successful cultures .
 The length of Cleopatra’s nose was one of the causes of World War I . Millions of events and causes channeled down to August 1914 .
 The contribution of Cleopatra’s nose to the cause of World War I is so small and remote that the counterfactual is more amusing than interesting when we try to ascertain why the war broke out . The contribution is so remote it is not worth trying to determine why the
 Proximity in time means that the closeness of two events in the chain of causation allows us better to control other causes and thereby obtain a truer weighing of factors . The closeness in time allows us to better control other factors, such as the relationship between two events .
 Counterfactual reasoning should rely on an existing body of theory . Theory represents a distillation of what we think we know about things that have happened before . Theory should be distillated into what we thought we knew about things before .
 We should ask whether a counterfactual is plausible considering what we know about all the cases that have given rise to these theories . We should also ask whether counterfactorial is plausible, considering all that we know .
 Theories provide coherence and organization to our thoughts about the myriad of causes and help us avoid random guessing . Theory provides coherence, organization and helps us to avoid random guesses .
 There is no theory behind the counterfactual theory that if Napoleon had had stealth aircraft he would have won the Battle of Waterloo . For example, there are no theories behind the theory that Napoleon had . stealth aircraft .
 The very randomness of the example helps explain why it is amusing, but also limits what we can learn from the mental exercise .
 Counterfactual questions explore the theory that the Cold War was caused primarily by ideology . These counterfactorial questions explore questions about ideology . The Cold War may have been caused by ideology rather than ideology, say experts .
 An alternative hypothesis is that the bipolar international structure caused the Cold War . An alternative theory is that it was caused by bipolar international structures .
 Given the distribution of power after World War II, we could expect some sort of tension even if the U.S. had been socialist . The United States had not been socialist, but there was some tension there .
 The counterfactual reasoning can be bolstered by observing that countries with a similar communist ideology have fought each other .
 Counterfactual allows us to assess theories of balance of power versus theories of ideological causation . The counterfactual gives us an idea of balance power versus ideological theories .
 Counterfactuals related to theory are more interesting and useful because the mental exercise ties into a broader body of knowledge . In general, counterfactorials are more useful because they relate to a wider body of theory .
 In examining the plausibility of a mental experiment, we must ask whether what is held constant is faithful to what actually happened . We must ask if what we hold constant isn't faithful to the reality of the world .
 We must be wary of piling one counterfactual on top of another in the same thought experiment . We must beware of piling counterfactorials in our own thought experiments .
 Such counterfactuals are confusing because too many things are being changed at once, says author . We are unable to judge the accuracy of the exercise by a careful examination of its real historical parts, he says .
 They are especially useful in international politics because there is no laboratory setting such as in physical science . They're especially useful because there are no laboratory settings such as physical science in the world .
 We need to be careful in constructing counterfactuals, for some are better constructed and thus more fruitful than others . But we must be careful not to construct counterfactorials, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Counterfactuals help us relate history to theory and make better judgments as we try to understand a world with no controlled experiments . Counterfactsuals are important to understand history and theory, and help us make better judgements .
 Some purists say counterfactuals that ask what might have been are not real history . Some historians are purists who say counterfactsuals aren't real history.
 Such purists miss the point that we try to understand not just what happened, but why it happened, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We need to know what else might have happened, and that brings us back to counterfactualuals . To do that, we need to find out what else may have happened .
 Some historians interpret history as simply the writing down what happened . Counterfactual analysis is essential to good historical analysis, many historians believe . Some historians believe counterfactual analyses are essential to history .
 The purists help warn us against poorly disciplined counterfactuals such as Napoleon's stealth bombers . Napoleon’s stealth bombers were the most successful bombers in the world .
 There is a distinction between saying that some counterfactual analysis is trivial and saying that good counterfactional analysis is essential to clear thinking about causation . But, as we see in the next chapter, as well, there is a difference between saying some of the analysis trivial or saying that
 World War I is often blamed on the balance of power, one of the most frequently used concepts in international politics . Balance of power is often used in the world's most complex concepts .
 Defenders of balance-of-power policies argue that they produce stability . They say balance of power policies produce stability and stability .
 Peace was rare; during three-quarters of the time there was war involving at least one of the great powers . Peace was rarely found during the early 20th century . War was rare during that period .
 Ten of the wars were large general wars with many of the great powers involved what we call hegemonic, or world wars . Ten of those wars were very general wars, including those involving the Great Powers .
 The balance of power preserved peace very well over the five centuries of the modem state system, the answer is no . Thus if we ask whether the balance of . power preserved . peace well over five centuries, it is no. The answer is yes .
 States balance power not to preserve peace, but to preserve their independence . That is not surprising because states balance power, not peace . That's not surprising .
 The balance of power helps preserve the anarchic system of separate states . It is the only way to preserve the anarchy of the world's anarchic society .
 At the end of the eighteenth century, Poland was, indeed, cut up like a cheese, with Polands neighbors—Austria, Prussia, and Russia all helping themselves to a large slice .
 In 1939 Stalin and Hitler made a deal in which they caryed up Poland again and gave the Baltic states to the Soviet Union . More recently, in 1939 Hitler and Stalin made an agreement to carye-up Poland again .
 Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia spent half a century as Soviet republics until 1991 . Lithuanians, Latvians, Estonia, Latvia and Estonia were part of the Soviet Union . Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia became republics in 1991 . Lithuania was one of the last Soviet Union republics
 The balance of power has not preserved peace and has not always preserved the independence of each state, but it has preserved the anarchic state system . The balance has preserved peace, but not always always preserved independence, says historian .
 The ability to affect others to get the outcomes one wants is key to success . More specifically, it is the ability to influence others to achieve the outcomes of one's goals .
 Yale political scientist defines power as the ability to get others to do what they otherwise would not do . Robert Dahl, a Yale political science, defines power . Dahl: "Power can get people to do something they otherwise wouldn't do"
 We measure power in terms of the changed behavior of others, we have to know their preferences . But when we measure power, we need to know the preferences of those people, it's important to know them .
 We may be as mistaken about our power as the fox who thought he was hurting Br’er Rabbit when he threw him into the briar patch . Otherwise, we may be mistaken for our power .
 Knowing how other people or nations would behave in the absence of our efforts is often difficult . Knowing in advance how other nations or countries would behave is difficult, it's difficult .
 The behavioral definition of power can be useful to analysts and historians, but to practical politicians and leaders it may seem too ephemeral . It may be useful for analysts but not for politicians and historians .
 The ability to influence others is usually associated with the possession of certain resources . Political leaders commonly define power as having certain resources in power .
 These resources include population, territory, natural resources, economic size, military forces, and political stability, among others . These resources are used to determine how much of a nation is capable of sustaining itself .
 The virtue of this definition is that it makes power appear more concrete, measurable, and predictable than the behavioral definition . The virtue is that this definition of power is more concrete and measurable than that of behavior .
 Power in this sense means holding the high cards in the international poker game . Power is in the sense of holding high cards .
 A basic rule of poker is that if your opponent is Power 61 showing cards that can beat anything you hold, fold your hand . If you're holding Power 61, you'll fold a hand .
 Some wars have been started by the eventual losers, which suggests that political leaders sometimes take risks or make mistakes . Political leaders sometimes make mistakes or take risks, which may be a result of mistakes .
 Often the opponent’s cards are not all showing in the game of international politics . Sometimes the opponent's cards are also showing .
 Even without deception, mistakes can be made about which power resources are most relevant in particular situations . Even if deception is made, it can be difficult to determine which resources are relevant .
 France and Britain had more tanks than Hitler in 1940, but Hitler’s tanks had greater maneuverability and his military utilized better military strategy . Hitler's tanks were more maneuverable than those of the other nations, but his military had a better strategy .
 Power conversion is a basic problem that arises when we think of power in terms of resources . It is a problem when we look at the resources of our power, rather than resources .
 Some countries are better than others at converting their resources into effective influence over other countries’ behavior . Some skilled card players win despite being dealt weak hands, some say .
 Power conversion is the capacity to convert potential power to realized power, as measured by the changed behavior of others . Power conversion conversion is a capacity to turn potential power into realized power .
 We need to know about a country’s skill at power conversion as well as its possession of power resources . To predict outcomes correctly, we need to be able to predict outcomes, says the expert .
 Another problem is determining which resources provide the best basis for power in any particular context, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Tanks are not much good in swamps; uranium was not a power resource in the nineteenth century . Uranium was not much of a source of power .
 Population was a critical power resource in the agrarian economies of eighteenth-century Europe . It provided a base for taxes and recruitment of infantry . population was a key resource for the power of Europe .
 At the end of the Napoleonic Wars, Pmssia presented its fellow victors at the Congress of Vienna with a plan for its own reconstruction .
 Its plan listed the territories and populations it had lost since 1805 and the territories it would need to regain equivalent numbers . The plan was outlined in its plan for the U.S. State Department .
 Many of the people in those provinces did not speak German or feel themselves to be Prussian . In the prenationalist period, it was not significant that many of the . people in . those provinces didn't speak German .
 Within half a century, nationalist sentiments mattered very much . However, within 50 years, nationalist sentiment was still very strong .
 The growing importance of industry and rail systems made rapid mobilization possible .
 Bismarck’s Germany pioneered the use of railways to transport armies in Europe for quick victories . In the 1860s, the railways were used to transport troops for quick victory .
 Russia had always had greater population resources than the rest of Europe, but they were difficult to mobilize . Russia's population resources have always been greater than Europe's in the past, but were hard to mobilize in Russia .
 The growth of the rail system in western Russia at the beginning of the twentieth century was one of the reasons the Germans feared rising Russian power .
 The spread of rail systems on the Continent deprived Britain of the luxury of concentrating on naval power . Further, the spread of . rail systems in the . Continent helped deprive Britain of . the luxury to concentrate on . concentrating on . naval power.
 There was no longer time, should it prove necessary, to insert an army to prevent another great power from dominating the Continent, says the British Prime Minister .
 The application of industrial technology to warfare has long had a powerful impact . It has long been used as a weapon of choice for the military .
 The power derived from nuclear weapons has proven to be so awesome and destructive that its actual application is muscle-bound . But the power of nuclear weapons is so awesome that it can be used for muscle-based purposes .
 There are many situations where any use of force may be inappropriate or too costly . Indeed, there are many cases where any force may not be appropriate or costly .
 Even if the direct use of force were banned among a group of countries, military force would still play an important background role . The use of military force is still a key part of the United States' foreign policy .
 American military role in deterring threats to allies or assuring access to crucial resource such as oil in the Persian Gulf . The provision of protective force can be used in bargaining situations, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Sometimes the linkage may be direct; more often it is a factor not mentioned openly but present in the back of leaders’ minds . More often, as we will see in Chapter 7, it is often not directly linked to leaders .
 Coercing other states to change is a direct or commanding method of exercising power . It is not the only way to coerce other countries to change, it is the way to do it .
 A country may achieve its preferred outcomes in world politics because other countries want to emulate it or have agreed to a system that produces such effects . A country's preferred outcomes may be achieved by other countries, such as Russia or China .
 In this sense, it is just as important to set the agenda and attract others in world politics as it is to force others to change in particular situations . The world's most powerful politicians should be able to set their own agenda and set their agenda, says David Cameron .
 This aspect of power is called attractive, or soft power behavior . Getting others to want what you want is attractive . Soft power behavior is considered attractive or attractive by some .
 Soft power can rest on such resources as the attraction of one’s ideas or on the ability to set the political agenda in a way that shapes the preferences others express . Soft power rests on the strength of a person who sets the political agendas that shapes others' preferences, the author
 Parents of teenagers know that if they have structured their children’s beliefs and preferences, their power will be greater and last longer than if they had relied only on active control .
 Political leaders and constructivist theorists have long understood the power that comes from setting the agenda and determining the framework of a debate . Similarly, political leaders have long known the power of setting an agenda and setting a framework of debate .
 The ability to establish preferences tends to be associated with intangible power resources such as culture, ideology, and institutions, such as ideology and culture .
 Soft power is not automatically more effective or ethical than hard power . Soft power does not automatically be more effective, ethical or effective, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The terrorist leader Osama bin Laden, for example, had soft power in the eyes of his followers who carried out the attacks in 2001 .
 Power is the ability to affect others to get the outcomes you want regardless of whether its sources are tangible . Power can be found whether it is tangible, or whether it can be made tangible .
 Soft power is often more difficult for governments to wield, slower to show results, and not effective in many cases . Soft power can be more difficult to wield than soft power is more effective than it can be used to achieve results .
 Frederick the Great of Prussia was about to be defeated by a coalition of France, Austria, and Russia . New Russian Czar Peter idolized the Prussian monarch and pulled troops out of the anti-Prussian coalition .
 In 1917, Great Britain had greater soft power than Germany in American opinion, and that affected the United States’ entry on Britain’s side in World War I . More recent examples of soft power include Franklin Roosevelt's Four Freedoms attracting European support in WWII .
 Material success makes a culture and ideology attractive, but decreases in economic and military success lead to self-doubt and crises of identity . Material success is attractive, and decreases in military success leads to self doubt and identity crises .
 The soft power of the Vatican did not wane as the size of the Papal States diminished in the nineteenth century . The Vatican's soft power didn't wane in the 19th century, but it continued to grow .
 Canada, Sweden, and the Netherlands today tend to have more influence than some other states with equivalent economic or military capability . The Netherlands, Canada and Sweden have the most influence in Europe .
 The Soviet Union squandered its soft power after its invasion of Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968 . The Soviets had considerable soft power in Europe after World War II but squandled it .
 A look at the five centuries of modern state systems shows that different power resources played critical roles in different periods . Different power resources have played critical role in the development of state systems .
 The sources of power are never static and they continue to change in today’s world. ‘Sources of power continue to be changing,’ says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Soft power is becoming more important in relations among the postindustrial societies in the information age in which the democratic peace prevails . Hard power is often more important to industrializing and preindustrial parts of the world . Soft power becoming increasingly important in post-industrial societies .
 In an age of information-based economies and transnational interdependence, power is becoming less transferable, less tangible, and less coercive, as we shall see in Chapters 7 and 8 .
 Traditional analysts predict the outcome of conflict mainly on the basis of whose army wins . Traditional analysts would predict outcome of war mainly on which army wins.
 Today, in conflicts like the struggle against transnational terrorism, it is equally important whose story wins . "It's equally important to know who's story wins in these conflicts," she says .
 Hard power is necessary against hardcore terrorists, but it is equally important to use soft power to win the hearts and minds of the moderate population that might otherwise be won over by the terrorists . Hard power must also be used to win over moderate population, says Dr. Peter Bergen .
 The twentyfirst century will certainly see a greater role for informational and institutional power . The 20th century will be the 21st century for informational power, author says .
 Economic scale, both in markets and in natural resources, will remain important . Economic scale will also remain important in the Middle East, says U.N. agency .
 The distinction between services and manufacturing continues to blur . The service sector grows within modem economies, and the distinction between manufacturing and services is blurred .
 Information will become more plentiful, and the critical resource will be organizational capacity for rapid and flexible response . Information will be more plentiful in the future, and it will be a critical resource for rapid response .
 Political cohesion will remain important, as well as the nurturing of a universalistic, exportable popular culture . Political cohesion is important, but it is also important for the future of the country . The U.S. has been in the throes of a turbulent world for more than a
 The difficulty of measuring changing power resources is a major problem for leaders trying to assess the balance of power . The difficulty is measuring changing resources is the difficulty of assessing power resources .
 Analysts of international politics often use the same word for different things . The word is used to refer to international politics .
 We must try to separate and clarify the underlying concepts covered by the loose use of the same words . We need to separate from the words used in the same terms .
 The term balance of power commonly refers to at least three different things . Balance of power is often used to refer to a number of things, including the power of a person or a person .
 Balance of power can mean, in the first sense, any distribution of power . Balances as Distributions of Power can mean balance of power, balance of balance . Balance is a balance of the power of a person or a group of people .
 Sometimes people use the term balance of power to refer to the status quo, the existing distribution of power . Balance of power is a term used to describe the distribution of the power in a democracy .
 Some Americans argued that if Nicaragua became a communist state, the balance of power would be changed . In the 1980s, some argued that some Americans believed that if the country went communist, the power would change .
 If one little state changed sides, that might slightly alter the existing distribution of power, but it was a rather trivial change . It did not tell us much about deeper changes occurring in world politics, says Julian Zelizer .
 The term can also refer to a special set of situations in which power is distributed equally . The term also refers to the distribution of power evenly distributed .
 This usage conjures up the image of a set of scales in balance or equilibrium . The term is used to refer to balance or balance balance .
 Some realists argue that stability occurs when there is an equal balance, but others argue it occurs when one side has a preponderance of power so the others dare not attack it . Others argue stability occurs in order to ensure that one side is dominant .
 A strong dominant power ensures stability, but when that strong power begins to slip and a new challenger rises, war is more likely . The U.S. has a long history of instability in the Middle East .
 As we will see later in this chapter, so does World War I . However, we must be cautious about such theories, for they tend to overpredict conflict . We must also be cautious of such theories .
 In the 1880s, the United States passed Great Britain as the largest economy in the world . The U.S. became the world's largest economy, passing Great Britain .
 In 1895, the U.S. and Britain disagreed over borders in South America, and looked as if war might result . The United States and Britain were at risk of war in 1895 .
 There was a rising challenger, an old hegemon, and a cause of conflict . But you do not read about the great BritishAmerican War of 1895 because it did not occur .
 As Sherlock Holmes pointed out, we can get important clues from dogs that do not bark . We can get clues from animals that don't bark, Holmes said .
 Realists point to the rise of Germany as a more proximate threat to Britain . Realists say that Germany is more likely to threaten Britain than the UK .
 Liberals point to the increasingly democratic nature of the two English-speaking countries . Liberals also point to transnational cultural ties between the old leader and the new challenger . Liberals say the two countries are increasingly democratic .
 The best we can conclude about the balance of power in the first sense of the term is that changes in the unequal distribution of power among leading states may be a factor, but not the sole factor, in explaining war and instability .
 The second use of the term refers to balance of power as a policy of balancing . Balance of Power as Policy is the term used to refer to balancing power .
 Balance of power predicts that states will act to prevent any one state from developing a preponderance of power . Balance of Power: States will act in order to prevent a state from becoming a dominant state .
 Lord Palmerston, British foreign secretary in 1848, said that Britain had no eternal allies or perpetual enemies . Britain thought only of its interests .
 Sir Edward Grey feared Germany would gain preponderance in Europe by controlling the Continent . He did not want to go to war, but eventually did because he feared it would lead to a war .
 Winston Churchill said Britain should make an alliance with Stalin when Hitler invaded the Soviet Union in 1941 . Churchill had been fulminating just a few years before against Stalin .
 International politics is an anarchic system of states, and states value their independence above all else . The structure of international politics is a system of anarchy, says David Cameron .
 A balance-of-power policy does not necessarily assume that states act to maximize power . A balance of power policy is based on a balance of state power, not power maximising power .
 In fact, a state might choose a very different course of action if it wished to maximize power . State might choose to take action to maximize its power if it wishes to maximize it .
 It might choose to bandwagon, that is, join whoever seems stronger and share in the victor’s gains . The U.S. might join the bandwagon, joining whoever seems to be stronger .
 Bandwagoning is common in domestic politics in which politicians flock to an apparent winner . Bandwagoners are more common in the U.S. than in other countries .
 Balance of power predicts that a state will join whoever seems weaker . States will act to keep any one state from developing a preponderance of power, balance of power experts say . Balance of Power predicts that whoever seems to be weaker will join in .
 Bandwagoning in international politics carries the risk of losing independence . Bandwagoners risk losing independence in the U.S.
 Mussolini joined Hitler’s attack on France as a way to get some of the spoils, but Italy became more dependent on Germany . In 1939 and 1940, the Italian dictator Mussolini . Mussolini became more and more dependent upon Germany .
 Balance of power is a policy of helping the underdog because if you help the top dog, it may eventually turn around and eat you . Balance of the power is the key to balancing power in the balance of power .
 States can try to balance power unilaterally by developing armaments or by forming alliances with other countries whose power resources help balance the top dog . States must balance power by developing weapons or forming alliances to balance the power gap .
 This is one of the more interesting and powerful predictions in international politics . This is a powerful prediction of the future of the Middle East .
 Syria is worried about the growing regional power of its neighbor Iraq . Syria was worried about its neighbor's growing power of Iraq .
 Syria chose to balance Iraqi power regardless of its ideological preferences . Syria chose not to engage in conflict with Iraq in Iraq .
 Efforts to use ideology to predict state behavior are often wrong, say experts . Counterintuitive predictions based on balancing power are often correct .
 Certain situa' tions predispose people toward a certain type of behavior, but we cannot always predict the details . We cannot predict how people will react to certain situations .
 Theories in international politics often have large exceptions . If all choose one exit, the stampede may prevent many from getting ouL . Theories are often left open to speculation .
 Balance of power in a policy sense is one of the strongest predictors in international politics, says David Cameron . But balance of power is far from perfect, he says, and its record is not perfect .
 Some countries see no alternatives or believe they cannot affect the balance . Some countries may see no alternative or believe it cannot change the balance.
 A small country may decide it has to fall within the sphere of influence of a great power while hoping that neutrality will preserve some freedom of action . If so, a small country might decide it must be within influence of the great power .
 Finland was far from the center of Europe during World War II and was defeated by the Soviet Union . Finland is now a small part of the world's largest country .
 Finns felt neutrality was safer than trying to become part of the European balance of power . The Finns wanted to avoid becoming part of Europe's most powerful nations . Finns decided to remain neutral rather than join the European Union .
 The best they could do was bargain away independence in foreign policy for a large degree of control over their domestic affairs . They were in the Soviet sphere of influence, and the best they were able to do is bargain away .
 Balance-of-power predictions are sometimes wrong has to do with perceptions of threat . Another reason is that balance of power predictions are often wrong is that they are often based on perceptions .
 A mechanical accounting of the power resources of countries in 1917 would have predicted that the U.S. would join World War I on the side of Germany . Britain, France, and Russia had 30 percent of the industrial world’s resources while Germany and Austria had only 19 percent .
 This did not happen, in part, because the Americans perceived the Germans as militarily stronger and the aggressor in the war . The Germans underestimated America’s military potential, the author says .
 Perceptions of threat are often influenced by the proximity of the threat, says CNN.com.com .
 A neighbor may be weak on some absolute global scale, but threatening in its region or local area . A neighbor is not weak on the global scale but threatening on its local scale . The U.S. should be wary of its neighbors .
 Britain could have fought, but instead chose to appease the U.S. Britain chose not to fight, but to appease America . Britain could not have fought and instead chose instead of fighting .
 It conceded to the United States on many issues, including the building of the Panama Canal . The Panama Canal allowed America to improve its naval position .
 Britain was more worried about its neighbor Germany than it was about the distant Americans . One reason is that Britain was worried more about Germany than the U.S.
 The United States was larger than Germany, but proximity affected which threat loomed larger in Britain's eyes . The U.S. was bigger than Germany in terms of proximity .
 From the point of view of Europe and Japan, the Soviets were an immediate threat and the United States was far away . The Soviets were the immediate threat . The U.S. is far away from the Soviet Union and the U.K. was far from war .
 The Europeans and the Japanese called in the distant power to rebalance the situation in their immediate neighborhood . The Europeans, the Japanese and the Europeans called for the power to .
 The fact that proximity often affects how threats are perceived qualifies any predictions based on simple mechanical toting up of power resources .
 Another exception to balance-of-power predictions relates to the growing role of economic interdependence in world affairs . Another exception is that the world's economic interdependency is growing .
 According to a balance-of-power policy, France should not wish to see Germany grow, but because of economic integration, German growth stimulates French growth . According to the balance of power policy, French growth stimulates German growth .
 French politicians are more likely to be reelected when the French economy is growing, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy . Sarkozy says the economy is more important when it is growing .
 French and German economies are so interdependent that a policy of holding back German economic growth would be foolish . Therefore, a French policy of trying to hold back German growth is foolish, says Francois Hollande .
 In economic considerations, joint gains would often be lost by following too simple a balance--of--power policy . The U.S. should not follow a balance-of-power policy, the author says .
 Ideology sometimes causes countries to join the top dog rather than the underdog . Ideology is also a factor in the decision to join a country with the most powerful .
 Even in Thucydides’s day, democratic city-states were more likely to align with Athens and oligarchies with Sparta . Democracy was more likely in the days of Athens and Sparta, says historian .
 Britain’s appeasement of the U.S. in the 1890s, or the Europeans joining with the Americans in an alliance of democracies after 1945, owed something to ideology, as well as the proximity of the threat .
 On the other hand, we must be careful about predicting too much from ideology, because it often leads to colossal mistakes . We must also be careful not to predict too much ideology, as it often makes mistakes .
 Many Europeans believed that Stalin and Hitler could not come together in 1939 because they were at opposite ends of the ideological spectrum . Balance-of-power considerations led them to an alliance against the countries in the middle of the spectrum .
 The U.S. mistakenly treated China, the Soviet Union, Vietnam, and Cambodia as similar because they were communist . Likewise, in the 1960s the United States treated China and Vietnam as similar . The United States mistakenly treated them as similar as communist countries .
 A policy based on balance of power would have predicted that communist states would balance each other . A less expensive policy would have been a less expensive way to pursue stability in East Asia, he says .
 The third way in which the term balance of power is used is to describe multipolar historical cases . Balance of Power as Multipolar Systems is used in the third way .
 Europe in the nineteenth century is sometimes held up as the model of a moderate multipolar balance-of-power system . Europe is sometimes considered to be the model for a multipolar power system .
 Historians such as Edward Gulick use the term classical balance of power to refer to the European system of the 17th century .
 A balance of power requires a number of countries that follow a set of rules of the game that are generally understood . In this sense, a balance in power requires countries to follow these rules, says CNN.com .
 We look at the two dimensions of systems, structure and process, that were introduced in Chapter 2 . Since this use of the term balance of power refers to historical systems, we look at structures and process .
 The structure of the nineteenth-century European balance of power changed toward the end of the century . It was the structure of European power relations in the late 1800s .
 From 1815 to 1870 five major powers often shifted alliances to prevent any one from dominating the Continent . Five major powers shifted alliances between 1815 and 1870 to avoid domination of Europe .
 The Triple Entente and the Triple Alliance (Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy) polarized into tight blocs . The loss of flexibility contributed to the onset of World War 1.
 At the Congress of Vienna, the states of Europe brought France back into the fold and agreed on certain rules of the game to equalize the players . France was brought back to the fold in the 1930s after the war .
 The states concerted their actions, meeting frequently to deal with disputes and maintain an equilibrium . The states meet frequently to discuss disputes and deal with each other .
 They accepted certain interventions to keep governments in power domestically when their replacements might lead to a destabilizing reorientation of policy . The interventions were accepted to keep government in power when their replacement might destabilize the country .
 This became more difficult with the rise of nationalism and democratic revolutions, but a truncated concert persisted from 1822 to 1854 .
 This concert fell apart in midcentury when revolutions of liberal nationalism challenged the practices of providing territorial compensation or restoring governments to maintain equilibrium .
 Nationalism became too strong to allow such an easy cutting up of cheeses . Nationalism was too strong for such a cut-up, says historian .
 The third period in the nineteenth-century balance-of-power system, from 1854 to 1870, was far less moderate and was marked by five wars . Five wars were fought during that period .
 Crimean War was a classic balance-of-power war in which France and Britain prevented Russia from pressing the declining Ottoman Empire . The Crimean War saw the Ottoman Empire lose ground in the Crimean Peninsula .
 The other conflicts, however, were related to the unification of Italy and Germany .
 Political leaders abandoned old rules and began to use nationalism for their expedient purposes . Political leaders used nationalism for the sake of their own interests, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 He was a deeply conservative man who wanted Germany united under the Prussian monarchy . He was deeply conservative and wanted Germany to be unified under the monarchy .
 He was prepared to use nationalist appeals and wars to defeat Denmark, Austria, and France in bringing this about . But he was quite prepared to fight back .
 He returned to a more conservative style once he had accomplished his goals . The former Manchester United star returned to his conservative style after achieving goals .
 The fourth period, 1870 to 1890, was the Bismarckian balance of power in which the new Prussian-led Germany played the key role . The new German-dominated Germany played a key role in the development of the country .
 Bismarck played flexibly with a variety of alliance partners . He tried to divert France overseas into imperialistic adventures and away from its lost province of Alsace .
 President Obama limited German imperialism in order to keep the balancing act in Europe centered on Berlin . He limited German Imperialism to order the balance of Europe centered around Berlin .
 Bismarck’s successors, however, were not as agile as their predecessors . The loss of Flexibility Power 69 is 69 .
 From 1890 to 1914 there was a balance of power, but flexibility was gradually lost . Flexibility gradually lost in the early years of this century .
 Bismarck's successors did not renew his treaty with Russia . Germany became involved in overseas imperialism, challenged Britain’s naval supremacy . Austria did not discourage Austrian confrontations with Russia over the Balkans .
 Balance of power as a multipolar system is intimately related to the concept of alliances . Germany's policies exacerbated the fears of neighboring states that felt threatened by rising German power, further polarized the system .
 Alliances are formal or informal arrangements that sovereign states enter into with each other in order to ensure their mutual security . The United States is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 Traditionally, military alliances have been one of the focal points of international politics . The U.S. military alliance has been a focal point of world politics .
 Ideology often draws states together, though it can also cause conflicts . Ideology can be used to draw states together and create conflict .
 Economic concerns might be another reason for an alliance, particularly in those parts of the modern world where purely military concerns are receding . Economic concerns could also be a factor in an alliance .
 Alliances collapse for as many reasons as they form, but in general states cease to ally when they come to see each other as irrelevant or as threats to their security . The United States is one of the most powerful states in the world, but it is not the only one to have
 Before, the two states might have shared a common ideology; now they are opposed . The two states are now opposed to each other . The U.S. and South Korea have been at odds for years .
 China and the U.S. were allies when the Nationalists were in power before 1949 . They were enemies after the Communists came to power in 1949 . The United States was allies when China was in power in China .
 It might view the other state as a rival, while it might view it as a threat . The other state might look for alliances elsewhere to balance that threat . It might also seek alliances with other states to balance the threat .
 The hallmarks of Bismarck’s alliance system were its flexibility and complexity . The alliance system was flexible and complex, the historian says .
 The former made the resulting balance-of-power system stable because it allowed for occasional crises or conflicts without causing the whole edifice to crumble . "The former makes the current balance of power system stable," he says .
 Bismarck can be likened to an expert juggler who keeps several balls in the air . Germany was at the center of the system, and can be seen as a juggler .
 If one ball falls, juggler can continue to keep the others aloft and even bend down to retrieve the errant one . If one of the balls falls, the juggler continues to keep it aloft .
 When Bismarck was succeeded by less adroit leaders, the alliance system could not be maintained . The alliance system was broken by the rise of the German statesmen .
 German decision makers in the years leading up to 1914 allowed alliances to lapse and tension to grow . Rather than channeling conflict away from Germany, as Bismarck did by encouraging France to expend its energies on colonial ventures in Africa, Germany chose to focus on Africa .
 The Kaiser let Russia float into an alliance with France and later Britain . Instead of renewing the German entente with Russia, the Kaiser let it float into a French-British alliance .
 What was once a fluid, multipolar alliance system gradually evolved into two alliance blocs, with dangerous consequences for European stability . European stability is at risk, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Compare that to 36,000 casualties when Bismarck defeated Austria in 1866 . Bismerck defeated the Austrians in the same year .
 World War I was a horrifying war of trenches, barbed wire, machine guns, and artillery . It ground up a generation of Europe’s youth . World War One was a terrifying war of trench warfare .
 After World War 1, Europe still mattered, but the U.S. and Japan emerged as major players . The United States and Japan became major players in the world of war .
 World War I also ushered in the Russian Revolution in 1917 and the beginning of the ideological battles that racked the twentieth century . The Russian Revolution was the first Russian Revolution .
 Prince Bernhard von Billow, the German chancellor from 1900 to 1909, met with his successor, Bethmann Hollweg, in the chancellor’s palace in Berlin shortly after the war broke out .
 There is a picture by some celebrated English painter, which shows the wretched scapegoat with a look of ineffable anguish in its eyes, such pain as I now saw in Bethmann’s .
 In many later polemics on war guilt I have often wished it had been possible to produce a snapshot of Bethmann Hollweg standing at the moment he said those words .
 Such a photo would have been the best proof that this wretched man had never wanted war . Such a photograph would have shown the truth, he says . Such an image would have proved that he never wanted to war .
 As we will see, it is impossible to isolate one cause, but it is possible to break the question down into distinct levels . The question is whether or not to be answered by one cause .
 At each of these levels, balance of power is essential to understanding of the outbreak of the war’s outbreak . At each level, balance is important to understanding the nature of the conflict, the author says .
 As the alliance system became less flexible, the balance of power became less multipolar and the likelihood of war increased . As the alliances system becomes less flexible and war increased, the risk of conflict increased .
 Parsimony suggests we start with the simplest causes, see how much they explain, and go on to more complexity as needed . Parsimony is an attempt to find out what causes causes causes .
 We look at the system-level explanations, both the structure and the process; then at the domestic societal level; and finally at the individuals. Thus we look first at the structure of the system and process, both in structure and process; and then at individuals.
 The rise of German power was the rise of Trench warfare during World War I . Trench Warfare was truly impressive .
 German heavy industry surpassed that of Great Britain in the 1890s . German gross national product at the beginning of the century was twice that of Britain’s .
 In the 1860s, Britain had 25 percent of the world’s industrial production, but by 1913 its share had shrunk to 10 percent . By 1913, Germany's share of industrial production had risen to 15 percent, and Britain's share had dropped to 10 .
 Germany transformed some of its industrial strength into military capability, including a massive naval armaments program . The country's industrial strength was transformed into a military capability .
 A strategic aim of Germany’s ‘Tirpitz Plan’ of 1911 was to build the second largest navy in the world, thereby advancing itself as a world power . The aim of the plan was to have the world's second largest naval power .
 Britain began to fear becoming isolated and worried about how it would defend its fat'flung empire . Britain feared it would not be able to defend itself from isolation .
 German sympathies for the Boers increased during the Boer War due to German sympathy for the Dutch settlers in South Africa, against whom Britain was fighting .
 In 1907, Sir Eyre Crowe wrote a long memoran' dum in which he tried to interpret German foreign policy . Crowe was permanent secretary of the British Foreign Office . He wrote a document famous in the history of British foreign policy.
 He concluded that although German policy was vague and confused, Britain could not allow one country to dominate the continent of Europe .
 In 1904, Britain parted from its geographically semiisolated position as a balancer off the Europe, Britain moved toward an alliance with France . France became a major ally of the British Empire in 1904 .
 In 1907, the Anglo-French partnership broadened to include Russia and became known as the Triple Entente . The Anglo-Russian partnership was formed in 1907, and is now known as "Triple Entente"
 Germany, seeing itself encircled, tightened its relations with Austria-Hungary . Germany saw itself being encirrounded, tightening its relations .
 The balance of power was no longer characterized by the shifting alignments that characterized Bismarck’s day . The shift of power no longer defined by the shifts that characterized the balance of the power during the day, it was not the shift .
 The structural shift to bipolarity affected the process by which the nineteenth-century balance-of-power system had worked . The balance of power system was the result of a shift in bipolarity, says historian John MacIntosh .
 constructivists would point to three other reasons for the loss of moderation in the early twentieth-century balance of power . Constructivists say that moderation was a factor in the decline of moderation .
 These included transnational ideas that were common to several countries . Transnational ideas were common in several countries, including Germany .
 In eastern Europe there was a movement calling for all Slavic-speaking peoples to come together . In east Europe, the movement was called for unity in the name of Slavs .
 Pan-Slavism threatened both the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian empires, which each had large Slavic populations . The Ottomans and Austrians were both Slavs .
 German authors wrote about the inevitability of the TeutonicSlavic battles and schoolbooks inflamed nationalist passions .
 Nationalism proved to be stronger than socialism when it came to bonding working classes together, and stronger than the capitalism that bound bankers together . Nationalism is stronger than capitalism when it comes to bonding the working classes .
 Just before the war broke out, the Kaiser wrote to the Russian Czar Nicholas II and appealed to him to avoid war . The Kaiser also appealed to the Czar to avoid conflict with Russia .
 The Kaiser hoped that because war was impending over the assassination of a fellow royal family member, the Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand, the Czar would see things the same way he did . The Kaiser was hoping that because of the death of Franz Ferdinand would prevent war, he didn't
 The family telegram had no impact in preventing war . But by then nationalism had overcome any sense of aristocratic or monarchical solidarity . The telegram was the first telegram to be sent to the White House .
 A second cause for the loss of moderation in the early twentieth-century balance of power was a rise in complacency about peace . The loss of balance was a result of a rise of complacentness about peace, the historian says .
 Great powers had not been involved in a war in Europe for 40 years . Great powers were not involved in Europe's first war in 40 years. The war was the first since World War II .
 There had been crises in Morocco in 1905-1906, Bosnia in 1908, in Morocco again in 1911, and the Balkan wars in 1912 . But they had all been manageable .
 Diplomatic compromises that resolved these conflicts caused frustration . However, the diplomatic compromises caused frustration for many .
 Charles Darwin’s ideas of survival of the fittest made good sense as a statistical construct about genetics of natural species over generations over generations . But they were misapplied to human society and unique events, he says . Charles Darwin's ideas made sense as statistical construct .
 Long wars seemed unlikely, and many leaders believed short decisive wars won by the strong would be a welcome change . Long wars were unlikely, but short decisive victories won by strong would have been welcome change, they said .
 A third contributing factor to the loss of flexibility in the early twentiethcentury balance of power was German policy . German policy was also a factor in the decline of flexibility .
 As Eyre Crowe said, it was vague and confusing and The Origins of World War I 73 confusing . It's vague and vague and the Origins of WWI is vague .
 The Germans were no different in having “world ambitions,” but they managed to press them forward in a way that antagonized everybody at the same time . Bismarck played the system in the 1870s and 1880s in the way he played it .
 They antagonized the Russians over issues in Turkey and the Balkans, and the French over a protectorate in Morocco . The Russians and French have also antagonized each other over the region .
 The Kaiser tried to shock Britain into a friendship, believing that if he scared Britain enough, it would realize how important Germany was and pursue improved relations . The Kaiser wanted to scare Britain enough to realize that it was important to Germany .
 He scared the British first into the arms of the French, then into the Russian, then the Russians . Instead of scaring the British, he scared the French and then the Russian .
 By 1914, the Germans thought they had to break out of this encirclement and thereby deliberately accepted the risk of war . So by 1914, they thought they needed to free themselves of the threat of war, he says .
 Russian revolutionary Vladimir Lenin’s argument that the financial capitalists caused the war was caused by financial capitalists . Lenin's argument was that financial capitalists were behind the financial crisis .
 Lenin had expected the war to arise out of imperialist conflicts on the colonial peripheries as Lenin had hoped . But the war did not arise from such conflicts as Lenin expected . The war ended up being a war of war between Russia and Germany .
 In 1898, Britain and France confronted each other at Fashoda in the Sudan . The British tried to complete a north-south line from South Africa to Egypt, while the French tried to create an east-west line of colonies in Africa .
 War broke out 16 years later in Europe, and even then bankers and businessmen strongly resisted it . But, in fact, the war broke out in Europe 16 years after it began .
 Eyre Crowe’s advice was that Britain had to prevent Germany from gaining mastery of the European balance of power . Sir Edward Grey, the British foreign minister, thought he had to follow Eyre .
 Grey worried about getting the London bankers to go along with declaring war . Grey also worried that London bankers would not agree to support the move .
 Gibraltar 2k Malta German naval base A"" Allied naval base Wi9 Triple Alliance 1 Triple Entente (Italy did not fight on Germany's side in 1914 and later joined the allies)
 The European Balance of Military Power in 1914 74 The Origins of World War I 75 Leninist explanation. 74 Leninists explanation. 75 Leninists explain.
 Both Austria-Hungary and Ottoman Turkey were multinational empires and therefore threatened by the rise of nationalism . Both empires were empires and were threatened by nationalism .
 Ottoman government was very weak, very corrupt, and an easy target for nationalist groups in the Balkans that wanted to free themselves from centuries of Turkish rule . In addition to the weak government, it was very corrupt and easy targets for nationalists in the region .
 The Balkan wars of 1912 pushed the Turks out, but in the next year the Balkan states then fell to war among themselves when dividing the spoils . In 1912, the Turks were pushed out of the Balkans, but the Balkans then fell on to war .
 Austria feared disintegration from this nationalistic pressure and worried about the loss of status that would result . Austria was worried about losing status as a result of the pressure .
 Austria went to war against Serbia not because a Serb assassinated its Archduke, Franz Ferdinand . Austria wanted to weaken Serbia and prevent it from becoming a magnet for nationalism among the Balkan Slavs . In the end, Austria fought against Serbia because it wanted to prevent it becoming a
 The monarchy had been seized by the throat and had to choose between allowing itself to be strangled, and making a last effort to prevent its destruction . Disintegration of an empire because of nationalism was the more profound cause of the war; the slain Franz Ferdinand was a pretext .
 World War I lay in a domestic-level explanation of the conflict in Germany . Germany's domestic politics was key to the success of the war in Germany, says historian .
 German historian Fritz Fischer and his followers argue that Germany’s social problems were a key cause of the war . Fritz Fischer's followers say social problems are a key factor in Germany's defeat .
 Fischer: Germany’s efforts toward world hegemony were an attempt by German elites to distract attention from the poor domestic integration of German society . According to Fischer, Germany's efforts to world hegemony was an attempt to distract from domestic integration . Fischer: German elites were trying to distract .
 Germany was ruled by a coalition of landed aristocrats and some large industrial capitalists . The Coalition of Rye and Iron ruled Germany between the aristocracy and large industrialists .
 "This ruling coalition used expansionist policies to provide foreign adventures instead of domestic reform," says Julian Zelizer . "Circuses in place of bread" is the result of foreign adventures, Zelizer says .
 Internal economic and social tensions are not sufficient to explain World War 1, but they do help explain one source of the pressure that Germany put on the international system after 1890 . Internal social and economic tensions not enough to explain the war, but help explain the pressure Germany faced .
 What distinguished the leadership on the eve of World War 1 was its mediocrity . The leadership of the U.S. during the First World War was its 'mediocrity'
 Austro-Hungarian emperor Franz Josef was putty in the hands of General Conrad and Count Berchtold, his duplicitous foreign minister . General Conrad was a tired old man .
 Franz Ferdinand, the crown prince who was assassinated at Sarajevo, would have been a restraining force, for the potential heir had liberal political views . Ironically, Franz Ferdinand had liberal views .
 In Russia, Czar Nicholas II was an isolated autocrat who spent most of his time resisting change at home . In Russia he was a leader who resisted change in his country .
 He was served by incompetent foreign and defense ministers . He was influenced by his sickly and neurotic wife. He was strongly influenced by her sickly .
 Most important was Kaiser Wilhelm II, who had a great sense of inferiority . Most important in the history of Germany was the Kaiser Kaiser Wilhelm .
 William II did not want war, if only because he did not trust his nerves not to give way under the strain of any really critical situation . William II didn't want war because he didn't think his nerves wouldn't give way .
 The moment there was danger, his majesty would become uncomfortably conscious that he could never lead an army into battle . He would become uncomfortable with the moment there were danger .
 His more menacing jingo speeches were intended to give the foreigner the impression that here was another Frederick the Great or Napoleon . His speeches were meant to show that he was not a repeat of Frederick or Napoleon.
 There was something about the leaders, the Kaiser in particular, that made them significant contributory causes of the war . The Kaiser was one of the most influential leaders in the world, says historian David Gergen .
 When several causes exist, each of which could be sufficient, we call a situation overdetermined . We call it overdetermined when a situation is overdetermined. When a situation has several causes, each could be enough, it's overdetermined, we say .
 War was not inevitable until it actually broke out in August 1914, 1914, says historian . The answer is no, war was inevitable until the war broke out, he says .
 Even then it was not inevitable that four years of carnage had to follow . And even then, even then it would not have been inevitable that it happened .
 Let us distinguish three types of causes in terms of their proximity in time to the event we are studying . The causes of these causes are different from the causes of this particular event to the cause of this event .
 The most remote causes are deep causes, then come intermediate causes, and those immediately before the event are precipitating causes . Those immediately before and after the event, precipitating cause are precipitated causes .
 The precipitating cause is that you flicked the switch, someone wired the building, and someone wired it . Thomas Edison discovered how to distribute electricity, and Thomas Edison did so .
 The logs are the deep cause, the kindling and paper are the intermediate cause, and the actual striking of the match is the precipitating cause . The logs, paper, logs, kindling, paper and paper all contribute to the fire .
 In World War I, the deep causes were changes in the structure of the balance of power and certain aspects of the domestic political systems . The deep causes of the war were changes to the structure and political systems in the country .
 The rise of German strength, the development of a bipolar alliance system, the rise of nationalism and the resultant destruction of two declining empires, and German politics. Especially important reasons were the rise .
 The intermediate causes were German policy, the rise in complacency about peace, and the personal idiosyncrasies of the leaders. The interimmediate causes were Germany policy and the rise of complacent about peace .
 The precipitating cause was the assassination of Franz Ferdinand at Sarajevo by a Serbian terrorist . Franz Ferdinand was assassinated by a Serbic terrorist . The assassination was the death of the former Prime Minister of Yugoslavia .
 If the assassination had not occurred, some other precipitating incident ..would have caused the war . Indeed, we might say that . if . the assassination hadn't occurred, ... would have caused war .
 Some say precipitating events are like buses -- they come along every ten minutes . Some say they're like buses that come along in the wake of a major event . This week's events in New York City are the focus of our weekly Washington Post .
 The specific event at Sarajevo was not all that important; some incident would probably have occurred sooner or later . Thus the specific event was not very important; it was probably not important .
 The deep and intermediate causes suggested a high probability of war, but not inevitability . High probability is not the same as inevitability. War is not inevitable, but it is likely to be a major factor in conflict .
 Using the metaphor of the fire again, logs and kindling may sit for a long time and never be lit . Logs may sit in the fireplace for a lot of time, and may sit there for years .
 If it rains before somebody comes along with a match, they may not catch fire even when a Sarajevo occurs . Indeed, if it rains in the rain, it will not be able to catch fire in the city .
 One possibility is that the growth in Russian strength might have deterred Germany from recklessly backing Austria . The growth in Russia's strength might also deterred German from backing Austria's intervention .
 In 1914, General von Moltke and Foreign Secretary Jagow believed that war with Russia was inevitable . The two of the German leaders were most influential in precipitating the war .
 Germany knew it would have a problem fighting two fronts and would have to knock out one side before fighting the other . They knew Germany would have problem fighting a war on two fronts . Germany knew they would have problems fighting on both fronts .
 Russia, although larger than Russia, was technologically backward and had a poor transportation system, so it could be put off for the second strike . Russia is technologically backward, but has a poor transport system . Russia's second strike could have been put off if it were put off .
 Germany should rush westward to knock out the French, they reasoned . They reasoned that Germany ought to rush westwards to knock them out of France .
 After victory in the west, Germany could turn east and take its time to defeat the Russians . Germany could take a longer lead than it did in the east .
 The Schlieffen Plan called for a rapid sweep through Belgium to knock out France quickly, and then to turn east . Indeed, that was the plan, the war plan of the German general staff .
 Russia was using French money to build railroads in 1916 . The strategy might have become obsolete by 1916 because of the French money .
 In the ISPOs it would have taken the Russians two or three months before they could have transported all their troops to the German front, giving Germany ample time to fight France first . Germany would have had to wait two months before transporting all its troops .
 By 1910, that time had shrunk to 18 days, the German planners knew they no longer had a large margin of safety . By 1910 the Germans knew they had to wait 18 days to reach the site .
 By 1916, the margin would have been gone and Germany might have had to drop its two-front strategy . The margin would be gone and the two frontlines might have to be dropped .
 If no assassination and crisis had occurred in 1914, and the world had made it to 1916 without a war, it is possible the Germans might have felt deterred, unable to risk a two-front war . If no war had occurred, the Germans may have been deterred .
 They might have been more careful before giving Austria a blank check, as they did in 1914 . Or they might have dropped the Schlieffen Plan and concentrated on a war in the east only .
 They might have come to terms with Great Britain or changed their view that the offense had the advantage in warfare . Or they might have changed their views of the offense .
 In another two years, a variety of changes related to Russian strength might have prevented the war .
 Germany might have become so strong that France and Britain would have been deterred . But it is unlikely they would be deterred by the threat posed posed posed by the country .
 We can raise counterfactuals about what might have happened in Britain s internal affairs if two more years had passed without war . We can also raise counterfacts about what would have happened if war hadn't ended .
 In The Strange Death of Liberal England, historian George Dangerfield tells of Britain's domestic turmoil . Dangerfield: "The strange death of liberal England"
 If the Ulster Revolt had developed, Britain would not have been able to join the coalition with France and Russia . It is quite plausible that Britain would have been so internally preoccupied that it would have joined the coalition .
 Many historically significant changes could have occurred in two more years of peace . Certainly many historic changes could've occurred if peace had been allowed to continue .
 Another set of counterfactuals raises questions about what kind of war would have occurred rather than whether a war would've occurred . The U.S. has not been able to predict the outcome of the war in the past .
 It is true that Germany’s policies frightened its neighbors and that Germany in turn was afraid of being encircled by the Triple Entente, so it is reasonable to assume war was more likely than not .
 Counterfactually, four other wars were possible . The war did not have to be what we now remember as World War I . Counterfactual, four more wars were also possible .
 Initially, the Kaiser expected a replay of the Bosnian crisis of 1908-1909 when the Germans backed the Austrians, and Austria was able to make Russia stand down in the Balkans . Austria was therefore able to get Russia to stand down .
 When the Kaiser returned from his cruise, he found that the Austrians had filled in the blank check he left them by issuing an ultimatum to Serbia . The Kaiser found that he had been given a blank check by Austria .
 The Kaiser made great efforts to keep the war from escalating, thus the Nicky-Willie telegrams referred to earlier . When he realized that, the Kaiser made a great effort to stop the war escalating .
 If his efforts had been successful, we might today recall not World War I, but merely a relatively minor Austrian-Serbian War of August 1914 . A second counterfactual possibility was a one-front war .
 The Kaiser asked General von Moltke whether he could limit the preparations to just the eastern front . The Kaiser wanted to limit his preparations to only the east front .
 Von Moltke replied that it was impossible because any change in the timetables for assembling troops and supplies would create a logistical nightmare . Von Molkke said that any change of the timetable would create logistical nightmare for the Germans .
 He told the Kaiser that if he tried to change the plans, he would have a disorganized mass instead of an army . The Kaiser would have to change his plans, the Kaiser said .
 After the war, General von Staab of the railway division of the German army admitted that it might have been possible, after all, to alter the mobilization schedules .
 Had the Kaiser known that and insisted, there might have been a one-frorit war . Had he known that, he might have gone to war, he would have avoided it .
 If the British had not been there to make the difference, Germany might well have won . Germany might have won if they had not won .
 It is possible that Britain might not have joined if Germany had not invaded Belgium . Belgium was not the main cause of Britain entering the war .
 For some people, like Sir Edward Grey and the Foreign Office, the main reason for entering the war was the danger of German control of the Continent . For others, the British government's main reason was to enter was to protect the British people from the Germans .
 Britain was a democracy, and the Liberal party in the Cabinet was split . But Britain was not a dictatorship, and Britain was still a democracy . The Liberal party was split, but the government was divided .
 The left Liberals opposed war, but when Germany swept through Belgium and violated Belgian neutrality, it allowed the prowar Liberals to overcome reluctance of the antiwar Liberals and to repair the split in the British Cabinet .
 A fourth counterfactual is a war without the United States. A war without U.S. would be without a war in the Middle East .
 By early 1918, Germany might have won the war if the U.S. had not tipped the military balance by its entry in 1917 . The United States entered the war in 1917, and the war might have been won by 1918 .
 One of the reasons the U.S. became involved was the German submarine campaign against Allied and American shipping . The United States became involved in the war against the Nazis .
 The Zimmermann telegram was sent by Germany to its embassy in Mexico to approach the Mexican government regarding an alliance against the United States . There was also some German clumsiness; Germany sent a message, now known as the Zimmermann message .
 Our counterfactual analysis suggests ways in which the war might not have occurred in 1914 . The war that occurred did not have to become four years of carnage, which destroyed Europe as the heart of the global balance of power .
 Events close in over time, degrees of freedom are lost, and the probability of war increases . The likelihood of war in Syria increases as a result of the situation .
 If we start in 1898 and ask what was the most likely war in Europe, the answer would have been war between France and Britain, which were eyeball to eyeball in a colonial dispute in Africa . War between Britain and France was likely to be most likely in 1898 .
 After the British and French formed the Entente in 1904, a FrancO'British war looked less likely . The Entente was formed in 1904 after the French and British formed an Entente .
 The first Moroccan crisis in 1905 and the Bosnian crisis in 1908 made war with Germany look more likely . War with Germany looked more likely in 1908 after the crisis in Bosnian war .
 Britain implied it would remain neutral in any European war if Germany would limit its navy . Britain implied that it would stay neutral if Germany limited its navy in Europe's first major war .
 At the same time, it looked as if renewed colonial friction between Britain and Russia in Asia and between the British and the French threatened a collapse or erosion of the Triple Entente .
 When France sent troops to help the Sultan of Morocco, Germany demanded compensation in the French Congo . Germany sent a gunboat to Agadir on the coast of Morocco and sent a French gunboat .
 French and German bankers lobbied against war, and the Kaiser pulled back . The Kaiser was forced to pull back from war .
 These events deeply affected public opinion and raised fears about German intentions . But these events deeply affect public opinion, raising fears of German intentions.
 The Balkan wars in 1912 and 1913 and increased pressure on Austria set the scene for 1914 . There was also a renewed effort at detente in 1912, but there was also an attempt to achieve detente .
 Britain sent Lord Haldane, a prominent Liberal politician, to Berlin . Britain and Germany resolved a number of the issues .
 By this time it had been clear that Britain had won the naval arms race . Also, by this time, it was clear that the British Navy had won .
 In June 1914, the feeling that relations were improving was strong enough for Britain to send four of its great Dreadnought battleships to Kiel, Germany, for a state visit .
 If Britain had thought war was about to occur, the last thing it would have done was put four of its prime battleships in an enemy harbor . The last thing Britain would do would be put in enemy harbor, he says .
 British and German sailors were walking along the quay in Kiel when they heard the news that a Serbian terrorist had shot an Austrian archduke in Sarajevo . In fact, on June 28, the news came from a faraway place called Sarajevao .
 History has its surprises, and once again, probable is not the same as inevitable . History has had its surprises. History has been unpredictable, but not inevitable .
 Analogies can mislead, and many myths have been created about World War 1 . World War I was one of the most famous battles fought in the trenches .
 If there was to be a war, Germany preferred a war in 1914 to a war later, it would be 1914-1919 . Germany would prefer a war on the front line in 1914 rather than 1914 .
 There were miscalculations over the length and depth of the war, but that is not the same as an accidental war . The war was not an accident, but it was a miscalculation, the historian says .
 The view that the war was precipitated directly by the arms race is too simple . While there was concern in Europe about the growing strength of the armies, the view was too simple.
 On the other hand, we can draw some valid warnings from the long slide into World War 1 . The long slide to WWI was a major factor in World War I .
 One lesson is to pay attention to the process of a balance-of-power system as well as to its structure or distribution of power . One lesson: Pay attention to how the system works .
 Constructivists add an important point that some realists miss . The constructivistists add that constructivists need to be careful of their views on the economy .
 The experience of World War I suggests it is important to have military forces stable in crisis, without any feeling that one must use them or lose them . In addition to the experience of WWI, it is also important to be stable in crises .
 The railway timetables were not the major determinants of World War I, but they did make it more difficult for political leaders to buy time for diplomacy .
 Today’s world is different from the world of 1914 in two important ways . One is that nuclear weapons have made large-scale wars more dangerous, and the other, as constructivists note, is that the ideology of war is weaker .
 In 1914, war was thought to be inevitable, a fatalistic view compounded by the social Darwinist argument that war should be welcome because it xvould clear the air like a good summer storm . In 1914 the view was that war was inevitable .
 Unsatisfied by material prosperity, nations turned fiercely toward strife, internal or external strife . The nations turned to strife in response to material prosperity . The world's first war of its kind began in the early 1900s .
 National passions, unduly exalted in the decline of religiorr, burned beneath the surface of nearly every land with fierce, if shrouded, fires . National passions burned beneath surface of most of the world with fierce if shrouded fires .
 Austria-Hungary 1,250,000 deaths in 1914-1918; Russia 1,750,000; France 1,500,000, Germany 1,800,000 . Austria-Germany 1,700,000 died in conflict, including 100,000 in Serbia, 100
 He argued, “The balance of power is the great game now forever discredited.” He argued that balance was “now forever discredited”
 As we have seen, balance of power is a way to preserve the sovereign state system . Balance of power can preserve the sovereignty of the country, says the BBC . As we've seen, balancing power is the key to preserving the sovereignty, he says .
 The resulting balance of power allows for war or violations of self-determination if that is the only way to preserve independence . The resulting power balance allows for a war or a violation of selfdetermination .
 World War I was so devastating, chaotic, and brutal that many people began to think that war to preserve the balance of power was no longer tolerable . However, the war was so brutal it was thought that it was too soon to be tolerable to go on .
 Sovereign states could not be abolished, Wilson admitted . But force could be tamed by law and institutions as it was at domestic level, he said .
 The liberal solution was to develop international institutions analogous to domestic legislatures and courts so that democratic procedures could be applied at the international level . International institutions should be similar to domestic courts and legislatures, says Julian Zelizer .
 Some liberals of the day thought that not only was World War I fought to make the world safe for democracy, but in turn democracy could make it more peaceful . Some liberals thought that the war was fought to protect democracy from the world .
 Wilson issued a 14'point statement of America’s reasons for entering the war in 1918 . Wilson issued the statement in January 1918, 1918, in a statement of his reasons .
 Wilson wanted to change the international system from one based on balance-of-power politics to another based on collective security . Wilson wanted the system to be more secure and more secure .
 Critics called Wilson a utopian, he believed that organizing international security could be a practical approach to world politics . The League of Nations was founded by Wilson in 1903 .
 He knew mere paper agreements and treaties would not be sufficient; organizations and rules were needed to The Rise and Fall of Collective Security 89 implement the agreements .
 This is why Wilson put so much faith in the idea of a League of Nations . Wilson put the idea in place of the League after World War II .
 Moral force was important, but a military force was necessary to back it up, says President Obama . Moral force is important, says Obama . "Moral force is necessary, but the military force is needed," he says .
 Wilson believed that the preponderance of power would be on the side of the good . Wilson: If all nonaggressive states band^ together, Wilson believed power would prevail .
 Nonaggressive countries would form a coalition against aggressors, says U.S. President Obama . International security would be a collective responsibility, he says .
 Second, deter aggression by forming a coalition of all nonaggressive states . Third, form an alliance of nonaggressive nations to deter aggression .
 If all pledged to aid any state that was a victim anywhere in the world, a preponderance of power would exist on the side of the nonaggressive forces . The pledge would be made to aid victims of any state in any way .
 Third, if deterrence failed and aggression occurred, all states would agree to punish the state that committed aggression . If deterrence fails and aggression occurs, the state would be punished for it .
 This doctrine of collective security bore some similarities to balance-oTpower policies . It said states tried to deter aggression by developing a powerful coalition, and if deterrence failed they were willing to use force .
 There are three important differences between the collective-security and balance-of-power approaches . But there are also important differences in the balance of power approaches .
 First, in collective security the focus was on the aggressive policies of a state, rather than its capacity . The focus was to focus on the policies of the state rather than the capacity of its own .
 This contrasted with balanceof-power politics, in which alliances were created against any state that was becoming too strong . The focus was on the capacity of states, rather than the strength of states . This contrasts with balance of power politics .
 A collective-security system could not be predetermined because it was not known which states would be aggressors . Unlike in a balance-of-power system in which coalitions were formed in advance, coalitions in a collective security system can't be predetermined .
 All states would band against the aggressor if aggression occurred . However, once aggression occurred, all states would fight back .
 Collective security designed to be global and universal with no neutrals or free riders . Third, collective security was designed to have no free riders or neutrals . Collective security is a global, universal, universal solution to global problems .
 If too many countries were neutral, the coalition of the good might appear weak and diminish the coalition’s ability to deter or punish the aggressor . Too many countries might appear neutral, which could diminish coalition's ability to punish or punish aggressors .
 The doctrine of collective security was embodied in the Covenant of the League of Nations . The Covenant was part of the treaties that ended World War 1 . It was also the treaty that ended the war .
 Several articles of the League of Nations Covenant were especially noteworthy . Several of the articles were particularly noteworthy .
 In Article 10, states pledged to protect all members against aggression . Article 10 of Article 10 states pledged all members of the EU to protect against aggression.
 In Article 11, any war or threat of war was declared to be of concern to all states . Article 11 was declared as a matter of concern for all states in Article 11 .
 Article 12 and 15 states agreed to submit disputes to arbitration and not go to war until three months after arbitration failed . States agreed not to go on to war for three months until arbitration fails .
 Article 16, the critical article, said any war disregarding the League of Nations procedures would be .regarded as a declaration of war against all the members of the .league of Nations . The critical article said any .war disregarding . League of . Nations procedures . would be considered
 The state that started a war would be immediately subject to economic sanctions . The Council of the League might recommend further military measures . The state would be subject to further sanctions .
 When states signed the Covenant they agreed to abide by Article 16, but in practice it was up to each state to decide what kinds of sanctions to apply and how to implement them . They were not bound by any higher authority, they were not .
 The League of Nations was not a move toward world government in which a higher authority could commit the member states to certain policies . The League was not an attempt at world government, it was a form of world government .
 As championed by state moralists and established by the League of Nations, the sovereignty of the state is absolute and inviolable . A state government has full authority within its borders, a state government must have full authority .
 It can limit that authority only with its own consent . That's if a government signs a treaty allowing another government to have some influence in its domains . That is an agreed limitation rather than an infringement of sovereignty, the government says . The U.S. can limit its own authority only
 By signing the pact of the League of Nations, states would voluntarily give up some sovereignty to the international community in return for the guarantees of collective security and international law . The pact would be signed by states voluntarily .
 Nations charter, international law transcended national law, hence sovereignty in particular situations . Nations charter: International law transcends national law and hence sovereignty . International Law transcends the law of sovereignty in certain situations .
 A central tenet of international law has been that states are sovereign except when they violate international law, in which case they are subject to punishment . Ever since the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, international law is based on the principle of sovereign states being sovereign .
 Collective security is to international law what the police are to domestic law . Collective security was to international . law what it is to domestic . law. Collective security .
 International law enjoyed far less acceptance among states than domestic law . However, international law enjoys less acceptance in domestic law than domestic .
 Many states refused to be constrained by international law and saw compliance as voluntary rather than mandatory . Many states refuse to comply with international law, and saw it as voluntary .
 The American Senate refused to ratify the Treaty of Versailles . It contained language endorsing the creation of the League of Nations . The treaty was ratified by the American Senate in 1918 .
 As a result, the collective-security system had to function without what would have been its biggest player . The collective security system has had to work without the presence of the U.S. government .
 Many define ‘normal’ as avoiding involvement in international affairs . Many defined “normal” as avoiding international affairs. Many define it as avoiding involving international affairs in the world .
 The leader of this opposition to the League of Nations, Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, feared that Article 16 of the Covenant would dilute both American sovereignty and the constitutional power of the Senate to declare war .
 Lodge suspected the U.S. might be drawn into distant wars on the basis of the League’s decisions to enforce collective security . Lodge suspected that the United States might not be drawn .
 The Rise and Fall of Collective Security 91 different forms of American moralism . The debate between President Wilson and Senator Lodge is sometimes portrayed as a clash between idealist and a realist .
 Wilson’s obdurate refusal to negotiate terms with Lodge was part of the problem . Wilson refused to negotiate with Lodge, but it was a mistake .
 Lodge’s resistance reflected a long-standing U.S. attitude toward the balance of power in Europe, Lodge says . Lodge's resistance reflects a long standing American attitude toward Europe's power in the region .
 Opponents of the League believed that European states pursued immoral policies in the name of the bah ance of power . America should not become an active player in such games .
 The U.S. was able to ignore the balance of power in the 19th century because Americans were enjoying a free ride behind Britain’s fleet .
 Other European countries could not penetrate the Western Hemisphere to threaten Americans . Americans would not have been threatened by other European countries .
 The U.S. was not at all isolationist when it came to interfering in the affairs of its weak neighbors in Central America, Mexico, or Cuba . And though the United States was isolationist toward Europe, it was not isolationist in the region .
 At the end of World War I Americans were torn between two forms of moralism . The isolationist impulse toward the European balance of power won .
 The result was that the country that had tipped the balance of power in World War I refused to accept responsibility for the postwar order . It was the result of the result that the US refused to be responsible for the post-war order .
 Wilson's conception of the League of Nations is just this, that it shall operate as the organized I moral force of men throughout the world . Wilson: "Whenever or wherever wrong and | aggression are planned or . contemplated, this searching light of conscience shall be turned | upon them" Wilson
 France pressed Britain for a security guarantee and military preparations in case Germany recovered . Because the United States would not join the League of Nations, the U.S. didn't join the league .
 Britain resisted on the grounds that such an alliance would be against the spirit of collective security because it would identify the aggressor in advance . Britain resisted the idea of an alliance on the basis that such a pact would be 'against spirit'
 Britain argued there was no need for an alliance, even on traditional balance-of-power terms . Britain saw France as stronger than Germany, and argued it was not needed .
 Britain said it was important to reintegrate Germany into the international system . Gongress of Vienna had brought France back into the Goncert of Europe at the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 .
 War passions had abated more quickly in Britain than in France, and the British felt it was time to appease the Germans by bringing them back into the process .
 France formed alliances with Poland, which had been reborn at the end of World War I, and with the “Little Entente,” the states of Yugoslavia, Gzechoslovakia, and Romania . The states had emerged out of the former Austro-Hungarian Empire .
 The Little Entente states were destabilized by ethnic problems and domestic divisions, and as a result were also weak allies . They were also weakened allies .
 The U.S. lost 25,000 square miles of territory and 7 million members of its population . It lost 7 million people, 25,500 square miles and 25 million square miles .
 Treaty of Versailles forced Germany to reduce its army to only 100,000 men and prohibited it from having an air force . Signed in June 1919, it was forced to reduce Germany's army to just a small army and prohibited from having a air force.
 The treaty contained the famous “war guilt clause,” placing the blame for war solely on Germany . The treaty included the infamous “War guilt clause’s”
 Because Germany was responsible, the victors argued Germany should pay for its costs . The victors wanted Germany to pay for the costs of the war . Germany's victory in the war was seen as Germany's responsibility for the defeat .
 The reparations bill was $33 billion, a sum Germans thouglit impossibly high given their damaged economic position . The reparation bill was estimated to be a staggering sum of $33billion .
 When they initially failed to pay, France sent troops to occupy Germany’s Ruhr industrial area until they did . When they failed to comply with the demands, France occupied the area until the Germans paid .
 Germany suffered enormous inflation that wiped out the savings of its middle class . The rise and fall of collective security forced the collapse of the middle class in Germany .
 The Weimar Republic struggled to create democracy . That in turn removed one of the sources of internal stability as the Weimar republic struggled .
 Italy had never been keen on the Paris peace treaties or the League of Nations . Italy never wanted to join the peace process .
 Italy had originally been allied with Germany and Austria'Hungary . At the beginning of the war, the Italians decided they would get a better payoff from the Allies and switched sides .
 Italy promised compensation at the expense of the part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire that became postwar Yugoslavia . In the secret Treaty of London signed in 1915, Italy was promised compensation .
 The Italians expected that these promises would be honored, but Woodrow Wilson objected to such old-fashioned spoils-of-war behavior . Wilson objected that such spoils of war behavior should be honored .
 Benito Mussolini and the fascists took power in 1922, one of their foreign policy aims was to gain glory and finally fulfill the destiny of a new Roman Empire . In addition, after Mussolini's fascist rule in Italy, he also wanted to gain the glory of the Empire .
 "The goals were inconsistent with the new vision of collective security," says President Obama . "We are not going to be able to do this again," says Obama .
 With such a start, it is remarkable the League was able to achieve anything at all . It is remarkable that the League has achieved anything after a difficult start .
 In 1924, governments signed a protocol on the peaceful settlement of disputes in which they pr^rnised to arbitrate their differences . Governments signed a treaty on peaceful settlement in 1924, and arbitrated disputes .
 Treaty of Locarno allowed Germany to enter the League of Nations . It gave Germany a seat on its council . Treaty also allowed Germany a place on the League Council .
 In the west, Germany guaranteed that its borders with France and Belgium would be inviolable . In the east, Germany promised that its border with Belgium and France would be protected . Germany's borders with Belgium, France, Belgium and Belgium were also guaranteed .
 Alsace-Lorraine, taken by Bismarck in the War of 1870, had been returned to France by the Treaty of Versailles . Germany promised to demilitarize a zone along the Rhine, and Germany demilitated a zone .
 In the east, Germany promised to arbitrate before pursuing changes in its eastern border with Poland and Czechoslovakia . Germany promised an arbitrator before pursuing the changes in the east .
 This second clause should have set off a warning bell, however, for there were now two kinds of borders around Germany . An inviolable part in the west and a negotiable part of the east are now two types of borders . This is the case, but it should be
 The League managed to settle some minor disputes, such as one between Greece and Bulgaria, and it began a process of disarmament negotiations . The League has also begun disarmament talks .
 The League organized a preparatory commission for broader disarmament talks, setting the scene for a worldwide conference that finally met in 1932 . The conference was set up after the 1921 Washington Conference .
 In 1928, states agreed to outlaw war in the Kellogg-Briand Pact, named after the American and French foreign ministers . In addition, in addition to the pact, states also agreed to ban war in 1928 .
 Americans and Russians sent observers to League meetings in Geneva . Although not members, the Americans and the Russians began to send observers to the meetings .
 The collective-security system was dispelled by two crises in the 1930s over Manchuria and Ethiopia . But that optimism about the collective security system was proved wrong by World War II .
 Japan transformed itself from a potential victim of imperialist aggression in the mid-nineteenth century to a very successful imperialist power by the century’s end .
 Japan defeated Russia in a war during 1904-1905, colonized Korea in 1910, and joined the Allies in World War 1 .
 At the Paris peace talks in 1919, Western governments rejected a Japanese proposal that the Covenant of the League affirm the principle of racial equality . Western governments reject the Japanese proposal .
 This decision mirrored the domestic political sentiment in the U.S. Congress, which, in the 1920s, passed racist laws excluding Japanese immigrants . This decision mirrors the domestic politics in the American Congress, the author says .
 Many Japanese thought the rules were changed just as they were about to enter the club of the great powers . Many thought the change was just before they entered the club . But many Japanese thought it was a surprise that the rules had changed .
 The 1911 revolution led to the fall of the Manchu or Qing dynasty that had ruled China since 1644 . The revolution established a republic .
 The nation quickly fell into chaos as regional civil wars broke out among contending warlords . But the nation quickly became embroiled in regional civil warlords' control .
 Manchuria, though part of China, was under the sway of one of these warlords and maintained a quasi-independent status . Manchia was ruled by one of China's most powerful warlords in the 19th century .
 The Chinese Nationalist movement tried to unify the country, and bitterly criticized the unequal treaties that had humiliated and exploited China ever since the end of the Opium Wars . Chiang Kai-shek was chief military adviser to the republic .
 As the Nationalists gained strength in the 1920s, friction with Japan increased and China declared a boycott against Japanese goods . The Chinese Nationalist Party became a major ally of Japan .
 Meanwhile in Japan, military and civilian factions contended for dominance . Meanwhile, military, civilian factions are vying for dominance in Japan .
 The global economic crisis that began in the late 1920s left Japan, an island nation, extremely vulnerable . The island nation's economy has been hit hard by the crisis .
 In September 1931, the Japanese army staged an incident along the Manchurian Railway, where they had had a right to station troops since the Russo-Japanese War of 1904—1905 .
 The sabotage on the Manchurian Railway provided Japan with a pretext to take over all of Manchuria . This act of sabotage provided Japan a pretext for its takeover of the region .
 Japan said its actions were intended to protect the Manchurian Railway . But it went further and set up a Japanese-controlled puppet state called Manchukuo . It installed China’s last Manchu emperor, Pu Yi, as its ruler .
 China appealed to the League of Nations to condemn Japan’s aggression, but Japan prevented passage of a resolution asking it to withdraw its troops . China also sought to withdraw troops from Japan .
 League agreed to send a committee under British Lord Lytton to investigate the events in Manchuria in December 1931 .
 His report identified Japan as the aggressor, and rejected Japan’s pretext as an unjustified intervention . His report also rejected Japan's pretext for intervention as unjustified .
 Report did not call for applying Article 16 sanctions against Japan . Report recommended that the members of the League of Nations not recognize the state of Manchukuo .
 The Assembly of the League of Nations voted 42 to 1 to accept Lytton’s report on the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1933 .
 The one opposing vote was Japan, which then announced its intention to withdraw from the League of Nations . Japan then withdrew from the league of Nations after the vote .
 The Rise and Fall of Collective Security 95 Manchurian case showed the procedures of the League of Nations to be slow, cautious, and totally ineffective . Overall, the The Rise And Fall of The Rise . Fall of collective Security 95 showed that the procedures were slow and cautious and ineffective
 The last great test of the League of Nations’ collective-security system came in Ethiopia in 1935 . The Ethiopian Debacle was in Ethiopia .
 Italy had long planned to annex Ethiopia; not only was it near Italy’s colonies in Eritrea on the Red Sea, but the fascists felt affronted that the Ethiopians had defeated an Italian effort to colonize them during the imperialist era in the nineteenth century .
 Fascist ideologists argued that this historic “wrong” should be rectified . Fascism ideologists argue that this historical ‘wrong’ has been rectified. Fascist Ideologists argue this is a historical error .
 Between 1934 and 1935, Italy provoked incidents on the border between Ethiopia and Eritrea . The incidents took place in Ethiopia, Eritrea and Ethiopia .
 Italy was committed to arbitrate for three months before doing anything in Ethiopia . It did so despite the existence of a peace treaty between Ethiopia and Italy . Italy had signed the Kellogg-Briand Pact outlawing war, and that as a member of the League of Nations, it
 The Council of the League avoided an Italian veto by calling for a special conference to decide what sanctions to impose against Italy . The invasion was a clear-cut case of aggression, the League said . The League avoided a veto by using a procedural device .
 Britain did not close the Suez Canal to Italy, allowing it to continue shipment of materials to Eritrea . Italy was still allowed to buy steel, coal, and oil . Diplomatic relations were not broken .
 There was general optimism that the recommended sanctions would force Italy to withdraw from Ethiopia . There were also hopes that the sanctions could force Italy out of Ethiopia .
 Italian exports declined by about one-third during the following year, the value of the Italian lira declined, and there were estimates that Italy’s gold reserves would be exhausted in nine months . Italy's gold reserves were estimated to be exhausted within nine months of gold reserves .
 Sanctions did not cause Mussolini to change his policies toward Ethiopia . But aside from inflicting economic damage, sanctions did not change Mussolini's policies .
 The anger of Britain and France over Ethiopia was more than offset by their concern for the European balance of power . The anger was offset by the concern over the EU's power balance .
 Britain and France wanted to avoid alienating Italy because Germany, now under Hitler’s leadership, was regaining its strength . It was thought it would be useful to have Italy in a coalition to balance Germany .
 Mussolini moved Italian troops to the Austrian border in 1934, when it looked as though Hitler would annex Austria . Hitler backed down after Mussolini's move was backed down .
 The British and French hoped Mussolini could be persuaded to join a coalition against Germany . Mussolini was a dictator of Italy and Italy . He was the prime minister of Italy in the 1930s .
 Traditional diplomats did not fight the League of Nations’ collective-security system . Instead, they reinterpreted it according to the old balance-of-power approach . Traditional diplomats didn't fight the system .
 From a balance-of-power perspective, the last thing they wanted was to become involved in a distant conflict in Africa when there were pressing problems in the heart of Europe . "From a balance of power perspective, they wanted to avoid becoming involved in an African conflict," says Ms.
 Germany needs to balance Italy in coalition to balance Germany . Conciliation and negotiation needed to bring Italians back into the coalition .
 British and French began to get cold feet about sanctions . Not surprisingly, the French and British got cold feet on sanctions .
 Sir Samuel Hoare and Pierre Laval, the British and French foreign ministers, met in December 1935 . They drew up a plan that divided Ethiopia into two parts, one Italian and the other League of Nations zone .
 When someone leaked this plan to the press, there was outrage in Britain . The plan was leaked to the media by someone who leaked it out .
 Hoare was accused of having sold out the League of Nations and collective security . Hoare resigned after being accused of selling out the league of Nations . He was forced to resign from the post in 2010 .
 In March 1936, Hitler denounced the Locarno treaties and marched German troops into the demilitarized Rhineland . In March 1937, Hitler marched into the region .
 They met with Italy to consult about how to restore the balance of power in Europe . They met in Rome to discuss how to balance power in the EU .
 The balance of power in Europe prevailed over the application of the collective-security doctrine in Africa . Consequently, the balance of the power in Africa prevailed over Europe .
 In May 1936, the Italians completed their military victory, and by July the sanctions were removed . The sanctions were lifted by July 1936 .
 The world’s first efforts at collective security were a dismal failure . The world's first efforts to secure collective security failed to live up to expectations .
 World War II overshadows all other wars in terms of its human costs, estimated to be between 35 and 50 million people . The cost of the war is estimated to have been as much as 35 to 50 million .
 Radar played a significant role in the Battle of Britain, one of the turning points in World War 11 . Radar was a key part of the battle of Britain in which it took place . Radar radar played a key role during the battle .
 At the end of the war, the atomic bomb ushered in the dawn of the nuclear age . The atomic bomb was the most powerful weapon in the world .
 Unlike World War I, the Western Allies occupied Germany and Japan and transformed their societies during the occupation . Unlike the war, the Allies were able to transform their societies in the occupied countries .
 The “German problem” was solved for half a century by dividing Germany . The "German problem" was solved by division of Germany . Germany is now divided by Germany .
 World War II created a bipolar world in which the U.S. and the Soviet Union emerged from the conflict stronger than the world’s former great powers . The United States and the USSR emerged stronger than any other great powers in the world .
 The war represented the end of Europe as the arbiter of the balance of power . The war was the end to Europe's role as an arbiter in power . It was the beginning of a new era in the world of power.
 Europe became Europe's arena where outsiders contended, somewhat like Germany before 1870 . Now Europe became an arena where outsider contended, like Germany .
 The end of World War II in 1945 created the framework for world order until 1989 . World's first World War I ended in 1945 and created framework for the future .
 Act II of the Great War that ended Europe’s hegemony in 1918; the interwar period was only an The Origins of World War II 97 intermission . Act II was the World War I that ended in 1918 .
 Another reason it was not simply Hitler’s war was the war in the Pacific . Another reason was that the war was not just Hitler's war .
 Hitler had continually, but unsuccessfully, urged the Japanese to attack the British colony of Singapore or to attack Siberia to divert Soviet troops away from Europe . Hitler had tried to attack Singapore or attack Siberia .
 Japan surprised Hitler by attacking the American naval base at Pearl Harbor instead of attacking the U.S. base . Japan did neither; it surprised Hitler .
 The war in the Pacific, while part of World War II, had different origins and was more a traditional imperial effort at regional hegemony . It was more than a war of war with the U.S. but was more of an imperial effort to regional dominance .
 P Taylor argues that while Hitler was a terrible person and a very unpleasant adventurer, he was merely an opportunist stepping into the power vacuums created by the appeasement policies of Western democracies .
 I He did not so much aim at war as expect it to happen, unless he could evade it by some ingenious trick, as he had evaded civil war at home . I . did not . much aim to war as he did to expect it, but he did not aim at
 Hitler expected others to do what he would have done in I their place, Hitler said . Those who have evil motives easily I attribute them to others, he said . Hitler expected those who had evil motives to do the same as him, he added .
 I plan that Taylor dismisses as Hitler’s ranting in resentment of the French invasion of the Ruhr . Taylor, The Origins of the Second War, is published by The World War Two .
 Hitler wrote another secret book in 1928 that repeated many of the arguments in Mein Kampf . Hitler wrote the book in a secret book .
 Even if it was not a detailed plan, it was a clear indication of where he wanted to go . Even if not detailed plans, the plan was clear indication that he wants to go further .
 Colonel Hossbach took notes at a meeting at Berchtesgaden in 1937 that detailed Hitler’s plan to seize foreign territory by 1943, before Germany's preeminence became obsolete . Hitler's plan was detailed at the meeting in which he took notes .
 Hitler knew it was important to take opportunities when they arose in the east, and that Austria and Czechoslovakia would be his first targets . The Nazi leader was determined to take advantage of the situation in the East .
 Taylor dismisses the importance of this memo by saying it was not an official memorandum . Taylor says the memo is not a memo that should have been made public .
 Hitler had four options after he came to power in 1933, and rejected three of them . Hitler rejected three options, and he rejected three others .
 He could have chosen passivity, accepting Germany’s weakened international position . But he could have chose passivity .
 He could have tried expansion through economic growth (like Japan after World War II) and led Germany to international influence through industrial expansion . He could also have tried expanding Germany's influence in the world .
 He could have limited his goals to revision of the Treaty of Versailles and regained some of Germany’s 1918 losses . But he also could have aimed to regain some of the losses he lost in the war .
 This option seemed likely even if some other leader had come to power in Germany . This option would have been possible even if someone else had been in power .
 By the 1930s, the Western democracies were sensitive to the injustice of blaming Germany for all of World War I . But these three strategies were rejected by Hitler, who chose instead an expansionist strategy to break out from Germany’s containment .
 In his view, Germany, stuck in the middle of Europe, could not live forever encircled . Germany's relationship with the EU has been a problem for decades, he says .
 He would go east for living space, expand his base, and at a later stage go for a larger world role . He would then go to a larger role in the world .
 First, he set out to destroy the Versailles framework through a very clever set of diplomatic maneuvers . First, it was a clever way to get around the world, he said .
 In October 1933, he withdrew from the League of Nations and from the disarmament conference the League had convened . In October 1934, he was forced to withdraw from the conference .
 He blamed the withdrawal on the French, who he said were not willing to cut their forces in the disarmament The Origins of World War II 99 conference conference .
 In March 1935, Hitler denounced the military clauses of the Versailles treaty, saying Germany would no longer be restricted to an army of 100,000 . Hitler denounced military clauses in the treaty in March 1935 .
 The British, French, and Italians met at Stresa to respond to Hitler’s activities, but before they could reach a consensus, they couldn’t agree on how to respond .
 Britain leapt at the opportunity, disrupting any coordinated response from the Stresa meeting . Britain jumped at the chance to disrupt the meeting, disrupting a coordinated response .
 In March 1936, Hitler moved his troops into the Rhineland, which had been demilitarized by the Locarno Pact . Events in Ethiopia diverted attention from central Europe in March 1936 .
 He claimed France had destroyed the Locarno treaty by developing an arrangement with the Soviet Union . He blamed France for forcing him to do this, blaming France for destroying the treaty . He also claimed that France had created a treaty with Russia .
 He dropped hints that he might return to the League of Nations after the other states in Europe accepted his views about the revisions of the Versailles treaty . He played on guilt and uncertainty in many Western capitals .
 Second phase was Hitler’s expansion into the small countries neighboring Germany . The second phase was the expansion of Nazi Germany into neighboring countries .
 In 1936, Hitler outlined a four-year economic plan for a military buildup in order to be ready for war by 1940 . Hitler outlined the plan in 1936 . In 1940, Hitler planned to build up a military force in order for war .
 He signed the Axis Pact with Italy and the Anti-Comintern Pact with Japan . He signed a pact with Japan and signed an anti-comintern pact with the West .
 Hitler intervened on the side of the fascists in their war against a left-wing democratically elected popular-front government in Spain . Hitler also intervened in the fight against a democratically elected government .
 Hitler justified sending troops and bombers to support the fascist general Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War as part of the protection of the West against the threat of bolshevism .
 In 1937, Spain became a testing ground for Germany’s military muscle when Hitler bombed defenseless civilian populations and annihilated the Basque city of Guernica . Spain was a test ground for the German military when Germany bombed defensens in 1937 .
 France, Great Britain, and the United States did little or nothing to defend the loyalists of the Spanish Republic . Despite widespread international outcry, France and Great Britain did little .
 The following year, Chancellor Schuschnigg of Austria called for a plebiscite on whether Austria should reunite with Germany, hoping that the Austrian people would vote against it before Hitler forced it upon them . Hitler forced Austria into a German-Austria union in 1944 .
 In 1938, German troops marched into Vienna, ending Austrian independence . Austrian independence was declared by the Nazis .
 Hitler pressured Czechoslovakia by pushing the issue of national self-determination for the 3 million Germans in the Sudetenland section of Czechsoslovakia . Hitler pressured the issue by pushing for the issue for the three million Germans .
 The Bohemian mountains were the natural line of defense for Czechoslovakia . They were the logical place for Czechs to mount their defense against potential German attack .
 He demanded that the German-speaking territory be permitted to leave Czechoslovakia to join the German fatherland . He demanded the area be allowed to join Germany's fatherland as part of the country .
 These events also alarmed Britain, which did not want war to break out in Europe . The events alarmed Britain and alarmed Britain .
 Neville Chamberlain made three trips to Germany to try to stave off the war . Neville Chamberlain, the British prime minister from 1937 to 1940, visited Germany three times . Chamberlain was prime minister between 1937 and 1940 .
 Chamberlain believed it was not possible for Britain to defend Czechoslovakia because of the distance and because Britain had no troops on the Continent . Chamberlain believed that it would not be possible for the country to defend .
 He did not think Czechoslovakia was worth war and he knew Britain was not ready for war . More important, he did not believe Britain was ready to go to war .
 Chamberlain realized the British air defense and radar systems were not ready for an air war . As the bombing of Guernica had shown, air power was becoming more significant, fear was growing .
 Chamberlain met with Hitler at Munich in September 1938 and agreed to the partition of Czechoslovakia . If Hitler would promise to leave the rest of the country alone, he agreed to give the Sudetenland to Germany .
 In March 1939, German troops rolled into the rest of Czechoslovakia and took the capital city, Prague . Only six months later, in March 1939 the German forces rolled into rest of the country and took over Prague .
 A shocked Britain realized Hitler might seek further conquests and that his next target might be Poland . Hitler's next target may be Poland, which the British government feared was Poland .
 Divided in the eighteenth century, Poland was re-created as a state after World War I . It was given a corridor to the port of Danzig on the Baltic Sea . The area included German-speaking people .
 France tried to deter Hitler by issuing a guarantee to defend Poland . Having German-speaking people inside Polish territory was a violation of selfdetermination, another example of the Versailles treaty .
 Hitler suddenly signed a treaty with Stalin in August 1939 . Despite having said he would protect the West against bolshevism, Hitler signed the treaty in 1939 .
 Hitler seized his part by starting a war against Poland on September 1, 1939 . Hitler seized part of the war by starting the conflict against Poland in 1939 .
 This time he was not looking for another Munich agreement in which the British would step in and give him part of Poland in return for promises of moderation . This time, he did not want another Munich deal in which he would be given part of the Polish Republic .
 Phase three of Hitler’s strategy was short. Phase three was short .
 In the spring of 1940, Hitler feared Britain would move troops to Norway . Hitler feared the move would lead to the deaths of his troops in Norway .
 He preempted a British landing in Norway by sending his troops there first . He sent his troops to Norway first .
 Hitler sent tanks through the supposedly impenetrable Ardennes Forest in May 1940 . The German invasion surprised the French and British by surprise .
 He had skirted the Maginot Line of French fortifications that guarded most of the French border with Germany with Germany .
 German forces drove the British troops back to the port of Dunkirk, where they had to leave their equipment and evacuate what was left of the men across the English Channel .
 Hitler became master of the European continent west of the Soviet Union through a brilliant set of moves in 1940 . Hitler was master of Europe west of Soviet Union .
 The fourth phase of Hitler’s plans, ‘the phase of overreaching’ , unleashed the fulLscale war . Hitler's plans were part of the plan to create a world of war .
 He wanted to dispose of Britain first to avoid the possibility of a war on two fronts . But he wanted to . avoid the . possibility of war on . two fronts to avoid .
 If he could gain air supremacy, he could then cross the channel and invade Britain . If he was successful, he would then be able to get air supremacy in Britain .
 Hitler decided to attack the Soviet Union even though he had been unable to defeat Britain . He thought he could beat Stalin quickly and then go at Britain once again . Hitler thought he was able to defeat Stalin quickly .
 He believed attacking the Soviet Union would deprive the British of any potential alliance with the USSR . Furthermore, he believed that attacking the Soviets would deprive Britain of a potential alliance .
 Hitler probably did this to keep Japan locked into the war . He took the occasion to unleash his UToat campaign against American shipping .
 In doing so, he unleashed the global war that ended his Third Reich . In doing that, he also unleashed a global war against the world .
 The Western democracies were so guilt ridden, weak, and internally divided that any clever German nationalist probably would have been able to revise the Versailles systems . But the second and third phases that brought mastery over Europe depended on Hitler’s skill, audacity, and bellicose
 The fourth phase, which brought on global war and failure, is also attributable to two aspects of Hitler’s personality . Hitler's personality also contributed to the failure of the fourth phase of the war, the historian says .
 Many Ukrainians and others revolted against Stalin’s brutality . For example, when Germany first invaded the Soviet Union, many Ukrainians revolted . Many Ukrainians were outraged when Hitler invaded the USSR .
 Hitler regarded the Slavs as an inferior people, unworthy of an alliance with him against Stalin . But Hitler regarded them as unworthy of a Stalin-style alliance against him .
 He thought the United States was weak because of its population of blacks and Jews . He also thought the U.S. was weak due to the population of Jews and blacks .
 President Obama failed to understand that American pluralism could be a source of strength . The U.S. should be proud of its pluralism, he failed to see it as strength .
 His anti-Semitism led him to expel some of the scientists crucial to developing the atomic bomb . He also expelled some of his anti-Semitic scientists .
 The kind of war it was and its outcome depended very much on Hitler’s monomaniacal personality . Hitler‘s monomenomenal personality’ was key to the success of the war, historian says .
 Versailles treaty was both too harsh because it stirred up German nationalism and too lenient because it left the Germans the capability to do something about it . The treaty was too harsh for the Germans because it was left Germany with the power to do its own own way about it, says
 The absence of the U.S. and the Soviet Union from the balance of power until very late in the game meant that Germany was undeterred from pursuing its expansionist policies . Furthermore, the United States and the . Soviet Union were not included in the balance-of-power
 Germany was a revisionist state bound on destroying the Versailles treaty system . Germany was bound to destroy the treaty system, says historian . It was a state bound to destroying the system, he says .
 The growth of ideologies, the great ‘isms’ of fascism and communism, engendered hatred and hindered communication in the 1930s . In addition, the growth of ideology, the “isms” of fascism . and communism . engendered anger and hatred, the writer says
 First, Western democracies torn apart by class cleavages and ideological disputes . First, the Western democracies were torn apart on ideological grounds . Second, the U.S. has been divided by class and ideological differences .
 In 1939, the British conservative government sent a mission to Moscow to see whether they could sign a treaty with Stalin . Both the mission and the government were internally divided . The mission and government were divided .
 Before the British could make up their minds, Hitler had beat them to it . Hitler had already beat the British to it, and Hitler had done so .
 One reason for the delay was the British upper-class reluctance to deal with communists . The British upper class was reluctant to confront communists .
 The Great Depression was systemic in the sense that it affected all countries . It grew out of the inability of the major capitalist states to establish effective international economic coordination to deal with imbalances .
 Depression had powerful effects on domestic politics and class conflict . The Depression was a period of economic turmoil in the 1930s and '30s .
 Visionary goals | 5 of national redemption through European domination and racial purification were at the | I heart of the regime .
 These meant constant dynamism and self-perpetuating, intensifying, intense radicalism . The radicalism was a constant constant, intense, constant source of energy .
 The longer the regime lasted, the more megalomaniac were its aims, says the author . "The longer [i boundless its] destructiveness was its destructiveness," he says .
 Its gamble for world supremacy meant an alliance against j |; extremely powerful allies . The U.S. risked its gamble for the world supremacy .
 It was a gamble against the odds, in which the regime asked its | i; own destruction and that of Germany itself . It was the regime's gamble against its own destruction, the author says .
 Hitler’s charismatic leadership implied, therefore, not just an unprecedented capacity for destruction, but also an inbuilt tendency for self-destruction . This was Nazism's essential irrationality. Hitler's charismatic leadership .
 In this sense the suicide of | I the German dictator on 30 April 1945 was not merely a welcome but also a logical end to | s the Third Reich . The suicide was not only a welcome, but a logical ending to the German Third Reich.
 Ian Kersha: "I fully accept the responsibilities of that position. I i i i —Ian Kersha. fully accept that position"
 In the 1930s, the Great Depression increased internal preoccupation and significantly deepened isolationism . The Great Depression led to an increase in isolationism among Americans .
 In his first term, President Franklin Roosevelt paid little attention to Europe . President Roosevelt, along with other Americans, paid little interest in Europe . Roosevelt's first term was the first term in office .
 After his reelection in 1936, Roosevelt began to realize that if Hitler became too strong, he might dominate Europe and eventually threaten the U.S. Roosevelt realized that if he became too powerful, Hitler might threaten the United States . Roosevelt realized if Hitler was too strong he might threaten his country
 In 1937, Roosevelt began to speak about events in Europe, but the American public did not want to get involved . The American public wanted to know more about the events in the Middle East .
 In 1940, Roosevelt traded destroyers to the British in return for military basing rights in British territories in the Western Hemisphere . The deal was part of a trade deal between the U.S. and Britain .
 He persuaded Congress to approve “lend-lease’s war supplies to Britain to prevent it from being defeated by Hitler . In 1941, he persuaded Congress . Congress approved ‘lend lease’ to Britain .
 Roosevelt was limited by domestic opinion on how far he could go in resisting Hitler . However, domestic opinion was too much to bear . Roosevelt was able to resist Hitler's efforts to defeat him .
 Only Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor and Hitler's subsequent declaration of war ended America’s isolationism . Only Japan’t attacked Pearl Harbor ended America's isolationism.
 We could say that the deep causes of World War II were systemic . The intermediate causes were largely domestic—the social and ideological disruptions that produced Hitler in Germany and the political and economic weaknesses in the democracies . The interimmediate causes are largely domestic .
 The failure of World War I to solve “the German problem” meant there was already some probability of a second war in 1918 . World War II was the first major European war to be fought in the world's first major conflict .
 If the Western democracies had chosen to appease Germany in the 1920s and treat it less punitively, the democratic government of the Weimar Republic might have been preserved . Western democracies should have treated Germany more leniently in the 1930s .
 If the United States had ratified the Treaty of Versailles and stayed in Europe to preserve the balance of power, Hitler might not have risen to power . Or if the U.S. had ratified it, the Treaty would have saved Hitler from Hitler .
 In the 1930s, the shock of the economic depression fueled the rise of ideologies that glorified aggression, making war more likely . In the same era, ideologies glorified aggressive ideologies were more likely to lead to war .
 He might not have had such dramatic early successes and might have been overthrown by his own generals, who several times had contemplated such a coup .
 By the late 1930s, once Hitler began to plan war, it became almost inevitable . Hitler began planning war with the Nazis in the 1930s . By the 1940s, it was almost certain war was inevitable .
 Some historians believe that if France and Britain had launched an offensive in September 1939, they might have defeated Germany . Even so, some historians say that if they had launched a offensive, it might have been more successful .
 Japan’s attention was focused on East Asia, and it was not deeply involved in European events . Japan was not involved in any of the European events in the 1980s .
 In the 1920s, Japan was far from being a perfect democracy, but it did have a parliamentary system . In the 1930s, the country's parliamentary system was far more democratic .
 In the 1930s, the military and extreme nationalists gained control of the government . However, the government was overthrown in favor of the military .
 Japan had always worried about maintaining access to the raw materials it had to import to sustain its economy . Japan's economy had to rely heavily on raw materials to sustain it .
 When the Depression cut Japan’s trade, the Japanese feared that if they did not change their situation, they would face a bleak future . The Depression cut the Japanese's trade, but they were able to survive .
 Japan believed the sphere would allow it to resist threats from Britain and the U.S. It was still major naval powers in the Pacific .
 Japan’s brutal war in China brought Japan into diplomatic conflict with the United States . The U.S. supported the Chinese Nationalists, which Japan supported .
 After France fell to Hitler in 1940, the Japanese took advantage of the opportunity to seize France’s colonies in Southeast Asia, Vietnam and Cambodia .
 Some people thought a Japanese-Soviet war along the Manchurian border was most likely . Since clashes had already occurred between Japanese and Soviet forces along the border in Manchuria .
 The second option for the Japanese was to strike south, for although they had already taken the French colonies in Southeast Asia . The biggest prize was the Dutch East Indies, which had the oil Japan needed .
 Option three was to strike east against the United States, by far the riskiest of the three options . Option three would be to strike against the U.S. by striking east against U.K.
 On December 7, 1941, they struck east against the United States and south toward Indonesia and the Philippines . The U.S. and Philippines joined forces together in the battle .
 The move south was for raw materials, but the attack on the United States is more difficult to explain . The U.S. is more likely to blame for the move south .
 The Japanese knew they could not ultimately win a war against the United States, but they hoped the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor would demoralize the U.S. Given the disparity in power resources, they knew they couldn't win a . war .
 By the fall of 1941, Japanese expansionists no longer considered the Soviet Union a viable target . The Japanese invasion of the USSR ended in 1941 . The Soviet Union was no longer a viable threat to Japan .
 Hitler’s attack on the Soviet Union had removed the Soviet threat to Japan . Hitler attacked Soviet Union in 1941, removing the threat from Japan . Japan was forced to withdraw from Soviet Union .
 The U.S. tried to deter the Japanese from striking south by putting an embargo on oil shipments to Japan . At the same time, the Americans tried to discourage the Japanese striking south . The embargo was imposed on shipments of oil to Japan, but it was never implemented .
 With 90 percent of their oil imported, they calculated that their navy could not last for even a year if that supply were cut off . Therefore they concluded it was better to go to war than to be slowly strangled .
 In addition to restricting Japan’s oil supplies, the U.S. demanded that Japan withdraw from China . The United States also wants Japan withdraws from China, the United States says .
 The Japanese believed this would cut them off from the area they viewed as their economic hinterland . The area was viewed as a vital part of the Japanese economy .
 If Germany defeated Britain and U.S. opinion was discouraged by the suddenness of the attack, a negotiated peace might be possible .
 There is no one who is willing to say, “Don’t worry, even if the war is prolonged, I will assume all responsibility.” No one who’s willing to “don” say they will assume responsibility for the loss of life in
 The role of the individual is certainly less pronounced than it was with Hitler in Europe, but individual policy makers nonetheless influenced the trajectory of events . Individual policy makers still influence the outcome of events in Europe .
 In Japan, expansionist generals and admirals wanted to increase Japan’s regional dominance and actively sought an expanded war; west to China; south to Singapore, Indonesia, and the Philippines; and east to U.S. possessions in the Pacific .
 Hideki Tojo played a leading role in determining government policy in Japan . Military leaders played a key role in the country's foreign policy .
 Tojo supported policies identical to those of many other high-ranking military and political leaders . However, Tojo's policies were not the same as those of others .
 Hitler had military and industrial support in Germany, but made decisions largely on his own . Hitler's decision was largely made largely by his own decision-making .
 In Japan, there was a greater diffusion of power at the top . Decisions were more the result of consensus among the political and military elite . Japan's political, military elite was more influential in the 1980s .
 The role of the individual was also important for determining U.S. policy . The individual is also important in determining United States policy .
 Franklin Roosevelt was willing to impose punitive sanctions in response to Japanese aggression in Southeast Asia . Many in Congress and throughout America were uneasy with Roosevelt’s activist and confrontational foreign policy .
 There was still strong isolationist sentiment in the United States in 1940 and 1941 . Many people still rejected U.S. involvement in international politics .
 If an isolationist like Senators Burton Wheeler of Montana, Gerald Nye of North Dakota, or Hiram Johnson of California had been president, the U.S. might have tried to appease Japanese aggression rather than confront it . Japan may never have felt the need to attack the United States
 Japan would have established itself as the regional power in the western Pacific . Of course, Japanese aggression would then have been unchecked, says the author .
 At a domestic level the increased militarism of Japan’s government made war more likely . In terms of domestic and systemic causes, we have seen how at a domestic . We have also seen how increased . militarism made war . more likely in Japan .
 Economic collapse in Japan and U.S. affected foreign policies of both countries in 1930s . As with Europe in the 1930s, the economic collapse in both countries affected their foreign policies .
 Until 1940 the United States became even more isolated . Japan became more expansionist, while until 1940 the U.S. became isolated .
 Japan's militarism has increased the influence of the militarists in domestic politics . That, in turn, it has been increased by the rise of militarism in the country's politics .
 Treaty of Versailles had left ambitions of Japan in China unsated . Economic problems of the 1930s made it more difficult for Japan to obtain its needed raw materials by trade alone .
 The breakdown between 1931 and 1933 of the League of Nations’ collective-security system in Asia removed any institutional constraints on Japan’s imperial ambitions . The breakdown of the already weak collective-nation security system in the region removed any constraints .
 Both the deep and intermediate causes of the war in the Pacific were largely domestic . The shift toward expansion in Japan and toward greater isolationism in the U.S. in the United States, and the chaos of 1930s China .
 The precipitating causes were Roosevelt’s decision to implement a full embargo in July 1941 and the resulting decision of the Japanese military to attack the U.S. on December 7 . Roosevelt's decision was to implement the full embargo .
 It is a policy choice to allow for changes in the balance of power that benefit a rival state . It is the policy choice, allowing for changes that benefit rival states, it is said .
 Rather than attempting to deter or contain the aggression of adversaries, a state might prefer to allow its adversaries modest gains . A state might want to let its adversaries gain modest gains, the author says .
 Corinth argued to the Athenians that it should be allowed to absorb Corcyra . On the eve of the Peloponnesian War, Corinth argued for the city's annexation .
 Athenians refused to appease Corinth and chose instead to fight . The Athenians, however, refused to be appeased by Corinth and instead chose to fight.
 Athens would have done better to appease Corinthian ambitions than to challenge them over Corcyra . Given subsequent events, it is possible that Athens would've done better than to appease .
 Appeasement was used successfully in 1815 when the victorious powers appeased the defeated but still strong France . Appeasment was successfully used in the same way in the French Revolution .
 We could argue that appeasement might have been the right policy for the Western Allies to have taken toward Germany in the 1920s . We could even argue that .
 One of the great ironies of the interwar period is that the West confronted Germany in the 1920s when it should have been appeased and appeased Germany in 1930s . Germany should have confronted the West in the 1930s, but the West did not confront it .
 Neville Chamberlain was not such a coward as the Munich experience makes him out of being a coward . Appeasement was the wrong approach to Hitler, but he was not a coward, he says . Chamberlain was the right man to stand up to Hitler in Munich .
 7 million young men who were cut off in their prime and 13 million who were maimed and mutilated . 13 million people were mutilated in the four years of WWII .
 Chamberlain's sins were not his intentions, but his ignorance and arrogance in failing to appraise the situation properly . Chamberlain’s sins were . not his intention, but rather his ignorance, arrogance . It is those thoughts which make me feel that it is my duty to strain every nerve
 World War II was not an unwanted spiral of hostility, it was a failure to deter Hitler’s planned aggression . World War I was not a unwanted spiral, but a failure .
 In that sense, the policies appropriate for preventing World Wars I and II were almost opposite . The policies appropriate to preventing World War I and I was almost opposite, he says .
 Accommodation of Germany might have helped forestall World War I and deterrence might have prevented World War II, but the policies were reversed .
 The efforts of U.S. leaders to deter Japan helped bring on war in the Pacific . At the same time, the efforts of United States leaders to . deter . Japan . helped bring . on war .
 Deterrence failed because the Japanese felt cornered in a situation in which the alternative of peace looked worse than risking a war . The alternative was peace, not war, would have been worse than a war, says historian .
 World War 1 was not purely accidental, and World War II, in the Pacific at least, was not merely Hitler’s planned aggression . World War I was not simply accidental, but it was a planned aggression, says historian .
 Always ask whether a model is true to the facts of history and whether it really fits the current reality . Always ask if a model fits the reality of the world and if it fits the real reality .
 Twain pointed out that a cat that sits on a hot stove will not sit on a cold one again . Twain also said that neither a cat nor a cat will sit on hot stove again . The cat will not be allowed to sit on cold stove again, Twain said .
 Ian Kershaw, “Hitler and the Nazi Dictatorship,” in Mary Fulbrook, ed., German History Since 1800 , 336. He says Hitler and Hitler were the Nazis .
 Dean Acheson quoted in Scott Sagan’s “The Origins of the Pacific War,” in Robert 1.1.1 .
 There was a cold war, a period of intense hostility without actual war . Instead of actual war, there was a Cold War without actual conflict .
 The hostility between the superpowers was so intense that many expected armed conflict . The hostility was so fierce that many people thought armed conflict would break out between the two countries .
 Fighting occurred not directly between the United States and the Soviet Union . Fighting occurred on the peripheries of the Cold War .
 The height of the Cold War was from 1947 to 1963, when there were few serious negotiations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The height was during that period, when few serious talks were held .
 In 1952, George Kennan, the U.S. ambassador in Moscow, compared his isolation in Moscow to being interned during World War II in Berlin . Kennan compares his isolation to his experience in the American embassy to his internment during WWII .
 The later phases of the Cold War in the 1970s and 1980s were very different . The Cold War was very different in the '70s and '80s, but it was very much different .
 The Americans and Soviets had many contacts, and they constantly negotiated on arms control treaties . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were constantly involved in arms control negotiations .
 The end of the Cold War occurred quite quickly with the change in Soviet policies after Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in 1985 . The Cold War ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Soviet hegemony over Eastern Europe collapsed in 1989, and the Soviet Union itself disintegrated in 1991 .
 Cold War was a period of protracted tension that did not end in a war between the two rival superpowers . The Cold War is the first time the two superpowers have been at odds for decades .
 To deter is to discourage through fear, and although frequently associated with the Cold War, deterrence was not a new concept in international politics . To deter was to discourage by fear, but deterrence is not new concept to international politics.
 Throughout history, countries built armies, formed alliances, and issued threats to deter other countries from attacking . The threat of an attack on the U.S. has been a key part of the history of nations .
 During the Cold War and with the advent of nuclear weapons, the superpowers depended more on discouraging by threat than on denying by defense .
 Cold War deterrence was closely tied to the maintenance of large American and Soviet nuclear arsenals, but it was also an extension of balance-of-power logic . The U.S. and the Soviet Union maintained large arsenals .
 Deterrence by nuclear threat was one way each superpower tried to prevent the other from gaining advantage and hence upsetting the balance of power between them . Deterrence was one of the ways each superpower wanted to prevent each other gaining an advantage .
 As we shall see, deterrence often aggravated the tension between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . It is not necessarily easy to demonstrate that deterrence worked, and deterrence often did not .
 If a professor said her lectures kept elephants out of the classroom, it would be difficult to disprove her claim . If no elephants ever came to class, no elephants would have been in class .
 During the Cold War, containment referred to a specific American policy of containing Soviet communism . The U.S. policy was to promote a liberal economic and political world order .
 Containment did not originate with the Cold War, even if the term did . But like deterrence, containment did not start with the term, it did .
 It can use military power in the form of war or alliances; it can use economic power in form of trade blocs or sanctions . Soft power can also be used to promote ideas and values, says President Obama .
 During the Cold War, the United States wavered between containing communism and containing the Soviet Union . The U.S. had an expansive policy of containing communism . The United States had a more limited policy in the 1950s .
 Almost since it began, those questions have been the subject of fierce debate among scholars and policy makers . Almost since the start of this year's debate, the debate has raged on the topic .
 There are three main schools of opinion; traditionalists, revisionists, and postrevisionists . Traditionalist, revisionist, postreversionist and post-revisionist views differ .
 The answer to the question of who started the Cold War is simple, Stalin and the Soviet Union . The traditiormksts. argue that the answer is quite simple .
 At the end of World War II, U.S. diplomacy was defensive, while the Soviets were aggressive and expansive . American diplomacy is defensive and expansive, but Soviet diplomacy is expansive .
 Immediately after the war, the United States was proposing a universal world order and collective security through the United Nations . The U.S. proposed a universal . world order after World War II .
 The Soviet Union did not take the U.N. very seriously because it wanted to expand and dominate its own sphere of influence in Eastern Europe . The Union wanted to dominate and dominate the United Nations .
 After the war, the United States demobilized its troops, whereas the Soviet Union left large armies in Eastern Europe . The United States and the Soviet Russia left their armies in eastern Europe .
 The U.S. recognized Soviet interests when they met in 1945 at Yalta . The Americans went out of their way to accommodate Soviet interests .
 Stalin did not live up to his agreements, particularly by not allowing free elections in Poland . Stalin, however, did not allow free elections, especially in Poland, he said .
 Soviet expansionism was confirmed when the Soviet Union was slow to remove its troops from northern Iran after the war . The Soviet Union remained in northern Iran for more than a decade .
 The Soviet Union blockaded Berlin in 1948 and 1949, trying to squeeze the Western governments out of the city . Berlin was occupied by the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 In 1950, communist North Korea’s armies crossed the border into South Korea . And in 1950, the North Korean government crossed into the South Korea border .
 Traditionalists say events awakened the U.S. to the threat of Soviet expansionism and launched the Cold War . According to the traditionalists, these events gradually awakened the United States . The Cold War was launched by the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 Revisionists believe Cold War was caused by U.S. rather than Soviet expansionism . The revisionists wrote primarily in the 1960s and early 1970s . The Cold War is thought to have been caused by the United States .
 At the end of World War II, the world was not really bipolar . The Soviets were much weaker than the United States, which was strengthened by the war and had nuclear weapons while the Soviets did not .
 The Soviet Union lost up to 30 million people, and industrial production was only half its 1939 level . Industrial production in the Soviet Union was half that level in 1939 .
 Stalin told American Ambassador Averell Harriman in October 1945 that the Soviets would turn inward to repair their domestic damage . Stalin told the American ambassador that the Soviet Union would be turning inward to fix its domestic problems .
 Revisionists come in two varieties that stress the first and second levels of explanation . Revisionists stress the second and third levels in their explanations .
 Level one revisionists stress the importance of individuals and claim that Roosevelt’s death in April 1945 was a critical event . They claim that American policy toward the Soviet Union became harsher after President Harry S Truman took office .
 In May 1945, the U.S. cut off the lend-lease program of wartime aid . Some ships bound for Soviet ports had to turn around in mid-ocean .
 At the Potsdam Conference near Berlin in July 1945, Truman tried to intimidate Stalin by mentioning the atomic bomb . At the 1945 conference, Truman mentioned the bomb at the top of his speech .
 In 1948, Truman fired Henry Wallace, his secretary of agriculture, who urged better relations with the Soviets . Truman fired Wallace in 1948 for urging better relations between the Soviet Union and Russia .
 At the same time, James Forrestal, Truman’s new secretary of defense, was a strong anticommunist . Forrestal was also a strong anti-communist . President Truman's defense secretary was an anti-Communist .
 They see the problem not in individuals, but in the nature of U.S. capitalism, they say . They say the problem is not individuals but in nature of American capitalism .
 Gabriel and Joyce Kolko and William A Williams argue that the U.S. planned to make the world safe, not for democracy, but for capitalism . Kolko, Williams: The United States needed to make it safe for capitalism, not democracy .
 American economic hegemony could not tolerate any country that might try to organize an autonomous economic area . U.S. economic hegemony would not tolerate such an economic area, he says . The U.N. would not be willing to tolerate any attempt to organize autonomous economic areas .
 American leaders feared a repeat of the 1930s because without external trade, there would be another Great Depression . Without external trade there would have been another Depression, the Great Depression would not have been possible .
 The Marshall Plan of aid to Europe was simply a way to expand the American economy . According to level two revisionists, the Marshall Plan was a way of expanding the economy .
 The Soviets rejected it as a threat to their sphere of influence in Eastern Europe . The Soviets were correct to reject it as it was a threat .
 Americans always favored an open-door policy in the international economy because they expected to walk through it, Williams says . Americans always favor an open door policy because they expect it to be walked through it .
 The postrevisionists of the late 1970s and 1980s have yet another explanation that focuses on the structural level . Yale historian John Lewis Gaddis, exemplified by Yale historian, has another explanation .
 Traditionalists and revisionists argue that nobody was to blame for starting the Cold War . They argue that the traditionalists are both wrong because nobody was responsible .
 It was inevitable, or nearly so, because of the bipolar structure of the postwar balance of power . "It was inevitable," says the author of the book, "because it was inevitable"
 Bipolarity plus the postwar weakness of the European states created a power vacuum into which the U.S. and the Soviet Union were drawn .
 Postrevisionists say it is pointless to look for blame for the conflict . They say it was bound to come into conflict and, therefore, it's pointless to blame . The postrevisionist says the conflict was bound for conflict and therefore it's not worth blaming .
 The Soviets and the Americans had different goals at the end of the war . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were at odds with each other at the time .
 Americans had intangible or milieu goals—they were interested in the general context of world politics . Americans were very interested in world politics, says historian John Avlon .
 The United States promoted the global UN system while the Soviets sought to consolidate their sphere of influence in Eastern Europe . Milieu goals clashed with possession goals when the U.S. promoted UN system .
 The Soviets may have had a sphere of influence in Eastern Europe, but the U.S. also had influence in the Western Hemisphere and Western Europe . The United States also had spheres of influence over Eastern Europe and Western America .
 The United States and the Soviet Union were both bound to expand, say the postrevisionists . The U.S. and the USSR were bound for expansion, they say, not because of economic determinism .
 Neither the Americans nor the Soviets could allow the other to dominate Europe any more than Athens could afford to let the Corinthians gain control of Corcyra’s navy .
 Postrevisionists cite Stalin’s comment to a Yugoslav leader, Milovan Djilas, in 1945; “This war is not as in the past; whoever occupies a territory also imposes on it his own social system.”
 Since the end of the Cold War, a modest flow of documents from formerly inaccessible Soviet archives has given new vigor to the debate over which side started the confrontation . The documents have been found in formerly inaccessible archives .
 Gaddis has become increasingly convinced that the USSR was primarily responsible for the onset and nature of the superpower conflict . He says he is increasingly convinced of Soviet involvement in the conflict .
 He cites the ideological rigidity of Stalin and other Soviet leaders, as well as the Kremlin’s commitment to maintaining a formal empire in its sphere of influence .
 Gaddis’s move back toward a traditionalist viewpoint has garnered a skeptical reception in some scholarly quarters . The debate will continue into the foreseeable future, guaranteeing that the debate .
 Roosevelt wanted to avoid the mistakes of World War 1 . Instead of a Versailles-like peace, he demanded Germany’s unconditional surrender .
 He wanted a liberal trade system to avoid the protectionism that had damaged the world economy in the 1930s and contributed to the onset of war . He wanted protectionism to avoid a damaging trade system .
 The U.S. would avoid its tendency toward isolationism that had been so damaging in the 1930s . The United States would avoid isolationism, President Eisenhower said .
 It would join a new and stronger League of Nations in the form of a United Nations with a powerful Security Gouncil . The United Nations would be a powerful body of power .
 Public opinion in the United States was strongly in favor of the United Nations . Cordell Hull, U.S. secretary of state during most of the war, was a committed Wilsonian .
 To promote his great design, Roosevelt needed to maintain bipartisan domestic support . Roosevelt needed bipartisan support for his international position .
 President Roosevelt needed to reassure Stalin that his security needs would be met by joining the U.N. Externally, he needed to convince Stalin that joining the United Nations was necessary .
 He placed too much faith in the United Nations, overestimated the likelihood of U.S. isolationism, and underestimated Stalin . The U.N. and the U.K. should have been more cautious, he says .
 Roosevelt thought he could treat Stalin the way he would treat a fellow American politician, throwing his arm around him, bonding politician to politician . Roosevelt's arm around Stalin bonded him to fellow politician, bonding politics to politics .
 He tried to tie economic aid to political concessions by the Soviets . He refused to share the secrets of the atomic bomb with them . He also refused to give them economic aid .
 "He was simply realistic about who would have troops in Eastern Europe at the end of the war," he says . He was realistic about the future of his troops in the region .
 Roosevelt’s mistakes were in thinking that Stalin saw the world his way, that he understood domestic politics in the U.S. The same American political skills in which a leader blurred differences would work in dealing with Stalin .
 The President acted as if genuine cooperation as the Americans understood the term were possible both during and after the war . The President said genuine cooperation would be possible .
 Roosevelt apparently had forgotten, if indeed he . ever knew, that in Stalin’s eyes, he was not all that different from Hitler . Both were heads of powerful capitalist states whose . longterm ambitions clashed with those of | the Kremlin .
 Stalin’s immediate postwar plans were to tighten domestic control . I —William Taubman, Stalin's American Policy . I . William Taubmen: Stalin's immediate postwar postwar plans .
 World War II inflicted tremendous damage on the Soviet Union, not just the terrible losses of life and industry, but also to the ideology of communism . The Soviet Union was devastated by the loss of millions of lives and industry . The loss of Soviet life, industry, and the fall of communism
 Many in the Soviet Union collaborated with the Germans because of their deep resentment over the harshness of communist rule . Many Soviet Union members collaborated with Germans because they were unhappy with the harsh Communist rule .
 Stalin had to increase his appeals to Russian nationalism during the war because the weakened communist ideology was insufficient to motivate his people . Stalin's appeal to Russian nationalists was increased in the war .
 Stalin’s isolationist policy at the end of the war was designed to cut off external influences from Europe and the U.S. Stalin's isolationist policies were designed to protect the Soviet Union from the outside .
 Stalin used the U.S. as an objective enemy, urging the Soviet people to tighten down, to pull in . Stalin's use of the United States was an attempt to get the Soviet Union to pull back .
 Stalin wanted the Cold War that actually developed, but it does not follow that Stalin wanted it to develop . Stalin wanted to create a Cold War, but that didn't happen, he says .
 Stalin preferred cooperation, especially if it helped him pursue his goals in Eastern Europe and brought him some economic assistance from the U.S. Stalin preferred some cooperation . The Soviet Union did not want to be seen as a threat to Russia .
 As a good communist, he believed the United States would have to give him economic assistance . The capitalist system had to export capital due to insufficient demand at home, he said .
 Stalin also believed that in 10 or 15 years, the next crisis of the capitalist system would come along, and at that time the Soviet Union would have recovered and be ready to benefit in the inevitable conflict with the capitalists . Stalin believed in that in that time, the Soviets would be ready
 In foreign policy terms, Stalin wanted to protect himself at home, as well as maintain the gains the Soviet Union had made in Eastern Europe from the 1939 pact with Hitler . The Soviet Union was trying to protect itself at home and maintain its gains in eastern Europe .
 Stalin wanted to probe soft spots, something better done when there is no crisis . Stalin also wanted to prob soft spots . Stalin wanted a probe into soft spots in order to find out what was wrong .
 In 1941, Stalin told the British foreign minister Anthony Eden that he preferred arithmetic to algebra . Stalin wanted a practical rather than a theoretical approach .
 Stalin’s early caution in supporting communist governments right away in China, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary fit well with this arithmetic rather than algebraic approach to achieving his objectives . Some of Stalin's early caution fits quite well with his early approach to using communist governments .
 Stalin was a committed communist, although he saw the world within the framework of communism, often used pragmatic tactics . Stalin was often seen as a committed Communist who often used pragmatism .
 At the end of World War II, Truman sent Roosevelt’s former aide, Harry Hopkins, to Moscow to see if some, arrangements could be worked out .
 Even after the Potsdam Conference, Truman continued to see Stalin as a moderate . Truman saw Stalin as an "moderate" leader .
 As late as 1949, he compared Stalin to his old friend Boss Pendergast in Kansas-City . Indeed, as late as 1950, he said Stalin was a good friend of Stalin in Kansas City .
 In 1946, George Kennan, writing from Moscow, was trying to warn American decision makers about Stalin’s intentions . Winston Churchill gave a famous speech in Fulton, Missouri, warning that an ‘iron curtain’ was falling across Europe .
 Truman asked his aide Clark Clifford to prepare a report on what the Soviets were really planning . Secretary of State James Byrnes was still trying to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets .
 Truman received the report in December 1946, but told Clifford he did not want its results widely known . Truman said he was still trying to follow Roosevelt’s great design and had not yet developed a new strategy .
 Americans believed Stalin broke a clear commitment to hold free elections in Poland after the war . Polarid, of course, had been one of the precipitating causes of World War II .
 When Stalin and Roosevelt met at Tehran in 1943, Roosevelt raised the Polish issue . He appealed to Stalin in the context of the 1944 American election . He had an election coming up, there were many Polish-American voters, and he needed to tell them .
 Stalin, who never worried about elections in the Soviet Union, did not take Roosevelt’s concerns seriously . Stalin never took Roosevelt's concerns seriously, and did not worry about elections .
 The February 1945 Yalta agreement was also somewhat ambiguous . Stalin stretched the meaning as far as he could by setting up a puppet government in Warsaw after Soviet troops had driven out Germans .
 Stalin felt the Americans would adjust to the reality that Soviet troops had liberated Poland . The Americans felt cheated, but Stalin felt they would adjust . Stalin felt that the Americans had to adjust .
 In May 1945, the lend-lease aid program was abruptly stopped, and the economic relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union became strained .
 The precipitous termination of lend-lease was to some extent a bureaucratic mistake, but the overall situation was not improved when in February 1946 the U.S. refused Soviet requests for loans .
 The Soviets interpreted those acts as economic leverage for hostile purposes . Soviets interpreted the acts as . economic leverage .
 At the Yalta meeting, the Americans and the Soviets agreed that Germany should pay $20 billion in reparations, with half going to the Soviet Union . Half of the reparations would go to the Soviets, half to the United States .
 The details of how and when the payments would be made were not worked out at Yalta . Both sides agreed they would be negotiated later in negotiations .
 At the Potsdam meeting in July 1945, the Soviets demanded their $10 billion . The Soviets wanted it from the western zones of Germany that the Americans, British, and French had occupied .
 Harry Truman said if the Soviets wanted to take $10 billion out of Germany, they should take it out of the eastern zone they occupied . Truman said he would let the Soviets know if there was anything left over after reconstruction of the western side of Germany .
 The Americans and the Soviets were divided about how to reconstruct Germany . Thus began a series of divisions between the U.S. and Soviets .
 The Americans, along with the British and French, created a single currency in the western zones of Germany . The Soviets tightened control of the eastern zone of Germany in turn . The Americans created the single currency, allowing West German integration .
 The Soviets were neutral in the Pacific until the last week of the war . The Soviet Union was neutral until the end of the Pacific War .
 The Soviets seized Manchuria and four islands from the north of Japan . The Soviets declared war on Japan, seizing Manchurian and four of the islands .
 At Potsdam, the Soviets asked for an occupation zone in Japan, like the U.S. in Germany . The Soviets wanted a Japanese occupation zone like the American occupation zone .
 Truman's response was, in effect, that the Soviets arrived at the party late, so no zone . Truman’s response was to say there would be no zone. Truman: "There was no zone."
 The situation reminded the Soviets of Eastern Europe, where the Americans wanted free elections and influence, but the Soviet armies had arrived there first . From the American point of view, this seemed perfectly reasonable, but this seemed not .
 The Soviets saw the Far Eastern situation as analogous to Eastern Europe, while the Americans saw it as one more example of the Soviets pressing for their own expansion . The Americans saw the situation as an example of Soviet expansion in the Far East .
 Roosevelt decided not to share the secret of the atomic bomb with the Soviet Union . Roosevelt had decided to keep the secret secret from the Soviets .
 Most historians now agree that Truman dropped the bomb at Hiroshima and Nagasaki primarily to bring a quick end to the war with Japan, not to intimidate the Soviet Union . Some revisionists have claimed that some revisionists claimed that the bomb was dropped to intimidate Russia .
 At the Potsdam meeting when Truman told Stalin that America had an atomic bomb, Stalin remained poker faced and seemingly unimpressed . Stalin was poker faced when Truman said America had atomic bomb .
 Stalin already knew about it from his own spies, but his equanimity was a bit of a jolt to the Americans . Of course, Stalin . Stalin already . knew about . Stalin .
 In 1946, the United States set forth the Baruch Plan for UN control of nuclear weapons, Stalin rejected it because he wanted to build his own bomb . Stalin rejected the plan because of his desire to build a nuclear bomb .
 As he saw it, a bomb under international control would still be an American bomb, for only the Americans knew how to build it, he said . He saw it as an American .
 First, the Soviets refused to remove their troops from northern Iran in March 1946 . First, they refused to leave their troops in northern Iran . The Soviet Union was forced to withdraw its troops in 1946 .
 The United States supported Iran in a debate within the United Nations . The U.S. supported Iran during a debate in the United States .
 The Soviets eventually moved, but not without a good deal of bitterness over the event . The Soviets were bitter over the loss of their territory .
 The Soviet Union also began to put pressure on Turkey, its neighbor to the south, at the same time that the communists seemed to be winning the civil war in Greece . Turkey's relations with the Soviet Union began at the beginning of the 1950s .
 These six issues were real, though some misperceptions were involved in almost all of them . Some of the issues were not real, but some of them were real .
 Appeasement would have been interpreted as a soft spot and invited more probing . Appeasment would have led to more probing and more questions being asked .
 A tactical appeal to Stalin’s pragmatism from a firmer American position, plus a willingness to negotiate, might have worked out better in that early period from 1945-1947 .
 Britain felt it could no longer provide security in the eastern Mediterranean . Britain was severely weakened by World War II, and felt it couldn't provide security .
 The United States had to decide whether to let a vacuum develop or to replace British power by providing assistance to Greece and Turkey . The U.S. had to choose whether to allow a vacuum to develop .
 This involved a considerable break from traditional U.S. foreign policy . This is the first time the Obama administration has taken action in a foreign policy move .
 Truman was not sure that U.S. public opinion would support such a move . Truman was worried that public opinion might not support the move .
 There was still fear that isolationism would be the mainstay of America’s postwar foreign policy . There were still fears of isolationism as a mainstay .
 Truman asked Arthur Vandenberg, the Republican leader from Michigan, whether the Senate would go along with aiding Greece and Turkey . Truman asked Vandenberg whether he would go with aiding Turkey and Greece .
 Truman did not talk about the need to maintain a balance of power in the eastern Mediterranean by providing aid to Greece and Turkey . The policy change was explained in a speech at the White House on Monday .
 This moralistic, ideological explanation for American assistance became known as the Truman Doctrine . The Truman Doctrine was used to justify American assistance to the Philippines .
 George Kennan, by then back in the State Department, objected to this ideological approach to formulating foreign policy . Kennan argued that it was too open-ended and would get U.S. into trouble .
 There were enormous ambiguities in the policy of containment that flowed from the Truman Doctrine . Indeed, there were enormous ambiguity in the Truman doctrine, the author says .
 At the beginning, containing Soviet power and containing communist ideology seemed to be the same . But later in the Cold War when the communist movement split, the ambiguities became important .
 Some observers feel it is harder to change public opinion in democracies than it is to change policies in totalitarian countries . Some observers say it is more difficult to change in democratic countries than in totalitarian ones .
 They argue exaggeration speeds up the process of change in democracies . They argue that exaggeration speeds down the democratic process .
 It is necessary to tug harder on the reins when trying to turn an unruly team of horses . It is also necessary to turn a team of unruly horses .
 Regardless of whether the exaggeration was necessary, it helped change the nature of the Cold War . Regardless of the exaggeration, the story was important to the U.S.
 In June 1947, Secretary of State George Marshall announced a plan for economic aid to Europe . Marshall announced an economic aid plan in June 1947 .
 The initial proposal of the Marshall Plan invited the Soviet Union and the Eastern Europeans to join if they wished, but Stalin put strong pressure on the Eastern European not to do so . The Soviet Union did not want to join .
 Stalin saw the Marshall Plan not as American generosity, but as economic battering ram to destroy his security barrier in Eastern Europe . Stalin saw it as an economic batter-ram for his security . The Marshall Plan was designed to destroy the security barrier .
 When Czechoslovakia indicated it would like U.S. aid, Stalin tightened the screws in Eastern Europe . The communists took full power in February 1948, taking over from the United States in 1948 .
 The United States advanced plans for West German currency reform; Stalin replied with the Berlin blockade . The U.S. advanced plans to reform the West German economy; Stalin responded with a blockade of Berlin .
 The alarm in Washington was illustrated by a secret government document . The alarm was raised by the secret document . It was published by the U.S. government .
 NSC-68 called for a vast increase in the U.S. defense expenditure . The U.N. Security Council has called for an increase in defense spending .
 Truman resisted NSC-68 until June 1950, when North Korea’s troops crossed the border into South Korea . President Truman resisted the move until June .
 The effect of the Korean War was like pouring gasoline onto a modest fire . The Korean War is the result of the war's failure to stop the rise in Korean refugees .
 The Russians instigated the attack on South Korea and opened the ‘hate America’ campaign . Even , I so, it is doubtful whether anything like what happened in the next few years could have been done had not the Russians been stupid .
 Kim II Sung, the North Korean leader, pressed Stalin for the opportunity to unify the peninsula . Stalin's visit to North Korea was the first time Stalin had visited the Korean peninsula .
 The United States had said Korea was outside its defense perimeter . Secretary of State Dean Acheson had articulated this position . Joint Chiefs of Staff had planned accordingly .
 Truman recalled Hitler moving into the Rhineland and recalled the axiom that aggression must be resisted everywhere . Truman remembered Hitler's move into the German-occupied territory .
 Calculated plans about defense perimeters were overshadowed by the historical analogies triggered by North Korea’s invasion . North Korea invaded North Korea in 2008 .
 The United States was able to mobilize the UN Security Council to endorse collective security . The Soviet Union was then boycotting the Security Council . The U.S. sent troops to Korea under the UN flag .
 In September 1950, an American amphibious landing at Inchon, halfway up the peninsula, routed the North Koreans . The landing was a major success for the U.S. in September 1950 .
 Truman succumbed to domestic pressures to pursue the retreating communist troops north of the thirty-eighth parallel . Had the U.S. stopped there, it could have claimed victory by restoring the preinvasion status quo .
 As the Americans approached the Yalu River, which divides Korea from China, the Chinese communists intervened . The Chinese communists pushed the UN troops back to the middle of the peninsula .
 The battle stalemated bloodily for three years until a truce was signed in 1953 . There were three years of fighting before the truce was reached .
 The United States had become embroiled with China, and communism appeared to be monolithic . The U.S. was in the midst of the Cold War .
 At home, the frustrating war led to domestic division and the rise of McCarthyism, named after the harsh and poorly founded accusations of domestic communist subversion made by Senator Joseph McCarthy .
 The intense ideological climate hampered the working of the United Nations, restricted clear communication, and contributed to the immoderate process of the international system, says U.N. Secretary of State Clinton .
 Under such systemic conditions, conflicts would have arisen over the six issues just identified, or some others, and proven difficult to resolve . Under such conditions it would have been hard to resolve.
 There were different phases of the hostility, and since the bipolarity of the system did not change until 1989, structural explanations cannot explain the different phases . Structural explanations can't explain different phases or depth of the .
 Roosevelt and Truman, Truman, Stalin and Khrushchev all had personal relationships . That's where individuals and domestic politics matter, says historian John Avlon .
 Domestic politics have to be considered to fldly understand the extent of the Cold War . Domestic politics must be considered in order to understand extent of Cold War, author says .
 The revisionists are right to focus on domestic questions, but they are wrong to focus so strongly on economic determinism . The revisionist is right to highlight domestic issues, but he is wrong to do so strongly .
 More important was the role of ideology and exaggeration in domestic politics, says David Frum . Frum says. "Ideas and exaggeration are more important than ideology"
 Truman exaggerated the nature of the communist threat in order to rally support for changing U.S. foreign policy . Stalin used ideology because of Soviet domestic problems after the war, and Truman exaggerated it to rally public support . Truman used ideology to justify changing American foreign policy in the 1950s .
 Alternative strategies at different times might have alleviated the depths of hostility . Ironically, alternative strategies might have helped ease the depths .
 Kennan advised the U.S. to respond more firmly in 1945-1947 . Kennan: If the United States had followed Kennan s advice and responded more firmly, the Cold War might not have mounted to the extent .
 Alexis de Tocqueville predicted that Russia and the U.S. were bound to become two great continental-scale giants in the world . The two nations were born in Russia and Russia .
 Realists might predict that these two would become locked in some form of conflict . Realists may also predict that they would be locked in conflict .
 In 1917, the Bolshevik Revolution added an ideological layer to the conflict . And of course, in 1917, it also added ideological layers to the war .
 When Woodrow Wilson first heard of the Russian Revolution, he congratulated the Russian people for their democratic spirit . Wilson was impressed with the democratic spirit of Russia's democratic spirit.
 The U.S. added a small contingent of troops to an Allied intervention, allegedly to keep the Russians in the war against Germany . The Soviets saw it as an attempt to strangle communism in its cradle . But it did not take long before the Americans were accusing the Bolsheviks of
 The United States and the Soviet Union avoided serious conflict in the interwar period and became allies in the early 1940s . Despite these differences, the U.S. and the USSR avoided serious war in the 1930s .
 The bipolarity that followed the collapse of all the other great powers in World War II and the resulting power vacuum changed the relationship between the two countries .
 Earlier there had been distrust between the two countries, but they distrusted each other at a distance . The two countries had been at odds for years .
 Before World War II they could avoid each other, but after 1945 they were face-to-face . Europe was divided, and deep conflict began after 1947 . After 1947 they began to see each other again .
 Some people wonder whether the bipolar structure had to have this effect . The bipolar structure is thought to have been created by bipolar structure .
 The key stakes in world politics were located on the peripheries of the Soviet Union, particularly Europe and Japan . The answer is that the countries that could tip the balance of power were on the periphery of Russia .
 George Kennan described the situation after the war as 'four great areas of technological and industrial creativity' If they were allied one way or the other, they could tip the global balance of power .
 The fact that Europe and Japan became allied with the United States against the Soviet Union was of profound importance . It was important to the U.S. to join the fight against Soviet Russia, says historian .
 For that we need to go beyond systems explanations to look at the societal and individual levels of analysis and constructivist explanations . For that, we must look beyond systems explanation . We need to look to the societal level of analysis .
 At the societal level, the two countries were very different from each other, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The two countries are very different at societal levels .
 In addition, the communist system treated class rather than individual rights as the basis for justice . In addition to individual rights, class was treated as a matter of justice, says historian .
 The ideological overlay gave an additional outward thrust to traditional Russian imperialism . It resulted in a secret and tightly held foreign policy process .
 It is interesting to note the strengths and weaknesses of that process . It's interesting to see how the process works in the U.S.
 Stalin was able to quickly sign the nonaggression pact with Hitler in 1939 . The strengths were evident in 1939 when Stalin signed the pact with the German leader .
 Public opinion did not constrain him, and he did not have to worry about a bureaucracy holding him back, he says . Public opinion was not constraining him, he said . He says he was not afraid of being held back .
 He was free to rush into the pact with Hitler while the British and French were still dithering about whether or not to deal with him . He was able to rush in to the pact while the French and British were dithering .
 The opposite side of the same coin became evident in 1941, however, when Hitler attacked the Soviet Union . The opposite sides of the two sides were evident in the war .
 Stalin was unable to believe Hitler would do such a thing and went into a deep depression for more than a week . Stalin went into deep depression after Hitler's assassination .
 The result was disastrous for Soviet defenses in the early phases of the war . The result is disastrous for the Soviet defense .
 The American political culture emphasized liberal democracy, pluralism, and fragmentation of power . In contrast, the U.S. political culture emphasizes democracy and pluralism .
 Instead of shame of backwardness, the U.S. took pride in its technology and expanding economy . The United States should be proud of its technology, expanding economy, says President Obama .
 The United States had been able to isolate itself between two oceans while it invaded its weaker neighbors . Instead of a fear of invasion, for much of its history, the U.S. had been isolated from the world .
 In terms of secrecy, the United States was so open that governmental documents often reached the press within a matter of days and weeks . The U.S. government was so secretive that it often reached out to the media within days or weeks .
 Instead of a class basis for conceptions of justice, there was a strong emphasis on individual justice . Instead of class basis, the class basis was the basis for conception of justice .
 The foreign policy that resulted from this political culture was moralistic, public, and tended to oscillate between inward and outward orientation . The country's foreign policy in the 1980s was a moralistic and public, the author says .
 The result was that the U.S. foreign policy process was often inconsistent and incoherent in many of its surface aspects . The result is that it was often incoherent and often inconsistent .
 The strengths of openness and pluralism often protected the U.S. from deeper mistakes, says President Obama . The strength of openness in the United States often protected it from a deeper mistake .
 It's not surprising that these two societies, so differently organized and with such different foreign policy processes, would confuse each other . Thus it is not surprising it would confuse the two societies .
 Both Roosevelt and Truman dealt with Stalin in the 1940s . We saw examples of that in the way both Roosevelt and Stalin dealt with him .
 The Americans were like a white noise machine that produced so much background noise that it was difficult to hear the true signals clearly, says CNN's John Sutter . The Americans are like a "white noise machine," he says .
 The Soviets were often confused about what the Americans really wanted . Thus the Soviets often got confused about the Americans' intentions .
 The Soviets were often accused of being expansionist, of being a revolutionary power rather than a status quo power . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were often seen as expansionist rather than status quo .
 Stalin, Churchill, and Roosevelt brought to the bargaining table at Yalta . We can see this in the demands that Stalin and Churchill brought . Stalin, Roosevelt, Churchill and Roosevelt .
 Churchill wanted the restoration of France to help balance Soviet power in case the Americans went home . Churchill wanted to restore France in order to balance the Soviet power .
 Roosevelt wanted the U.N. and an open international economic system . Roosevelt wanted to open the world's economic system, Roosevelt said . Roosevelt also wanted the United Nations and open international trade .
 Stalin wanted to keep the gains he had made in the treaty with Hitler . In some ways, Stalin’s postwar goals were classic Russian imperialist goals . He wanted to maintain his gains he made with Hitler, he says .
 Some Americans thought the Soviets were as expansionist as Hitler in desiring world domination . Some Americans believed the Soviets wanted world domination in the 1930s . Some thought the Soviet Union was as aggressive as Hitler .
 Others said the Soviets were basically security oriented; their expansion was defensive . Others said it was mostly security oriented .
 There were at least two ways in which Soviet expansionism was not like Hitler’s. There were also two ways that Soviet expansionistism wasn’t like Hitler.
 When Hitler invaded Poland, he worried he would be offered another Munich instead of the war he wanted for the glory of fascism . Hitler worried he might get another Munich as he wanted to win the war .
 The Soviet Union was cautiously opportunistic, not recklessly adventuresome . Another difference was that the Soviet Union wasn't recklessly adventureous .
 Adventurism was seen as a sin against communism because it might disrupt the predicted course of history . Adventurousism was also seen as an act of rebellion against the Communist Party .
 During the Cold War, the Soviet Union was never as bellicist or as reckless as Hitler was . The Soviet Union never was as reckless or bellicist as Adolf Hitler was, says historian .
 There are problems in portraying Soviet behavior as purely defensive . Nonetheless, there are problems there being portrayed as solely defensive, he says .
 As we know from the Peloponnesian War, it is very hard in a bipolar world to distinguish offense from defense . The Pelopannesian war was very hard to distinguish between defense and offense .
 Certain actions may have defensive motives but may look very threatening to the other side . The actions may look threatening to other sides, but may also be defensive .
 There is a long tradition of defensive expansion, or imperialism. Moreover, there is a history of imperialism, or defensive expansion .
 Britain originally went into Egypt to protect the sea routes to India . For example, in the nineteenth century, Egypt was a vital part of the British Empire .
 After it took Egypt, it thought it had to take the Sudan to protect Egypt, then took Uganda to protect the Sudan . After taking Egypt, the U.S. thought it would have to take Sudan, then Uganda, to protect Sudan .
 Britain had to take Kenya to build a railway to protect Uganda . After it took Uganda, Britain took Kenya to help build the railway .
 The appetite grows with the eating as the security dilemma is used to justify further and further expansion of the network . The appetite for the network continues to grow .
 Soviet communism added an ideological motive of freeing working classes in all areas of the world, which further legitimized expansion . The Soviet state of Soviet communism was founded by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 In short, the Soviet Union was expansionist during the Cold War, but cautiously and opportunistically so . The Soviet Union's expansionist was aggressive but opportunistic, not aggressive .
 During the Cold War, the U.S. government wanted to contain the Soviet Union . During the 1950s, the United States government tried to contain Soviet Russia .
 The ends and means of containment in Korea were hotly debated in the period before the Korean War .
 George Kennan dissented from the rather expansive version of containment that Truman proclaimed . Kennan: "George Kennan was not impressed with Truman's idea of containment" Kennan says .
 The U.S. has it in its power to mcrease the strains under which Soviet policy must operate, writes John Avlon . Avlon: The United States has it .
 Tito split with Stalin over Soviet efforts to control Yugoslavia’s foreign policy, including its support for the Greek communists . Tito and Stalin split in 1948 over Yugoslavia's support for Greece's communist government .
 According to an ideologically driven containment policy, the U.S. should not help Yugoslavia because it was communist . The United States should not have helped Yugoslavia because of its communist policies, the author says .
 In a containment policy driven by balance-of-power considerations, the U.S. should help Yugoslavia as a means of weakening Soviet power . The United States should help the country as a result of a weakened Soviet power, the author says .
 Truman Doctrine proclaimed the goal of defending free peoples everywhere . It provided military aid to a totalitarian communist government despite the Truman Doctrine .
 The U.S. did this for balance-of-power reasons, and the policy put a big dent in Soviet power in Europe, historian says .
 After the Korean War, Kennan’s approach to containment lost ground . Kennan: After the war, however, he’d lost ground on containment .
 NSC-68 predictions of Soviet expansionism had been justified . Then it looked as though the predictions were justified . Now it looks as though it was justified .
 The rhetoric of containment emphasized the ideological goal of preventing the spread of communism . Communism seemed monolithic after the Chinese entered the Korean War .
 The United States made the costly mistake of becoming involved in Vietnam’s civil war . In this context, the U.S. should not have been involved in the civil war in Vietnam .
 For nearly two decades, the U.S. tried to prevent communist control of Vietnam, at a cost of 58,000 American lives . More than a million Vietnamese lives, $600 billion, and domestic turmoil undercut support for the policy itself .
 The U.S. feared that a defeat might weaken the credibility of its global military commitments, and thus containment in other parts of the world . In addition to containing communism in South Vietnam, the United States feared a defeat may weaken its credibility .
 After the U.S. defeat and withdrawal from Vietnam in 1975, nationalist rivalries among the communist countries in Asia proved to be an effective force for maintaining the balance of power in the region .
 In 1952, Dwight Eisenhower was elected president on a campaign pledge to end the Korean War and roll back communism . Eisenhower's victory in Korea was the result of his election promise to end communism in 1952 .
 Within six months, however, it became clear that rolling back communism was too risky in terms of precipitating nuclear war . The Soviet Union was overthrown in 1968 .
 After Stalin died in 1953, the frozen relations of the Cold War thawed slightly . After Stalin's death, relations between Russia and the U.S. have since thawed .
 Both sides agreed to the establishment of Austria as a neutral state in Geneva . Austria was established by the Soviet-Austria summit in Geneva in 1950s .
 The secret leaked out and contributed to a period of disarray in the Soviet sphere in Eastern Europe . The secret was leaked out in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Hungary attempted to revolt, but the Soviets intervened militarily to keep it within the communist camp . Hungary was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1944 .
 Khrushchev decided he needed to get Americans out of Berlin and reach a final settlement of World War II so he could consolidate the Soviet hold on Eastern Europe and begin to take advantage of the decolonization occurring in the Third World . The U.S. was in the midst of
 Khrushchev's style and efforts to negotiate with the U.S. were reminiscent of the Kaiser’s style in trying to force the British to bargain before 1914, full of bluster and deception .
 Efforts to make the U.S. come to terms had the opposite effect . Efforts were unsuccessful, but efforts to make it come to an end had no effect .
 From 1963 to 1978, there was a gradual detente, or relaxation of tensions, between 1963 and 1978 . From 1963-1978, tensions were relaxed, but tensions were high .
 Vietnam War diverted U.S. attention more to threat from Chinese communism . Vietnam War diversion diverted attention from threat from communist China . Vietnam war diverted attention to China .
 From 1969 to 1974, the Nixon administration used detente as a means to pursue the goals of containment . The Nixon administration was in control of the Korean peninsula from 1969-1974 .
 The Vietnam War led to the American public’s disillusionment with Cold War interventions . The war was the first Cold War intervention in the U.S.
 Nixon’s strategy was to negotiate a strategic arms control treaty with the Soviet Union . Nixon also wanted to open diplomatic relations with China and create a three-way balance in Asia .
 The high point of detente occurred in 1972 and 1973, but it did not last very long . The high-point was the end of the Cold War era, ending in 1973 .
 The Middle East War of 1973 and Soviet assistance to anti-Western movements in Africa led to bad feelings about who misled whom . The Soviet Union was involved in the Mideast War and the African continent .
 American domestic politics contributed to the decline of detente when American legislators tried to link trade with the Soviet Union to human rights issues, such as the treatment of Soviet Jews, rather than to behavior in balance of power terms .
 In 1975, when Portugal decolonized Angola and Mozambique, the Soviet Union transported Cuban troops to help keep communist-oriented governments in power there .
 One argument is that detente was always oversold, that too much was expected of it . One argument: Detente was oversold and too much of it was expected . The U.S. and Russia have been at odds for decades .
 There were three trends in the 1970s that undercut it. More to the point is that there was three trends that undermined it. The 1970s was one of the most successful decades of American politics .
 The Soviets increased their defense spending by nearly 4 percent annually . They introduced new heavy missiles that particularly worried U.S. defense planners .
 Second was the Soviet interventions in Angola, Ethiopia, and Afghanistan . Third was the intervention in Angola and Ethiopia, followed by Afghanistan .
 The Soviets thought that these military actions were justified by what they called the changing “correlation of forces in history,” their belief that history was moving in the directions that Marxism-Leninism predicted . The Soviets believed that history would be moving in directions that they predicted .
 The result of the interaction of Soviet acts and U.S. political trends confirmed the view that the Cold War persisted, that detente could not last, the author says .
 The renewed hostility in the 1980s was not a return to the Cold War of the 1950s . However, the renewed hostility against each other was not the same as in the '50s .
 There was a return to the rhetoric of the 1950s, but actions were quite different . There was also a 'return to rhetoric' of the '50s but action was quite different'
 President Reagan talked about the Soviet Union as an “evil empire,” he pursued arms control agreements . Even though President Reagan called it an ‘evil empire’, he pursued the arms control agreement .
 There was increased trade, particularly in grain, and there was constant contacts between Americans and Soviets . There was also increased trade in grain and grain .
 The origins of the Cold War were very heavily related to the division of Europe by the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Cold War might be dated by when the division ended in 1989 .
 When the Berlin Wall was pierced by jubilant crowds in November 1989, the Cold War could be said to be over . When the Soviet Union did not use force to support the communist government in East Germany, it could have been said to have ended .
 George Kennan argued right after World War II that if the U.S. could prevent the Soviet Union from expanding, there would be no successes to feed the ideology, and gradually Soviet communism would mellow . Kennan: "If the United States . prevented the Soviet . Union from
 People would realize that communism was not the wave of the future, that history was not on its side . New ideas would arise, people would realize, that communism would not be the wave-of-the-future, he says .
 The soft power of American culture, values, and ideas eroded communist ideology . American military power helped deter Soviet expansion while soft power eroded Soviet ideology .
 Yale historian Paul Kennedy has argued that empires overexpand until that overexpansion saps the empire’s internal strength . The Yale historian argues that empires over-expansion is a sign of weakness .
 With more than a quarter of its economy devoted to defense and foreign affairs, the Soviet Union was overstretched . In the 1980s, the United States spent more than 6 percent of its GDP on defense .
 Kennedy went on to say that none of the overexpanded multinational empires in history ever retreated to their own ethnic base until they had been defeated or weakened in a great power war . Kennedy: None of the over-expansion empires have retreated until they have been defeated in a war .
 The Soviet Union, however, was not defeated or weakened in a great power war . It was not weakened in the Soviet Union .
 A third explanation is that the U.S. military buildup in the 1980s forced the Soviets to surrender in the Cold War . A third is that a third explanation could be that the United States military buildup forced the Soviet surrender .
 Ronald Reagan’s policies dramatized the extent to which the Soviets were imperially overstretched, but it does not really answer the basic question . There is some truth to that insofar as Ronald Reagan's policies . But it doesn’t answer the question .
 Earlier periods of U.S. military buildup did not have that effect . After all, earlier periods of American military buildup didn't have such effect .
 To think that U.S. rhetoric and policy in the 1980s were the prime cause of the Soviet Union’s decline may be similar to the rooster who thought that his crowing before dawn caused the sun to come up . We must look for deeper causes, because to
 The most important precipitating cause of the end of the Cold War was an individual, Mikhail Gorbachev, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The Cold War is over and over again. It's over and around."
 Reform snowballed into a revolution driven from below rather than controlled from above . However, the reform snowballed . It is now driven by the grassroots rather than by the top .
 In both domestic and foreign policy, Gorbachev launched a number of actions that accelerated the existing Soviet decline and the end of the Cold War . The actions accelerated the Soviet decline in the Soviet Union and the West in the 1980s .
 When he first came to power in 1985, Gorbachev tried to discipline the Soviet people as a way to overcome the existing economic stagnation . The Soviet people were disciplined as a result of economic stagnation in the country .
 When discipline was not enough to solve the problem, he launched the idea of perestroika, or “restructuring,” he said . But he was unable to restructure from the top because the Soviet bureaucrats kept thwarting his orders .
 To light a fire under the bureaucrats, he used a strategy of glasnost, or open discussion and democratization, he says . To light the fire under bureaucrats he used an open discussion, he tried to light the blaze under .
 Gorbachev believed that airing people’s discontent with the way the system was working would put pressure on the bureaucrats and help perestroika work . The idea was that airing public discontent would pressure the bureaucrats .
 Once glasnost and democratization let people say what they were thinking, and vote on it, many people said, “We want out.” Many people said they wanted out of the country .
 Gorbachev unleashed the disintegration of the Soviet Union, which became increasingly evident after the failed coup by hard-liners in August 1991 . Gorbachachev unleashed a series of reforms in the early 1980s .
 Gorbachev’s foreign policy, which he called “new thinking,” also contributed to the end of the Cold War . Gorbachachev called his foreign policy ‘new thinking’ and called it “New thinking”
 Constructivists are changing ideas that constructivists emphasize, such as the concept of common security in which the classical security dilemma is escaped by joining together to provide security . One of the ideas is that constructivistists emphasize .
 Gorbachev and the people around him said that in a world of increasing interdependence, security was a non-zero-sum game . All could benefit through cooperation through cooperation, they said . Gorbachachev and his people said that security was not a zero sum game .
 The existence of the nuclear threat meant all could perish together if the competition got out of hand . It was the existence of a nuclear threat that meant all would perish together .
 Gorbachev said expansionism is usually more costly than beneficial . The other dimension of his foreign policy change was his view that expansionism was not beneficial .
 The Soviet control over an empire in Eastern Europe was costing too much and providing too little benefit . The invasion of Afghanistan had been a costly disaster, says President George W. Bush .
 It was no longer necessary to impose a communist social system as a way to ensure security on Soviet borders . The Soviet Union no longer needed to impose such a social system, says Soviet leader Vladimir Putin .
 Eastern Europeans were given more degrees of freedom by the summer of 1989 . The Eastern European was given more freedom by Eastern Europeans .
 Hungary allowed East Germans to escape through its territory into Austria . East Germans were allowed to escape into Austria through Hungary's territory . Hungary was one of the last few countries to allow them to escape .
 This exodus of East Germans put enormous pressure on the East German government . This exodus was enormous pressure for the government in East German politics .
 Eastern European governments no longer had the nerve (or Soviet backing) to put down demonstrations . Additionally, Eastern Eastern governments had the courage to stand down demonstrations in the Soviet Union .
 In November, the Berlin Wall was pierced a dramatic conclusion to a crescendo of events occurring over a very short period . The Berlin Wall is pierced in November .
 We can argue that these events stemmed from Gorbachev’s miscalculations . We can also argue that the events occurred because of his miscalculation . The world's first major crisis was in the 1980s and 1990s .
 He thought communism could be repaired, but in fact, in trying to repair it, he punched a hole in it . "He thought communism can be repaired," he said .
 Like a hole in a dam, the pent-up pressures began to escape, rapidly increasing the opening and causing the entire system to collapse . The entire system collapsed after the dam burst .
 In the early 1980s, three old Soviet leaders died, one soon after the other . The deaths of three Soviet leaders occurred in one of the most recent known deaths in history .
 It was not until 1985 that the younger generation, the so-called generation of 1956, had their chance . Khrushchev's generation was the generation of the 'generation of 1956' Heavily influential in the Soviet Union .
 Two important intermediate causes were soft povyer of liberal ideas, emphasized in con' structivist explanations, and imperial overstretch, emphasized by realists . The realists were realists, liberals, liberals and conservatives .
 The ideas of openness and democracy that Gorbachev used were Western ideas that had been adopted by the generation of 1956, he says . The ideas he used were those of the generation that had adopted the ideas of the 1956 generation .
 One of the key architects of perestroika and glasnost, Aleksandr Yakovlev, had been an exchange student in the U.S. and was attracted to American theories of pluralism . The architect of the Soviet-era Soviet Union had been a student
 The growth of transnational communications and contacts pierced the Iron Curtain and helped spread Western popular culture and liberal ideas . Transnational communications helped spread the spread of liberal ideas across the world .
 The demonstrated effect of Western economic success gave them additional appeal . The West's demonstrated effect on Western success gave it additional appeal.
 Hard military power deterred Soviet expansionism, soft power ate away belief in communism behind the Iron Curtain . Soft power also ate away the belief in the belief of the Soviet Union behind the curtain .
 Berlin Wall fell in 1989, not artillery barrage, but an onslaught of civilian hammers and bulldozers . When the Berlin Wall finally fell, it did not succumb to an artillery barrage .
 The enormous Soviet defense budget began to affect other aspects of Soviet society . As for imperial overstretch, the enormous defense budget became an issue of concern .
 EventU' ally even the military became aware of the tremendous burden caused by imperial overstretch . EventU’s ally even . became aware .
 Marshall Ogarkov, the Soviet chief of staff, realized the Soviet Union needed a better civilian economic base and more access to Western trade and technology . In 1984, he realized the Soviets needed access to the U.S. and Western technology .
 The old leaders were unwilling to listen and Ogarkov was removed from his post . But during the period of stagnation, the old leaders refused to listen to him .
 Communism’s loss of legitimacy over the postwar period was quite dramatic, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: ‘Communism’ was a form of authoritarianism in Soviet Russia .
 In the early period, immediately after 1945, communism was widely attractive . Communism was widely popular in the early years of the Cold War .
 Many people believed that communism was the wave of the future in Europe . Many communists had led the resistance against fascism in Europe, and many people believed it was the future .
 The Soviet Union gained a great deal of soft power from their communist ideology, but they squandered it . It was a mistake for the Soviet Union to squander it on soft power .
 Soviet soft power was progressively undercut by the de'Stalinization in 1956 that exposed his crimes . The repressions in Hungary in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968, and in Poland in 1981 .
 Lenin’s heirs maintained domestic power through a state security system involving gulags, gulags and censorship, and the use of informants . Although in theory communism aimed to instill a system of class justice, Lenin aimed to maintain class power .
 The net effect of these repressive measures on the Russian people was a general loss of faith in the system as voiced in underground protest literature and the rising tide of dissent advanced by human rights activists .
 Behind decline in Soviet economy reflects diminished ability of Soviet central planning system to respond to change in the world economy .
 Stalin had created a system of centralized economic direction that emphasized heavy metal and smokestack industries . Stalin's system of economic direction was created to emphasize heavy metal .
 HisI torians can no more reconstruct what actually happened than maps can replicate what is I really there. HisI Torians can . no more . reconstruct . what actually . actually happened . Maps can . replicate what I really was there .
 We can represent the past, just as cartographers approximate terrain . But we can represent past, like cartographers did in the past .
 The end of the Cold War and at least the partial opening of documents from the former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and China, the fit between our representations and the j; i reality they describe has become a lot closer than it once was . i
 Capitalism is creative destruction, a way of responding flexibly to major waves of technological change . As the economist Joseph Schumpeter pointed out, it is a way to respond flexibly . Capitalism is a response to a major wave of technology change .
 At the end of the twentieth century, the role of information was the scarcest resource in an economy . Information is now the most important resource in the world's economy .
 The deep secrecy of its political system meant that the flow of information was slow and cumbersome . The flow of the information was slowed and cumbersome, says CNN.com .
 Western economies were able to transfer labor to services, to reorganize their heavy industries, and to switch to computers . There was a great deal of turmoil in the world economy at the end of the twentieth century .
 When Gorbachev came to power in 1985, there were 50,000 personal computers in the Soviet Union; in the U.S. there were 30 million . In the United States, there was 30 million personal computers .
 Four years later, there were about 400,000 personal computers in the Soviet Union, and 40 million in the U.S. The Soviet Union had more than 400 million personal computers . In the United States, 40 million computers were used in four years .
 Market-oriented economies and democracies proved more flexible in responding to technological change than the Soviet system that Stalin created for the smokestack era of the 1930s .
 By the late 1980s, only 8 percent of Soviet industry was competitive at world standards . According to one Soviet economist, by the late 80s, just 8 percent was competitive . The Soviet Union is still struggling to find a way to compete internationally .
 "It is difficult to remain a superpower when 92 percent of industry is subpar," says President Obama .
 The end of the Cold War was one of the great transforming events of the twentieth century . It was also the end of a great transforming event of the 20th century .
 It was equivalent to World War II in its effects on the structure of the international system, but it occurred without war . It was the equivalent to WWII in terms of its impact on the world's international system .
 In the next chapters, we turn to what this may mean for international politics in the future . We turn to the next chapter of this week's book .
 Following the breakup of the Soviet Union, Russia has undergone a significant transformation . Russia's economy has been hit hard by the economic downturn .
 Post-Cold War Russia embarked on path of democratization and economic liberalization . Renouncing the planned economy of the Soviet state, post-WWII Russia tentatively embarked on a path of democracy and liberalization.
 shock therapy so disrupted Russian society that it was quickly shelved in favor of a more gradualist approach . Shock therapy is now being phased out of use in Russia .
 As the economic situation deteriorated, Russian nationalism was rejuvenated . Russian nationalism has been rejuvenated in recent years . As the economy deteriorated, Russia's nationalism was revived .
 If Russia makes a successful transition to democracy, it will bode well for international peace . Theorists such as Michael Doyle hypothesize that liberal democracies do not fight wars with one another .
 It remains to be seen whether Russian foreign policy will fit the model of the democratic peace . A resurgence of Russian authoritarianism and nationalism will challenge the U.S. and Western Europe .
 Just as important as the Cold War ended is the question of why it did not turn hot . The Cold War did not end, and why it didn't turn hot.
 Why did the Cold War last so long without a ‘hot war’ erupting between the two superpowers? "Hot war” erupts between superpowers .
 Some analysts believe that advanced developed societies learned from the lessons of World War I and World War II and simply outgrew war . Others say advanced developed countries learned from lessons of the lessons and outgrow war . The U.S. is one of the most powerful nations in the world
 Others believe that the ‘long peace’ in the second half of the twentieth century stemmed from the limited expansionist goals of the superpowers . Others believe the peace in the past few decades stemmed from limited expansionism .
 Others credit the stability of pure bipolarity in which two states are dominant . Still others credit what they consider the inherent stability of the bipolarity .
 Most analysts say nuclear weapons and nuclear deterrence are the answer to the nuclear crisis . But for most analysts, the largest part of the answer lies in the special nature of the weapons and deterrence .
 The enormous destructive power of nuclear weapons is almost beyond comprehension . Nuclear weapons are almost impossible to comprehend .
 All the explosive power used in World War II could fit in one 3-megaton bomb . One bomb could fit into the nose cone of one large intercontinental missile .
 By the 1980s, the U.S. and the Soviet Union together had more than 50,000 nuclear weapons . The United States and the USSR together had over 50,00 nuclear weapons.
 The theory of nuclear winter holds that a nuclear war would create so much carbon and dust in the atmosphere that it would block sunlight, preventing plants from conducting photosynthesis and leading to the end of life .
 A National Academy of Sciences study reported that nuclear winter is possible, but highly uncertain . A nuclear winter could be possible but uncertain, study says .
 Much would depend on whether the weapons were aimed at cities rather than at other weapons . Much of the weapons would be aimed at targets such as cities, rather than other weapons.
 Burning cities would cause smoke with a high carbon content that would block sunlight . It is uncertain how long the smoke would stay aloft, but it is unclear how long it would stay .
 Some skeptics argued the worst result would not be nuclear winter, but nuclear autumn—a faint consolation . Some skeptics said the worst would be a nuclear winter .
 The certainty is that a large-scale nuclear war would destroy civilization as we know it, at least in the Northern Hemisphere . Large-scale nuke war would kill civilization as well as civilization as it knows it .
 The world of anarchic states with no higher government above them continued in the nuclear age . It continued to be the case in the 1950s and '60s, with no government above it .
 In 1946, the U.S. proposed the Baruch Plan to establish international control of nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union viewed it as just another American plot . The United States proposed the proposal in 1946 .
 Albert Einstein lamented that everything changed except our thinking . Einstein: "After this failure, everything changed ... except our own thinking" Albert Einstein: 'Everything changed except ourselves' Einstein: ‘Everything changed but our thinking'
 Perhaps apocryphally, he is supposed to have said that “physics is easier than politics.” He was supposed to say that . “Physics is easy than politics,” he said .
 There are both military and political reasons why nuclear weapons did not have a more dramatic effect right after 1945 .
 The early atomic weapon did not do significantly more damage than the most deadly uses of mass conventional weapons . For one thing, the early atomic weapons did not damage significantly more than most serious uses of conventional weapons, the author says .
 Firebombing of Dresden in 1945 killed more people than the nuclear bombing of Hiroshima . Dresden firebombing killed more than any nuclear bomb of Hiroshima in Hiroshima .
 At first there were not that many nuclear weapons in the United States arsenal . Though one atomic weapon did the work of a entire air attack using conventional bombs .
 Many military planners thought atomic bombs were not totally different, just extensions of conventional warfare . Many thought atomic bomb bombs were just extensions to conventional warfare. They were thought to be harmless .
 The emerging U.S.-Soviet rivalry also slowed change in political thinking . The emerging Soviet-U.S. rivalry slowed change of thinking .
 Soviet Union mistrusted the United Nations and saw it as too reliant on the United States . The Soviet Union saw the U.N. as too dependent on U.S.
 If the U.S. threatened nuclear attack, the Soviets could threaten to invade Europe with conventional forces . Europe was a hostage between the Soviets and the Americans . The United States could not coerce the Soviets into cooperation because Europe was hostage .
 The revolutionary physical effects of nuclear technology were initially not enough to change the ways states behaved in an anarchic system . It was not enough for states to change how they behaved in anarchic systems .
 The second stage of the nuclear revolution occurred in 1952 when the hydrogen bomb was first tested . The atomic bomb was the first to be tested in the United States .
 Hydrogen bombs rely on the fusion energy released when atoms are fused into one, instead of split apart as in the early fission bombs . Fission bombs were first detonated in the 1950s .
 The H-bomb vastly increased the amount of destruction possible with a single weapon . It was the first weapon to be used by the U.S. in the World War II era .
 Ironically, the more important change that accompanied the development of the H-bomb was miniaturization . Ironically, that change was the most important change in the development .
 Fusion made it possible to deliver enormous amounts of destructive power in very small packages . Fusion is a form of fusion that allows the creation of the most powerful weapons in the world .
 The systems built to deliver the early atomic bombs got bigger and bigger as the bombs increased in size and required more space . The systems were designed to deliver atomic bombs to the U.S. during WWII .
 The B-36 bomber was a huge eight-engine airplane with one big cavity to hold one bomb . It was one of the largest airframes in the history of the bomber .
 A hydrogen bomb, on the other hand, could put the same potential destruction in a much smaller package . The hydrogen bomb could be smaller than a hydrogen bomb .
 The increased destructiveness of hydrogen bombs also dramatized the consequences of nuclear war . The increase in the destruction of nuclear bombs dramatised by the threat of nuclear weapons .
 No longer could warfare be considered merely an extension of politics by other means . The U.S. government is no longer able to engage in warfare by means of other means, it says .
 Karl von Clausewitz, a nineteenth-century Prussian general and military strategist, said war is a political act, and therefore absolute war is an absurdity . Clausewitz said that absolute war was an absurdity and war is political .
 The enormous destructive power of nuclear weapons meant there was now a disproportion between the military means and virtually all the political ends a country might seek . The power of the nuclear weapons is now a huge disproportion between military and political ends .
 This disjunction between ends and means caused a paralysis in the use of the ultimate force in most situations . The ultimate force was used in most of the world's most dangerous situations .
 Nuclear weapons have not been used since 1945, thus the view that nuclear weaponry is muscle-bound . The view is that nuclear weapons are muscle bound . Nuclear weapons haven't been used in the world since 1945 .
 The H-bomb had five significant political effects, even though it did not reorganize the anarchic way in which the world goes about its business . It was not reorganizing the way the U.S. went about its own business .
 The first half of the twentieth century saw a change from the limited wars of the nineteenth century to the two world wars, which took tens of millions of lives . The first world wars were the two wars, taking place between 1914 and 1918 .
 War in the second half of the century was more like the old wars of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries . The Korean and Vietnam wars each cost more than 55,000 American deaths, but they remained limited in scope .
 In Vietnam and Afghanistan, the U.S. and the Soviet Union each accepted defeat rather than use their ultimate weapon . In Afghanistan and Vietnam, the United States and Soviet Union accepted defeat .
 In the past, war was the time when all the cards were face up on the table . War is now a time when the cards are face-to-face in the war .
 In the nuclear age, war is too devastating and the old moments of truth are too dangerous . But in the nuke age, it's too devastating to think about war again .
 Third, nuclear weapons made deterrence (discouragement by fear) the key strategy . Nuclear weapons were key to the success of the U.S. strategy .
 It was now critical to organize military might to produce fear in advance so attack would be deterred, says President Obama . Obama: "It is now critical"
 In World War II, the U.S. relied on its ability to mobilize and gradually build a war machine after the war started . But that approach no longer worked when a nuclear war could be over in a matter of hours .
 A fourth political effect was the development of a de facto regime of superpower prudence . The U.S. has developed a 'de facto regime' of de facto prudence in the world .
 During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union engaged in proxy or indirect peripheral wars, but in no case did the two nations go head-to-head . The Cold War was a two-state war between the U.S. and Soviet Union .
 The Hungarians revolted against their Soviet rulers in 1956, the U.S. did not rush in to help them for fear of nuclear war . The Americans talked about rolling back communism in the 1950s .
 The Soviets were relatively careful about incursions into the Western Hemisphere . Similarly, with the exception of Cuba, the Soviet Union was relatively careful .
 Technology made it easier to cooperate in times of crisis by making the bipolar system more flexible and personal . Technology also helped make it easier for leaders in bipolar system to work together .
 The Limited Test Ban Treaty in 1963, and frequent arms control negotiations became a way to discuss stability in the nuclear system . Simultaneously, the codification of a number of arms control treaties, started in 1963 .
 Nuclear weapons in general and the Fl-bomb in particular were seen by most officials as unusable in time of war . Fifth, nuclear weapons were thought to be unusable during war .
 There was a stigma attached to the use of nuclear weaponry that simply did not apply to conventional weaponry . The stigma was attached to using nuclear weapons that simply didn't apply to ordinary weaponry .
 By the late 1960s, engineers and scientists had managed to shrink the payload of nuclear weapons . Some nuclear weapons could have been used by the U.S. in Vietnam and the Gulf War or by the Soviet Union in Afghanistan .
 Both Americans and Russians refrained from using smaller-pay load nuclear weapons . They opted instead for destructive tools such as napalm, incendiary bombs, and assorted conventional weapons .
 In part, it was feared that using any nuclear weapon, no matter how similar to conventional weapons, would open the window to using all nuclear weapons . "That risk was unacceptable," the U.S. government said .
 There was a lingering sense that nuclear weapons were immoral, that they went beyond the realm of what was acceptable in war . Ever since the first bomb was dropped by the U.S. on Hiroshima, there has been lingering sense of morality .
 The normative restraint is hard to measure, but it clearly suffused the debates over nuclear weapons . It was one reason for the unwillingness of states to use them, he says .
 Both sides followed a policy of preventing preponderance by the other, but the result was different from previous systems . The result of the new system is different from the previous system .
 Cold War balance was organized around two very large states, each capable of destroying the other in an instant . Unlike the nineteenth-century balance-of-power system in which five great powers shifted,alliances, the Cold War was clearly clear .
 The problems raised by the classical security dilemma were not ended by the terror of nuclear weapons . The superpowers acted prudently despite their ideological differences . The world's superpowers act prudently in the face of ideological differences.
 Their prudence was similar to the effects of the constant communications that occurred in managing the multipolar nineteenth-century balance of power . The prudence of their prudence is similar to that of the 18th century .
 At the same time, the superpowers tried to calculate balances of force, just as in the days when statesmen compared provinces, infantry, and artillery . At the time, statesmen tried to compare provinces and infantry to artillery .
 Some neorealists such as Kenneth Waltz define bipolarity as situations in which two large states have nearly all the power, but that type of pure bipolarity is rare . Some neoreals define it as a rare situation of bipolarity .
 The alliances around Athens and around Sparta coalesced tightly into a bipolar situation . Even though they were independent states, the alliances coalesced around Athens . The alliances were tightly formed around Athens, Sparta and Athens .
 On eve of World War I the alliance systems became tightly bound into bipolarity . Similarly, on the eve of the . eve of . World War . I the . alliance systems become tightly bound to each other .
 Waltz argues that bipolarity is a particularly stable type of system because it simplifies communication and calculations . Waltz: Bipolarity is particularly stable because of its simplicity and simplicity .
 On the other hand, bipolar systems lack flexibility and magnify the importance of marginal conflicts such as the Vietnam War . The bipolar system is not flexible enough to deal with marginal conflicts like Vietnam War, the author says .
 The conventional wisdom in the past was that bipolarity either erodes or explodes, but bipolarity has never been seen to erode or explode . In the past, bipolarity was thought to be a problem for bipolarity .
 The stability Waltz attributed to pure bipolarity was really the result of the bomb . Perhaps the prudence produced by nuclear weapons provided the answer, he says .
 Imagine that in August 1914 the Kaiser, the Czar, and the Emperor of Austria-Hungary looked into a crystal ball and saw a picture of 1918 . Imagine that the Kaiser and Czar looked in a crystal-ball and saw the picture of the year 1918 .
 They would have seen that they had lost their thrones, their empires had been dismembered, and millions of their people had been killed . The world's most powerful people would have been able to see that they'd lost thrones and seen their empires .
 Knowledge of the physical effects of nuclear weapons may be similar to the effect of giving leaders in the post-1945 period a crystal ball .
 Few political goals would be proportionate to such destruction, they would not want to take great risks . They would want to avoid taking great risks, not to take risks .
 Bipolarity and nuclear weapons produced longest peace between central powers since modem state system . Of course, crystal balls can be shattered by accidents and miscalculations .
 Nuclear deterrence is a subset of general deterrence . The peculiar qualities of nuclear weapons changed how the superpowers approached international relations during the Cold War .
 Political scientist John Mueller argues that nuclear weapons are no more than the rooster crowing . The political scientist says they are irrelevant to nuclear weapons .
 The peoples of Europe had been turning away from war as a policy instrument ever since the horrors of World War 1, argues .
 The cause of peace was the increased recognition of the horror of war, at least in the developed world, writes David Frum .
 Mueller: Hitler was a rare person who had not learned the lessons of World War 1 and was willing to go to war . According to Mueller, Hitler was an aberration . Mueller says Hitler was not willing to learn lessons from lessons of WW1 and still willing to fight .
 After World War II, the general revulsion toward war returned more strongly than before . After the war, many people were less likely to return to war .
 Crises over Berlin, Cuba, and perhaps the Middle East might have spiraled out of control without the prudence instilled by the crystal ball effect .
 Effective deterrence requires both the capability to do damage and a credible threat that the weapons will be used . The U.S. has not been able to use any of its weapons in the past .
 An American threat to bomb Moscow in retaliation for a nuclear attack was probably credible . For example, an American threat would be probably credible, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The U.S. threatened to bomb Moscow in 1980 if the Soviets did not withdraw their troops from Afghanistan . But suppose the United States had threatened to attack Moscow if it did not pull out troops in Afghanistan .
 The U.S. certainly had the capability, but the threat would not have been credible because the stakes were too low . The United States could have threatened to bomb the Soviet Union in return for bombing Washington .
 Deterrence is related not just to capability, but also to credibility, says the U.S. ambassador . So deterrence is related to capability and credibility, he says .
 A distinction is between deterring threats against one’s homeland and extending deterrence to cover an ally . That problem of credibility leads to a distinction between deterrence and extending it to an ally, the author says .
 For example, the United States could not stop the Soviet Union from invading Afghanistan by nuclear deterrence, but for the four decades of the Cold War it threatened to use nuclear weapons if the Soviet U.S. invaded the NATC countries of Western Europe . The United States was unable to stop
 To look for the effects of nuclear weapons in extending deterrence and averting war, we must look at major crises in which the stakes are high . Thus to look at nuclear weapons, we should look at the effects .
 From 1945 to 1949, the United States alone had nuclear weapons, but did not use them . The U.S. alone had the most nuclear weapons in the world .
 So there was some self-restraint even before mutual nuclear deterrence . So there were some self restraint even before nuclear deterrence, he says . The U.S. has a long history of anti-nuclear deterrence .
 By the 1950s, both the U.S. and the Soviet Union had nuclear weapons . American leaders considered their use in several crises .
 Nuclear weapons were not used in the Korean War, or in 1954 and 1958 when the Chinese communists mobilized forces to invade Taiwan .
 Presidents Truman and Eisenhower vetoed the use of nuclear weapons for several reasons . Truman, Eisenhower vetoed use of nukes in the early 1950s .
 In the Korean War, it was not clear that dropping a nuclear weapon would stop the Chinese . The U.S. was concerned about the Soviet response .
 There was always the danger that the threats might escalate and the Soviets might use a nuclear weapon to help their Chinese ally . There was also the danger of using a nuke to help the Chinese ally, the author says .
 Even though the Americans had superiority in the number of nuclear weapons, there was the danger of heading to a larger war involving more than Korea and China . So even though the U.S. had superior numbers of nukes, the danger was a bigger problem .
 In addition, ethics and public opinion played a role . The role of nuclear weapons was also a factor .
 In the 1950s, U.S. government estimates of the number of citizens who would be killed by a nuclear attack were so high that the idea was put aside . The idea of a nuke attack in the United States was rejected in the 1950's .
 President Eisenhower, when asked about using nuclear weapons, said, “We can’t use those awful things against Asians for the second time in less than ten years.” President Eisenhower .
 This 13'day period was probably the closest call in the nuclear age to a set of events that could have led to nuclear war . The 13'days were probably the most likely moments of nuclear war in the history of nuclear power .
 If a total outsider, a “man from Mars,” had looked at the situation, he would have seen that the U.S. had a lY-to-l superiority in nuclear weaponry .
 We now know the Soviets had only about 20 nuclear weapons on intercontinental missiles that could have reached the U.S. President Kennedy did not know it at the time .
 If even one or two of the Soviet missiles had escaped and been fired at an American city, that risk was enough to deter a U.S. first strike . The answer was that if even one . or two . Soviet missiles escaped and were fired at American cities, the risk was
 Cuba, which had long been a virtual colony of the United States, had recently moved into the Soviet orbit . Cuba was recently moving into Soviet orbit.
 President Kennedy told the American public that, to the best of his underS I standing, these weapons were defensive, not offensive . President John F Kennedy said the weapons were not offensive, not defensive .
 I had given him absolute assurances that this was the case. Khrushchev said he would not have been in charge of the Soviet Union . He said he had 'absolute assurances' that this would not happen .
 U-2 reconnaissance photos show Soviet missile installations in Cuba . U.2 aircraft captured the images from very high altitude by U.S. reconnaissance plane . The missiles were intended to target cities in the continental United States .
 Kennedy and a circle of advisers debated how to cope with the challenge . For the next 13 days, Kennedy and his circle of advisors debated how he would cope with it . Kennedy and the advisers I I. I I debated how I would cope .
 Kennedy’s civil defense expert offered the chilli ing information that the United States population was frighteningly vulnerable . They knew that one possible outcome was I K nuclear war .
 One of the most striking differences among the participants was how much each indivi ual had been willing to take risks . The study was carried out in a bid to raise awareness of the risks of taking risks .
 Each country's view of nuclear war depended on how likely each thought were the prospects of a nuclear war . That in turn depended on each other's views on the prospect of a war .
 Robert McNamara, Kennedy s secretary of defense, became more cautious as the crisis unfolded . McNamara was more cautious in the wake of the crisis than he expected .
 Douglas Dillon, who was the secretary of the treasury, said he thought the risks of nuclear war were about zero . Douglas Dillon said he believed the risks were zero .
 He did not see how the situation could possib y progress to nuclear war . McNamara was willing to push the Soviets harder and to take more risks than McNamara did .
 General Maxwell Taylor, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also thought the risk of nuclear war was low . Taylor complained that the U.S. let the Soviet Union off too easily in the Cubari Missile Crisis .
 He argued that Kennedy could have pushed much harder and should have demanded the removal of Cuba’s president, Fidel Castro . He said Kennedy should have pushed harder to remove Castro from Cuba .
 The moral of the story is that a little nuclear deterrence goes a long way, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "A little nukes go a little way"
 The question of how much the U.S. won and why it won is overdetermined, but it's overdetermined . The United States won the election in 2008, but the question of why is still being asked?
 One view is that because the U.S. had more nuclear weapons than the Soviet Union, the Soviets gave in . One view says because the United States had more nukes than the Soviets, it was easier for the Soviets to negotiate .
 A second explanation adds the importance of the relative stakes of the two superpowers in the crisis . A third explanation is that the US and Russia share the same level of power in Syria .
 An American naval blockade and the possibility of an American invasion of Cuba also played a role in Cuba's decision to leave Cuba .
 The psychological burden was on the Soviets because higher stakes and readily available conventional forces gave the Americans more credibility in their deterrent position . The U.S. gave the Soviets more credibility .
 We can conclude that nuclear deterrence mattered in the crisis and that the nuclear dimension certainly figured in Kennedy’s thinking . Kennedy's thinking may have been influenced by nuclear deterrence, says author .
 It was not the ratio of nuclear weapons that mattered so much as the fear that even a few nuclear weapons could wreak such devastation . The fear of nuclear devastation was the greatest fear of a nuclear war in history .
 In 1963, a hotline allowing direct communication between Washington and Moscow was installed, an arms control treaty limiting atmospheric nuclear tests was signed . Kennedy announced the United States would be willing to trade mote with the Soviet Union .
 Through the late 1960s, the U.S. was preoccupied with the Vietnam War, yet there were still arms control efforts .
 Fear of nuclear war returned after the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in 1979 . Intense fear of nuclear warfare returned after Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1980s .
 During “the little cold war” from 1980 to 1985, strategic arms limitation talks stalled, rhetoric became particularly harsh, and military budgets and the number of nuclear weapons increased on both sides .
 Peace groups pressed for a freeze and ultimate abolition of nuclear weapons . President Ronald Reagan talked about nuclear war fighting . Peace groups press for an end to nuclear war .
 Just war theory argues that certain conditions must be met in making moral judgments . As we saw earlier, just war theory says certain conditions are necessary to make a moral decision .
 Self-defense is usually regarded as a just cause, but the means and consequences by which a war is fought are equally important . Self-defence is usually seen as the cause of war, but it is equally important to the outcome .
 "There has to be some proportionality, some relationship of the ends and the means," he says . "In terms of the means, civilians must be distinguished from combatants," he adds .
 Lowyield nuclear weapons such as artillery shells and depth charges might be used against radar systems, submarines, ships at sea, or deep underground command bunkers . The weapons could be used in the U.S.
 In that case, we could discriminate between combatants and noncombatants and keep the effects relatively limited . The effects would be limited if we were able to use the same name as the name .
 If the fighting stopped there, we could fit nuclear weapons within just war theory . We could fit nukes into war theory, says Peter Bergen .
 In 1962 President Kennedy insisted that each member of the National Security Council had a gun . Barbara Tuchman’s The Guns of August was published in August 1962 . The story of the Vietnam War is told in a new book, "The Guns Of August"
 The book is the story of how the nations of | i Europe inadvertently blundered into World War 1 . The book tells the tale of the nations that inadvertently blundered into WWI .
 The author begins by quoting Bismarck’s quote that “some damned foolish thing in the Balkans” would ignite the next war . The author says that ‘some foolish thing’in the Balkans would ignite war .
 The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand by Serbian nationalists led to the conflict . She | i then related the series of steps . Each small and insignificant in itself, she said .
 President Kennedy reminded us of the 1914 conversation between two German i chancellors on the origins of that war . Time and again, at the brink of hostilities, the chiefs of state tried to pull back, but the momentum of events dragged them forward .
 Nuclear weapons probably played a significant role in preventing the Cold War from turning hot . Nuclear weapons played a key role in stopping Cold War turning hot, experts say .
 During the 1980s, the American Association of Catholic Bishops said that nuclear deterrence could be justified on a conditional basis as a tolerable interim measure until something better was developed .
 So long as nuclear knowledge exists, some degree of nuclear deterrence will exist, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Some degree of nukes will exist," he says. "So long as nukes exist"
 Although the weapons produced prudence during the Cold War, complacency is a danger . "Complacency was a danger. It was a good thing for the U.S. to keep a close eye on the Soviet Union," says President Obama .
 It took the U.S. and the Soviet Union some time to learn how to control nuclear weapons . It is far from clear that such control systems will exist among new aspirants to nuclear status like North Korea and Iran .
 UN inspectors uncovered and destroyed major Iraqi nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons programs . After the Gulf War in 1991, UN inspectors found and destroyed Iraq's nuclear and biological weapons .
 The fear that such programs could be reconstituted was one of the causes of the Iraq War in 2003 .
 Newspaper accounts of nuclear material making its way out of the former Soviet Union and into the international black market demonstrate that these weapons can still cause tension and bring nations to the brink of war .
 Khan had sold nuclear secrets to a number of countries, including Libya, Iran, and North Korea . Khan, had sold secrets to Libya, North Korea, and Iran, among others .
 Reports that terrorist groups such as the Japanese Aum Shinrikyo cult and Osama bin Laden’s A1 Qaeda network were investigating the production of nuclear and biological weapons indicate they may someday become available to nonstate actors .
 The continued international worry about weapons of mass destruction has both a moral and a realist dimension . The continued concern has both moral and realist dimensions .
 The moral opprobrium against nuclear weapons is shared not just by states that do not have the capacity or desire to make such weapons, but even by countries that continue to have them, such as the United States, Prance .
 Weapons of mass destruction carry great risk of escalation and enormous potential for devastation, says U.S. State Department . Weapons of Mass Destruction carry great potential for escalation and potential for destruction .
 Weak states with nuclear or unconventional weapons are better able to threaten strong states . Strong states with these weapons can more effectively threaten and deter adversaries, experts say . Weak states have nuclear, unconventional weapons that can be more effective at deterring adversaries .
 At the same time, the risk that these devices will be used if a crisis spins out of control raises the level of tension, whether it is between the United States and North Korea or India and Pakistan .
 The threat of use by terrorists adds a chilling dimension in which deterrence is not a sufficient response . And the threat of using terrorists adds to the chilling dimension of the situation .
 The Cold War may be over, but the era of nuclear and unconventional weapons is not . The era of unconventional weapons may not have ended, but it's not over .
 Some historians argue that the real question is not why the Cold War occurred, but why it did not escalate into a “hot war’s” war . The Cold War was not a ‘hot war,’ says one historian .
 Kennan, “The Sources of Soviet Conduct,” Foreign Affairs 25:4 , 581. George Kennan . Kennan: "The sources of Soviet conduct" was the source of Soviet behavior .
 Gaddis: Russia, the Soviet Union, and the U.S. were the two countries involved in the Cold War . He says the Soviets and the United States were involved in a war of interest .
 Major war became less likely after the end of the Cold War, but regional and domestic conflicts persist . There will always be pressures for outside states and international institutions to intervene .
 Most ethnic wars occur where established mechanisms for mediating conflicts break down . Most ethnic war occurs where established mediations for mediations break down, such as in Afghanistan .
 The inability of governments to mediate conflict frequently occurs in the aftermath of collapsed empires, such as the European colonial empires in Africa or the Soviet Empire in Central Asia .
 Failed states either never had a strong government or their governments were undermined by economic conditions, loss of legitimacy, or outside intervention . Such failed states have never had strong government, or failed governments have been undermined .
 The end of the bipolar conflict of the Cold War led to the withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola, and Somalia, but communal war continued .
 The death of President Tito and the end of the Cold War weakened the ability of the central government to mediate ethnic conflicts . And in the former Yugoslavia, which held together to preserve its independence in a bipolar world .
 Constructivists point out that ethnicity is not an immutable fact that inevitably leads to war . Constructivistists point to the fact that ethnicity does not necessarily lead to war, but it does lead to conflict .
 It is socially constructed in the sense that symbols, myths, and memories can be altered over time . The social constructions of the society are socially constructed . It is a myth that symbols and myths can be changed over time, says author .
 In Rwanda, people spoke the same language and had the same skin color, but there were economic class differences . The Tutsi people had migrated into the area with a cattle-based culture centuries earlier and the larger number of agricultural Hutu people . Rwanda suffered a genocide in 1994,
 Over time, intermarriage and social change had blurred some of the distinctions, but they were reinforced during colonial rule .
 Hutus who urged moderation or who appeared to be Tutsi were also murdered . In the 1994 genocide in which 750,000 Tutsis were killed, many Hutus urged moderation . Hutus were also killed during the genocide .
 The breakup of the former federation of Yugoslavia in 1991 also led to ethnic conflicts . The breakup led to the breakup of Yugoslavia .
 Some of the worst fighting occurred between Serbs, Croats, and Muslims in Bosnia . Bosnia was one of the most heterogeneous of the Yugoslav republics .
 Old identities and myths were strongest in rural areas where old identities were strongest . But urban communities where many people had intermarried and come to identify themselves as ‘Yugoslavs’ rather than as Croats, Serbs, or Muslims .
 Once Yugoslavia collapsed and fighting broke out, some of these people had new identities thrust upon them . Some of these identities were thrust upon by Yugoslavia's collapse .
 As one man told me in 1993, “All my life I considered myself a Yugoslav, not a Muslim,” he said . “I considered myself myself a Serbian, not Muslim.” He said .
 Before the war, you would have to know their name, but now uniforms made it easy, says a Bosnian Croat military commander . He says he knew whom to shoot because people on the street looked so similar .
 UN imposes arms embargo on all members of the former I Yugoslav Republic . UN imposed arms embargo in order to stop the spread of arms weapons in the former Yugoslavia . UN also imposed an arms embargo against Serbia and Yugoslavia .
 Reports of “ethnic cleansing’s” against Muslims in Bosnia .
 UN humanitarian convoys to Muslim enclaves in Bosnia blocked by Serb forces . Convoys to Bosnian Muslim enclave blocked by Serbian forces in 1992-93 .
 Vance-Owen Peace Plan, proposing to divide | 0 Bosnia along ethnic lines, is rejected by Bosnian Serb Parliament . Peace Plan proposes to divide Bosnia along . ethnic lines . Bosnia .
 Bosnian government army makes advances against separatist Serbs, recapturing some of I the territory around Bihac, in Bosnia’s northeast corner . Serb forces recapture the region around the city in Fall 1994 i -■ Serb .
 In retaliation, NATO bombs runways of Si Serb'controlled airport in Krajina . NATO bombed runways in retaliation for bombing of airport in the region . In response, NATO bombed the airport in southern Serbia .
 Croatian forces capture Krajina area from Serbs and force local Serbs to flee in massive ethnic'cleansing operation . August-September 1995 Sj Croatian forces captured Krajinija area from . Serbs forced to flee from Croatian forces in ethnic cleansing operation . Croatian forces
 Kosovo Albanians and Yugoslavia fail to reach an agreement in Paris in 1999 . I March 1999 I Kosovo Albania and Yugoslavia failed to reach a deal in Paris . Kosovo Albanian Albanians were in the midst of a war between Yugoslavia and Kosovo .
 Thousands of Kosovo Albanians flee to Albania, creating a I massive refugee crisis . Thousands of Albanians have been forced to flee Kosovo to Albania .
 NATO suspends bombing after 78 days when Serbia begins to withdraw troops from I Kosovo . Serbia withdraws troops from Kosovo in June 1999 . Kosovo was declared a state of war with Serbia in September 1999 .
 September 2000 Vojislav Kostunica wins more votes than Milosevic, but the federal elections commission says he did not receive a majority . September 2000 .
 Kostunica supporters reject the I findings, and begin a campaign of strikes and civil disobedience to force Milosevic to I step down, if October 2000 I . A huge rally in front of the Parliament ends with protestors storming the building and I setting it on fire .
 Milosevic concedes defeat, and Kostunica is sworn in as president . Miloseovic concedes defeat and is sworn-in as president of Serbia .
 Commandos raid his compound and a gun battle I ensues with Milosevic’s bodyguards . Commandos raided his compound after a commando raid .
 UN chief prosecutor Carla Del Ponte announces a second arrest warrant for Milosevic for crimes committed in Bosnia . UN chief: Second arrest warrant is issued for the former Yugoslavia leader . Milosevi is accused of war crimes in Bosnia and Bosnia .
 International peacekeepers remain deployed to the Balkans 10 years after the Dayton Accord . Final status issues remain unresolved . Dayton Accord signed in 2005 .
 March 2006 Milosevic found dead in his prison cell; medical experts say he died of natural causes . March 2006: Medical experts said he died from natural causes. March 2006 : Milosevi found dead at a prison cell in Serbia .
 Humans always differentiate themselves into groups, and sometimes the differences are accompanied by prejudice and hatred . Sometimes the differences come with prejudice or hatred .
 Ethnic symbols and myths create divisions, economic rivalries or the weakening of state authority create fears for group survival . While no two conflicts are exactly the same, a common dynamic is that ethnic symbols and myth create divisions .
 Elites or leaders then mobilize support by appealing to ethnic symbols, and any number of events, (such as Bosnia’s declaration of independence in 1992) can spark the fighting . Events such as the death of Rwanda's president in an April 1992 plane crash, can spark fighting .
 Political scientist John Mueller stresses role of violent groups who achieve their ends by manipulating ethnic myths and fears .
 Extremist groups use emotional power of ethnic symbols to reconstruct the larger group’s preferences . Political entrepreneurs and extremist groups use the power of emotional power to reconstruct preferences .
 The classic security dilemma that we described in Chapter 1 arises among rational actors when lack of trust and inability to enforce agreements under anarchic conditions causes serious conflicts to erupt . It is a security dilemma for rational actors .
 Security dilemmas involved in the early stages of ethnic conflict often grow out of the manipulation of emotional symbols by those who prefer violence .
 Some analysts believe outsiders should ignore sovereignty in failed states or genocide is threatened . Some analysts say outsiders must ignore sovereignty .
 Intervention is a confusing concept, partly because the word is both descriptive and normative . Intervention is the word for intervention, but it is also a word for normative intervention . Intervention can be both descriptive or normative, and it can be a problem .
 It not only describes what is happening, but it also casts value judgments . "It's not just about what's happening, it's about how it's happening," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Nonintervention in the internal affairs of sovereign states is a basic norm of international law . Noninterference is a non-intervention of sovereign state's sovereignty .
 The absence of a higher government is not the same as chaos if basic principles are observed . International anarchy is not anarchy, but anarchy is anarchy, says Julian Zelizer .
 Sovereignty and nonintervention are two principles that provide order in an anarchic world system . Sovereignty is a principle that provides order in the world system, says John Defterios .
 Nation-states are communities of people who deserve the right to develop a common life within their own state boundaries . Nation-state is a state of citizens who should be able to develop their own life within state boundaries.
 Sovereignty is a concept that has been applied to many states where it fits poorly . The concept has been used poorly in many of the states .
 Group and clan fighting meant no government was effectively in control in Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Somalia at the beginning of the twenty-first century .
 There is often a tension between justice and order that leads to inconsistencies about whether to intervene . Thus there is often an issue of whether or not to intervene in the world's most violent crimes .
 Some analysts use the term more narrowly to refer to forcible interference in the domestic affairs of another state . Some analysts say the term is more narrowly used by some .
 Intervention may be simply a speech designed to influence domestic politics in another state . At the low end of the scale, intervention may be just a speech aimed at influencing domestic politics .
 In 1999, Saddam appealed to the peoples of several Arab states to overthrow their leaders . Bush appealed to Iraqi people to overthrow Saddam Hussein, and in 1999, several Arab countries .
 Such speeches are designed to interfere in the domestic politics of another state . Often without much effect. Such speeches often fail to interfere with domestic politics .
 In the 1980s, the U.S. government established Radio Marti to broadcast its messages against Fidel Castro in Cuba . But Castro was still in power at the turn of the new century .
 Economic assistance can also influence the domestic affairs of another country . Economic assistance is also a form of influence in foreign policy .
 U.S. economic aid to El Salvador and Soviet aid to Cuba were designed to influence domestic affairs in those states . For example, during the Cold War United States economic aid was designed to help El Salvador, Cuba .
 During the Cold War, U.S. and Soviet intelligence agencies often poured resources into foreign elections in an attempt to engineer a favorable outcome . American and Soviet spies often poured money into foreign election campaigns .
 In the 1970s, South Korea spent a great deal of money to help elect U.S. politicians who were more favorable to its interests . Similarly, the government of South Korea also spent a lot of money in the 70s to elect politicians favorable to it .
 A little further along the spectrum of coercion is the provision of military advisers . Military advisers are also being provided by the State Department .
 In the late 1950s, during the early days of the Vietnam War, the United States began its intervention first with economic and later with military assistance . The U.S. helped Vietnam in the early 1950s with economic assistance .
 The Soviet Union and Cuba provided military aid and advisers to Nicaragua and other ‘client’ states . Similarly, the Soviet Union gave military aid to Nicaragua .
 The U.S. channeled money to opponents of Salvador Allende in Chile . The Soviet Union channeled funds to peace groups in Western European countries .
 The United States has provided financial assistance to nascent democratic movements to several former Soviet bloc countries, including Ukraine . More recently, the U.S. has provided assistance to the country's democratic movements .
 The United States bombed Libya in the 1980s in response to its support of terrorism . The Soviet Union helped one faction fighting a civil war in South Yemen in the 1990s .
 In 1998, the U.S. launched cruise missile attacks into Sudan and Afghanistan in reprisal for terrorist attacks against American embassies in East Africa . The attacks were in response to attacks on American embassies .
 The U.S. used air and ground support to overthrow the Taliban government in Afghanistan after the September 2001 terrorist attacks on American soil . And it used air, ground support for local forces to oust the Taliban .
 Full-scale military invasion or occupation is the upper end of the spectrum of coerciveness . The U.S. should not be allowed to invade or occupy, it says .
 Examples include United States actions in the Dominican Republic iri 1965, Grenada in 1983, Panama in 1989, and Iraq in 2003 . The Soviet Union’s actions in Flungary in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968, and Afghanistan in 1979 .
 Tanzania sent troops into Uganda in 1979, and Vietnam invaded Cambodia in Cambodia in 1979 . In 1979, Tanzania sent forces into Uganda, and Cambodia invaded Cambodia .
 Rwanda intervened militarily in the affairs of its troubled neighbor, Congo, in 1997 . In 1997, tiny Rwanda intervened in its neighbor's affairs .
 Some interventions are multilateral, but often one state takes the lead . The intervention is often multilateral and multilateral .
 The United States led the 1995 UN intervention in Haiti and NATO’s 1999 intervention in Kosovo . Nigeria led a group of West African states that intervened in Liberia and Sierra Leone in the 1990s .
 The broad definition of intervention includes the whole range of behavior, from not very coercive to highly coercive . Intervention is defined as not very very coercive, but very coercive . The government says intervention is not only coercive but highly coercive.
 The degree of coercion involved in intervention is important because it relates to the degree of choice that the local people have, and thus curtailment of local autonomy . It is important to know how much coercion is involved in intervening in intervention .
 Sovereignty sovereignty was a vital concept of the Westphalian system . It was reinforced by the Covenant of the League of Nations and the Charter of the United Nations .
 It is also at the heart of debates about the legitimacy of intervention in the world .
 Even popular and effective governments rarely have full control of everything within their borders . For several reasons, even popular or effective governments often have little control over everything they do .
 Socialists found that the French economy was so interdependent with the other European economies that when they tried to make changes unilaterally, capital fled abroad and the value of the French franc dropped . But the Socialists find that when . tried to change the French . economy, capital fleeing abroad and
 France's Socialists returned to a common economic policy with the other European states . Ultimately, France’s Socialists agreed to a deal with the EU .
 Interdependence did not limit French legal sovereignty, but it certainly limited de facto control . Interimependence was not limited to French sovereignty but it was limited to de facto sovereignty .
 France was too economically interdependent to pursue a fully autonomous economic policy . France's economy is too interdependent for an independent state to pursue an independent economic policy, the government says .
 The Asian financial crisis created uncertainties in world markets that forced sovereign governments as physically distant as Russia and Brazil to devalue their currencies and change economic policy . Similarly, in 1998, in Asia, the Asian financial crash created uncertainties that forced countries as far away as Russia to change their economic policy
 We shall look further at the challenges that economic globalization poses for sovereignty in the next chapter of this chapter .
 Economic interdependence is only one of several factors impinging on sovereignty . The United States is one of the most powerful nations in the world .
 Refugees from Haiti and Cuba led to political debates in Washington in 1993 and 1994 . Rwandan refugees poured into neighboring Burundi and Congo, exacerbating ethnic conflict there .
 The influx of arms into northern Pakistan from Afghanistan throughout the 1980s and 1990s limited the ability of the Pakistani government to control its northern territory . The illegal influx of drugs into the U.S. from abroad has created problems of law and order domestically .
 States may be sovereign in the legal sense, but outside actors affect internal affairs . States are sovereign in legal sense but are affected by outside actors in their own affairs .
 Some poor states may have low de facto autonomy because they have very low capabilities . Poor states may also have low autonomy because of their low capabilities, experts say .
 Some kinds of intervention may actually increase capabilities and thus real autonomy in the future . Some of the intervention may even increase capabilities, thus real autonomous autonomy, the author says .
 Economic or military assistance may help a state become more independent in the long term . UN intervened in Cambodia in the 1990s to help it develop institutional capabilities after two decades of civil strife .
 These are some of the complications in the relationship of sovereignty, autonomy, and intervention . The country's sovereignty and autonomy are key issues in its sovereignty .
 Realists, cosmopolitans, and state moralists have different views of intervention . For skeptics, moral judgments do not matter, but realists and cosmots have different opinions .
 For realists, the key values in international politics are order and peace, and the key institution is the balance of power . Realists believe intervention can be justified when it is necessary to maintain order and maintain peace .
 The Soviets articulated a right to inter' vention in 1968 with the Brezhnev Doctrine, which claimed that they had a right . to intervene to preserve socialism in their sphere of influence . In 1968, the Soviet Union claimed that it was necessary to maintain socialism in its sphere of
 Realists might justify interventions on the grounds that they preserved order and prevented the possibility of misunderstandings and miscalculations that might escalate to war, particularly nuclear war . Realists may justify such interventions as preserving order and preventing misunderstandings .
 For them, the key international institU' tion is a society of individuals . For them they say the key to success is the society of individual individuals .
 During the Cold War, liberal coS' mopolitans argued that intervention was justified against right'wing regimes such as the Marcos dictatorship in the Philippines or the apartheid regime in South Africa . Conservative cosmopolitans said that inter' vention was . justified against left'wing
 In the 1980s, some Americans proclaimed a Reagan Doctrine when defending the United States’ right to inter' vene against the Sandinista government in Nicaragua and against the communist governments in Angola and Mozambique .
 In the 1990s, cosmopolitans urged humani' tarian intervention in Somalia to halt widespread starvation . In Haiti, Haiti, Bosnia, Bosnia and Kosovo to stop a civil war, and Kosovo .
 What cosmopolitans, left and right, shared is the view that intervention is justified if it promotes individual justice and human rights, they say .
 For state moralists, the key value in international politics is the autonomy of the state and its people . The key value of international politics for international diplomacy is autonomy of state and people, writes David Cameron .
 The key institution is a society of states with certain rules and international law, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Of these precepts, the most important is nonintervention in the sovereign territory of another state . Of those precepts: Nonintervention is not allowed in sovereign territory .
 State moralists believe inter' vention is justified only to defend a state’s territorial integrity or to defend its sovet' eignty against external aggression . Consequently, state moralists say inter-invasion is only necessary to defend the state's territorial integrity .
 In June 1967, Israel preemptively attacked Egypt in response to its decision to deny Israel access to vital shipping lanes and mass troops along its border . Israel also attacked Egypt after it refused to allow Israel to use its border with Egypt in 1967 .
 In Just and Unjust Wars, political scientist Michael Walzer discusses four situations that could morally justify war or military intervention in the absence of overt aggression . Walzer presents the state moralist position in his book .
 If there is a clear and sufficient threat to a state’s territorial integrity and political sovereignty, it must act right away or it will have no chance to act later . If a state has a clear threat to its territorial integrity or political sovereignty it must take action immediately .
 Such an argument would not justify, for example, the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, would not have been justified .
 A preventive war occurs when leaders believe merely that war is better now than later, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "A preventive war" is a preventive war, he says .
 Germany feared that if Germany waited until 1916 to launch a war, Russia would be too strong for the Schlieffen Plan to work . As we have seen, views regarding preventive war influenced the German general staff in 1914, which worried about Russia .
 Walzer’s first exception to nonintervention would not have allowed a preventive war because there was no clear and present danger to Germany, he says . Walzer would have not allowed a pre-emptive war because of the threat to Germany .
 Many other things might have changed the situation between 1914 and 1916 . And as we saw earlier with our counterfactual examples, many other things may have changed things .
 During the buildup to the 2003 Iraq War, U.S. officials blurred this classic distinction by claiming that a preventive strike against Iraq was preemptive . The threat of an Iraqi attack against the United States or its allies was not imminent, officials say .
 The second exception to the strict rule against intervention occurs when intervention is needed to balance a prior intervention .
 This rule goes back to John Stuart Mill and the nineteenth-century liberal view that a people has the right to determine its own fate . This rule is based on Mill's view that people should be able to determine their own fate.
 If an intervention prevents local people from determining their own fate, a counterintervention can be justified . Counterintervention nullifies the first intervention, it restores the local people’s right to decide .
 Mill’s argument permits intervention only as far as it counterbalances a prior intervention . More than that is not justifiable, Mill says . Mill: Intervention only can be limited to counterbalancing prior intervention; more is needed .
 "The overriding principle is to allow the local people to solve their own problems," says David Cameron . The overriding principle of the government is to let local people solve their problems, he says .
 The United States sometimes used this as a justification for its involvement in Vietnam . The U.S. sometimes used it as a . justification for . its involvement .
 In 1979, China intervened in Vietnam by crossing the border, but China pulled its troops back within a few weeks . In 1979 China crossed the border in Vietnam, but pulled its forces back within weeks .
 China argued it was countering Vietnam’s intervention in Cambodia . China argued that it was countering Vietnam”s intervention .
 The third exception to the rule against intervention is when it is necessary to rescue people who are threatened with massacre . The exception is when they are rescued from the scene of a massacre .
 If such people are not saved from total destruction, there is no point to nonintervention as a sign of respect for their autonomy or rights . If such a person is not saved, there should be no point for noninter intervention .
 In 1979, Tanzania invaded Uganda when a dictatorial leader was slaughtering large numbers of people . It justified its intervention as rescuing people threatened by massacre . In 1979 the country invaded Uganda in a similar way, in which it defended its intervention .
 massacres and genocide do not necessarily lead states or the international community to intervene . Still, massacres or genocide don't necessarily lead nations to intervene. Still, they do lead states to intervene, say experts .
 U.S. reluctance to send troops to Rwanda in 1994, Bosnia in 1995, Liberia in 1996, Sierra Leone in 1999, and to Congo in 2003 . Note the reluctance of the United States to send forces to Rwanda .
 In 2005, support for a military intervention to stop the killing of various ethnic groups was limited to a modest, regional peacekeeping operation led by the African Union . Darfur region of Sudan was the scene of ethnic violence in Darfur .
 The fourth exception to nonintervention is the right to assist secessionist movements when they have demonstrated their representative character . The right to help secessionists movements is an exception to the non-intervention rule .
 Such a view is consistent, at least, with the principle of nonintervention and a society of states . But it is deficient as a moral principle because it suggests that might makes right .
 Self-determination is generally defined as the right of a people to form its own state . Self-determined is the right to form your own state, and self-determination can be defined as a state .
 This is an important principle, but there is always the question of who determines. This is the case, says David Cameron . It is important principle but there are always questions about who determines, he says .
 Somalia, unlike many other African states, had roughly the same linguistic and ethnic background . Somalia is one of the few African nations with a relatively small but diverse history .
 Neighboring Kenya was formed by colonial rule from dozens of different peoples or tribes, with different linguistic backgrounds and customs . Neighboring nations have different languages, customs and cultures . Kenya is one of the poorest economies in the world .
 Somalia said the principle of national self-determination should allow the Somalis in the northeastern part of Kenya and the southern part of Ethiopia to secede . Somalia said it was one Somali nation because they were one of them .
 Kenya and Ethiopia refused, saying they were still in the process of building a nation . The result was a number of wars in northeast Africa over the Somali nationalist question .
 Somalia later fragmented in a civil war among its clans and warlord leaders . The ironic sequel was that Somalia itself itself itself later fragmented . Somalia's civil war was the result of a war between clans and leaders .
 Catholics objected that if a vote were held within the political area of Northern Ireland, the two-thirds Protestant majority would rule . Catholics objected to the idea of a vote being held in Northern Ireland .
 Protestants reply that if a vote were held within the geographical area of the entire island, the two-thirds Catholic majority would rule . Protestants replied that if the vote was held within a geographical area, the Catholic majority of the island would rule. Protestants replied .
 In the 1960s, the Somalis wanted to vote right away; Kenya wanted to wait 40 or 50 years while it went about its nation-building, or reshaping tribal identities into a Kenyan identity . In the 1970s, Kenya was trying to reshape its tribal identities, or
 The Sudetenland was incorporated into Czechoslovakia even though the people spoke German . For example, after the dismantlement of the Austrian Empire in 1918, the people who spoke German were incorporated .
 After the Munich Agreement in 1938, the Sudeten Germans seceded from Czechoslovakia and joined Germany . That meant the mountainous frontier went under German control, which was a terrible loss for Czech defenses .
 They argued that the oil belonged to all the people of Nigeria, not just the eastern area . They said the oil belongs to the entire nation, not only the eastern part of Nigeria .
 Indonesia has made the same argument about secessionist demands in its oil-rich province of Aceh . Indonesia has also made the case about secessionists in Aceh province of Indonesia .
 After 1989, the issue of self-determination became acute in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union . Self-determination is a key issue in the region after 1989 .
 Throughout the former Soviet Union, different ethnic groups claimed the right of self-determination, just as many of them had done between 1917 and 1920 .
 In the Caucasus, Azerbeijanis, Armenians, Georgians, Abkhazians, and Chechens all demanded states on the basis of self-determination . The Caucasus is the region of Russia, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan .
 As we have seen, in the former state of Yugoslavia, different ethnic and religious groups seceded and claimed self-determination . In the former Yugoslavia, many ethnic groups have secedceded to claim self determination .
 The Slovenes, Serbs, and Croats managed to carve out independent republics in the early 1990s, but Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina were less successful . Muslims in the Muslim-dominated region have not been successful in the past .
 Bosnia was more ethnically diverse and its population included large minorities of Serbs and Croats . While Serbia and Croatia had small ethnic minorities, Bosnia had small minorities of its population . Bosnia's population included Serbs, Croats and Serbs .
 After 1992, Bosnian Muslims were subjected to a campaign of ethnic cleansing by both Croatian and Serb forces . Bosnian Muslim Muslims have been subjected to ethnic cleansing since 1992 .
 The war in Bosnia was devastating for the civilian population . War-crimes tribunals were convened in The Hague, starting in 1996, to convict those responsible for the massacres .
 For much of the conflict, the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Union were divided over how to respond . The U.N. and the EU were divided on how they responded to the conflict .
 If it was not simple aggression by Serbia, then the only grounds for intervention would be to prevent a massacre . The only grounds would be for intervention to stop a massacre, writes Peter Bergen .
 The international community was unable to agree on effective joint action until late in the conflict in 1995 . A NATO peacekeeping force was sent to the troubled area to combat the violence .
 Dayton Accords stopped Bosnian civil war between Muslims and Serbs in 1995 . Questions of self-determination continue to plague the Balkans even though the peacekeepers stopped the Bosnian war .
 Kosovo is a province of Serbia with a large ethnic Albanian Muslim population . An independence movement had been gaining momentum since the death of Yugoslav communist leader Josip Tito .
 In 1997 an armed insurgent group known as the Kosovo Liberation Army began attacks on Serbian security forces within Kosovo, prompting a retaliatory crackdown by Serbian President Milosevic . In 1997 the group began attacks against Serbian forces in Kosovo .
 American and European diplomats monitored the situation carefully as human rights conditions deteriorated in the province . Clinton administration was unwilling to let Kosovo become another Bosnia, where thousands of Muslims had been massacred .
 The United States and NATO bombed Serbia for 78 days in the spring of 1999 . After negotiations and sanctions against Serbia failed to make a difference, the U.S. bombed Serbia . Serbia was bombed by NATO forces in spring 1999 .
 Milosevic pulled Serb troops out of Kosovo in June, and NATO deployed an international stability force to the troubled province . NATO deployed a stability force in June to stabilize Kosovo .
 An agreement regarding the “final status’s of Kosovo remains elusive . Though the killing has stopped, an agreement regarding Kosovo's "final status" of Kosovo is still elusive .
 Adolf Hitler used the principle to undermine fragile states in the 1930s . Adolf Hitler also used it to undermine the idea of fragile states .
 Less than 10 percent of the world’s states are homogeneous, it is clear that treating self-determination as a primary rather than secondary moral principle could have disastrous consequences for many parts of world .
 The best hope for the future is to ask what is being determined as well as who determines it . "Ask what's being determined and how it will be determined," says the author .
 In situations where groups have difficulties living together, it may be possible to allow a degree of autonomy in the determination of internal affairs .
 Internal self-determination could allow degrees of cultural, economic, and political autonomy similar to that which exists in countries like Switzerland or Belgium .
 Where such loosening of the bonds is still not enough, it may be possible to arrange an amicable divorce . Czechoslovakia peacefully divided into two sovereign countries on January 1, 1993 .
 But absolute demands for self-determination are more likely to become a source of violence unless handled carefully carefully . The situation is particularly serious for the country .
 Vietnam War cost more than 58,000 U.S. and some three million Vietnamese lives over two decades between 1957 and 1975 . Vietnam War was the Vietnam War, which cost over three million lives .
 The South blocked a referendum on reunification that had been agreed to at Genevea . With the support of the United States, the U.S. blocked the referendum .
 The U.S. sent its troops into Vietnam to reverse the verdict of a local struggle, which | I meant, in turn, imposing a ghastly cost in death and suffering upon the Vietnamese .
 As it turned out, the United States could not reverse that verdict finally; it could only delay its culmination . I I As I I
 We were in the difficult I position of urging a relatively complex argument at a moment when most Americans, proI S and antiwar, wanted blinding simplicities . And we were in a difficult position of . urging . a relatively . complex argument .
 It feared that if South Vietnam fell, other noncommunist governments in Southeast Asia would topple like a row of dominoes . South Vietnam feared other non-communist countries would topple .
 The North Vietnamese government and its southern allies viewed the war as a continuation of the struggle against the French for independence and self-determination . The war was fought in Vietnam between the North and the South .
 After fifteen years of fighting, direct U.S. involvement ended with the signing of a peace treaty in Paris in 1973 .
 The war between the North and South continued until Hanoi succeeded in uniting the country in 1975 . The North and the South were united in 1975 after the war ended .
 A unified Vietnam wound up fighting with its communist neighbors, Cambodia and China . But rather than toppling the dominoes, a unified Vietnam ended up fighting against each other .
 If the U.S. had correctly interpreted the conflict as being more about nationalism and self-determination than communism, it might have seen the conflict in terms of the balance of power and used a metaphor of checkers .
 Ironically, the communist government of Vietnam and the U.S. today enjoy good relations . Ironically, Vietnam's communist government today enjoys good relations with the United States .
 Judging interventions by one dimension alone may yield an incomplete understanding of the conflict . All three dimensions are important because they are important to understand why intervention is needed in Syria .
 On the other hand, good intentions alone do not justify an intervention . Good intentions alone don't justify a government intervention, it says .
 Norman Podhoretz argued that the U.S. was right to intervene in Vietnam because the Americans were trying to save the South Vietnamese from totalitarian rule . For example, the writer said that the United States was trying to help the South Vietnam .
 It is a rainy night; your friend drives too fast and skids off the road and your daughter is killed . Your daughter was killed by a car crash .
 "I wanted to get her home early for a good night’s rest before the SATs," she says . "She was going to get home early," she adds .
 You, however, are no doubt more concerned with the consequences of her actions . You are more concerned about her actions than the consequences .
 Podhoretz’s argument that the U.S. action in Vietnam was what he called “imprudent but moral” fails to account for consequences, he says . Likewise, his argument that it was ‘impruddent’ but moral
 In evaluating inter' ventions, we have to consider more than the motivation . appropriate means and good consequences must be considered as well . We must also consider appropriate means, good consequences and appropriate means .
 In the Vietnam War, the U.S. tried to save South Vietnam from the horrors perpetrated by North Vietnamese communists . It was not enough that the United States tried to protect the South from the North Vietnamese .
 Even if the cause was just, the means used are a different proposition . The means used in this case are not the same thing as the cause .
 As obvious as it seems, we must still emphasize the need to be careful about situations where there is enormous complexity and very long causal chains . We must be careful, especially in situations like this, where there are enormous complex causal chains, says CNN.com .
 Motives, means, and consequences must all be considered before judgments can be made. Motives and means must be considered, says CNN.com .
 As we have seen, in the early stages just after World War II, the issue was whether the United States should step into Britain’s place in the eastern Mediterranean to defend Turkey and Greece against possible Soviet encroachment .
 U.S. policymakers struggled with how to frame this intervention to the American people . United States policymakers struggled to figure out how to respond to this issue .
 Others pushed for a moral argument to appeal to the American people’s belief in a universal right to freedom .
 President Truman explained his actions in the Truman Doctrine, he talked of protecting free people everywhere . Consequently, when President Truman . explained his . actions in . Truman Doctrine . He talked of . protecting free . people everywhere.
 Diplomat George Kerman had warned against Stalin’s aggressive plans . He became disillusioned as containment became ideological .
 He argued that the United States was trying to contain Soviet power . Anything that balanced Soviet power without intervening directly with U.S. troops was for the good .
 Those who took the more ideological view said the U.S. should contain communism directly, through more aggressive means . Others said the United States should use more aggressive methods .
 The argument for balancing Soviet power gave way to a broader view of containment as keeping the world free from communism . Over time, the argument for containment gave way for balance .
 This view caused leaders to underestimate national differences among communist states . In Vietnam, this view led to leaders underestimating national differences in communist countries .
 The U.S. began to think it had to contain Chinese and Soviet power and the spread of communist ideology . The United States began to . think it . had to . contain Chinese, Soviet power .
 By the time the doctrine of containment moved from the eastern Mediterranean in 1947 to Southeast Asia in the 1950s, it had become a justification for an overly ambitious and ill-fated intervention .
 In conclusion, although the simple absolute principle of nonintervention is frequently breached in practice, the norm of non-intervention remains important . In conclusion: Although the absolute principle is often breached, it is important to maintain the norm .
 The same principles can be applied to the Iraq War, as we will see shortly . The Iraq War is the first time the U.S. government has been involved in the war .
 sovereignty and nonintervention are enshrined in international law and organization . International law and international organization enshrined sovereignty in the U.S.
 People sometimes have problems understanding international law, organization because they use domestic analogy . People sometimes use a domestic analogy to understand international law and organization .
 But international organization is not like domestic government, and international law, she says . International organizations are not just like domestic governments, she adds . International law is "not like domestic law"
 International organizations do not act as an incipient world government for two reasons . International organizations don't act as a government for the first time . The United Nations is not an international organization, but an international body .
 The sovereignty of member states is protected in the charters of most international organizations . First, the sovereignty of members of the U.N. should be protected in most of the world's most important organizations .
 In other words, the organization is not an effort to replace the nation'States. It's not an attempt to replace them, it's not a nation'S.E.C. The organization will not be replaced by the nation.
 The other reason that international organization is not incipient world government is because of its weakness . International organizations are weak because of their weakness, says John Defterios .
 There is an international judiciary in the form of the International Court of Justice . The 15 judges are elected for nine-year terms by the United Nations . The International Court is not a world supreme court .
 States may refuse its jurisdiction, and a state may refuse to accept its judgments, even if the court has accepted the court’s jurisdiction . States may also refuse to submit judgments .
 In the 1980s, the Reagan administration refused to accept an International Court of Justice ruling that the U.S. had acted illegally in mining the harbors of Nicaragua .
 If we imagine the UN General Assembly as the equivalent of Congress, it is a very strange kind of legislature . The UN is the equivalent to Congress, and it is very strange to have its own kind of parliament .
 It is based on the principle of one state, one vote, but that principle does not reflect either democracy or power relations in the world . It is not a democracy, it is a form of democracy that reflects power relations, says David Cameron .
 The Maidive Islands with 100,000 people in the southern Indian Ocean has one vote . China, a country with more than a billion people, has a one vote in the UN .
 A Maidive Islander has 10,000 times the voting power of a Chinese in the UN General Assembly, which does not fit well with the democratic criteria for legislatures . That means a Maidive islander has more than 10,00 times the power of an Asian in the General Assembly
 The Maidive Islands has the same vote in the General Assembly as the United States or India or China . Nor is it a very good reflection of power, because the Maidive islands have the same power as the U.S. or India .
 General Assembly makes states unwilling to have it pass binding legislation . So there is an oddity about the General Assembly that makes states reluctant to pass legislation .
 We might imagine that the secretary-general of the United Nations is the incipient new president of the world . We might also imagine that Secretary-General of the U.N. is the world's president .
 If the secretary-general has power, it is more like the soft power of a Pope than the combination of hard and soft power a president possesses . The secretary of general has power more like a pope than a president, writes Simon Tisdall .
 Trying to understand international organizations by analogy to domestic government is a sure way to get the wrong set of answers . The U.S. should not try to understand the world by analogy with domestic government, it says .
 Domestic law is the product of legislatures and customs, sometimes called common law . Domestic law, or common law, is the result of legislatures, and customs . Common law is often called "common law"
 Domestic law involves enforcement, adjudication by individuals (you can go to a court yourself and bring suit), and orderly revision by legislation . Domestic law has provisions for enforcement and adjudication, and for orderly revision .
 Public international law is similar in the sense that it consists of treaties, which are agreements among states, and customs which are the generally accepted practices of states . International law consists of treaty agreements, customs, and other customs .
 On enforcement, there is no executive to make a state accept a court decision . No executive can make an executive make a decision to accept the decision .
 In the classic ways of international law, enforcement was sometimes provided by the great powers . In the 1930s, the U.S. was involved in the fight against the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 A custom developed that a state could claim a 3'mile jurisdiction out into the oceans . For example, in the Law of the Sea, a state can claim a jurisdiction in 3'miles of the ocean .
 Umguay claimed broader territorial seas to protect its fisheries off its coasts . Britain sent gun boats within 3 miles of the coast to protect fisheries .
 The answer is that enforcement in selffhelp systems is a one'way street . The answer to the problem is that it's not a one-way street, it's a one way .
 Only the states can bring cases to the international court . States unlikely to bring cases unless they want to get them off their docket or think they have a reasonable chance of winning .
 In the 1990s, special tribunals were established to try war criminals from the Bosnian and Rwandan conflicts . A large number of states established an International Criminal Court in 2002 . In 2002, the court was set up to try genocide and war criminals .
 A number of significant states, including the United States and China, refused to ratify the treaty . They felt it infringed on their sovereignty . The treaty was ratified by the U.S. and China .
 There are problems about how customary rules should be interpreted even when a principle is agreed on . In addition, there are also problems about interpreting customary rules even when they are agreed on.
 It is accepted that a state can nationalize a corporation from another country that opet' ates on its territory, but it must pay compensation for what the corporation is worth . The state must pay for what it is worth.
 Many of the less developed countries argue that low compensation is adequate . Rich countries usually want higher levels .
 Even when the UN General Assembly has passed resolutions, there is a good deal of ambiguity about what they mean . Finally, even when a resolution has been passed, there are a good deals of ambiguity .
 The only area in the UN Charter in which a state must legally accept a decision is Chapter VII, which deals with threats to peace, breaches of the peace, and acts of aggres' sion . Chapter VII is the only area that state must accept decision .
 Security Council finds that there has been an act of aggression or threats to peace warranting sanctions . Member states are bound to apply the sanctions if they are found to be justified by the Security Council .
 Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990 when it invaded Kuwait, and in 2001 after the U.S. was the target of transnational terrorist attacks . That is what happened in 1990 and 2001 when the United States was targeted .
 The other way in which new law is created is through large intergov' emmental conferences that negotiate draft treaties .
 The U.S. appealed to the international Law of the Sea to resist possible Chinese claims to the seas around the Spratly Islands in 1995 . In 1995, the United States wanted to resist . China's claim to the islands is disputed .
 International law basically reflects the fragmented nature of international politics . International law reflects the fragmentation nature of world politics, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The weak sense of community means there is less willingness to obey or restrain oneself out of a sense of obligation or acceptance of authority . The weak community means people are less willing to obey out of obligation .
 The absence of a common executive with a monopoly on the legitimate use of force means that sovereign states are in the realms of self-help, and force, and survival, writes Andrew Hammond .
 International law and organization are an important part of political reality because they affect the way states behave . Nonetheless, international law is important in political reality, writes David Frum .
 The vast range of international transactions, both public and private, includes trade, tourism, diplomatic missions, and contacts among peoples across national boundaries .
 As interdependence grows, those contacts grow and there are increasing opportunities for friction . As inter-inter-interrelationships grow, friction will grow in the U.S.
 International law allows governments to avoid conflict at a high level when such friction arises . International law means governments must avoid conflict when it comes to such friction .
 Governments may not want to spoil their relations over private collisions . For example, an American tourist is arrested for smuggling drugs in Mexico, a British ship collides with a Norwegian ship in the North Sea .
 Handling such issues by international law and agreed principles depoliticizes them and makes them predictable . Handling such an issue depolitically depolitics makes it easier to deal with them, experts say .
 Predictability is necessary for transactions to flourish and for the orderly handling of the conflicts that inevitably accompany them . Predictability of transactions is necessary to flourish, but it is also necessary to avoid conflicts, experts say .
 Legitimacy is a second reason why governments have an interest in international law . Legitimi is the reason governments have a interest in the law, says the UK .
 Politics is not merely a struggle for physical power, but also a contest over legitimacy . Politics isn't just physical power but it's also a struggle over legitimacy, says Julian Zelizer .
 It is a political fact that the belief in right and wrong helps move people to act, and therefore legitimacy is a source of power, says David Cameron . It is also a fact that people are willing to act in order to protect themselves, he says .
 If a state’s acts are perceived as illegitimate, the costs of a policy will be higher . The costs of the policy will also be higher if a state's acts are seen as illegitimate .
 States appeal to international law and organization to legitimize their own policies or delegitimize others . That often shapes their tactics and outcomes, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 International law may not restrain states, but it often helps shape the flow of policy . In major conflicts of interest, international law can help shape the flows of policy, experts say . International law can be used to help shape foreign policy, they say .
 Cynics may say these are just games that lawyers play; but the fact that governments find it important to make legal arguments or to take the resolutions of international organizations into account shows they are not completely insignificant .
 Passed at the end of the 1967 Middle East War, it called for a return to pre-war boundaries .
 Arab states lost the war, but were nonetheless able to put pressure on Israel . The Arab states were able to defeat Israel in the Arab Spring .
 In 1976, the Arab coalition tried to expel Israel from the United Nations, the U.S. spent a good deal of political capital lobbying before the General Assembly to prevent Israel’s expulsion . The United States spent good time lobbying to prevent the expulsion of Israel .
 When vital issues of survival are at stake, a state will use its most effective form of power, which is military force . When a state is threatened, the use of military force is the most effective way of survival, says CNN.com .
 International law and organization to deal with the use of force may have limited success . And that may explain the limited success of efforts of international law, organization to . deal with force, he says .
 It is one thing to handle drug smuggling, collision of ships at sea, or patent infringement by international law . It is another to put the survival of one’s country at risk by obeying international law, he says .
 A modified form of collective security was re-created in the UN charter . That was the problem with collective security in the 1930s, but a modified form has been created .
 The classical balance of power did not make war illegal in the classical balance-of-power . Peacekeeping is a key part of the world's peacekeeping force .
 The use of military force was accepted, and it often ensured the stability of the system . It was accepted by the West, but it was not accepted by others .
 During the nineteenth century, with changes in technology making war more destructive, and with the rise of democracy and peace movements, there were several efforts to organize states against war . The efforts were made in response to the rise in technology and the increase in the use of war .
 Conferees tried to persuade all states to sign treaties of arbitration so disputes would be handled by arbitration rather than force . The conferees also tried to convince all countries to sign agreements on arbitration .
 They tried to codify rules of war in case arbitration did not work . They also tried to codeify rules for case arbitration failed to work .
 The League of Nations was an attempt to develop a coalition of states that would deter and punish aggressors . World War I was the first attempt to form a coalition to deter aggressors from aggression .
 World War I was largely an accidental and unnecessary war caused by the balance of power . Such wars could be prevented by an alliance of all states for collective security . The alliance could prevent wars such as World War II being prevented .
 The United Nations was designed in 1943-1945 to prevent World War 11 . If the League of Nations was . designed to prevent . World War I after the fact, the United Nations would have been designed .
 Forty-nine states met in San Francisco in 1945 to sign a charter that included innovations to repair the deficiencies of the League .
 UN designers also created a Security Council composed of five permanent members and a rotating pool of nonpermanent members . The UN also designed a permanent Security Council made up of permanent members .
 The Security Council can pass binding resolutions under Chapter VII of the charter . Security Council members can pass resolutions under the Charter of the United States .
 Better a veto that makes the lights go out than the house bum down in the form of a war against a great power, argued the UN founders . UN founders argued that vetoing a veto was better than a war .
 In 1956 Israeli forces crossed the border into Egypt first . In 1956 Israel suh fered from covert attacks by Egyptian-backed guerrillas . Israeli conventional forces crossed into Egypt .
 Depending on your side in the Cold War, you took different views regarding who was the initial aggressor . The U.S. and the Soviet Union have been at odds for decades over the years .
 For two decades during the Cold War, UN committees tried to define aggression . UN committee tried to try and define aggression in Cold War era .
 A list of acts of aggression was followed by the proviso that the Security Council could determine that other acts also constituted aggression . The Security Council can decide if other acts are also considered aggression .
 Even when armed force had been used, the council could choose not to declare that there had been any aggression .
 The U.N. says aggression committed when the Security Council said so . So as far as the United Nations was concerned, aggression was committed when it was said so, he says .
 "Everything depended on a consensus in the Security Council, that was rare during the Cold War," says President Bush . "That was rare," says Bush .
 The impasse over collective security gave rise to the concept of the UN preventive diplomacy and peacekeeping forces . The UN has been involved in the creation of peacekeepers in the past .
 Rather than identifying and punishing the aggressor, the U.N. would assemble independent forces and interpose them between the warring powers . The United Nations would have to interpose itself between the two sides of conflict .
 Sir Anthony Eden, the British prime minister, saw this as a major threat to Britain . Sir Anthony Anthony Eden saw it as a 'major threat' to Britain.
 Fie regarded Nasser as a new Hitler, and drew analogies to the 1930s . He said he thought Nasser was "a new Hitler"
 He worried about the fact that Nasser had accepted Soviet arms . This, being at the height of the Cold War, he said . He said he worried about Nasser accepting Soviet arms.
 They wanted to continue until they could eliminate Nasser . They wanted the intervention to continue . They said they wanted to end the intervention .
 In the nineteen-thirties Hitler established his position by a series of carefully planned I movements . A Letter to President D\¥ight Eisenhower I was written to President Eisenhower .
 I sive acts of aggression against Austria, Czechoslovakia, Poland and the West . These began with occupation of the Rhineland and were followed by succesesful acts of . aggression against the West.
 He believes that if he can get away with this, and if he . can successfully . successfully . defy eighteen nations, his prestige in . Arabia will be so great that he will be able to mount | i revolutions of young officers in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Syria and Iraq .
 These new | i Governments will be Egyptian satellites if not Russian ones . These new governments will be Egypt's satellites .
 A united Saudi Arabia led by Egypt and Egypt under Russian influence . They will have to place their united oil resources under the control of a united oil . A united kingdom would have to be placed under the influence of Russia .
 When that moment comes Nasser can deny oil to Western | I Europe and we here shall be at his mercy . When that . moment comes he can deny . oil to . Western . Europe . Europe and . Europe shall not be at . his mercy.
 UN Emergency Forces (Yugoslavs, Indians, and Canadians) take over, Nov.56. 1956 . Egypt 1948-1956 j. Egypt .
 Dag Hammarskjold, the UN secretary-general, devised a plan to separate the Israelis and the Egyptians by inserting a UN peacekeeping force . The plan was devised by Canadian foreign minister Lester Pearson .
 A resolution in the General Assembly, where there was no veto, authorized a UN force in the Sinai region . The resolution was passed by the UN General Assembly . A resolution authorizing a force in Sinai region was approved in 2012 .
 On November 15, the first UN expeditionary force was inserted into the Sinai between the opposing forces . Later in December, the United Nations took on the task of clearing the ships that had been sunk in the canal .
 This peacekeeping model has become an important role for the U.N. U.S. peacekeepers have become important role in the world's most important role .
 At the beginning of 2006, 17 UN peacekeeping operations were in the field . At the start of the year, there were 17 operations in the world .
 The Cold War prevented the United Nations from implementing the formal doctrine of collective security . Even though the Cold War did not prevent the innovation of using international forces to keep two sides apart, the U.N. did not implement the doctrine .
 In collective .security, if a state crosses a line, all the others are to unite against it and push it back . In collective security, all of the others must unite against the state, push back .
 If a state crosses a line, the United Nations steps in and holds the parties apart without judging who is right or wrong . In preventive diplomacy and peacekeeping, the U.N. holds parties apart .
 During the Cold War, UN peacekeepers always came from small states, not from the Soviet Union or the United States . Small states would be kept out of direct conflict with great powers .
 Preventive diplomacy and peacekeeping was an important innovation that still plays a significant role in regulating international conflicts . Peacekeeping was important innovation in the world's first peacekeeping effort .
 UN collective security was used for the first time in 40 years . The Soviet Union and China did not exercise their vetoes . The UN has not used collective security for 40 years.
 Iraq committed an extraordinarily clear-cut aggression, very much like the 1930s, which reminded leaders of that failure of collective security . First, Iraq committed a very clear-cutting aggression, the author says . Iraq's aggression was reminiscent of the 1930's failure to secure collective security, he
 The second reason was the feeling that if UN collective security failed in such a clear case, it would not be a principle for order in a post-Cold War world . The UN has been accused of failing to act in the wake of the Cold War .
 Small states in the U.N. supported the action because most of them were fragile and had disputable postcolonial boundaries . Third, the small states supported the move because they were fragile, had postcolonial borders .
 The arguments Saddam Hussein used to justify his invasion of Kuwait threatened most of the other small states as well . Saddam Hussein's invasion of the small states also threatened them as well as most of them .
 To paraphrase the Haitian delegate to the League of Nations quoted earlier, they did not want to become someone else’s Kuwait . The Haitian delegation to the L.N. says they don’t want to be ‘Kuwait’
 The permanent members of the Security Council were not able to agree on resolutions to authorize either the Kosovo or Iraq wars in 1999 and 2003 . The Kosovo and Iraq wars were not authorized to go ahead in either way .
 UN system works best when there is clear-cut aggression, says Peter Bergen . It is much more difficult to apply in civil wars, he says . Bergen: The UN system is best best to apply to civil wars .
 The United States, Russia, China, Britain, or France cannot reach agreement on collective security . Collective security will work if there is no veto, but if the U.S. and Russia fail to reach agreement .
 In 1945, UN collective security was not designed to be applicable against the five great powers with vetoes in the Security Council . Moreover, in 1945, the UN was not meant to be able to protect against the vetoes of vetoes .
 Collective security works when UN member states provide the necessary financial and military resources, but it is difficult to imagine collective security working if states with large military forces do not contribute . UN member state should contribute to the UN's security mission, says David Cameron .
 Solid lines from a Principal Organ indicate a direct reporting relationship; dashes indicate a non-subsidiary relationship . Solid lines indicate a relationship between Principal Organ and Principal Organs . Solid dashes are indicated to indicate that the Principal Organ is in a relationship with a Principal or Principal Organ
 OHRLLS Office of the High Representitive for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States . UNSECOORD office of the United -Nations security .
 As we see in Chapter 9, collective security is only part of what will be needed for world order in the future . But it was only a minor miracle, for, as well as collective security, as we see .
 The presumption against force written into the UN charter places the burden of proof on those who want to use force . The United Nations has political effects, even when collective security cannot be applied, writes David Cameron .
 It affects states’ soft power, as the U.S. discovered in 2003, the United States discovered . The U.N. discovered that soft power can be used in soft power .
 The failure to obtain a second UN resolution did not prevent the U.S. from going to war with Iraq . It limited the amount of help received and made the war and its aftermath more costly .
 The Security Council provides an important forum for the discussion of international violence, dramatizing the practice of collective concern and directing attention to important matters in times of crisis . In addition, the Security Council .
 It sometimes crystallizes viewpoints, raising the costs of aggressive uses of force, and acts as a safety valve for diplomacy . The U.S. has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 Trip wires and buffer zones are devices that states have found in their interests again and again . These devices have been found in the state's interests again, again, by states .
 With the end of the Cold War came more opportunities for the U.N. with more opportunities . The United Nations is one of the world's most powerful powers .
 The U.N. played a role in the decolonization of Namibia, monitoring human rights in El Salvador, Nicaragua, Cambodia, Cambodia and Cambodia .
 UN peacekeepers helped in Haiti and Cambodia in the 1990s, but failed to prevent genocide in Rwanda or to stop civil war in Angola . Peacekeepers failed in Rwanda, failed in Angola and failed to stop the civil war .
 They played a crucial role in Cyprus for three decades, but in Bosnia they had to be replaced by a stronger NATO force . The force was replaced by stronger NATO forces in Bosnia .
 Neutral interposition of troops does not always work well in ethnic conflicts . Neutral interpospositions of troops do not work well well, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Some political scientists argue neutral interventions may lengthen the duration of civil wars, causing greater bloodshed and loss of life .
 Australia takes the lead in providing forces to stabilize a chaotic situation like East Timor . On the other hand, the UN still plays an important legitimizing role while countries like Australia take the lead .
 The failure of the United States and Britain to obtain a second Security Council resolution explicitly authorizing their use of force in 2003 greatly increased the cost of their occupation of Iraq .
 It is a mistake to be too cynical or too naive about international organization and law . It's a mistake, too naive, to be cynical about international organizations and law, he says . It is also a mistake not to be naive, he adds .
 States do not live by law alone, but they do live completely without it . States are not alone by law, but by law they live by it, say experts .
 At the beginning of the twenty-first century, the UN is clearly not the “parliament of man” that some of its founders hoped for when it was created in 1945 . At the start of the 20-first . century, some of the UN’s founders
 With an annual regular budget of less than $2 billion a year, the organization has fewer resources than many colleges and universities . The organization has a central staff of 9,000 members, with a central budget of $1 billion .
 The budget for human rights activities is smaller than that of the Zurich Opera House, and the budget of the UN’s World Health Organization is similar to that of one medium-sized hospital .
 The 15 members of the Security Council have the legal power to authorize the use of force . 5 permanent members have had veto power since 1945, 5 have veto power . 15 members have the power to use force .
 In 2005, a High Level Panel appointed by Secretary-General Kofi Annan suggested enlarging the Council to 24 members . India, Brazil, Japan, and Germany would be permanent members of the Council .
 China objected to Japan’s inclusion, regional rivals raised objections, African states demanded more seats . The plan failed, however, when China objected, and regional rivals also objected .
 The panel made a number of useful suggestions for reform, including a Peacebuilding Commission to oversee the reconstruction of failed states . The panel also suggested a revised Human Rights Commission to exclude states that violate human rights .
 Security, international development, humanitarian assistance, environmental degradation, drugs, transnational crime, health and diseases are issues that require international collaboration . Yet it also represents a central point for focusing on issues of security, international .
 Despite its flaws, it remains the only universal organization that creates a focal point for international diplomacy . The U.N. is the world's only universal body of diplomacy .
 It is sometimes said that if the UN did not exist, it would have to be reinvented . The UN is the world's most powerful body of political power . It has been described as the most powerful institution in the world .
 Given the diversity of cultures and national interests in the world today, it is not clear that it could be a solution . It's not clear whether the world is ready for such a change in direction .
 The Middle East has been the stage of some of the world’s most notorious regional conflicts . The region has been torn by strife for the last 50 years .
 International law and organization have played significant roles in international politics . International law has played a significant role in the fight against terrorism in Syria .
 Nationalism, religion, and balance-of-power politics provide part of the answer . Balance of power politics is key to balancing the nation's fate .
 Under the Shah, Iran had claimed the whole waterway between Iran and Iraq . The Shah claimed the entire waterway under the Shah .
 Iraqi Muslims were divided between Sunnis and Shi’ites, and Saddam Hussein was a secular head of state . Iraqi Muslims are divided between Sunni and Shiite Muslims .
 The Shi’ite fundamentalists in Iran urged the Iraqi Shi'ites to rise up against Saddam Hussein . The Shi'ite fundamentalist in Iran has called for the rise of Saddam Hussein to be defeated .
 This transnational religious appeal failed when Saddam Hussein killed many Iraqi Shi’ite leaders . Saddam Hussein’s death was the result of his killing spree in Iraq . The U.S. government failed to win support for the Shi'ite movement in Iraq and Syria .
 Iranians are not Arabs, and there was a large Arabic-speaking minority in the part of Iran adjacent to Iraq . Iranians not Arabs are not .
 Iraqis thought they would be welcomed as liberators in the Arabicspeaking part of Iran, but that was not the case . Iraqis were thought to be liberators, but they were not welcome in Iran .
 After this pair of miscalculations, the war bogged down into a long drawn-out affair, instead of the short profitable war Saddam Hussein had intended . Saddam Hussein's miscalculation led the war to become a long-drawn affair, rather than a profitable war .
 Having been attacked, it was not going to let Iraq decide when to quit . Having attacked, the U.S. did not want Iraq to decide when it was going to quit, it said .
 The Ayatollah Khomeini said Iran would not end the war until the downfall of Saddam Hussein . The spiritual leader of Iran said the war would not be over until Hussein was toppled .
 Conservative Arab countries like Saudi Arabia and Jordan supported Iraq against Iran because they were more afraid of Iranian revolutionary power . Jordan and Saudi Arabia supported Iraq because of their fear of Iran .
 Arab Syria, a secular and radical regime in many ways similar to Iraq, supported Iran for balance-of-power reasons . But, as we have seen, as well as Syria, Arab Syria supported Iran, for balance of power reasons .
 Damascus was worried about the rising strength of its neighbor Iraq, rather than more distant Iran . Damascus was not worried about Iraq's rising strength, but Iran's growing strength .
 The United States provided covert assistance to Iraq . The U.S. worried about the growth of Iranian power, provided assistance .
 Israel secretly shipped U.S.-built weapons to Iran, even though fundamentalists in Iran were calling for the abolition of Israel . The weapons were shipped to Iran by Israel, despite the opposition to Israel .
 Israel's covert weapons assistance can be explained by balance-of-power considerations . Israel’s covert weapons aid can be seen as a balance of power . Israel has been involved in several covert operations in the past .
 Israel feared both Iraq and Iran, but Iraq was a closer threat, and on the principle of “the enemy of the enemy is my friend,” Israel provided assistance to Iran .
 A war that started from miscalculations rooted in religion, nationalism, and ambition was expanded by balance-of-power concerns into an intractable, nearly decade-long conflict . So far, the conflict has been a nearly 10-year conflict .
 The dictionary defines a nation as a group claiming common identity and the right to be a state . A nation is a group that claims common identity, the dictionary says .
 The United States is ethnically diverse and yet one nation . One claim is ethnic similarity, but the U.S. is still one nation, despite its diversity .
 Switzerland is linguistically diverse and yet one nation . Another claim is linguistic similarity, but Switzerland is one of the world's most diverse nations .
 Some states, such as Israel and Pakistan, are largely based on religious identity . Others say religion can be the basis of a nation, and some say religion is the basis .
 The point is that when a group of people with a common identity calls itself a nation, there can be various sources of that identity . The point of the question is that the identity of a nation can be found through various sources .
 Nationalism is tricky because it is not merely a descriptive term, it is also prescriptive . Nationalism isn't just descriptive term but prescriptives, it's prescriptively, says David Cameron .
 When words are both descriptive and prescriptive, they become politi' cal words . Words are used in struggles for power in politics .
 Nationalism has become a crucial source of state legitimacy in the modern world . Nationalism is a key source of legitimacy in modern society, says David Cameron .
 If a people can get others to accept its claim to be a nation, it can claim national rights and use such claims as a weapon against its enemies . Such claims can be used by a nation to use national rights to protect its own interests .
 Arab states successfully lobbied in the UN General Assembly to pass a resolution that labeled Zionism as racism . For example, in the 1970s the Arab state successfully lobbied for a resolution to label Zionism as racist .
 Their intent was to deprive Israel of the legitimacy of calling itself a nation, Israel says . Israel has been accused of being a terrorist in the past .
 To be labeled as racist is bad is bad; to be labeled nationalist is good . To be a nationalist is generally good. To be called racist is good, to be called nationalist is bad, says Obama .
 To argue that Israel was not a nation was to use words as weapons that would deprive Israel of legitimacy and weaken its soft power, he says . Israel's soft power is important to Israel, he writes .
 The analytic problem with the argument was that religion can be a basis of national identity, the author says . The argument is that religion is a basis for national identity .
 It is also true that a religious basis can make it more difficult for minorities outside the religion to share the national identity . It also makes it harder for minorities to share national identity with the national .
 Life can be more difficult for Muslims in Israel than for Jews, just as it can be for Hindus in Pakistan . Life can also be more trying for Hindus and Muslims in Pakistan than Muslims .
 "It does not follow that because a people uses religion to call itself a nation that the state is racist," he says . But it does not lead to the state being racist, he adds .
 The UN General Assembly annulled the resolution by a second vote in 1991 . The UN finally annulls the resolution in 1991 by a further vote .
 constructivists showed that humans are capable of multiple crosscutting loyalties, above and below the state level . After all, as constructivistists showed, humans are able to cross-dress the state, state and country .
 Loyalties tend to change when the usual patterns of life are disrupted, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Loyalty matters very much more when you're in trouble," he says .
 The idea of the nation often starts among the most disrupted, with people who are marginal figures in their own cultures and less certain about their identity . People with marginal status in their cultures often start with their marginal status .
 These are often people who are jolted out of normal patterns, who start to ask questions . These are people who often start to think about themselves, say experts .
 National claims often start with intellectuals or with deviant religious groups . National claims are often started by deviant groups .
 Early Arab nationalists in the nineteenth century were often Ghristians rather than Muslims . For example, the early Arab nationalists often were Ghristian rather than Muslim .
 Rural communities have long held an identity in rural areas . Rural people say they want to reclaim their rural identity . Rural communities say they need a new identity to identify themselves .
 The disruptions that mobilize people for new identities can come from inter' nal or external forces . The disruptions are often caused by inter-nals and external forces, such as the Internet .
 The rise of the middle class disrupted traditional political and social patterns . It has disrupted traditional social and political patterns .
 Rising political groups no longer wanted the state of France to be defined by the king but by the nation, all the people . They wanted to define the French state in terms of the people, not the king .
 Napoleon’s armies disrupted society and mobilized nationalist feelings among Germamspeaking peoples, other groups . And externally, as Napoleon's armies marched across Europe, they disrupted society, mobilized nationalism .
 By the middle of the century, there was widening support for the idea that each nation should have a state . By the mid-century, support was widening for each nation to have its state .
 He harnessed nationalism for his purposes, and the unification of Germany and Italy became a model of success . The unification of Italy and Germany was a model for success .
 Decolonization was one of the major movements in Asia and Africa over the next three decades . World War II weakened the European colonial empires, and decolonization became one of major movements .
 The metropolitan societies had been weakened by the war itself, and elites in the colonized areas began to use the idea of nationalism against the crumbling European empires .
 The nineteenth-century model of states based on language and ethnicity had been used to organize the postcolonial world . It would have led to thousands of mini-states in Africa and many parts of Asia .
 Postcolonial elites asserted the right of the state to make a nation, just the opposite of the nineteenth-century pattern . Instead of the 19th century pattern, the postcolonial elites assert the right to create a nation .
 The local leaders argued that they needed to use the state machinery the colonists had established to shape a nation out of smaller tribal groups . The state's budget, the police, the civil service were established, they argued .
 The same ideology of nationalism came to be used to justify two things that are almost the opposite of each other . Nation makes state or state makes nation—because nationalism is a political word with an instrumental use .
 In the early romantic days of colonial liberation movements, there was often a successful blurring of these differences in ‘pan’ movements . In the 1970s and '60s, the liberation movement was often successful .
 Europe in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries saw the rise of pan-Slavism, claiming a common identity of all Slavic-speaking peoples . Pan-Slavia claimed to be one of the world's oldest Slavs .
 Early opponents of alien rule argued that since colonized people all suffered alike from the external colonizers, they should form pan-African or pan-Arab nations .
 The business of government required the instruments of state such as budgets, police, and civil service . But when it came to the actual business of governing, as opposed to liberating or resisting colonialism, it was not easy to do so .
 Those instruments existed not on a ‘pan’ basis, but on the basis of the artificial boundaries created by colonial rule . And those instruments existed on a "pan" basis, not on “pan” basis,’s the author says .
 Identity based on the state began to replace that of the pan movements . So, as the romanticism gradually wore away, identity based on state was replaced by state identity .
 The romanticism of the pan movements often lingered on as a disruptive force . Nonetheless, the romanticism remains a force in the modern world .
 The Middle East has often seen appeals to pan-Arabism and odd situations in which countries suddenly announce that they are forming a union . Egypt and Syria did in forming the United Arab Republic in 1958 . Libya and Morocco did in 1989 .
 The forces of the state have prevailed over pan-nationalist movements in India . Over time, however, the state has prevailed over these pan-nationist movements .
 Egyptian nationalism focused on the state gradually became stronger in public opinion than pan-Arabism . For example, Egyptian nationalists focused on state became stronger public opinion .
 Much of the postcolonial world saw enormous disruption of the normal patterns of life because of economic change and modem communications . The post-colonial world was disrupted by modem communications and economic change .
 Some used national appeals, some used pan-Arab appeals, and others used fundamentalist religious appeals . All contribute to the complexity of the forces that create conflict in regions like the Middle East .
 The Arab-Israeli conflict has produced six wars between two groups of people asserting different national identities, but claiming the same postage-stamp-size piece of land .
 In modern historical times, Israelis have pointed to several events tied to World Wars 1 and II to justify the existence of Israel . Israel has pointed to the events to justify Israel's existence .
 During World War I, the British issued the Balfour Declaration, a letter written by the British government to Lord Rothschild of the British Zionist Federation . The British government promised to work for a Jewish homeland in Palestine . The Declaration was issued during the war and was signed by British government in
 After World War II, Israelis argue, the horrors of Hitler’s Holocaust proved the need for a Jewish state . Israelis argue that the Holocaust proved that the need to be Jewish state was needed after the war .
 In 1948, Jewish settlers were willing to accept a partition of Palestine, but the Arab people in the area were not . In 1948 the Arab population in the region were not willing to live under the Jewish rule .
 The United Nations recognized the new Jewish state, but Israel had to fight to preserve it from concerted Arab attack . The Israelis had to defend it from Arab attacks . The U.N. recognized it as a Jewish state .
 Israelis say this is the historical origin and justification of the state of Israel . This, the Israelis say, is the reason for the existence of Israel, Israel .
 His Majesty’s Government views with favour the establishment in Palestine of'a national home for the Jewish people . Nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing, non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other
 At the time of World War I, when the Balfour Declaration was issued, 90 percent of the people living in the area of Palestine were Arabs . The Declaration was signed by the British government in 1917 .
 They argue that Britain had no right to make a promise to the Jews at the Arabs’ expense . They say Britain should not have made a promise at the Jews' expense .
 The Holocaust may have been one of history’s greatest sins, but it was committed by Europeans . What is more is more, the Arabs continue, the Arab Spring continues .
 In World War I, the area that is now Palestine was ruled by the Turks, and the Ottoman Empire was allied with Germany . The area that now Palestine is now part of the Palestine region .
 Turkey's defeat, its empire was dismembered, and its Arab territories became mandates under the League of Nations . Turkey’s defeat was the result of its Arab Arab territories becoming mandates .
 By 1936, nearly 40 percent of Palestine was Jewish, and the influx led the Arab residents to riot . Arab residents rioted over the Jewish influx .
 The British established a royal commission, which recommended partition into two states . The commission was set up by the British government in 1903 .
 In May 1939, with World War II looming, Britain promised the Arabs it would restrict Jewish immigration . Britain needed Arab support against Hitler’s Germany, so Britain promised to restrict immigration .
 Because of the Holocaust, many in Europe were sympathetic to the idea of a Jewish homeland . There was a good deal of smuggling Jewish refugees . The Holocaust was a major source of Jewish refugees in Europe during the Holocaust .
 In addi' tion, some of the Jewish settlers in Palestine engaged in terrorist acts against their British rulers . Some of the British rulers in Palestine were killed by Jewish settlers .
 Britain was exhausted from World War II and decolonization of India . It announced in fall of 1947 that come May 1948, it would turn Palestine over to the United Nations .
 Ironically, it would have been better for the Arabs if they had accepted the UN partition plan, but instead they rejected it . Ironically, the Arabs rejected it. Instead they accepted it.
 In May 1948 Israel declared itself independent, and Israel’s Arab neighbors attacked to try to reverse the partition . Israel's Arab neighbors tried to reverse Israel's partition of Israel .
 Arabs outnumbered the Israelis 40 to 1, but they were hampered by disunity . The Arabs were poorly organized and hampered by their disunity, the Israeli government says .
 After a cease-fire and UN mediation, Jordan controlled the area called the West Bank and Egypt controlled Gaza, but most of the rest of the Palestinian mandate was controlled by the Israelis . The Arabs had more than they would have had if they accepted the UN plan of 1947 .
 The war produced a flood of Palestinian refugees, a sense of humiliation among many Arabs, and a broad resistance to any idea of permanent peace . The war also produced a . sense of . humiliation among . many Arabs . Arabs .
 The Arabs didn't want to accept the outcome of the war because they did not want to legitimize Israel . The Arabs did not accept Israel's victory in the Arab-Arab conflict .
 Arab leaders fostered pan-Arab feelings and the belief that they could destroy Israel in another war . Arab leaders believed they could kill Israel in a war, but did not want to .
 King Abdullah of Jordan was assassinated when he tried to sign a separate peace treaty with Israel in 1951, further decreasing the likelihood of a peaceful settlement between the Arab states and the new Israeli government .
 Gamal Abdel Nasser and other young nationalist officers overthrew King Farouk of Egypt in 1952 . Nasser seized power in 1952 after the overthrow of Farouk's government . He was one of the most prominent figures in Egypt's history .
 The Suez Canal is a vital commercial shipping channel linking Europe and Asia . They soon received arms from the Soviet Union and maneuvered to gain control .
 As we saw earlier, Britain and France colluded with Israel to attack Egypt . The two countries were angry about the canal and worried about Nasser dominating the region .
 The war was stopped by a UN resolution and peacekeeping force that was inserted to keep the sides apart . However, the United States refused to help Britain, and the war was ended by the UN .
 The Six-Day War of June 1967 shaped the subsequent territorial problems at the heart of today’s Middle East peace problem . The war was the most important in shaping the future of the Middle East .
 Nasser and the Palestinians continued to harass the Israelis with guerrilla attacks . Egypt closed the Straits of Tiran, which cut off Israeli shipping from the Red Sea . Nasser continued to attack the Israelis .
 Nasser saw the prospect of a Syrian-Israeli war looming and thought he would do well to join . Nasser was not quite ready for war, but he saw the possibility of a war looming . He thought he'd do best to join.
 Nasser asked the United Nations to remove its peacekeeping forces from his border . Nasser has asked the U.N. to remove the peacekeepers from his country's border .
 The Israelis caught the Egyptian air force on the ground and went on to capture not only the Sinai Peninsula, but also the Golan Heights from Syria and the West Bank from Jordan . Israel captured Sinai Peninsula from Egypt and captured Golan heights from Syria .
 At that point the superpowers stepped in to press the two sides to accept a cease-fire . The two sides have been engaged in an ongoing conflict for more than a decade .
 In November 1967, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 242, which said Israel should withdraw from occupied lands in exchange for peace and recognition . Resolution 242 was passed by the UN in November 1967 .
 Depending on which of the several language versions of the resolution one read, it did not say all territories, just “territories,” implying that some might not have to be returned . Some language versions say some territories might not be returned to the U.S.
 It was also ambiguous about the status of the Palestinians, who were not recognized as' a nation but were described as refugees . The Palestinians were described by the Israeli government as refugees.
 In 1969-1970, Nasser organized crossings of the Suez Canal and other harassments . Nasser, with support from the Soviet Union, organized crossings . In 1970-70, he was involved in a series of attacks on Israel .
 Israeli and Egyptian pilots fought a number of air battles . These provoked an air war in which Israel and Egypt fought each other . The Egyptian and Israeli pilots were involved in the battle .
 After Nasser died, he was succeeded by Anwar Sadat, who realized that Egypt could not destroy Israel . Sadat realized that he could not kill Israel .
 He decided that some psychological victory was necessary before he could make any conciliatory moves toward peace . He decided to make a psychological victory necessary before making peace moves . The president decided that he needed psychological victory .
 Sadat decided to attack across the Suez Canal, but not to try to recapture all of the Sinai Peninsula . Sadat attacked across the canal, not trying to capture all of Sinai Peninsula, he says .
 In first stages, the war went well for the Egyptians, but the Israelis vigorously counterattacked . In the first stages of the war, the Egyptians went well, but it went badly for Israel .
 Secretary of State Henry Kissinger flew to Moscow, but while he was there the Israelis surrounded the Egyptian armies . Kissinger was in Moscow when he was surrounded by the Israeli army .
 The U.S. sent a letter suggesting that the superpowers introduce their own forces directly . The Soviet Union mobilized their forces in the southern part of the Soviet Union .
 The United States responded by raising the nuclear alert level in the United States, and the Soviets dropped their demand . The U.S. responded to the Soviets' demand, raising the alert level and dropping the threat level .
 The Israelis also backed down under American pressure and released the noose around the Egyptian army . The Egyptian army was forced to withdraw from the country .
 The war was followed by a series of diplomatic maneuvers in which the United States negotiated a partial drawback by Israel . The U.S. negotiated a partially offset by Israel in the war .
 In 1977, Sadat went to Israel and announced that Egypt was ready to negotiate a separate peace with Israel . Sadat announced that he would negotiate a deal with Israel in 1977, but it was never a deal .
 In 1978 and 1979, with President Jimmy Carter’s mediation, Israel and Egypt negotiated the Camp David Accords . The agreement returned the Sinai to Egypt and provided for talks about local autonomy in the West Bank .
 The Camp David Accords meant that the largest Arab state had quit the coalition confronting Israel, and Egyptian nationalism had prevailed over pan-Arabism . Egypt's withdrawal from the coalition led to the collapse of the coalition .
 Sadat broke the pan-Arab coalition, but a few years later he was assassinated by religious extremists who objected to his policy . Sadat was assassinated in 1994 by religious extremist extremists .
 Initially, Lebanon had been delicately balanced between Christian and Muslim Arabs . Initially, the country was balanced between Christians and Muslims .
 In 1978 Israel went into southern Lebanon as far as the Litani River . Syria began to impose order in the north, and in 1978 Israel invaded southern Lebanon . Syria imposed order in north .
 Israeli Defense Minister Ariel Sharon decided to go further in 1982 . Ariel Sharon became Israel's first president in 1979 . Sharon's assassination was the first Israeli assassination of President George H.W. Bush Jr.
 Israeli troops marched farther north and besieged Beirut for ten weeks . First he said Israel would go only 25 miles into Lebanon to protect the northern parts of Israel . Then he said he would only go just 25 miles .
 The siege led to the evacuation of the PLO from Beirut . The Lebanese Christian leader, Bashir Gemayel, signed a peace treaty with Israel .
 Gemayel was soon assassinated, the treaty collapsed, and Lebanon fell further into chaos . However the treaty was soon collapsed and the peace treaty collapsed .
 In 1985, the Israelis withdrew from most of Lebanon except a buffer zone in the south, which they finally evacuated in 2000 . Israel withdrew from Lebanon in 1985, but the buffer zone was never fully evacuated .
 The violent recent history of the Middle East shows how regional conflicts based on ethnicity, religion, and nationalism can become embittered and difficult to resolve . The Middle East is a region where ethnic, religious and nationalistic conflicts are often embitated .
 Arab governments were slow to make peace because they did not want to legitimize Israel . In their rejection, they reinforced the domestic position of those Israelis who didn't want peace with Arabs .
 The extremists formed a de facto transnational coalition that made it very difficult for moderates who wanted to find a compromise, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Extremists formed a 'de facto coalition' that made moderates want to compromise .
 In 1973 and 1977 Sadat took risks, but eventually paid for them with his life . Sadat's life was in danger, but he paid for it with his own life .
 A decade later, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin also took risks for peace . Rabin was assassinated by a Jewish religious extremist .
 The Prisoner’s Dilemma provides an accurate model of regional politics . In such a world of extremes, trust and cooperation are difficult, and trust is difficult, says the author .
 During the bipolar Gold War era, wars in the Middle East tended to be short, in part because the superpower role was so prominent . In part because of the power of the U.S. in the region, wars tend to be shorter .
 On the one hand, each superpower supported its clients, but when it looked like the clients might pull the superpowers toward the nuclear brink, they pulled their clients back .
 In 1956, it was the United States via the United Nations . In 1967, the U.S. and the Soviet Union used their hotline to arrange a cease-fire . In 1973, the United . States and the . Soviet Union stepped in in 1982 .
 The Gold War placed a safety net under the weight of regional conflicts . It also placed regional conflicts in the balance balance .
 With the end of the Gold War, smaller states have increasingly looked to the United Nations to provide that safety net . It was unclear to see how effective the UN safety net could be .
 In 1990-1991, responding to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait, the United Nations passed its first post-Gold War test . The U.N. passed the test in response to the invasion of Iraq .
 The Persian Gulf crisis started on August 2, 1990, when Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait . The 1991 Persian Gulf War and Its Aftermath was the first Persian Gulf war .
 Iraq always claimed that Kuwait was an artificial creation of the colonial era and should not be a separate state . Iraq had always claimed it was a colonial-era creation .
 It had an $80 billion debt, which was increasing at the rate of $10 billion every year . The country's debt is at an annual rate of more than $20 billion .
 Iraq sat next to a gold mine --Kuwait -- with enormous oil surpluses and a small population . At the same time, Iraq sat near to an oil mine -- Kuwait—with enormous oil surplus and a population .
 Iraq argued that Kuwait ignored OPEC guidelines for oil production . Every dollar reduction in the price of a barrel of oil cost Iraq $1 billion per year, Iraq said .
 Capturing Kuwait, therefore, looked like a solution to Iraq’s economic problems . Captured Kuwait was seen as an economic solution to the country's economic woes . Capturing the country was a major economic problem for Iraq .
 In 1981 the Israelis had bombed his nuclear research reactor, and with the decline of the Soviet Union, it looked as though the U.S. and Israel were becoming ever more powerful .
 Saddam said the Soviet Union was in decline and could no longer counter the Americans and the Israelis . In a speech in Amman, Jordan, in February 1990, he said the U.S. and Israel could not counter the Soviets .
 The U.S. was trying to appease Saddam Hussein, to bring him back into the community of responsible nations . Ironically, the United States tried to use Iraq as an effective balance to Iranian power in the region .
 Saddam Hussein believed he could get away with the invasion of Kuwait without serious reprisals . The inconsistency of U.S. policy misled Saddam Hussein, he says .
 UN resolutions applied the doctrine of collective security against Iraq . A series of UN resolutions apply the doctrine to collective security .
 Oil exports to the U.S. and other leading Western industrialized nations made the Persian Gulf an abnormally important region . But there was more to the 1990 crisis than oil, and it was more than oil .
 Britain was deeply involved in the war, but Britain did not import any gulf oil . For example, Britain was not allowed to import any oil from the Gulf .
 There was also concern about collective security . Echoes of failure to stand up to German aggression in the 1930s .
 He had a nuclear weapons program with covertly imported materials; he had chemical weapons and was developing biological weapons . He also had a chemical weapons program .
 If he were to have, in addition to this, the world would face a larger, stronger, more devastating Iraq later in the decade . Iraq would be stronger, stronger and more devastating in the next decade .
 Others argued that economic sanctions could force Iraq to evacuate its troops from Kuwait . But others argued that the war was unnecessary because of economic sanctions . The U.S.-led invasion of Kuwait was launched in 1991 .
 The counterfactual is hard to prove, but historically sanctions have rarely achieved their intended effect in a short time frame . Sanctions have rarely been successful in short time periods, according to the U.S.
 In November, the U.S. doubled the size of its troop deployment in Saudi Arabia in the prelude to war . The United States doubled the number of troops deployed to Saudi Arabia .
 Saddam may have been driven by pride and an inability to back down after being at the center of the world stage . And partly, perhaps, he may have had to accept his decision .
 Questions exist about how typical this regional conflict was . It briefly revived the doctrine of UN collective security, but questions exist about it .
 The cease-fire set a precedent whereby UN inspectors visited Iraq and destroyed its nuclear and chemical facilities . UN inspectors destroyed Iraq's nuclear, chemical and nuclear facilities .
 President Bush decided not to occupy Baghdad because he thought Saddam Hussein might be removed by his own people . President Bush was concerned that neither the American public nor the UN coalition would tolerate a costly occupation .
 In the aftermath of the Gulf War, the Israeli government and the PLO made significant progress toward peace . In the 1990s, Israeli and PLO had normalized relations .
 Bush administration pressured the PLO and the government of Yitzhak Shamir to meet in Madrid and Washington in 1991 and 1992 . The Bush administration used the political leverage it accrued from the war to pressure the Israeli government .
 The Declaration of Principles was signed in Washington, D.G. between the PLO and the government of Yitzhak Rabin .
 The declaration was followed by a series of agreements for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the Gaza Strip and Palestinian towns and villages in the West Bank .
 During the Gulf War, Jordan had equivocated in its support for the U.S.-led coalition . King Hussein calculated that normalizing relations with Israel would put him back into the good graces of the United States and the Middle East .
 The PLO had backed Saddam Hussein and Iraq during the Gulf War . It had seen its once generous donations from Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and the other oil states diminish .
 With its financial situation desperate, the PLO relaxed its opposi' tion to a negotiated settlement . The PLO's financial situation was desperate, and it relaxed its opposition .
 In spite of the peace negotiations, many Israelis remained skeptical about the policy of ceding occupied territory to a Palestinian state .
 Ultraconservative Israelis considered Rabin a traitor, and in November 1995 he was assassinated by one of them .
 The PLO government and Arafat were perceived by some Palestinians as corrupt and authoritarian . Arafat's government was perceived as authoritarian, thereby giving strength to opposition groups such as Hamas .
 Terrorist bombings by Arab extremists opposed to the peace process affected the 1996 Israeli elections, and the new Likud government, led by Benjamin Netanyahu slowed the process .
 Netanyahu signed the Wye River Accords with the PLO in 1998 . A subsequent Labor government under PM Ehud Barak offered significant concessions in negotiations with Yasir Arafat at Camp David in the summer of 2000 .
 Violence broke out again in September 2000 . Camp David negotiations failed, and despite efforts to revive talks, violence broke out .
 President Clinton told Arafat and Barak that there was some danger that if they reached agreement, they would be killed by their own extremists . If they failed to reach agreement, many people, all younger than they, would die on both sides, he said .
 During the last days of his presidency, Clinton made a last-ditch attempt to broker a settlement between Barak and Arafat, which culminated in the failed Taba Talks in late January 2001 .
 The context of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict changed greatly over the next year . Israel and Palestine have been at odds for more than a decade .
 Ariel Sharon replaced Barak as Israel’s prime minister in February 2001 . Sharon is a decorated war hero with a reputation for tough military tactics . Sharon was Israel's first prime minister .
 By electing Sharon, the Israeli public signaled its fatigue with negotiations and preference for a more aggressive response to the wave of Palestinian suicide bombings that had taken place inside Israel since September 2000 . Sharon's election signaled its preference for an aggressive response .
 Sharon made it clear that he considered Arafat a terrorist, and that a peace settlement was not possible with Arafat . Sharon said that Arafat was a terrorist and that peace would not be possible with him .
 When George W Bush took office in January, he promoted a realist foreign policy agenda . He promoted the importance of Great Power relations with China and Russia .
 Bush criticized Clinton’s involvement in the peace process and made it clear that he would take a hands-off approach to the conflict . Bush said Clinton's involvement in peace process was a mistake .
 Bush’s foreign policy dramatically shifted after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 . Bush's foreign policy shifted after 9/11, 2001.
 In October through December 2001, American air power and Special Forces helped turn the tide in the civil war .
 The American action was widely supported by NATO allies and legitimized by a UN resalution . The U.S. took action against Syria in Syria .
 In 2002, as the Bush administration prepared to go to war against Iraq, international support began to fade . International support for the Iraq war against the U.S. has since faded .
 Many countries saw the U.S. proposed invasion as a “preventive” war of choice because the threat posed by Iraq was not imminent . In terms of the distinction drawn earlier in this chapter, the United States called its actions against Iraq ‘preemptive�
 The United States obtained a UN Security Council resolution demanding that Saddam Hussein cooperate fully with international inspectors to prove that he was complying with UN resolutions passed a decade earlier assuring that he had given up his nuclear, biological and chemical weapons programs .
 Saddam allowed inspectors to return to Iraq for the first time in four years . Meanwhile, the United States moved forward with a large buildup of troops in neighboring Kuwait and Qatar .
 In December 2002 and again in February 2003, inspectors reported partial but not complete compliance . Inspectors 'asked for more time to com-plete their task'
 The United States felt that another delay would cause its efforts to lose momentum . Concerned about the approach of hot weather and the readiness of its forces, the U.S. felt it would lose momentum if it continued to delay efforts .
 After failing to obtain a second Security Council resolution authorizing an attack against Iraq, the United States, Great Britain, and a small coalition argued that the earlier resolutions provided a legal basis . The U.S. and Britain invaded Iraq in March 2003, 2003 .
 Baghdad was occupied within three and a half weeks, and Saddam had fled . Iraq was occupied and Saddam Hussein was forced to flee . Saddam was captured in 2003 .
 Many of the former Sunni ruling groups and some Shia formed an insurgency against the occupation . The occupation was initially welcomed in some Shia and Kurdish areas of the country .
 Al Qaeda operative Abu Musab al-Zarqawi crossed into Iraq and sought to continue their radical jihad against the U.S. They were aided by foreign terrorists, such as Jordanian-born Al Qaeda operatives . The United States has been targeted by al-Qaeda and al-
 The Bush administration had not planned for enough troops to manage the looting that followed the collapse of Saddam’s regime, or the insurgency that followed . Bush administration didn’t have enough troops for the looting of the looting .
 The ensuing violence slowed reconstruction efforts that could have helped generate popular support and soft power . The ensuing conflict in Iraq has slowed efforts to rebuild the country .
 Failure to obtain a second UN resolution meant that many countries believed that the invasion lacked legitimacy, as a result, their participation in the reconstruction effort was limited .
 The costs of the war for American soft power were compounded when inspectors failed to find any weapons of mass destruction after the war . The costs were compounded by the failure of inspectors finding no weapons of war .
 Two of the three reasons given for the invasion turned out to be based on false intelligence and political exaggeration . The three reasons for the Iraq invasion were based on a link between Saddam Hussein and 9/11 events .
 Polls in 2006 showed that many Americans were beginning to believe that the costs had outweighed the benefits of the Iraq war . In 2006, polls showed that most Americans began to believe the costs outweighed benefits .
 The failure to plan carefully for appropriate means contributed to negative consequences . Whatever the original intentions, the failure to . plan carefully contributed to . negative consequences contributed to the failure of .
 Saudi Arabia and other U.S. allies insisted that President Bush first turn his attention to the Israeli-Palestinian situation, which had reached crisis proportions . In the spring of 2002, the United States began making an international case for war with Iraq, Saudi Arabia .
 Israeli troops held Arafat’s compound in Ramallah under siege for months in the spring of 2002 . In retaliation for a spate of terrorist attacks during the winter of 2001-2002, Israeli troops reoccupied towns and cities in the West Bank .
 The U.S. developed a “Road map” for peace with cooperative, reciprocal measures to be implemented by both sides . The United States announced that in conjunction with a ‘Quartet’— the European Union, Russia, and the UN— it had developed
 Israel says it will proceed with unilateral plans to build security fence to separate the West Bank from Israel to prevent suicide bombers from entering . Israel, however, said it would proceed with plans to construct a security fence .
 The United States articulated its support for the Road map most clearly in June, when Bush stated that the United States sought a permanent two-state solution to the conflict by 2005 .
 The removal of Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq in the spring of 2003 significantly improved Israel’s security among its neighbors . Israel's security in Iraq has improved since the removal of Hussein in 2003 .
 The absence of a strong external military threat to Israel in the region led to a renewed push for progress on the Israeli-Palestinian issue . Israel has been criticized for not having a strong military presence in the Middle East .
 Arafat appointed Mahmoud Abbas, also known as Abu Mazen, prime minister of the Palestinian Authority . Arafat's appointment was acceptable to both the U.S. and Israel .
 Hamas, a party that rejected recognition of the legitimacy of Israel, began to increase its strength among Palestinians . At the same time, Hamas, which rejects recognition of Israel's legitimacy, increased its strength .
 The Quartet Road map was released, calling for a two-state solution . It outlines a three-phase process for achieving this goal .
 Abbas negotiated a three-month cease-fire among the Palestinian militant groups . Sharon, Abbas, and Bush met in Aqaba, Jordan, in June 2003 for peace talks .
 These were the first face-to-face talks between an Israeli and Palestinian leader since Bush and Sharon had come to power .
 The cease-fire failed to hold, however, and plans for a second round of talks were cancelled . Plans for the second round have been cancelled .
 In the fall of 2003 unofficial Israeli and Palestinian negotiators met in Geneva to work out a model comprehensive peace deal . Unofficial negotiations were held in Geneva .
 Geneva Accord followed the outlines of Glinton proposals from Gamp David and Taba . It went further by resolving the difficult questions of the status of Jerusalem, Israeli settlements, and the limited Palestinian “right of return” for the families of refugees who had fled in 1948 .
 U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell met with the accord negotiators despite strong protests from Israeli government . Colin Powell meets with the Israeli government to discuss the deal . The Israeli government has protested strongly .
 As more than one observer noted, it was easier to identify a solution to the IsraehPalestine conflict than identify a way to get there . The episode showed that it was more of a solution than a solution .
 The death of PLO leader Yasir Arafat in November 2004 was followed by the election of Abbas to the presidency of the Palestinian Authority . Abbas has been in charge of Palestinian Authority since 2004 .
 While this represented progress, it did not lead to implementation of the road map or resolution of the longer-standing issues in the conflict . The road map will not be implemented or resolved any of the larger issues in conflict .
 In January 2006, Sharon was incapacitated by a major stroke . Hamas won the Palestinian elections further adding to the political uncertainty and slowing agreement .
 The Middle East illustrates the same dynamics of the individual, the state, and the international system we have seen in other conflicts, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen says the Middle East is an example of the dynamics of individual and the state .
 At one level, individuals such as Arafat, Rabin, Sharon, Sadat, and King Hussein determined whether there would be peace accords . Arafat and Rabin were key to the peace talks in the Arab-Israeli conflict .
 The states of the region frequently act in a manner consonant with the realist model . International law and organizations have helped shape the political struggles, as have individual and nonstate actors .
 Throughout the region, autocratic governments are faced with fundamentalist challenges to their authority . Many of these threaten to explode into civil war, as they have in Algeria and the Sudan .
 The 1967 war yielded the present configuration of the Arab-Israeli dispute . The 1967 conflict ended in Israel and Israel's Arab-Arab relations .
 Sadat claimed that he had to go to war in 1973 to achieve peace with Israel . Sadat said he had gone to war to achieve a peace deal with Israel after the war .
 John Mueller, “The Banality of Ethnic War,” International Security 25 , 42. John Mueller . John Mueller: “I am not a believer in ethnic warfare, but I am a supporter of ethnic war.”
 With the end of the Cold War in 1989, a number of observers argued that economic issues would become more central in world politics . Chapter, Chapter, chapter, Chapter 2 .
 Networks of economic interdependence that span the globe have increased as costs of communication and transportation have declined and shrunk the effects of distance . The networks of interdependency have increased .
 The role of markets has also increased as a result of new information and transportation technologies, as well as changed attitudes about the role of governments and states . The roles of markets and governments have also increased in recent years .
 Nearly half of all industrial production today is produced by multinational enterprises . Decision about where to locate production has a powerful effect on domestic economies and politics .
 Security can be taken for granted in peaceful times, but all markets operate within a political framework . Markets operate within the political framework, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Economic sanctions have been popular instruments because they avoid the use of force, but their effectiveness is mixed . Similarly, economic sanctions have also been popular in the U.S. as they avoid using force .
 Studies suggest they have achieved their intended effects in fewer than half of the cases in which they have been tried .
 Multilateral sanctions were one factor in ending apartheid in South Africa and putting pressure on Serbia and Libya . But they failed to oust Iraqi troops from Kuwait or return an elected president to power .
 States followed relatively liberal policies toward trade, investment, and migration in the nineteenth century . Moreover, globalization and economic interdependence were growing rapidly when states followed liberal policies .
 This did not stop two world wars and an economic depression in the first half of the twentieth century from occurring . Two world wars, economic depression and two economic depressions in the early 20th century .
 Globalization does not imply universality . Globalization is defined as worldwide networks of interdependence . Globalized networks are not universal .
 At the beginning of the twenty-first century half of the American population used the World Wide Web, compared to one-hundredth of one percent of the population of South Asia . South Asia is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Hundreds of millions of people live as peasants in remote villages with only slight connections to world markets or the global flow of ideas . Even in an era of cheap cell phones, hundreds of millions live in rural villages .
 globalization is accompanied by increasing gaps, in many respects, between the rich and the poor . Indeed, globalization has led to increasing gaps between rich and poor, says David Frum .
 Even among rich countries, there is a lot less globalization than meets the eye, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A truly globalized world market would mean free flows of goods, people, and capital, and similar interest rates . The world's interest rates would be much lower if the globalized market were truly globalised .
 Even in North America, Toronto trades ten times as much with Vancouver as with Seattle, though the distance is the same and tariffs are minimal . Even in Canada, even in the U.S., Toronto trades 10 times more with Vancouver than with Seattle .
 Globalization has made national boundaries more porous, but not irrelevant . Globalization means national borders are more porous than ever before .
 Clearly, homogenization does not follow necessarily from globalization . Clearly, in social as well as economic terms, Homogenization is not necessarily a result of globalization .
 Other forms of globalization also have significant effects on our daily lives . Globalization is a form of form of globalization that can affect our daily life .
 The plague or Black Death originated in Asia, but its spread killed a quarter to a third of the population of Europe in the fourteenth century . The plague, or the Black Death, originated from Asia and spread killed up to a quarter of a third .
 Europeans carried diseases to the Americas in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries that destroyed up to 95 percent of the indigenous population . Europeans carried out diseases that wiped out up to 90 percent of indigenous population in the Americas .
 In 1918, a flu pandemic caused by a bird virus killed some 40 million people around the world, far more than the recently concluded world war . The pandemic killed more than 40 million in 1918 than any other major war .
 Since 1973, 30 previously unknown infectious diseases have emerged, including new drug-resistant forms . Since that time, diseases have spread geographically in new drug resistant forms .
 HIV/AIDS killed 20 million people and infected another 40 million around the world in the 20 years after it was identified in the 1980s . It infected 40 million people in the last 20 years, killing 20 million .
 The spread of foreign species of flora and fauna to new areas has wiped out native species . The spread may result in economic losses of several hundred billion dollars a year, experts say .
 On the other hand, not all effects of environmental globalization are adverse . Not all environmental problems are caused by global warming, but they can be overcome .
 The “green revolution” agricultural technology of the past few decades has helped poor farmers throughout the world . For instance, both Europe and Asia benefited from the importation of such new world crops as the potato, com, and tomato .
 The result could be more severe variations in climate, with too much water in some regions and not enough in others . Too much water could be too much in some parts of the world's most populous regions .
 The effects in North America will include stronger storms, hurricanes, floods, droughts, and landslides . The effects of these storms will include strong storms, floods and droughting .
 In Europe, warming sea temperatures could alter the flow of the Gulf Stream and result in severe local cooling trends . Warm sea temperatures in Europe could alter flow of Gulf Stream, causing severe cooling trends in Europe .
 Rising temperatures have lengthened the freeze-free season in many regions and led to a 10 percent decrease in global snow cover since the 1960s .
 The rate at which the sea level rose in the last century was ten times faster than the average rate over the last three millennia . The rate of sea level rise in the past 100 years is ten times the rate of the previous century .
 It does not matter whether carbon dioxide is placed in the atmosphere from China or the U.S., it still affects global warming . Carbon dioxide is still a big factor in global warming, scientists say .
 Military globalization consists of networks of interdependence in which force, or the threat of force, is employed . Military globalization is a form of internationalism that involves the use of force in the form of force .
 During the Cold War, the global strategic interdependence between the United States and the Soviet Union was acute and well recognized . The U.S. and the USSR was well-recognized in terms of their mutual dependence .
 It was distinctive not because it was totally new, but because the scale and speed of the potential conflict arising from military interdependence ..were so enormous, it was so enormous .
 Today, A1 Qaeda and other transnational actors have formed global networks of operatives, challenging conventional approaches to national defense . Today's A1 al Qaeda and others have formed .
 Social globalization is the spread of peoples, cultures, images, and ideas . Social globalization has spread cultures, cultures and ideas across the world .
 In the nineteenth century, some 80 million people crossed oceans to new homes . In the twenty-twentieth century, far more than in thenineteen century, people crossed the oceans .
 At the beginning of the twenty-first century, 32 million residents of the United States were foreign-born . 32 million people in the U.S. were foreign born at the start of the 20th century .
 Four great religions of the world have spread across great distances over the last two millennia . Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, Islam, and Islam spread over great distances . The scientific method and Enlightenment worldview have spread over the past few centuries .
 Political globalization (a part of social globalization) is manifest in the spread of constitutional arrangements, the increase in the number of countries that have become democratic, and the development of international rules and institutions . Political globalization is a part of the social globalization that is manifested in constitutional arrangements .
 Those who think it is meaningless to speak of an international community ignore the importance of the global spread of political ideas such as the antislavery movement in the nineteenth century and anticolonialism after World War II .
 The world is a long way from a global community replacing citizens’ loyalties to clans, tribes, and states . Such transnational political ideas affect how nations construct their national goals and how they use their soft power .
 Globalization today is different from the nineteenth century, when European imperialism provided much of its political structure, and higher transport and communications costs meant fewer people were involved with people and ideas from other cultures .
 Many of the most important differences are closely related to the information revolution . But many of the biggest differences are related to information revolution, say experts .
 One telephone is useless, but its value increases as the network grows . The value of one telephone increases when it is connected to a larger network .
 As government officials fashion foreign policies, they encounter the increasing thickness of globalism . The density of the networks of interdependence means that the effects of events in one geographical area, or the economic or ecological dimension, can have profound effects in other geographical areas .
 These international networks are increasingly complex and their effects are therefore increasingly unpredictable, says the author . The author of the book, "Unpredictable", says the book is published in the UK and Australia .
 In human systems, people are often hard at work trying to outwit each other, to gain an economic, social, or military advantage precisely by acting in an unpredictable way . People often try to gain a social or economic advantage by acting unpredictably .
 There will be continual competition between increased complexity and uncertainty, on the one hand; and efforts by governments, corporations, and others to comprehend and manipulate to their benefit these increasingly complex interconnected systems .
 Frequent financial crises or sharp increases in unemployment could lead to popular movements to limit interdependence . Frequent economic crises will lead to mass movements to reduce inter-independence .
 Quickness adds to uncertainty and the difficulties of shaping policy responses . Quickness also adds to the difficulty of shaping responses to the crisis, says David Cameron .
 As mentioned, modern globalization operates at a much more rapid pace than its earlier forms . Modern globalization is a more rapid and more rapid form than earlier forms of globalization . Today's globalization is more rapid than ever before .
 Smallpox took nearly three millennia to spread to all inhabited continents, finally reaching Australia in 1775 . It took three centuries to reach the continent, reaching Australia by 1775. Smallpox was the first virus to reach Australia .
 AIDS took less than three decades to spread from Africa all around the world . AIDS took place in Africa less than 30 years ago . AIDS was the first virus to be spread in Africa .
 In 2000 the ‘love bug’ computer virus, invented by hackers in the Philippines, needed only three days to straddle the globe . And to switch to a metaphorical virus, in 2000 the 'love bug' computer virus needed just three days . In 2000, hackers in
 Direct public participation in global affairs has also increased in rich countries . Public participation has increased in richer countries, but it has not increased in the past .
 Ordinary people invest in foreign mutual funds, gamble on offshore Internet sites . Travel and sample exotic cuisine that used to be the preserve of the rich .
 Friedman termed this change the democratization of technology, finance, and information because diminished costs have made what were previous luxuries available to a much broader range of society . Friedman: "Democratization" of technology and finance has democratized society .
 Democratization is not quite the right word, however, because in markets, money votes . Money votes, and people start out with unequal stakes, in the markets .
 There is no equality, for example, in capital markets, despite the new financial instruments that permit more people to participate . There is also no equality in capital market, despite new financial tools that allow more to participate, he says .
 A million dollars or more is often the entry price for large hedge fund investors . The entry price is often a large amount of money .
 Pluralization might be a more accurate description of this trend, suggesting the vast increase in the number and variety of participants in global networks . The trend is likely to continue with the rise in the size of global networks, experts say .
 In 1914, the English economist John Maynard Keynes said Londoners could order by telephone, sipping his morning tea in bed, and expect their early delivery upon his doorstep . Keynes’s Englishman had to be wealthy to be a global consumer .
 Today, supermarkets and Internet retailers extend that capacity to the vast majority of people in postindustrial societies . Today, they extend that .
 The information revolution has added to contemporary globalization is a quickness and thickness in the network of interconnections that make them more complex, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: What the information revolution added to modern globalization is the quickness of the network, thickness .
 Domestic politics channel responses to change, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Political Reactions to Globalization: Domestic politics channels responses to globalization .
 Some countries imitate success, as exemplified by democratizing capitalist societies from South Korea to Eastern Europe . South Korea is one of the most democratic countries in the world .
 Small European states such as the Netherlands and Scandinavia have maintained relatively large governments and emphasized compensation for disadvantaged sectors . Anglo-American industrialized countries have, in general, emphasized markets and competition .
 Capitalism is far from monolithic, with significant differences between Europe, Japan, and the U.S. Capitalism is not monolithic in the United States .
 There is more than one way to respond to global markets and to run a capitalist economy, says David Cameron . Cameron: 'There is more of a way to run the capitalist economy. There is no one way'
 In other societies like Iran, Afghanistan, and Sudan, conservative groups have resisted globalization strongly, even violently . In other countries like Iran and Afghanistan, conservatives have resisted it strongly .
 Domestic institutions and divisions -- economic or ethnic -- can lead to domestic conflict . Domestic conflict can reformulate ethnic and political identities in profound ways, often unanticipated ways .
 In Bosnia, political elites appealed to traditional identities of people in rural areas to overwhelm and dissolve the cosmopolitan identities that had begun to develop in the cities, with devastating results . As we saw in the last chapter of this chapter, in Bosnia, in . Bosnia, we saw political elites
 Iran has seen struggles between Islamic fundamentalists and their more liberal opponents . And Iran has also seen struggles with its liberal opponents, who are more sympathetic to Western ideas .
 As mentioned earlier, rising inequality was a major cause of the political reactions that halted a previous wave of economic globalization early in the twentieth century . Rising inequality was also a major factor in the political reaction that halted previous economic globalization .
 The recent period of globalization, like the half century before World War 1, has also been associated with increasing inequality among and within some countries . Globalization is associated with rising inequality in some countries, like in the 50 years before WWI .
 The ratio of incomes of 20 percent of people in the world living in the richest countries, compared to 20 percent living in poorest countries, increased from 30 to 1 in 1960 to 74 in 1997 .
 Between 1870 and 1913, it increased from 7 to 1 to 11 to 1 . By comparison, the number of people killed in the war increased from 1 to 1 per cent .
 In any case, inequality can have political effects even if it is not increasing, even though it's not increasing . Inequality has political effects, even if inequality is not rising .
 Karl Polanyi argued powerfully in his classic study The Great Transformation that the market forces unleashed by the Industrial Revolution and globalization in the nineteenth century produced not only great economic gains . The political consequences of these shifts in inequality are complex, but the economic historian says they are important .
 Globalization and Interdependence but also great social disruptions and political reactions . Globalization, Inter-interdependence and social disruptions but also social disruptions, political reactions.
 There is no automatic relationship between inequality and political reaction, but the former can give rise to the latter . The former can be seen as a political reaction to inequality, but it can also lead to political reaction .
 Protests against globalization are, in part, a reaction to the changes produced by economic interdependence . Protests are against globalization, but they are against the changes made by inter-interrelependence .
 Some imperfections in international markets can be considered “useful inefficiencies” because they slow down and buffer political change . From an economist’s view, imperfect markets are inefficient, but from a political view, some imperfections are useful, says Julian Zelizer .
 As globalization removes such inefficiencies, it becomes the political prisoner of its economic successes . The U.S. should be proud of its successes, says President Obama . The world's most successful economy is now in its infancy, says Obama .
 As global networks become more complex there are more linkages among issues that can create friction . In addition to global networks, there are also more links between issues that create friction.
 Liberals sometimes argue that interdependence means peace and cooperation, but unfortunately it is not that simple . Liberals say that inter-inter-independence means peace, cooperation, not power and power .
 The conflicts are often like playing chess on several boards at the same time . Because the coalitions are more complex and different forms of power are used, the conflicts often involve complex coalitions . The conflict is often like a chess game on several chess boards, CNN's John Sutter says
 Mao Zedong once said that power grows out of the barrel of a gun . The Chinese leader once said power grows from barrel of gun .
 After the oil crisis of 1973, the world was reminded that power can also grow out of a barrel of oil—as we shall see shortly . After the 1973 oil crisis, oil crisis was a reminder of the power of the U.S.
 Interdependence is often a fuzzy term used in a variety of conflicting ways, like nationalism, imperialism, and globalization . The concept of independence is often confused with other political words such as nationalism .
 Leaders and analysts have different motives when using political words . Leaders use political words when they use them to express their views .
 The leader wants as many as many people marching behind his or her banner as possible .
 The analyst, on the other hand, makes distinctions to understand the world better . The analyst makes distinctions in order to make sense of the world .
 Analyst may note that the boat we are all in may be heading for one person's port but not another's . Analyst may also note that one person is doing all the rowing while another steers or has a free ride .
 Interdependence refers to situations in which actors or events in different parts of a system affect each other . As an analytical word, interdependence is analytical word . Interdependency is a form of interdependency in a system .
 Such a situation is neither good nor bad in itself, and there can be more or less of it . Such a bad or good thing is not always good or bad, but it is good or good, says CNN.com.com .
 Jean-Jacques Rousseau pointed out that along with interdependence comes friction and conflict . Rousseau: Along with Interdependence, along with friction, conflict is friction . The French Revolution was founded in France in 1717 .
 When countries try isolation, as with the cases of North Korea and Myanmar , it comes at enot' mous economic cost . North Korea's isolation comes at an economic cost, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Interdependence can originate in physical (natural (natural) or social) phenomena . Interdependency can also originate in natural or social phenomena . It can be used to explain the origin of independence .
 The distinction helps clarify the degree of choice in situations of reciprocal or mutual dependence . The distinction is important to distinguish between mutual dependence and reciprocity .
 Military interdependence is the mutual dependence that arises from military competition . Military interdependency is a mutual dependence between military rivals .
 There is a physical aspect in the weaponry, especially dramatic since the development of nuclear weapons and the resulting possibility of mutually assured destruction . The physical aspect of the weaponry is the physical aspect, especially in the nuclear weapons .
 Change in perception or policy can reduce the intensity of military interdependence . However, an important element of perception is also involved in the relationship between the two countries .
 Americans lost little sleep over the existence of British and French nuclear weapons during the Cold War because there was no perception that those weapons would ever land on American soil . As we saw in Chapter 5, there were no perceptions that such weapons would land on U.S. soil .
 Gorbachev announced his ‘new thinking’ in Soviet foreign policy in the 1980s . Westerners slept a bit easier in the late 1980s after Gorbias announced his "new thinking" in Russia's foreign policy .
 It was not so much the number of Soviet weapons that made the difference, but the change in the perception of Soviet hostility or intent, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 American public anxiety about the Soviet nuclear arsenal virtually evaporated after the final collapse of the USSR . Thousands of poorly guarded Soviet warheads were at risk of falling into the hands of terrorists or states such as Iran and North Korea .
 Economic interdependence is the stuff of traditional international politics and has a high degree of social, especially perceptual, origin . It is similar to military inter-interdependency in that it is a matter of international politics . The United States is one of the most powerful countries in the world
 “For the first time in more than a decade, the developing countries have some real leverage,” said an official from a Caribbean nation . Economic interdependence involves Ecological AND Egonomic Interdependence ' i .
 Poor nations see leverage because the north, the main polluter, wants them to cut emissions, stop deforesting and make other changes . It’s their negotiating strategy. Poor nations, he said, see leverage .
 In the early 1970s there was concern that the world’s population was outstripping global food supplies . For example, in the early 70s there were concerns that food supplies were being outstripped .
 Many countries were buying American grain, which in turn drove up the price of food in U.S. supermarkets . The price of American food was driven up by the demand for grain in the United States .
 A loaf of bread cost more in the United States because the Indian monsoons failed and because the Soviet Union had mishandled its harvest . The Soviet Union also had a bad harvest, and the U.S. had to pay more .
 In 1973, the U.S. decided to stop exporting soybeans to Japan . In an effort to prevent price rises at home, the United States decided to end the export .
 A few years later, when supply and demand were better equilibrated, the U.S. farmers regretted that embargo . The Japanese were buying their soybeans from a cheaper source in Brazil . The embargo led to an increased demand for soybeans .
 Social choices as well as physical shortages affect economic interdependence in the long run . Social choices and physical shortages will affect interdependency in the future, experts say .
 It is always worth considering the long-term perspective when making short-term choices . It is also worth considering considering a decision to buy a car in the first place .
 Benefits of Interdependence are sometimes expressed as zero-sum and nonzero-sum . The benefits of interdependence can be expressed in terms of the benefits of a person's relationship with a person .
 In a positwe-sum situation, we both gain; in a negative-sum situations we both lose . In a positive-sum scenario, we gain, we lose. In a negative one, you both gain in a positive one .
 Dividing a pie is zero-sum, baking a larger pie is positive-sum . Baking a pie in a bigger pie is negative-sum and dropping it on the floor is negative sum .
 Both zero-sum and nonzero-sum aspects are present in mutual dependence . Both zero sum and non zero sum aspects are part of mutual dependence.
 Some liberal economists tend to think of interdependence only in terms of joint gain, that is, positive-sum situations in which everyone benefits and everyone is better off . Some liberals tend to see the benefits only in positive sum situations, such as those where everyone benefits .
 Failure to pay attention to the inequality of benefits and the conflicts that arise over the distribution of relative gains causes such analysts to miss the political aspects of interdependence . Failure to focus on the political aspect of interdependency, analysts say, is a failure .
 The distribution of benefits is a zero-sum situation in which one side's gain is the other’s loss, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Distribution of benefits— who gets how much of the joint gain is -- is a 'zero-sum'
 The result is that there is almost always some political conflict in economic interdependence . The result of this is that the economy is interdependent and interdependent . The U.S. has a long history of political conflict .
 Even when there is a larger pie, people can fight over who gets the biggest slices . Even when the pie is bigger, people still fight for the biggest slice .
 Even if interdependent countries enjoy a joint gain, there may be conflict over who gets more or less of the joint gain . Interdependent countries may be at risk of conflict over the gain .
 Some liberal analysts mistakenly think that as globalization makes the world more interdependent, cooperation will replace competition . Some liberals mistakenly think cooperation is replaced by cooperation .
 Inter-independence creates joint benefits, and those joint benefits encourage cooperation, the authors say . Inter-inter-independence is interdependence creates benefits for cooperation, they say .
 Economic interdependence can also be used as a weapon, witness to the use of trade sanctions against Serbia, Iraq, and Libya . That is true, but it is also possible to use it as a tool to get around the world .
 Economic interdependence can be more usable than force in some cases because it may have more subtle gradations . Indeed, economic interdependency can be used more effectively than force, economist says .
 Some states are less interested in their absolute gain from interdependence than in how the relatively greater gains of their rivals might be used to hurt them . And in some circumstances, states are more interested in how their relative greater gains might hurt them than what they really gain from their interd
 Some analysts believe that traditional world politics was always zero-sum . Some analysts say that is not the case for the future of the world .
 It made a difference, for example, whether Bismarck or Hitler was in charge of Germany, says historian . "It made a different difference, because it was important to know who was responsible for Germany," he says .
 If one party sought aggrandizement, as Hitler did, then indeed politics was zero-sum . One side's gain was another’s loss, and politics was a zero sum: one side's gains was another's loss . Hitler did this, Hitler did .
 If all parties wanted stability, there could be joint gain in the balance of power . But if all parties want stability, they could gain a joint gain .
 The politics of economic globalization has competitive zero-sum aspects as well as cooperative positive-sum elements . Conversely, the politics of globalization has competitive and cooperative aspects, says David Frum .
 In the politics of interdependence, the distinction about what is domestic and what is foreign becomes blurred . The distinction between domestic and foreign is blurred, says David Cameron .
 The soybean situation involved the domestic issue of controlling inflation at home, as well as American relations with Japan and Brazil . For example, the soybean issue mentioned earlier involved the U.S. controlling inflation .
 In the late 1990s, an Asian financial crisis depressed world commodity prices, which helped the American economy continue to grow without encountering inflationary pressures . The U.S. economy continued to grow in the 1990s without experiencing inflationary pressure .
 After Iran’s 1979 revolution curtailed oil production, the U.S. government urged citizens to cut their energy consumption by driving 55 miles per hour and turning down thermostats .
 Interdependence mixes domestic and foreign issues, which gives rise to more complex coalitions, more intricate patterns of conflict, and a different distribution of benefits than in the past . Interdependency is a form of instability that has caused more conflict and instability in the world .
 French politician concerned with relative economic gains pursued a policy of holding Germany back . In 1890, a French politician wanted to hold Germany back.
 Today a policy of slowing economic growth in Germany is not good for France, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy . Sarkozy: Germany's slow economic growth will not be good enough for France .
 Economic interdependence between France and Germany means that the best predictor of whether France is better off economically is when Germany is growing economically . France is best off economically when it's growing economically, according to experts .
 French politicians are in the self-interest of the French politicians that Germany do well economically and vice versa . Now with the two countries sharing a common currency, it is in their own interest . Germany and France share a common euro currency .
 The classical balance-of-power theory, which predicts that one country will act only to keep the other down lest the other gain preponderance, is not valid . Balance of power theory is wrong, says the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 In economic interdependence, states are interested in absolute gains as well as gains relative to other states . States are looking at absolute gains, relative gains, rather than absolute gains .
 Costs of Interdependence can involve short-run sensitivity or long-term vulnerability . Costs of interdependence include short-term sensitivity or vulnerability . The costs of inter-dependence involve a person's relationship with others .
 The market was extremely sensitive to the withdrawal of foreign funds from the market, says CNN's Mark Wallis . Wallis: "It all happened very quickly; the market is extremely sensitive" Wallis says the market was "extremely sensitive"
 In 1998, weakness in Asia had a contagious effect that undercut geographically distant emerging markets in Russia and Brazil . The effect was similar in 1998, when weakness in Asian markets had a contagion effect on other markets .
 A high level of sensitivity, however, is not the same level of vulnerability, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I have a lot of respect for people in the world"
 Vulnerability refers to the relative costs of changing the structure of a system of interdependence . Vulnerability is a relative cost of changing a system's structure to make it stronger .
 It is the cost of escaping from the system or of changing the rules of the game . It is also the cost to escape the system and change the rules, the author says . The cost of escapeing the system is the price of escaping the system .
 The less vulnerable of two countries is not necessarily the less sensitive, but rather the one that would incur lower costs from altering the situation . The less sensitive of two nations would be less sensitive to alter the situation, the author says .
 During the 1973 oil crisis, the U.S. depended on imported energy for only about 16 percent of its total energy uses . The 1973 crisis was the first national oil crisis in the United States . The United States had to rely heavily on foreign energy imports .
 In 1973 Japan depended about 95 percent on imported energy . On the other hand, in 1973 Japan relied on 95 percent of its own energy imports .
 The United States was sensitive to the Arab oil boycott in 1973, but it was not as vulnerable as Japan was . The U.S. was less sensitive than Japan was in 1973 when prices shot up .
 In 1998, the U.S. was sensitive but not vulnerable to East Asian economic conditions . The United States was not particularly vulnerable to the East Asian economy . The U.N. was not as vulnerable as it was in 1998 .
 The financial crisis there cut half a percent off the United States growth rate . The U.S. could afford it, but with a booming economy, the U.K. could .
 Indonesia, on the other hand, was both sensitive and vulnerable to changes in global trade and investment patterns . Indonesia was both vulnerable and sensitive to changes to global trade, investment patterns.
 Its economy suffered severely and that in turn led to internal political conflict . The country's economy suffered badly and that led to political turmoil .
 When the shah of Iran was overthrown in 1979, Iranian oil production was disrupted at a time when demand was high and markets were already tight . The shah's overthrow was a major oil production disruption .
 The loss of Iran’s oil caused the total amount of oil on the world markets to drop by about 5 percent . The loss is caused by the loss of the Iranian oil .
 Markets were sensitive, and shortages of supply caused a rapid increase in oil prices . Markets are sensitive and markets are sensitive to shortages of oil supply .
 Americans could reduce 5 percent of their energy consumption by turning down their thermostats and driving 55 miles per hour . Americans could also reduce their energy use by driving 55 mph .
 It appears that the United States was sensitive but not very vulnerable if it could avoid damage by such simple actions . The U.S. appears to be very vulnerable in the way of such actions .
 The Bank of Japan is under pressure to raise interest rates to bolster the sagging yen . It is the fourth time since May that interest rates have been raised in the country's economy .
 Fear of inflation are also lingering, due to a severe i ij shortage of labor, soaring land prices and rapid growth in the nation’s money supply . Fear is also lingering due to the severe labor shortage and soaring land costs .
 It also depends on whether a society is capable of responding quickly to change, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The United States was less adept at responding to changes in the oil markets than Japan . For example, the U.S. was less able to respond to changes than Japan, the author says .
 Private actors, large corporations, and speculators in the market may each look at a market situation and decide to hoard supplies because they think shortages will grow worse .
 Their actions will drive the price even higher because it will make the shortages greater and put more demand on the market . The price will be even greater because of the shortages and demand .
 Thus degrees of vulnerability are not quite as simple as they first look, says CNN.com .
 Vulnerability also depends on whether substitutes are available and whether there are diverse sources of supply . Vulnerability depends on availability of substitutes and availability of supply, experts say .
 In 1970, Lester Brown of the World Watch Institute expressed alarm about the increasing dependence of the United States, on imported raw materials, and therefore its vulnerability . Lester Brown expressed concern about the U.S. dependence on imported materials .
 The United States was dependent on imports for nearly 90 percent of aluminum, chromium, manganese, and nickel . Of 13 basic industrial raw materials, the U.S. is dependent on importing for nearly 80 percent of those materials .
 By 1985 the United States would be dependent on imports in 10 of the basic 13 U.S. basic products . He predicted that by 1985 the U.K. would be reliant on imports .
 Brown failed to consider the alternative sources of raw materials and the diversity of sources of supply that prevented producers from jacking up prices artificially .
 Companies now mine discarded tailings because new technology has made it possible to extract copper from ore that was considered depleted waste years ago .
 Today’s reduced use of copper is also due to the introduction of fiber-optic cables made from silicon, whose basic origin is sand . The use of these cables is due to a decrease in copper usage .
 Projections of U.S. vulnerability to shortages of raw materials were inaccurate because technology and alternatives were not considered . Technology and alternatives not adequately considered, experts say .
 Some analysts refer to advanced economies today as information-based in the sense that computers, communications, and the Internet are becoming dominant factors in economic growth .
 The value of information embedded in products is often greater than the value of the raw materials involved . Such economies are sometimes called “lightweight” economies because of the information .
 Such changes depreciate the value of raw materials in world politics . Such changes further depreciates the value in politics, say experts .
 Oil still plays a significant role in most advanced economies, particularly for transportation . One of the few exceptions is oil, which still plays significant role for transport .
 A large portion of the world’s currently known oil reserves are located in the Persian Gulf . This in turn contributes to the strategic significance of the region . The Persian Gulf is one of the largest oil reserves in the world .
 Symmetry of Interdependence refers to situations of relatively balanced versus unbalanced dependence . Symmetric refers to a relatively balanced vs. relatively balanced situation . Symetry is defined as the result of a balance of dependence .
 If two parties are interdependent but one is less dependent than the other, the less dependent party has a source of power as long as both value the interdependent relationship . Less dependent parties can have power if they value interdependent relationships .
 Manipulating the asymmetries of interdependence can be a source of power in international politics, says David Cameron . The world's most powerful nations should be able to rely on each other, he says .
 Chart demonstrating the asymmetric nature of interdependence away the most interesting political behavior . Chart shows that the relationship between the two countries is very fragile .
 Such perfect symmetry is quite rare; so are cases of complete imbalance in which one side is totally dependent and the other is not dependent at all . Such perfect symmetrical symmetry is rare, but it is rare to find it quite rare .
 In the 1980s, the United States became dependent on imported Japanese capital to balance its federal government budget . President Reagan cut taxes and raised expenditures to balance the U.S. budget .
 Some argued that this gave Japan tremendous power over the United States . Some argued this gave the U.S. tremendous power .
 Japan would hurt itself as well as the U.S. if it stopped lending to the United States. But the other side of the coin was that Japan would be hurt by stopping lending .
 Japanese investors who already had large stakes in the U.S. would have found their investments devalued by the damage done to the American economy .
 Japan’s economy was a little more than half the size of the American economy . That meant the Japanese needed the American market for their exports more than vice versa . Both needed each other and both benefited from the interdependence .
 A similar relationship has developed today between the U.S. and China . The relationship between China and the United States is similar .
 America accepts Chinese imports, and China holds American dollars and bonds, in effect making a loan to the U.S. America accepts China imports, but it holds American dollar and bonds . China is making a debt to the United States .
 Security was often linked to other issues in the U.S.-Japanese relationship . Security was also linked to the relationship between Japan and the United States .
 After World War II, Japan followed the policy of a trading state and did not develop a large military capability or gain nuclear weapons . Japan followed a policy of not developing military capability and not developing nuclear weapons after the war .
 It relied on the American security guarantee to balance the power of the Soviet Union and China in the East Asian region .
 The U.S. and Japan made concessions to prevent weakening the overall security relationship . The Japanese made concessions when a dispute seemed to be developing over trade in 1990 .
 When there is an asymmetry of interdependence in different issue areas, a state may try to link or unlink issues . State may also try to unlink or link issues, such as the issue of national security, it says .
 If each issue could be thought of as a separate poker game, all poker games were played simultaneously, one state might have most of the chips at one table . Another state might be playing a poker game at another table, and the chips are at another .
 Depending on a state’s interests and position, it might want to keep the games separate or create linkages between the tables . Depending on the interest and position of a state, the games may be kept separate .
 Much of the political conflict over interdependence involves the creation or prevention of linkage . Therefore, much of the conflict is over inter-inter-interdependency .
 In 1996 the United States threatened sanctions against foreign companies that invested in Iran, but when faced with European threats of retaliation through other linkages, the U.S. backed down . The United States backed down in 1996, but faced with other threats from European threats .
 International institutions often set the rules for the trade-offs in interdependent relationships . International institutions set agendas and define issue areas, setting agendas and defining issue areas .
 States try to use international institutions to set the rules that affect the transfer of chips among tables . States use the power of international institutions in order to set rules on how chips are distributed .
 International institutions can benefit the weaker players by keeping some of the conflicts in which poorer states are relatively better endowed separated from the military table, where strong states dominate .
 The danger remains, however, that some players will be strong enough to overturn one or more of the tables . The danger is that some of the current players may be stronger enough to topple one of the top tables .
 With separate institutions for money, shipping, pollution, and trade, if the militarily strong players are beaten too badly there is a danger they may try to kick over the other tables .
 The U.S. and Europe were beaten at the oil table in 1973, but did not use their preponderant military force to kick it over the table . A complex web of linkages held them back because, as we see later, a complex web was held back by a
 The largest state does not always win in the manipulation of economic interdependence, says the author of the book . "The largest state in the world is not always winning," he says .
 If a smaller or weaker state has a greater concern about an issue, it may do quite well . If a weaker state is concerned about it, it could do well well .
 Canada is more dependent on the United States than vice versa . The United States accounts for nearly threequarters of Canada’s foreign trade . Canada accounts for about one-quarter of the U.S. foreign trade.
 Canada often prevailed in a number of disputes with the United States because Canada was willing to threaten retaliatory actions, such as tariffs and restrictions . The U.S. was often deterred by Canada's threats of retaliatory measures .
 The Canadians would have suffered much more than the United States if their actions had led to a full dispute . Canada felt it was better to risk occasional retaliation than to agree to rules that would always make it lose . The Canadian government felt it would be better than the U.S.
 Deterrence via manipulation of economic interdependence is somewhat like nuclear deterrence in that it rests on a capability for effective damage and credible intentions . Deterrence rests on capability to damage and carry out credible intentions, experts say .
 Small states can often use their greater intensity and greater credibility to overcome their relative vulnerability in asymmetrical interdependence . Small states often use greater intensity to overcome the relative vulnerability of their own small states .
 A natural outgrowth of rising interdependence is the proliferation of trade pacts . Trade pacts are a natural growth in the global economy . The U.S. is one of the fastest growing economies in the world .
 The European Union is the most sophisticated of these agreements and requires its member states to forfeit not just some economic sovereignty, but political sovereignty as well . The EU is one of the world's most sophisticated agreements, with member states forfeiting economic sovereignty and political sovereignty .
 For Mexico and Canada, NAFTA was appealing because it bound their economies more tightly to the larger U.S. economy . NAFTA increased their access to United States markets and increased their ability to export their products to the United States . NAFTA was a boon for Mexico, Canada .
 NAFTA expanded the realm of United States exports and made it easier for U.S. companies to do business in Canada and Mexico . For the United States, NAFTA expanded its realm of exports . NAFTA was a boon for the U.N. companies in Canada, Mexico and other countries .
 Regional pacts such as NAFTA may increase interdependence and lessen the asymmetry in a relationship . NAFTA is a regional pact that may increase the need for regional pacts to lessen the neediness of relationships .
 When the value of the Mexican peso plummeted in 1994, the Clinton administration rushed in early 1995 to shore up the flagging currency . The Clinton administration assembled a multibillion-dollar aid package in 1995 .
 At a time when Congress is deadlocked over increased domestic spending for services such as health care, the administration saw little choice but to rescue the peso . The peso is worth about $1.5 billion .
 Even strong countries can find themselves sensitive to economic developments beyond their borders . With greater interdependence, even strong countries may find them sensitive to developments beyond borders .
 In 1997, when Southeast Asia'suffered its financial crisis, the United States was less vulnerable than in 1997 . The U.S. responded primarily through multilateral institutions, including multilateral financial institutions .
 Fears of an economic domino effect in which collapse of some developing economies would undermine confidence in others . U.S. and other advanced economies could not continue to stand idly by .
 In the nineteenth century, Great Britain was the strongest of the major world economies . In the 19th century, Britain was one of the world's strongest economies .
 In the monetary area, the Bank of England adhered to the gold standard, which set a stable framework for world money . In the financial system, it was set up to set up the world's gold standard .
 Britain enforced freedom of the seas for navigation and commerce, and provided a large open market for world trade until 1932 . Britain also enforced freedom .
 After World War I, Britain was severely weakened by its fight against the Kaiser’s Germany . After the war, Britain suffered a series of devastating defeats .
 The U.S. turned away from international affairs in the 1930s . The United States became the world’s largest economy, but it turned away .
 The largest player in the world economy behaved as if it could still take a free ride rather than provide the leadership its size implied . The U.S. Treasury is the largest bank in world and largest economy .
 Some economists believe that the Great Depression of the 1930s was aggravated by bad monetary policy and lack of U.S. leadership . Some economists say that the Depression was worsened by the lack of American leadership .
 Britain was too weak to maintain an open international economy, U.S. was not living up to its new responsibilities . Britain was not strong enough to maintain open international trade, the author says .
 Bretton Woods established institutions to maintain an open, international economy . After World War II, the lessons of the 1930s were on the minds of U.S. leaders . The conference established institutions for an open economy .
 The International Monetary Fund lends money, usually to developing countries and new market economies, to help when they have difficulties with their balance of payments or with paying interest on their debts .
 IMF generally conditions its loans on the recipient country reforming its economic policies, such as reducing budget deficits and price subsidies . The IMF's loans are conditional on reforming the recipient countries' economic policies .
 IMF played a role in helping the Russian economy in the early 1990s as well as in the Asian financial crisis later in the decade . While its policies are sometimes controversial and not always effective, the IMF has played a key role in Russia's economy .
 The International Bank for Reconstruction a*d Development lends money to poorer countries and new market economies for development projects . The bank is based in the United States .
 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development serves as a forum for thirty of the most developed countries to coordinate their economic policies . Organization is based in the United States and Canada .
 Since the mid'1970s, the leaders of the seven largest economies have met at annual summit conferences to discuss conditions of the world economy . The seven nations account for two-thirds of world production . Since the 1970s, they have held annual summits to discuss economic conditions .
 These institutions helped reinforce government policies that allow rapid growth of private transnational interactions . These institutions are key to government policies allowing rapid growth in transnational interaction .
 In most of the period after 1945, trade grew between 3 and 9 percent per year, faster than the growth of the world product . Trade grew faster than growth of world product, according to the OECD .
 International trade represented 10 percent of the United States GDP in 1960 . International trade more than doubled to 22 percent of U.S. GDP by the 1990s and was roughly 25 percent of GDP in 2004 .
 Large multinational corporations with global strategies became more significant as international investments increased by nearly 10 percent per year . International investments increased nearly 10 per year, according to the study .
 Gritics have argued that the major international economic institutions are biased in favor of rich rather than poor countries . They say the major economic institutions in the world are biased towards rich countries .
 IMF and World Bank have weighted voting that gives a preponderant influence to the United States, Europe, and Japan . The IMF and the World Bank, for example, are weighted voting .
 The Fund has always been directed by a European and the Bank by an American . The Fund is always directed by European and American .
 IMF bureaucrats insist on a return to market discipline as a condition for help . The United States is able to run fiscal and trade deficits with only the mildest of criticism . But when poor countries incur similar debts, IMF officials insist on market discipline .
 The institutions reflect the underlying power of the asymmetrical interdependence of financial markets . In other words, the institutions reflect an underlying power in financial markets, the authors say .
 Abolishing the IMF would not change the underlying power reality in financial markets . Abolish the IMF is not going to change the power of the world's financial markets, analysts say .
 Leaving matters to private bankers and fund managers might make it even more difficult for poor countries to borrow . If anything, leaving matters to bankers and managers will make it harder for poor nations to borrow more .
 Critics argue that the agreements countries negotiate within its framework (such as the current Doha ‘development round’ of multilateral trade talks) have allowed rich countries to protect areas such as agriculture and textiles .
 The critics are correct, and the protectionist policies hurt poor countries . The critics describe the critics descriptions are correct . Protectionist policies are correct and they hurt poor nations .
 The causes of protection' ism lie in the domestic politics of the rich countries, writes Andrew Hammond . But the causes of such protection lie in domestic politics, he says .
 International institutions can alleviate but not remove the underlying power realities, says CNN's John Defterios .
 The United States and Europe have abided by costly decisions made against them by WTO panels . The fact that institutions can make a difference, even if at the margin, sug' gests that institutions such as the WTO can make an impact .
 Even among the rich and powerful countries, there are problems in managing a transnational economy in a world of separate states . There are problems among the world's richest and most powerful countries .
 In the 1980s and again after 2001, the United States became a net debtor when it refused to tax itself to pay its bills at home and instead borrowed money from abroad . The U.S. refused to pay taxes at home, instead of paying taxes, and borrowed money abroad .
 Other countries continued to lend it money because they had confidence in its economy . But the United States did not decline and turn inward, and the U.S. did not turn inward .
 China, for example, continues to hold large reserves in dollars as a means to facilitate its exports to the U.S. China is still holding large reserves of dollars in dollars .
 In 1999 most members of the European Union created a European monetary unit with a single currency, the euro . Some think the euro may come to rival the dollar as another world reserve currency .
 Global financial markets have grown dramatically in recent years, and their volatility poses risks to stability . In addition to global financial markets, the volatility of these markets poses a risk to stability, the authors say .
 Much will depend on the willingness of their governments to pursue policies that maintain stability in the international economic system . Much of the world's economic stability depends on their governments' policies .
 "In any case, the global political and economic system is more complicated and complex than before," he says . The global political system, he says, is more complex and complex now than before .
 More sectors, more states, more issues, and more private actors are involved in the complexity of interdependent relationships . More sectors and more states will be involved in complex interdependent relations .
 It is increasingly unrealistic to analyze world politics as occurring solely among a group of large states, writes David Frum . Frum says it is impossible to predict how world politics will unfold .
 These assumptions are that states are the only significant actors, military force is the dominant instrument, and security is the primary goal . The assumptions are based on state and military force are the dominant instruments, the author says .
 States are not the only significant actors, transnational actors working across state boundaries are also major players . Economic manipulation and the use of international institutions are the dominant instruments . Security is not the dominant goal, security is not security, welfare is the primary goal, says the author .
 It is an imaginary concept that does not exist in the real world, but as we have seen, neither does realism perfectly fit the reality world . It is not the first time we've seen a concept that doesn't exist in real world .
 Complex interdependence is a thought experiment that allows us to imagine a different type of world politics . Complex interdependency is a political thought experiment, says John Defterios .
 Both realism and complex interdependence are simple models or ideal types . The ideal types are models of realism or complex inter-independence .
 We can ask where certain country relationships fit on a spectrum between realism and complex inter-ependence . We can also ask if certain countries relationships fit in a spectrum of realism .
 The Middle East is closer to the realist end of the spectrum, but relations between the U.S. and Canada are closer to interdependence . Relations between France and Germany today come much closer than the complex inter-dependence of the Middle East, author says .
 Different polities and different forms of the power struggle occur depending on where on the spectrum a particular relationship between a set of countries is located . Different forms of power struggle are possible depending on the relationship .
 United States imports from China far outstrip United States exports . U.S. imports from Chinese far outstripped U.K. exports . China is the world's largest source of trade and energy-related imports in the world .
 The bilateral trade relationship between the U.S. and China is asymmetrical in China’s favor . The United States is not particularly vulnerable to potential Chinese trade embargoes . China has strong domestic incentives to export to the United States .
 The potential size of the Chinese market for American goods and domestic demand for Chinese goods in the U.S. mean that the ability of the United States government to act against China is somewhat constrained by transnational actors . Transnational actors, including United States multinational corporations, have pressured the U
 The rapid growth of China’s economic and military strength had a strong effect on the perceptions of the balance of power in East Asia . It contributed to the reinvigoration of the U.S.-Japan security alliance starting in 1995, says author .
 Before the 2003 Iraq War, Robert Kagan argued that many European countries were less willing to confront dangerous dictators like Saddam Hussein because they had become accustomed to the peaceful conditions of complex interdependence that prevailed inside Europe .
 Of course this clever phrase was too simple , but it captured different perceptions across the Atlantic . Of course it was too simplistic .
 In their relations with each other, all advanced democracies form Kantian islands of peace in the sea of Hobbesian realism . All advanced democracies have a Kantian island of peace, Hobbes said .
 In its relations with Canada, Europe, and Japan,.even the United States is from Venus . The U.S. has a long history of diplomatic relations .
 It is equally mistaken to pretend that the whole world is typified by Hobbesian realism or by Kantian complex interdependence . It is also mistaken to think that the world should be typified in Hobbes or Kantian realism .
 Oil is the most important raw material in the world, in both economic and political terms . Oil is likely to remain the key source of energy well into this century .
 Even with high Chinese growth, the world is not running out of oil anytime soon . The world will need to rely on oil for the long-term, however .
 More than a trillion barrels of reserves have been proven, and more is likely to be found . More than 1.4 billion barrels have been found in the world's largest oil reserves .
 Two-thirds of the proven reserves are in the Persian Gulf and therefore vulnerable to political disruption . Political disruption could have devastating effects on the world economy . The world's largest oil reserves are thought to be in the region .
 As one wag put it, if the gulf produced broccoli instead of oil, the wars might not have occurred . The wars might have been averted by the fact that oil was not produced by oil .
 Oil not only is important in itself, but also illustrates aspects of realism and complex interdependence . Thus oil is important enough to illustrate aspects of both realism and realism, says the author .
 Interdependence in a given area often occurs within a framework of rules, norms, and institutions that are called a regime . A regime is a framework that includes rules and norms, such as a regime, that is called a 'regime'
 The international oil regime has changed dramatically over the decades . Oil prices have risen dramatically in recent years .
 In 1960, the oil regime was a private oligopoly with close ties to the governments of the major consuming countries . The oil regime in 1960 was an oil regime that was privately owned .
 Oil at that time sold for about $2 a barrel, and seven large transnational oil companies, sometimes called the “seven sisters,” determined the amount of oil that would be produced . Oil at the time was about $1 a barrel .
 The price of oil depended on how much the large companies produced and on the demand in the rich countries where most of the oil was sold . Oil prices depend on the amount of oil produced and demand in rich countries .
 Transnational companies set the rate of production, and prices were determined by conditions in rich countries . Prices were set by companies set by international companies .
 The strongest powers in the international system in traditional military terms occasionally intervened to keep the system going . The strongest countries in the world's political system intervene to keep it going .
 Britain and the U.S. covertly intervened to return the Shah of Iran to his throne in 1953 . In 1953, when a nationalist movement tried to overthrow the Shah, the UK intervened .
 As mentioned earlier, after 1973 there was a major change in the international regime governing oil . After 1973, the international oil embargo was imposed on Libya .
 The producing countries set the rate of production and therefore had a strong effect on price, rather than price being determined solely by the market in the rich countries . Price is set by the production rate and therefore has a strong impact on price .
 There was an enormous shift of power and wealth from rich to relatively poor countries, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: There was a shift of wealth and power to poor countries .
 The U.S. considered the use of force to seize Persian Gulf oil fields in 1973, according to documents released in 2004 . Confidential documents show that in response to the Arab oil embargo of 1973, the United States had considered using force .
 The regime changed in favor of the weaker countries. But it did not do so, and the regime did not change, it did so .
 OPEC was formed in 1960 and the dramatic change did not occur until 1973 . The trouble with this explanation is that OPEC didn't form until the 1970s . OPEC is the world's largest oil-heavy trading group in the world .
 Realists look at changes in the balance of power resting primarily on military force . The Persian Gulf, the major oil-exporting region of the world, is a key region for the U.S.
 In 1960, half of the OPEC countries were colonies of Europe; by 1973, they were all independent . In 1973, OPEC countries had all been independent from their colonies .
 The rise in nationalism was accompanied by a rise in the costs of military intervention . Accompanying the rise in nationalistic nationalism was a rise of the costs .
 It is much more expensive to use force against a nationalistically awakened and decolonized people, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: It is more expensive than using force against people who have awakened .
 When the British and Americans intervened in Iran in 1953, it was not very costly . But if the Americans had tried to keep the Shah on his throne in 1979, the costs would have been prohibitive . The costs would be prohibitive if the Shah were kept in Iran .
 Relative changes in U.S. and British power also affected the balance of power in the Persian Gulf . Relative changes were also affected by changes in the United States and Britain .
 Britain was trying to cut back on its international defense commitments in 1971 . But by 1971 Britain was economically weakened, and the British government was cutting back its international commitments .
 Britain was unable to maintain its role as a power in the eastern Mediterranean in 1947 . That may sound a bit like 1947, when Britain failed to maintain a role in eastern Mediterranean .
 At that time, the United States stepped in to help Greece and Turkey, and formulated the Truman Doctrine . The Truman Doctrine was formulated by the Truman administration .
 In 1971, the United States was not well placed to step in to replace Britain as it did in 1947 . But in 1971 the U.S. was not as well placed in the world as it was in 1947.
 The United States was deeply embroiled in Vietnam and unwilling to accept an additional major military commitment in the Persian Gulf . The U.S. was deeply involved in the Vietnam War and was reluctant to accept a major commitment .
 President Nixon and then National Security Adviser Kissinger designed a strategy that relied heavily on regional powers . Nixon and Kissinger designed an American strategy relying heavily on the regional powers of the Middle East .
 By using Iran as the regional hegemon, they thought they could replace the departing British policeman cheaply . They thought they would replace them with Iran, they said .
 A realist would point to these changes in the overall structure of power, particularly the balance of power in the Persian Gulf region, to explain the change in the oil regime .
 A second way of explaining the change is a modified form of realism that focuses on the relative market power of various nations, such as Russia .
 Between 1950 and 1973 serious changes occurred in global oil consumption that altered U.S. dependence on foreign oil . The United States is now dependent on most of the world's oil production .
 Until 1971, the United States was the largest oil producer in the world . The United States, until 1971, was the world's largest producer of oil .
 American production peaked in 1971; American imports began to grow thereafter . The United States no longer had any surplus oil . The U.S. had no surplus oil in 1971 .
 Arab countries tried an oil embargo during the two Middle East wars of 1956 and 1967, but their efforts were easily defeated . The United States was producing enough oil to supply Europe when it was cut off by Arab countries .
 The power to balance the oil market switched to countries like Saudi Arabia and Iran . American production peaked in 1971 and the U.S. began to import oil .
 The United States no longer was the supplier of last resort that could make up any missing oil . The U.S. was no longer the last resort to make up the missing oil, it said .
 When a multinational corporation goes into a resource-rich country with a new investment, it can strike a bargain in which the multinational gets a large part of the joint gains . The deal is a bargain between the two companies .
 From the point of view of the poor country, having a multinational come in to develop its resources will make it better off, says the president . "Having a multinational coming in will make the country better off," he says .
 Even if it gets only 20 percent of the revenues and the multinational gets 80 percent, the poor country has more than it had before . Even if the country gets less than 20 percent, it has more to it than it did before .
 At the early stages when multinationals have a monopoly on capital, technology, and access to international markets, they strike a bargain with the poor countries in which the multinationals get the lion’s share . So at the beginning of the world's economic boom, multinationals strike a
 Over time, the multinationals inadvertently transfer resources to the poor countries, not out of charity but in the normal course of business . The move is not charity, but it's a way of business, not charity .
 The Saudis, Kuwaitis, and others learn how to run oil fields, pumping stations, and loading docks . Saudi Arabia, Kuwaiti, Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states learn to run fields .
 The multinational could threaten to pull out, but now the poor country can threaten to run the operation by itself . The company could pull out of the project .
 The power of the multinational company, particularly in raw materials, diminishes in terms of its bargaining with the host country . So over time, the power of multinational companies, such as foreign companies, is diminished, says CNN.com .
 From the 1960s to 1973, multinationals inadvertently transferred technology and skills that developed the poor countries’ capacity to run oil operations themselves . The technology was transferred to poor countries from multinationals .
 The seven sisters were joined by ‘little cousins’ when new transnational corporations entered the oil market . The sisters say they are proud to be part of the world's largest oil industry .
 Although they were not as large as the seven sisters, they were still big, and they began to strike their own deals with the oil-producing countries .
 When an oil-producing country wanted to get out of the hands of the seven sisters, it could strike a deal with smaller independent multinationals . Thus when an oil producing country . wanted to avoid the hands . of the . sisters, they could strike deals with independent multinational companies .
 OPEC has a modest increase in the effectiveness of the cartel as a cartel, OPEC says . Institutionally, there was an increase in OPEC's effectiveness, OPEC said in a statement .
 Cartels restricting supply had long been typical in the oil industry, but in the past they had been private arrangements of the seven sisters . Cartels restrict supply of oil, but it has been a private arrangement of the sisters .
 Cartels have a problem because there is a tendency to cheat on production quotas when markets are soft and the price drops . Cartels generally cheat on quotas when market is soft and price drops, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Cartels work best when there is a shortage of oil, but when there's a surplus, people want to sell their oil . People tend to cut the price in order to get a bigger share of the market . Cartels are best to cut oil prices when it is a surplus .
 OPEC represented an effort to shift from a private to a governrfiental cartel of the oil-producing countries . OPEC represented a private effort to become a governing body of oil-producer countries .
 OPEC had trouble exercising power because there was plenty of oil in its early years . OPEC has struggled to exercise its power because of the lack of oil .
 OPEC countries had incentives to cheat to get a larger share of the market, OPEC says . As long as oil was in surplus, OPEC countries cheated to get bigger share of market, he says .
 OPEC was unable to enforce price discipline from the year it was founded, 1960, until the early 1970s . OPEC was founded in 1960, but it was not able to impose price discipline until the 1970s, OPEC says .
 OPEC’s role in coordinating the bargaining power of the producers increased after oil supplies tightened . OPEC is now coordinating its bargaining power with other oil producers .
 The Middle East War of 1973 gave OPEC a boost, a signal that now it could use its power . OPEC was weakened by the war, but now it is able to use that power .
 The Arab countries cut off access to oil during the 1973 war for political reasons, but that created a situation in which OPEC could become effective . The Arab nations cut off oil access to Arab countries during the war . OPEC became effective in 1973 after the Arab-Arab conflict .
 Shah of Iran moved to quadruple oil prices and the other OPEC countries followed suit . Iran, which is not an Arab country, was allegedly the American instrument for policing the Persian Gulf .
 OPEC could not maintain permanently high prices because of market forces, says analyst . But there was a stickiness on the downside that was an effect of the OPEC coalition, he says . OPEC coalition can't maintain permanent high prices, he adds .
 A more important institutional factor was the role the oil companies played in ‘smoothing the pain” in the crisis itself, says David Gergen . Gergen: Oil companies played a key role in smoothing out the pain .
 Henry Kissinger said that if the U.S. faced “strangulation,” force might have to be used . Henry Kissinger, by now secretary of state, said force might be needed . Kissinger: "If the United States faced ‘stangulation’,
 Arab embargo reduced U.S. oil exports to the United States by 25 percent . Fifteen percent of traded oil was cut, and the embargo reduced 15 percent .
 Oil companies made sure that no one country suffered much more than any other . However, oil companies ensured no one nation suffered more from their oil wealth .
 When the United States lost 25 percent of its Arab oil imports, the companies shipped it more Venezuelan or Indonesian oil . The U.S. oil companies shipped more Venezuelan and Indonesian oil than Arab oil .
 They helped prevent the economic conflict from becoming a military conflict . The U.S. helped prevent it from becoming an economic conflict, experts say .
 Transnational companies want to maximize their profit in the long term . Transnational firms are long-term profit maximizers, says John Defterios .
 The multinational companies feared situations in which they would be nationalized in a country if they refused to sell to that country . The multinationals feared situations would be .
 Prime Minister Edward Heath of Britain demanded that the head of British Petroleum sell only to Britain and not to other countries . For example, he demanded that that British oil be sold to Britain .
 The head of British Petroleum replied that if he followed such an order, the company would be nationalized by those other countries, which would destroy British Petroleum . British Petroleum says such a move would destroy the company .
 Oil companies tried to stabilize the market rather than have the pain strike any one country strongly . Oil companies were long-run profit maximizers, they tried to stabilize the market, he says .
 By reducing the threat of strangulation, they reduced the probability that force would be used, the police say .
 Oil is an illustration of an issue that falls between the ideal types of realism and complex interdependence . In short, oil is an example of the ideal type of realism that falls in between realism and complexity .
 Changes in three dimensions explain the dramatic difference between the oil regime of 1960 and 1973 . The balance of power, the issue structure of power and the institutions within the oil issue area are key to changing the situation .
 By cutting production and embargoing sales to countries friendly to Israel, Arab states were able to bring their issues to the forefront of the U.S. agenda . Arab states have been able to raise their issues with the United States .
 Japan, Europe, and the U.S. are at odds in the Middle East . They created temporary disarray in the alliances between Japan and Europe . They also created disarray between the United States, Japan, and Europe.
 France and Japan took independent positions in order to protect their oil supplies . Japan and France took separate positions to protect its own oil supply .
 The oil weapon encouraged the U.S. to play a more conciliatory role in arranging the settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute in the aftermath of the Yom Kippur War .
 On the other hand, the oil weapon did not change the basic policy of the U.S. in the Middle East . The oil weapon is not the only weapon to change the United States' policy in the region .
 The Americans did not suddenly switch from their alliance with Israel to support the Arab cause . The U.S. did not switch from its alliance with the Israeli government to support Arab causes . The Americans are not changing their stance on Israel, they say .
 Oil was a power resource that had an effect, but not a strong enough effect to reverse U.S. policy . Oil was not a powerful enough resource to reverse American policy .
 Saudi Arabia, which became the key country in oil markets, had large investments in the U.S. Saudi Arabia had large investment in the United States .
 If the Saudis damaged the U.S. economy too much, they would also hurt their own economic interests . The Saudis would also be hurt by the United States' economic interests, he says .
 Saudi Arabia depended on the U.S. in the security area, Saudi Arabia said . Saudi Arabia's economy has been hit hard by an economic downturn .
 In the long run, the U.S. was the only country able to keep a stable balance of power in the Persian Gulf region . The United States was the last country to keep the balance in the Gulf region, CNN says .
 The Saudis knew this and they were careful about how far they pushed the oil weapon, CNN's John Sutter says . The Saudis were careful not to push too far, he says .
 There was no military intervention because strangulation never occurred . There was never a military intervention .
 The Saudis were benefiting from the long-run security guarantee provided by the U.S. The Saudis are benefiting from a long-term security guarantee from the United States .
 Force was too costly to use overtly, but it played a role as a power resource in the background . Force was used as a tool of power in the past, but was too expensive to use .
 Oil remains an exception among raw materials, and this contributed in part to the two Gulf Wars and to the continuing strong U.S. naval presence in the Persian Gulf . Oil is the only raw material left in the United States' hands .
 Global oil prices are sensitive to global market forces . But multinationals’ exploration for new supplies in Central Asia and other regions has increased supply .
 Prices at the end of the century had returned to historical lows before the 1973 crisis . Prices at end of century had . returned to . historical lows .
 The nightmare oil scenarios predicted during the 1970s failed to materialize . The worst oil scenarios never materialized during that era .
 The United States Department of Energy forecast that oil would cost more than $100 a barrel by 2000 . The U.S. government forecast that the price of oil would rise to $100 by 2000 by that time .
 On the demand side, policy measures and price increases led to more efficient use of energy . Policy measures also led to increased efficiency in energy use, energy efficiency .
 Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency law in the U.S. mandated that automakers manufacture cars that achieved minimum standards for gas mileage . For example, the law required that cars achieve minimum gas mileage standards .
 This is an example of a domestic policy that had a clear intended effect on foreign policy . This is one of many examples of foreign policy gone from domestic policy to domestic policy . The U.S. House of Representatives will hold a hearing in New York City next week .
 OPEC faced more competition on the world market . The emergence of non-OPEC oil sources that were unavailable during the Cold War meant that OPEC faced competition .
 Caspian Sea reserves also offer another promising outlet outside OPEC’s control . The Caspan Sea reserves are also expected to be released in the next few years .
 Advances in technology led geologists to gain access to oil that had previously been impossible to reach . Geologists reveal the limitations of the projections that were made in the 1970s about global reserves .
 Two growing giants will influence the future of energy markets; China and India . India is one of the fastest-growing countries in the world, China is the fastest growing economy .
 As the two most populous nations on earth, both are experiencing rapid increases in demand for energy as they modernize and industrialize . The two countries are experiencing a rapid increase in energy demand .
 Both countries are making efforts to control foreign oil supplies . Oil markets tend to spread supplies and even out the pain no matter who owns it .
 China also has vast coal reserves as well as natural gas in its western Xinjiang province . China will increasingly rely on imports to meet its •growing needs .
 Both countries use fossil fuels that may have global implications in terms of air pollution, and climate change . Both countries also face serious environmental challenges from their use of fossil fuels .
 In any event, their rapid economic growth will contribute significantly to the global demand for oil . The U.S. is the world's largest oil exporter .
 The U.S. will likely continue to rely on imported oil to meet its energy needs . The biggest global oil-producing regions, such as the Persian Gulf, will still play a key role in geopolitics . The United States will likely still rely heavily on oil imports .
 Saudi Arabia and its neighbors will meet two-thirds of global oil demand between now and 2030, experts say . Experts predict that Saudi Arabia will meet 2-3% of the increased global demand that takes place .
 While raw materials are less crucial in information age economies than in the industrial age, oil still matters . Oil still matters in the information age age economies .
 Growing global networks of economic inter-independence produce joint gains, they can also create political problems . Growing global inter-economic inter-dependency produces joint gains but also creates political problems, experts say .
 Power politics just becomes more complex in an era of economic globalization . Power politics is more complex than ever before, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Liberal theory was optimistic that increasing international commerce would decrease the attractiveness of military force as a tool in international politics . Liberal theory hoped that increasing commerce would reduce the attractiveness .
 Under classical realist assumptions, we would not expect to see cooperation among states under conditions of anarchy, says Julian Zelizer . The world's most powerful state of independent nations would not be cooperating under anarchy, he says .
 James J McCarthy, “The Scope of the IPCC Third Assessment Report,” Climate Report , 3.3.5.5 . McCarthy: The scope of the report is the scope of IPCC’s assessment of climate change .
 Joseph Stiglitz, “Weightless Concerns,” Financial Times , February 3, 1999, 14.14. Joseph Stiggitz, "Weightless concerns," Financial Times, Feb. 2, 1999 .
 Robert O. Keohane, Robert O., and Joseph S Nye, Jr., Power and Interdependence, 2nd ed. Joseph S. Nye Jr., Jr., wrote a book on the topic .
 An information revolution is currently transforming world politics . The revolution is being transformed by the information revolution .
 Francis Bacon wrote that knowledge is power . Bacon: "Knowledge is power. Knowledge is power"
 Governments have always worried about the flow of information and control of information . The current period is not the first to be strongly affected by changes in technology .
 Gutenberg’s invention of movable type is often credited with playing a major role in the onset of the Reformation . Gutenberg's invention allowed printing of the Bible and its accessibility to large portions of the European population .
 Pamphlets and committees of correspondence paved the way for the American Revolution . The American Revolution was founded in 17th century .
 As constructivists point out, rapid changes in information flows can lead to important changes in identities and interests . Rapid changes of information flows lead to changes in identity and interests, they say .
 The current information revolution is based on rapid technological advances in computers, communications, and software that in turn have led to dramatic decreases in the cost of processing and transmitting information . Technology has led to a dramatic decrease in cost of sending and sending information .
 Computing power doubled every 18 months for 30 years . By the beginning of the twentyfirst century it cost one-thousandth of what it did in the early 1970s .
 If price of automobiles had fallen as quickly as the price of semiconductors, a car today would cost five dollars . The price of cars today would be five dollars if the price had fallen faster .
 Communications bandwidths are expanding rapidly, and communications costs continue to fall even more rapidly than computing power . Communications costs are falling more rapidly as computing power increases .
 A thin strand of optical fiber can transmit 90,000 volumes in a second . As late as 1980, phone calls over copper wire could carry only one page of information per second . Today a thin wire can transmit more than one page per second.
 In terms of current dollars, the cost of a brief transatlantic phone call had fallen from $250 in 1930 to considerably less than a dollar at the beginning of the new century . In 1930, a transatlantic call was $250 .
 Webcams allow people to have personal videoconferences from the comfort of their home office . Webcam allows you to have your own videoconference from your home office. Webcam technology is available in the U.S.
 Apple iPod that fits in your pocket comes with 60 gigabytes of storage . In 1980, a gigabyte of storage occupied a room; now an iPod can fit in a pocket . The iPod is now a pocket-sized version of the iPod Nano .
 The crucial change is the enormous reduction in the cost of transmitting information, says the BBC . The BBC says it has been reduced to a fraction of a billion dollars a year to transmit information .
 The amount of information that can be transmitted worldwide is effectively infinite . For all practical purposes, the actual transmission costs have become negligible .
 The result is an explosion of information, of which documents are a tiny fraction . The result of the release of documents is a small fraction of what documents are released .
 By one estimate, there are 1. billion gigabytes of digital magnetically stored information . shipments of such information are doubling each year . The storage of such data is also doubling annually .
 This dramatic change in the linked technologies of computing and communications, sometimes called the “third industrial revolution,” is changing the nature of governments and sovereignty . This change is creating a diffusion of power, the author says .
 In the first industrial revolution around the turn of the nineteenth century, application of steam to mills and transportation had a powerful effect on the economy, society, and government .
 Patterns of production, work, living conditions, social class, and political power were transformed . Patterns of work, work and living conditions were transformed in the 1960s .
 Public education arose as literate trained workers were needed for increasingly complex and potentially dangerous factories . Public education came to prominence in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Police forces such as London’s ‘bobbies’ were created to deal with urbanization . Police forces like London's 'bobbies' were created in response to urbanization.
 Subsidies were provided for the necessary infrastructure of canals and railroads . Subs were provided to build canals, railroads and canals . Subsidied was provided for construction of the canals in the 1930s .
 The “second industrial revolution” around the turn of the twentieth century— electricity, synthetics, and the internal combustion engine—brought similar economic and social changes . The ‘Second industrial revolution,’ is known as the second industrial revolution .
 The United States went from a predominantly agrarian to a primarily industrial and urban nation . The U.S. went from an agriarchy to an industrialized nation .
 A few decades later, the majority lived in cities and worked in factories . The majority of people still live in small towns and factories .
 Social class and political cleavages were altered as urban labor and trade unions became more important . Urban labor, trade unions were more important in the early 1900s .
 The bipartisan progressive movement ushered in antitrust legislation, early consumer protection regulation . It also ushered in economic stabilization by the Federal Reserve Board . The economy has been stabilized by the progressive movement .
 The United States rose to the status of a great power in world politics . The U.S. rose to a status of world politics.
 Some expect the third industrial revolution to produce analogous transformations in the economy, society, government, and world politics . Some expect it to produce similar transformations in society, society and politics .
 Historical analogies help us understand some of the forces that will shape world politics in the twenty-first century . These historical analogies can be used to help explain the forces shaping world politics .
 Economies and information networks have changed more rapidly than governments have . Economies, networks and technology have changed faster than governments do .
 The political scales of sovereignty and authority have not yet grown to a similar scale . The political scale of sovereignty is not yet large enough to determine how much power it has .
 If we focus solely on the hard power of nation-states, we will miss the new reality . The new reality is that the world is no more dependent on nation-state power, it is dependent on nations .
 We are still at an early stage of the current information revolution, and its effects on economics and politics are uneven . The effects of the information revolution are uneven, and the effects on the economy and politics will still be uneven .
 As with steam in the late eighteenth century and electricity, productivity growth lagged as society had to learn to fully utilize the new technologies . The productivity growth of the late nineteenth century lags behind steam, electricity and other technologies .
 Henry Ford pioneered reorganization of factory assembly lines to take full advantage of electric power . The electric motor was invented in 1881, but it was nearly four decades before Henry Ford took advantage of it . Ford pioneered the reorganization in the 1930s .
 The increase in productivity of the U.S. economy began to register only as recently as the mid-1990s . The rise in productivity in the United States began in the 1990s .
 A century ago, mass communications and broadcasting was facilitated by newly cheap electricity . The advent of mass communication and broadcasting provides some lessons about possible social and political effects today, writes Andrew Hammond .
 While information was more widespread, it was more centrally influenced even in democratic countries than in the age of the local press . Local press was more widely influential even in the democratic countries .
 President Roosevelt’s use of radio in the 1930s worked a dramatic shift in American politics . President Roosevelt used the radio to change the course of American politics.
 These effects were particularly pronounced in countries where they were combined with the rise of totalitarian governments that were able to suppress competing sources of information . The effects were especially pronounced in those countries with totalitarian governments .
 Some scholars believe totalitarianism could not have been possible without mass communications . Mass communications came to prominence in the second industrial revolution . The industrial revolution was the birth of mass communication .
 In the middle of the twentieth century, people feared that the computers and communications of the current information revolution would create the central governmental control dramatized in George Orwell’s novel 1984 . People feared that computers would create central government control in Orwell's novel .
 Mainframe computers seemed set to enhance central planning and increase the surveillance powers of those at the top of a pyramid of control . Mainframes computers seemed to be set to increase surveillance powers .
 Through central databases, computers can make government identification and surveillance easier . Commercialization has already altered the early libertarian culture and code of the Internet .
 The technology of encryption is evolving, and programs like Gnutella and Freenet enable users to trade digital information anonymously . Nonetheless, the technology of encrypting data is evolving .
 The Internet is more difficult for governments to control than was the technology of the second information revolution . They promise greater space for individuals than the early pessimists envisioned, says author .
 As computing power has decreased in cost and computers have shrunk in size and become more widely distributed, their decentralizing effects have outweighed their centralizing effects . In the past, computers have been centralized and decentralized .
 The Internet creates a system in which power over information is much more widely distributed . The Internet is a system of which power will be distributed widely .
 New information technologies have tended to foster network organizations, new types of commimity, and demands for different roles for government . Rather than reinforcing centralization and bureaucracy, the new information technology has tended to encourage network organizations .
 What this means is that world politics will not be the sole province of governments, it is claimed . World politics will no longer be the only province of government, it has been claimed .
 Both individuals and private organizations, ranging from corporations to NGOs to terrorists, will be empowered to play direct roles in world politics . The U.S. will be able to play a direct role in the future of world politics, says President Obama .
 The spread of information means that power will be more widely distributed . Informal networks will undercut the monopoly of traditional bureaucracy, says David Cameron .
 The speed of the Internet time means all governments, both here and overseas, will have less control of their agendas . Governments will be less likely to be able to control their agendas if they use the Internet .
 Political leaders enjoy fewer degrees of freedom before they must respond to events . Political leaders will then have to share the stage with more actors, says Julian Zelizer .
 Realist images of sovereign states balancing and bouncing off each other like billiard balls will blind us to the new complexity of world politics, says David Frum . Realist image of nation's sovereignty balancing is a reminder of the complexity of global politics, he says .
 The effects of the third information revolution on central governments are still in their early stages . The effects are still being seen in the early stages of the revolution .
 Peter Drucker and Heidi and Alvin Toffler argue that the information rev' olution is bringing an end to the hierarchical bureaucratic organizations that typified the age of the industrial revolution .
 If these prophets are right, the result would be a new cyberfeudalism, with overlapping communities and jurisdictions laying claim to multiple layers of citizens’ identities and loyalties . It would be the result of overlapping communities, jurisdictions laying claims to each other .
 A medieval European might have owed equal loyalty to a local lord, a duke, a king, and the Pope . A medieval Europe might have been loyal to local lords, dukes, kings and the pope .
 A ffiture European might owe loyalty to Brittany, Paris, Brussels, as well as to several cybercommunities concerned with religion, work and various interests .
 Crosscutting communities and governance resemble the situation before the Peace of Westphalia formalized the state system in 1648 . While sovereign states are still the dominant pattern in interna' tional relations, we can begin to discern a pattern .
 Transnational contacts across political borders were typical in the feudal era, but were gradually constrained by the rise of nationstates . Transnational contact was typical in feudal era but was constrained by rise of centralized nationstates.
 Three decades ago, transnational contacts were already growing, but they involved relatively small numbers of elites involved in multinational corporations, scientific groups, and academic institutions . Today, the number of people in the U.S. is now at the top of the charts .
 The Internet is creating low costs that open transnational communications to millions of people . Now the Internet is enabling low costs to create transnational communication to millions, say experts .
 The issue of sovereignty is hotly contested in world politics today . sovereignty is a key issue in the world's political landscape .
 Political leaders resist anything that seems to diminish national autonomy . Many political leaders resist things that seem to diminish the nation's autonomy .
 They worry about the political role of the U.N. in limiting the use of force, the economic decisions handed down by the World Trade Organization, and efforts to develop environmental institutions and treaties .
 In their eyes, the notion of an international community of opinion is illusory, they say . The notion of a global community is not what they see as .
 The debate over the fate of the sovereign state has been poorly framed, says David Cameron . But the debate has been badly framed, he says .
 Medieval trade fairs were not substitutes for the institutions of feudal authority . Trade fairs are not a substitute for the institution of feudal power, says historian .
 Medieval merchants developed the Lex Mercatoria that governed their relations largely as a private set of rules for conducting business . Medieval merchants used it to govern relations with each other in private .
 Everyone from hackers to large corporations is developing the code and norms of the Internet partly outside the control of formal political institutions .
 The development of transnational corporate intranets behind firewalls and encryption “represent private appropriations of a public space,’s author says . These private systems do not frontally challenge the governments of sovereign states, he says .
 People will participate in transnational Internet communities without ceasing to be loyal citizens . But their perspectives will be different from those of typical loyal citizens before the Internet, he says .
 Even in the age of the Internet, the roles of political institutions are likely to change gradually . The roles of the political institutions will likely change gradually, even in the Internet age .
 After the rise of the territorial state, other successors to medieval rule such as the Italian city-states and the Hanatic League in northern Europe persisted as viable alternatives .
 The real issue today is not the continued existence of the sovereign state, but how its centrality and functions are being altered . The issue is how the centrality of the state is being altered, says David Cameron .
 Complicating the task of national governance is not the same as undermining sovereignty . Complicating national governance does not undermine sovereignty, it says . Complicated national governance should not be undermined, says David Cameron .
 In the process of adaptation they change the meaning of sovereign jurisdiction, control, and the role of private actors . However, in the process, they also change the definition of sovereignty and control .
 It takes five hours to inspect a fully loaded 40-foot shipping container . More than 5 million containers enter the country each year .
 Millions of undocumented immigrants have simply walked or ridden across the Mexican and Canadian borders . In addition, millions of illegal immigrants have just walked or rode across the border .
 As September 11, 2001, illustrated, terrorists can easily slip across borders . It is easier to bring in a few pounds of a deadly biological or chemical agent than to smuggle in the tons of illegal heroin and cocaine .
 The only way to cope with such flows is to expand intelligence sharing with and cooperation inside the jurisdiction of other states . Homeland Security should rely on private corporations to develop transparent systems for tracking international commercial flows .
 The sovereign state adapts, but in doing so it transforms the meaning and exclusivity of governmental jurisdiction . The sovereignty of a sovereign state can transform the meaning of its jurisdiction, the author says .
 The absence of threat to major values is another example . National security is the absence of a threat to a nation's major values .
 Damage done by climate change or imported viruses can be larger in terms of money or lives lost than the effects of some wars . Climate change and imported viruses are often bigger than some wars, experts say .
 The nature of military security is changing in the U.S. military, experts say . But even if one restricts the definition of national security more narrowly to organized violence, the change is changing .
 The U.S. has not been invaded by foreign armies since 1814 . The military is designed to project force and fight wars far from our shores . The country has not had a foreign invasion of the past two decades .
 The U.S. military was not well equipped to protect us against an attack on the homeland by terrorists using civilian aircrafts as weapons of great destruction . But the United States military is not equipped to .
 The U.S. suffered more casualties from the transnational terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, than from the Japanese government’s attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 . The attacks on 9/11 killed more than any other attack in the United States .
 Today's attackers may be governments, groups, individuals, or some combination . Today's attacks may be carried out by individuals, groups or groups, or groups .
 Some aggressors may be anonymous and not even come near the targeted country . But some aggressors might even come close to the target .
 In 1998, when Washington complained about seven Moscow Internet addresses involved in the theft of Pentagon and NASA secrets, the Russian government replied that phone numbers from which the attacks originated were inoperative .
 The United States had no way of knowing whether the Russian government had been involved in the attack . The U.S. government had not been able to determine whether the attack was Russian .
 More than 30 nations have developed aggressive cyberwarfare programs, but as anyone with a computer knows, any individual can enter the game .
 With a few keystrokes, an anonymous source anywhere in the world might break into and disrupt power grids of major cities or emergency response systems . Anonymous source could break into power grids and disrupt emergency systems .
 A hacker in Malaysia who turns off the electricity in Chicago can do great damage from halfway around the world . A hacker can turn off electricity in Malaysia or Chicago, the world's electricity can be turned off .
 Every night, American software companies send work electronically to India and other countries . Software engineers can work while Americans sleep and send it back the next morning .
 Someone outside America’s borders could embed trapdoors deep in computer code for use at a later date . Someone outside the U.S. borders could also embed trapdoors deep in code .
 Nuclear deterrence, border patrols, and stationing troops overseas to shape regional power balances will continue to matter in the information age . But they will not be sufficient to ensure national security, writes Peter Bergen .
 Competing interpretations of sovereignty arise even in the domain of law . Competing interpretation of sovereignty arises in the domains of law and law .
 Since 1945, human rights provisions have coexisted in the Charter of the United Nations alongside provisions that protect the sovereignty of states . Human rights provisions are co-existed alongside those protecting sovereignty of nations .
 Article 2. says nothing shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters within domestic jurisdiction . Article 2 says nothing should be authorized to authorize the U.N. intervention in domestic matters .
 The development of a global norm of antiracism and repugnance at the South African practice of apartheid led a large majority at the UN to abridge this principle . Yet the development of an anti-apartheid global norm was abridge .
 General Augusto Pinochet was detained in Britain in 1998 in response to a Spanish request for extradition based on human rights violations and crimes committed while he was president of Chile . Another example of this complexity was the 1998 detention of General Pinochet in Britain .
 Information technology, particularly the Internet, has eased the tasks of coordination and strengthened the hands of human rights activists . Political leaders cling to the protections legal sovereignty provides against outside interventions .
 The world is likely to see these two bodies of international law continue to coexist for years to come . The world will likely see these partly contradictory bodies of law coexist in the coming years .
 For many people, the national state provides an important source of political identity that is important to them . The national state is important for many people to have a political identity, the author says .
 People are capable of multiple crosscutting identities, including family, village, ethnic group, religion, nationality, nationality . Which one predominates often depends on the context of the identity .
 In many preindustrial countries, subnational identities at the tribe or clan level prevail . Subnational identities prevail at the tribal level in many pre-industrial countries .
 In some postindustrial countries, cosmopolitan identities such as “global citizen” or “custodian of planet Earth” are beginning to emerge . In the United States and European countries, such as the U.S. and Europe, these identities are emerging .
 It is still too early to understand the full effects of the Internet, but the shaping of identities can move in contradictory directions at the same time . Identity can move up to Brussels, down to Brittany, or fixed on Paris .
 A fascinating use of the Internet to wield soft power can be found in the politics of diaspora communities . The Internet is a powerful tool of power in diasporpora communities, writes David Frum .
 Internet connections between foreign nationals and local citizens helped spark protests in Beijing against anti-Chinese riots taking place in Indonesia in 1998 . Internet connections helped spark anti-China riots in Indonesia .
 The frustration of ethnic Chinese living in Indonesia was transferred to Beijing with remarkable speed . The frustration has been transferred from Indonesia to Beijing in recent years .
 The Internet was crucial in spreading news about government actions during disputed elections in Zimbabwe . Similarly, in Zimbabwe, it was crucial to spread news of disputed elections .
 A diaspora group that has effectively used the Internet and other media sources to affect political outcomes in its home country is the Ghanaian expatriate community . One example of a diasporporate group that uses the Internet to influence political outcomes is Ghana's Ghanaian dias
 In 2000, the diaspora network mobilized support and money for the opposition candidate . In the elections of 2000, it was the first opportunity for Ghanaians to change their government through democratic means .
 GCG is in the process of establishing a network among 2. million Ghanaian expatriates to increase the flow of capital to their home country . The GCG aims to establish a network of 2.1 million Ghanaians in Ghana .
 In Vietnam, planning a protest required weeks and months of pamphlets, posters, and phone calls . It took four years before the size of the first rallies of 25,000 reached half a million in 1969 .
 The result may be greater volatility rather than consistent movement in any one direction . The result is greater volatility than consistency of movement .
 One effect is ‘flash movements’—sudden surges of protest— triggered by particular issues or events, such as antiglobalization protests or the rise of the anti-fuel tax coalition that captured European politics in the autumn of 2000 .
 Zapatista rebels in Mexico’s Chiapas province relied less on bullets than on transnational publicity . Much of it coordinated on the Internet, to pressure the Mexican government for reforms . The Zapatistas are demanding reforms .
 In 2004, activists used cell phones to organize peaceful revolutions in the former Soviet states of Georgia and Ukraine . Activists used the phones to help organize peaceful protests in both countries .
 Political scientist James Rosenau invented a new word, fragmegration, to express the idea that both integration toward larger identities and fragmentation into smaller communities can occur at the same time . Rosenau has tried to summarize such trends by inventing a new term .
 Apparently contradictory movements can occur simultaneous' ously . But one need not alter the English language to realize that apparently contradictory movements occur .
 They do not spell the end of the sovereign state, but they do make its politics more volatile and less self-contained within national shells . It does not spell end of sovereign state but it does make it more volatile .
 International politics is a useful simplification, especially in the classical period of international politics, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: "That shorthand is useful . It's a useful . simplification"
 Frederick the Great wanted something for Prussia, Frederick was Pnissia . Frederick was the king of Prussia . Frederick wanted something to be done with Prussia. Frederick wanted it to be a part of his empire .
 Even on eve of World War I, European diplomacy was a relatively narrowly held cabinet-level affair . In the nineteenth century, a broader elite class controlled foreign policy decisions, but even on the eve of WWI, Europe's foreign policy was narrowly held Cabinet-level .
 In addition, in the classical period of international politics the agenda was more limited . In addition to that, in addition to the 'classical period of diplomacy, the agendas were more limited,' he said .
 Military security issues dominated the agenda . Foreign issues were handled primarily by the foreign office . Military issues were also discussed .
 The quantitative shift in the last half of the twentieth century marks a significant change in the international system . Qualitatively, transnational actors have played a role for centuries, but the quantitative shift has been significant .
 In a world of global interdependence, the agenda of international politics is broader, and everyone seems to want to get into the act . In the world, everyone wants to get involved in international politics .
 In the United States, for example, almost every domestic agency has some international role . In the U.S. it's not surprising that almost all agencies have some international roles .
 Every bureau of the U.S. government has its own little foreign ministry . Every bureau in the United States has a foreign ministry, including the White House .
 "Only a minority of the Americans in most embassies are from the State Department," says Obama . "In fact, if we look at the representation of the United States abroad, only a minority"
 There is too much traffic for one intersection or for one cop at one intersection . There are too many people in the world to be able to control the traffic, police say .
 These interactions across state borders outside the central control of the foreign policy organs are called transnational relations . These interactions outside of state borders are known as transnational ties .
 World stock and money markets, illicit trafficking in weapons and drugs, and certain forms of terrorism, occur daily . They include but not limited to migration of populations, the rapid transfer of capital .
 Governments can try to control these activities, and in the case of terrorism or smuggling they need to, but control often comes at a very high price . Governments need to control terrorism and smuggling, but it's not always easy to do .
 The Soviet Union closely controlled transnational relations, and the Soviet economy suffered gravely for it . For example, the Soviet Union tightly controlled relations with transnationalists . The economy suffered badly for it, and it suffered for it.
 In circumstances with high degrees of interdependence and a great number of transnational actors, we can be led astray by the shorthand that was so useful in the classical period . We can't rely on shorthand used in classical period. We need to be careful not to rely on it
 We say things like “Japan agreed to import more” or “America opposed broad claims to the continental shelf under the ocean” But looking more carefully, we notice that Japanese firms acted transnationally to export more or that some U.S. citizens lobbied internationally to
 This complexity of interests has always existed, but it is greater in economic and social issues than in the traditional military security issues . The complexity of the military's interests is greater than ever existed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Social and economic issues are often less broadly shared; there are more differences of interest . Social, economic issues often don't share the same level of interest as economic issues do .
 The rise of economic interdependence and the rise of issues on the agenda of international politics, we find that our traditional shorthand less adequately describes the political process . Thus, with the rise in economic inter-dependence, the traditional shorthand does not adequately describe political process, says David Cameron
 Consumer nations wanted low prices and producer nations wanted high prices in 1973, says President Richard Nixon . President Nixon said in 1973 that the world wanted a low price in 1973 .
 Producing interests inside the . consumer countries wanted high oil prices . Producer countries wanted to raise oil prices, says CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 Small Texas oil producers were not at all unhappy that OPEC raised oil prices . They had the same economic interests as the Arabs, not the consumers freezing in New England .
 Producers of nuclear energy were not unhappy to see oil prices rise because that might help nuclear energy become a more competitive energy source . Nuclear energy producers were happy to see a rise in oil prices .
 The declining coal industry in Europe and unemployed coal miners were not unhappy about the rise of oil prices either . The decline of the European coal industry and unemployed miners are not unhappy .
 Ecologists believed higher prices would curtail consumption and pollution . Neither were ecologists who believe higher prices will curtail consumption or pollution .
 There are enormous differences in the interests over oil prices in consumer countries . So inside the consumer countries there were enormous differences, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Politics looks different if we lift the veil of national interest and national security . In a situation of interdependence, politics looks different, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . "Politics looks different," he says .
 Traditional versus transnational world politics interdependence that led to high energy prices was regarded as good by important political actors inside the consumer countries . High energy prices are seen as good for consumers in the U.S. and other countries .
 There was a de facto transnational coalition that was not unhappy with higher oil prices . The coalition was not happy with higher prices, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Of course, the existence of contradictory interests inside nations is not new, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In the nineteenth-century U.S. politics was marked by differences between Southern farmers and Northern industrialists over tariffs .
 President George W Bush raised tariffs on steel in 2002 . He pleased companies and unions that produce steel, but hurt those companies such as car manufacturers .
 As we saw in Chapter 2, domestic politics has always been important to foreign policy . But with the expansion of participation in domestic politics it becomes more so, it becomes even more important, we say .
 As some of those domestic interests develop the capability to communicate and interact directly with other interests in other countries, they develop a different type of world politics .
 The traditional fonn of international politics is the outside shell in the left-hand diagram of the figure . The outside shell is the traditional shell of the international politics .
 If people in Society 1 want to put pressure on Government 2, they ask Government 1 to talk to Government 2 . Government 1 and Government 2 should talk to each other, says David Cameron . If people want to pressure Government 1, they must talk to them, he says .
 In transnational relations, people in Society 1 put pressure on Government 2 directly, or people in society 2 directly . People in society 1 may put pressure upon people in . Society 1 puts pressure on government 2 directly or on Society 2 directly. But in transnational . relations, this is
 Additional lines in the right-hand diagram are individuals or nongovernmental organizations going across national boundaries . The additional lines include individuals or groups that go across national borders .
 When we talk about the politics of interdependence, we must not assume that everything is captured by the traditional model of govemment-to-govemment relations . We need to be careful not to rely on traditional models of govmment and government-to
 One of the distinguishing characteristics of complex interdependence is the significance of other actors in addition to the states, says the author of the book "Complex Interdependence"
 It remains the best first approximation even for the politics of interdependence . It remains a first approximation to the political system .
 If you restrict your attention to states alone, you may be misled about the politics of interdependence . But if you focus on states alone you may have been misled by the political power of states alone .
 States may look invulnerable in the aggregate in aggregate, but some parts of states are vulnerable . Some parts of the U.S. are highly vulnerable while other parts are not . States are vulnerable in some areas, but others are not, experts say .
 And those vulnerable parts may act transnationally to remedy their situation . The vulnerable parts of the U.S. may act as an act of solidarity .
 In short, states remain the most important actors in international politics, but as constructivists remind us, when you have said that, you have not said everything that is important to know about the politics and conflicts of interdependence .
 Continued peace movements, women’s suffrage organizations, and the International Law Association, among others . Continued peace movement, women's suffrage groups, and peace movements .
 There has been an explosion in the number of NGOs, increasing from 6,000 to approximately 26,000 during the 1990s alone . More recently, there has been a surge in NGOs in the country .
 The numbers do not tell the full story, because they represent only formally constituted organizations . And the numbers don't tell the truth, because of the size of the organizations involved .
 Many NGOs claim to act as a ‘global conscience’ representing broad public interests beyond the purview of individual states, or that states are wont to ignore . Many NGOs say they represent broad interests beyond individual states' purview .
 Though they are not democratically elected, they sometimes help develop new norms by pressing governments and business leaders to change policies . They often change public perceptions of what governments and firms should be doing .
 In terms of power resources, these new groups rarely possess much hard power . But the information revolution has greatly enhanced their soft power, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Governments now have to share the stage with actors who can use information to enhance soft power and press governments directly, or indirectly, by mobilizing their publics . Governments must share stage with actor actors who use information .
 A rough way to gauge the increasing importance of transnational organizations is to look at the number of mentions these organizations receive in mainstream media publications . Given the power of credible editors and cue givers, credible editors can cut through the avalanche of available information in the Internet age .
 The biggest NGOs have become established players in the battle for the attention of influential editors . By this measure, the biggest NGOs are now established players .
 Amnesty International, the International Red Gross, Greenpeace, Doctors Without Borders, and Transparency International have undergone exponential growth in terms of mainstream media mentions . Human Rights Watch is one of the most prominent human rights groups in the world .
 Not only is there a great increase in the number of transnational and governmental contacts, but there has also been a change in type of contact . The number of contacts has increased in recent years .
 The lower costs of communication in the Internet era have opened the field to loosely structured network organizations with little headquarters staff, and even to individuals . Such organizations remain important, but the lower costs have opened up the field for individuals .
 Nongovernmental organizations and networks are particularly effective in penetrating states without regard to borders . These nongovernmenter organizations and . networks are especially effective, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Citizens often involve citizens who are well placed in domestic politics of several countries . They are able to focus the attention of the media and governments on their preferred issues .
 The treaty banning landmines was the result of a coalition of Internet-based organizations working with middle-power governments such as Canada and some individual politicians and celebrities such as the late Princess Diana .
 In 2005, rock stars, NGOs, and political leaders worked together to press for debt relief for heavily indebted poor countries . Rock stars and NGOs, including politicians, worked together in 2005 to push for relief .
 The role of NGOs was important as a channel of communication across delegations in the global warming discussions at Kyoto in 1997 . NGOs were important in the discussions in Kyoto in Kyoto, Japan .
 Industry, unions, and NGOs competed in Kyoto for the attention of media from major countries in a transnational struggle over the agenda of world politics . Industry and unions competed for the . attention of major countries .
 Geographical communities and sovereign states will continue to play the major role in world politics for a long time to come . But they will be less self-contained and more porous, writes Andrew Hammond .
 They will have to share the stage with actors who can use infoimation to enhance soft power and press governments directly .
 Governments that want to see rapid development will find that they have to give up some of the barriers to information flow that historically protected officials from outside scrutiny .
 Even large countries with hard power, such as the U.S. find themselves sharing the stage with new actors . Even large nations with hard-power find themselves having trouble controlling their borders .
 Cyberspace will not replace geographical space and will not abolish state sovereignty, but like the town markets in feudal times, it will coexist and greatly complicate what it means to be a sovereign state .
 Transnational Terrorism has attracted the attention of governments . Transnational terrorism is a type of nonstate actor that has attracted governments' attention .
 Terror means great fear, and governments as varied as the French First Republic and Stalin’s Soviet Union have used it to control their populations . Terror means fear and terror is used to control the population .
 Terrorism was also used by anarchists and other transnational revolutionaries in the nineteenth century, as we saw in Chapter 3 . Terrorism also was used by transnational revolutionary groups in the same way .
 World War I was triggered in part by such a terrorist turned assassin . They killed half a dozen heads of state, and WWI was triggered by such an assassin . The assassin turned assassin was a member of the U.S. aristocracy .
 In the twentieth century, heads of government such a large number of people could kill large numbers of people . Stalin and Hitler could kill thousands of people, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 If terrorists are able to obtain weapons of mass destruction in the twenty-first century, they will develop similar capabilities . Terrorists will be able to get similar capabilities in the 20th century, experts say .
 Some observers refer to terrorism as the privatization of war . That is why some observers call it the privatization war . Some observers say terrorism is the privatization .
 Technology has made the complex systems of modem societies more vulnerable to large-scale attack . Technology has also made complex systems more vulnerable, says the author .
 There is nothing to smuggle across borders and less chance of getting caught . That means there is less of a chance of smuggling across borders . That's less likely to get caught .
 One of the hardest things for terrorists to do is to organize trustworthy cells across borders that cannot be taken down by intelligence and police agencies . Terrorists can't be stopped by police and intelligence agencies, officials say .
 By moving from the 1990s to virtual sanctuaries on the Internet, the terrorists reduce their risk . Terrorists are now using the Internet to reduce their risks, the author says . The author says terrorists are using the internet as a way to reduce the risk .
 No longer does recruiting occur only in physical locations like mosques and jails . Recruitment is no longer limited to physical locations such as mosques, jails and prisons .
 In isolated national niches, alienated individuals can make contact with a new virtual community of fellow believers around the world . Instead of a virtual community, alienated people can connect with each other online .
 They include detailed instructions on how to make bombs from fertilizer, how to cross the border into Iraq and how to plant and explode devices to kill U.S. soldiers .
 Experts use chat rooms and message boards to answer trainees' questions . Chat rooms and chat boards are used to help trainees answer questions about their training .
 The cat and mouse game between police agencies and terrorists is a close one . But it's a close game between the police and terrorists, police say .
 Terrorism in the 1970s and 1980s was driven largely by ideology or nationalism, but by the 1990s, extreme religious beliefs provided its context . Extremist religious beliefs increasingly provided the context .
 Traditional terrorists, whether left-wing, right-wing or nationalist-separatists, often had scruples about indiscriminately killing innocent people . But such differentiations between the “enemy” and innocent civilians seem less prevalent today .
 When such attitudes are combined with a willingness to sacrifice their own lives, the new terrorists can wreak enormous destruction . The new terrorists are often willing to sacrifice themselves themselves to help the cause .
 Under American law it is premeditated, politically motivated violence against noncombatant targets by subnational groups . Under U.S. law, such violence must be politically motivated, says the law .
 UN has passed conventions to suppress terrorist bombings, assassinations, hostage taking, and the financing of terrorism . The UN has also passed conventions banning terrorist bombings and assassinations and hostage taking .
 The General Assembly found it difficult to agree on a resolution defining terrorism . Nonetheless, the General Assembly agreed on the resolution .
 Arab governments blocked any text that did not exempt groups such as Palestinians from being defined as terrorists . Arab governments led by Egypt and Syria blocked the text . Egypt, Syria and Egypt blocked any bill exempting Palestinians from terrorist status .
 In their eyes, the Palestinian resistance to Israeli occupation of the West Bank was legitimate national resistance . The responses used by the Israeli government were killing innocent Palestinian civilians, they said .
 President George W Bush addressed the UN General Assembly in 2001 . He said the world must unite in ‘opposing all terrorists, not just some of them’
 His statement was consistent with the just war doctrine discussed in Ghapter 6, and with international law, he said . He said the statement is consistent with a just war theory .
 Some acts of nonstate political resistance perhaps should not be considered terrorism . For example, much of the antiapartheid struggle in South Africa did not kill civilians .
 The taking of innocent life is not morally or legally acceptable under just war doctrine . But even if a political group can argue that the absence of democratic procedures for change make violence necessary in a “war of national liberation,” the taking innocent life isn't morally acceptable .
 If states deliberately kill noncombatants to terrorize a population, it is a war crime . Similarly, if state deliberately kills noncombatant to terrorise a population it is war crime. If state deliberately kill a population in terroristic circumstances, it's war crime, says U.
 If terrorism is defined as the substate use of violence for political purposes, states are excluded . States are excluded, but they are not exculpated if they engage in similar immoral and illegal behavior .
 For all the difficulties at the margins of defining terrorism, the core evil of deliberately killing innocent people for political purposes is broadly condemned by the moral codes of all major religions and by international law .
 In 2004, a High-Level'Panel appointed by the UN Secretary-General agreed unanimously that terrorism is any action intended to cause death or serious bodily harm to civilians or noncombatants for the purpose of intimidation .
 Transnational terrorism is to the twenty-first century somewhat like piracy was to an earlier era . Transnational terrorists are to the 20-first century somewhat like pirates, says the author of the book .
 Some governments gave pirates and privateers safe harbor to earn revenues or harass enemies . Some governments did this to earn revenue or harass their enemies . Others gave them safe harbor .
 Some states harbor terrorists in order to attack their enemies or because they are too weak to control such groups . Today some states harbor terrorist groups to attack enemies or to protect themselves .
 The American campaign against the Taliban government of Afghanistan, and the various UN resolutions, may make state-sponsored terrorism less likely in the future .
 At the same time, the technology of miniaturization of explosives, the vulnerability of modern systems such as air travel, and the increasing ease of communication via the Internet provide opportunities for nonstate actors to do great harm .
 The anarchy of the interstate system is usually more bearable than the chaotic anarchy of a nonstate actor’s war of all against all . The anarchy is more tolerable than that of the anarchy of nonstate actors .
 The information revolution is making world politics more complex by empowering nonstate actors, for better and worse, and reducing control by central governments . Information revolution is changing world politics, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 More than half of all Internet users in 2005 lived in either Europe or North America . China, India, and Malaysia have made significant progress in entering the information economy .
 In the information age, the world remains a mixture of agricultural, industrial, and service-dominated economies . The world is still a mix of agriculture, industrial and service economies .
 Postindustrial societies and governments most heavily affected by the information age coexist and interact with countries thus far less affected . The postindustrial societies are less affected by information revolution than countries less affected, such as Japan and Germany .
 Decreasing costs may allow poor countries to leapfrog or skip over certain stages of development . The cost of developing countries in poor countries may be too low to compete in developing countries .
 For instance, wireless communications are already replacing costly landlines . Voice recognition technologies can give illiterate populations access to computer communications .
 The Internet may help poor farmers better understand weather and market conditions before they plant crops . More information may diminish the role of predatory intermediaries .
 Distance learning may help isolated doctors and scientists in poor countries . Distance learning and Internet connections may help scientists and doctors in poor .
 What poor countries need most is basic education and infrastructure, says poverty expert . Poor countries need basic education, infrastructure and education, he says .
 Many countries are keen to develop their own Silicon Valleys . Technology spreads over time, and many countries want to develop Silicon Valley .
 It is easier to identify the virtual keys to the high-tech kingdom than to open the actual gates . But it is easier than identifying the virtual key to the kingdom than opening the gates .
 Well-developed communications infrastructure, secure property rights, sound government policies, and deep capital markets will come to some poor countries in time, but not quickly . Many of these factors will not come quickly .
 Even in India, which meets some of the criteria, software companies employ hundreds of thousands of thousands . Half of India’s 1 billion people remain illiterate .
 As it reduces costs and barriers of entry into markets, it should reduce the power of large states . Small states and nonstate actors should be able to compete in the markets, says the author of the book .
 International relations is more complex than such technological determinism implies . But in practice, international relations are more complex, the author says . International relations are complex, he says .
 Some aspects of the information revolution help the small; but some help the already large and powerful . The information revolution helps the small, but also helps the already powerful .
 What economists call barriers to entry and economies of scale remain in some of the aspects of power that are related to information . What economists say is barriers in some aspects of the power that remain .
 Large established entertainment industries often enjoy economies of scale in content production and distribution . Large established industries enjoy considerable economies of . scale .
 The dominant American market share in films and television programs in world markets is a case in point . The dominant U.S. market share is in movies and TV programs in the world .
 In the information economy, there are ‘network effects’ with increasing returns to scale . Moreover, in the information . There are “network effects,’s ‘Network effects” in the . information economy .
 Even though it is now cheap to disseminate existing information, the collection and production of new information often requires major investment . Second, even though it's now cheap, it is often expensive to produce new information .
 "It may make a big difference if I have the light first and see things before you do. But in a competitive situation, it may make big difference," he said . "I have the lights first and I see things first," he added .
 America, Russia, Britain, and France have capabilities for collection and production that dwarf those of other nations . America's capabilities for collecting and production dwarfs those of others .
 Published accounts suggest the United States spends some $44 billion a year on intelligence . The U.S. spends some of the world's most significant sums on intelligence and surveillance .
 In some commercial situations, a fast follower can do better than a first mover . But in terms of power among states, it is usually better to be a first-mover than a fast-following .
 What makes for success is informal access to new information before it becomes public, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 First movers are often the creators of the standards and architecture of information systems . Third, first movers often create the architecture and standards for information systems, experts say .
 As in Robert Frost’s famous poem, once the paths diverge in the wood and one is taken, it is difficult to get back to the other, Frost says .
 Low-cost technologies open shortcuts that make it possible to overtake the first mover . But in many instances, the path-dependent development of information systems reflects the advantage of the first-mover .
 The use of the English language and the pattern of top-level domain names on the Internet is a case in point . Top-level domains names are often used to refer to the Internet .
 Fourth, as we have seen, military power remains important in critical domains of international relations . The U.S. military power is important in the world's most important domains, such as the Middle East .
 Information technology has some effects on the use of force that benefit the small and some that favor the already powerful . Information technology can have some effects that help the small .
 Anyone can order 1-meter-resolution satellite images of what goes on in other countries inexpensively from commercial companies . For example, today anyone can order a 1-m-reserved satellite image .
 Commercial firms and individuals can go to the Internet and get access to satellite photographs that were top secret and cost governments billions of dollars just a few years ago . Commercial firms can now access satellite photos that were previously classified .
 A nongovernmental group published satellite pictures of North Korean rocket launch pads . The group felt that American policy toward North Korea was too alarmist .
 U.S. bases in the United States can be purchased for similar pictures of American bases . Other countries can purchase similar pictures .
 Global positioning devices that provide precise locations, once the property of the military alone, are readily available at stores such as Wal-Mart .
 Information systems create vulnerabilities for rich states by adding lucrative targets for terrorist groups . What’s more, information systems create vulnerable targets for terrorists, experts say .
 It's conceivable in the next 25 years that a sophisticated adversary will decide it can blackmail the U.S. It’s conceivable in that time it will decide to blackmail the United States .
 Space-based sensors, direct broadcasting, high-speed computers, and complex software provide the ability to gather, sort, process, transfer, and disseminate information about complex events that occur .
 This dominant-battle-space awareness combined with precision targeting and networking of military systems produces a powerful advantage . This dominance of battle space awareness and precision targeting is key to success .
 As the two Gulf Wars showed, balances of weapons platforms such as tanks or planes become irrelevant . Traditional assessments of balances of platforms become irrelevant unless they include the ability to integrate information with those weapons .
 Many of the relevant technologies are available in commercial markets, and weaker states can be expected to purchase many of them . Weak states can expect to buy many of the technologies from weaker states .
 The key will not be possession of fancy hardware or advanced systems, but the ability to integrate a system of systems . The key is not to be possessing fancy hardware, but to being able to integrate systems .
 The information revolution has not equalized power among states, says John Defterios . The Information Revolution and Complex Interdependence are complex interdependence, he says .
 Realists might feel vindicated, but realists might be vindicated . Thus far it has had the opposite effect, and realists feel vindated .
 The changes are more along the lines predicted by liberals and constructivists . Here are some of the changes to be made in the next few years .
 Complex interdependence is certainly much greater in the dimension of multiple channels of contact between societies, says the author of the book "Complex Interdependence" is greater than in the world, he says .
 When people are overwhelmed with the volume of information confronting them, they have difficulty discerning what to focus on . People have difficulty focusing on what they need to do to deal with the overwhelming amount of information .
 Editors and cue givers are in increasingly higher demand, and this is a source of power for those who can tell us where to focus our attention . Editors are increasingly important in the world of television .
 Brand names and the ability to bestow an international ‘Good Housekeeping’ seal of approval will become increasingly more important . Brand names will become more important in the future of the world .
 In addition, publics have become more wary and sensitized about propaganda . Publics are also becoming more wary of propaganda, experts say .
 Milosevic’s control of television was crucial to his power in Serbia in the 1990s . The former Serbian president's control of TV was crucial in his country's power .
 Now credibility is the crucial resource, and an important source of soft power . Credibility is crucial resource for the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Reputation becomes even more important than in the past, and political struggles occur over the creation and destruction of credibility . Reputations become more important as political struggles become more difficult for politicians .
 Governments compete for credibility not only with other governments, but with a broad range of alternatives including news media, corporations, nongovernmental organizations, intergovernmental organizations, and networks of scientific communities . Governments compete with news media and corporations .
 The world of traditional power politics is typically about whose military or economy wins, says CNN's John Defterios . He says the world of power politics typically involves the military and the economy . The U.S. has been in the midst of a global recession .
 Serbia and NATO are trying to frame the interpretation of events in Kosovo in 1999 and the events in Serbia a year later . Witness the struggle between the two countries to frame events in the Kosovo conflict .
 Prior to the overthrow of Slobodan Milosevic in October 2000, 45 percent of Serb adults tuned to Radio Free Europe and the Voice of America . Prior to demonstrations that led to overthrow of Milosva, 45 per cent of Serbs tuned to Free Europe .
 In contrast, only 31 percent listened to the statecontrolled radio station . Only 31 percent of people listened to state radio stations .
 Domestic alternative radio station, B92, provided access to Western news . When the government tried to shut it down, it continued to provide such news on the Internet .
 Information that appears to be propaganda may not only be scorned, but it may also turn out to be counterproductive if it undermines a country’s reputation for credibility . Information may also undermine a country's reputation for its credibility, experts say .
 In 2003, exaggerated claims about Saddam Hussein’s weapons of mass destruction and ties to A1 Qaeda may have helped mobilize domestic support for the Iraq War . But polls showed that the subsequent disclosure of the exaggeration dealt a costly blow to British and American credibility .
 Under the new conditions more than ever, a soft sell may prove more effective than a hard sell . Soft sell may be more effective in the future than hard sell, experts say .
 The Iraq example illustrates that power does not necessarily flow to those who can withhold information, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Iraq example shows that power doesn't necessarily flow from those who withhold information .
 Under some circumstances, private information can cripple the credibility of those who have it . Private information can be used to cripple people's credibility, experts say .
 Nobel Prize winner George Ackerloff has pointed out that sellers of used cars have more knowledge about their defects than potential buyers .
 Owners of bad cars are more likely to sell than owners of good ones, experts say . Owners of a bad car are likely to be sold more quickly than those of a good one .
 Potential buyers discount the price they are willing to pay in order to adjust for unknown defects . These facts lead potential buyers to discount the prices they would be willing to .
 The result of the superior information of sellers is not to improve the average price they receive, but instead to make them unable to sell good used cars for their real value . Hence, the result of this is to make it impossible to sell a good used car for its real value.
 Information power flows to those who edit and validate information to sort out what is both correct and important . Unlike asymmetrical interdependence in trade, power goes to those with power to hold back or break trade ties .
 The secretary general of Amnesty International and the chief executive officer of Royal Dutch Shell cast longer shadows on the international stage than leaders of Moldavia, Namibia, or Nauru . Just as the leaders of the Knights Templars or the Franciscan order outranked all but the most
 Soft power is likely to become less a function simply of material resources than in the past, says Spiro . Soft power likely to be less of a function of material resource than in past, Spiro says .
 When the ability to produce and disseminate information is the scarce resource, limiting factors include the control of printing presses, radio stations, and newsprint . The ability of producing and disseminating information is scarce .
 Hard power can generate soft power, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Hard power is used to take over the radio station, he says .
 In the case of worldwide television, wealth can also lead to soft power . Wealth can also be seen as a source of soft power in the U.S. television industry .
 CNN was based in Atlanta rather than Amman or Cairo because of America’s leading position in the industry and in technology . For instance, CNN was headquartered in Atlanta because of the country's leading position .
 The rise of cable networks in the region undercut the American monopoly in Iraq War coverage . The networks provided a local framing of the issues involved in the Iraq War . Al Arabiya, al jazeera and al Arabiya provided an alternative to the U.S.
 In the information age, the occupation of Iraq and its coverage were very costly for U.S. soft power . The occupation was costly for American soft power, says John Avlon .
 The close connection between hard and soft power is likely to be weakened under conditions of complex interdependence in an information age . The close relationship between soft and hard power will be somewhat weakened under new conditions .
 The power of broadcasting persists, but it will be increasingly supplemented by the Internet with its multiple channels of communication, controlled by multiple actors who cannot use force to control one another . The Internet is increasingly more powerful than broadcasting .
 Broadcasting is a type of information dissemination that has long had an impact on public opinion . Broadcasting is one of the most important forms of information disseminating . Broadcasting has long been an important part of the American public's life .
 By focusing on some conflicts and human rights problems, broadcasters have pressed politicians to respond to some foreign conflicts rather than others . For example, Somalia rather than southern Sudan in the 1990s .
 Governments have sought to influence, manipulate, or control television and radio stations . Governments have been able to do so with considerable success since small number of physically located broadcasting sites were used to reach many people .
 The shift from broadcasting to “narrowcasting’s” has major political implications . However, the shift has major implications for the country .
 The Internet is important for politics, especially in the Middle East, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the Internet is an important part of the world's political process . He says it's important to focus attention and coordinate action across borders .
 As far as countries are concerned, most information shapers are democracies . The Information Revolution and Democratization is a key to democracy's success .
 Their societies are familiar with free exchange of information and their institutions of governance are not threatened by it . Their society is familiar with the idea of free information exchange, but it is not threatened .
 Authoritarian states, typically among the laggards, have considerably more trouble . Authoritarian countries, typically, have more trouble than other countries, have .
 Governments can control their citizens’ access to the Internet by controlling Internet service and content providers, such as Yahoo and Google . Governments such as China’s can control access to Internet by monitoring the relatively small percentage of users .
 Control does not have to be complete to be effective for political purposes . It is possible, but costly, to route around such restrictions, but it is possible .
 Singapore is a state that combines political control with economic liberalism . It has thus far combined its political controls with an increasing role for the Internet .
 Singapore runs the risk of losing its creative knowledge workers, its scarcest resource for competing in the information economy . Singapore's knowledge workers want fewer restrictions on Net access .
 Another reason closed systems become more costly is that it is risky for foreigners to invest funds in an authoritarian country . The key decisions are made in an opaque fashion .
 Transparency is becoming a key asset for countries seeking investments . Transparency is also becoming an asset to countries seeking investment .
 The ability to keep information from leaving, which once seemed so valuable to authoritarian states, undermines the credibility and transparency necessary to attract investment on globally competitive terms .
 Governments that are not transparent are not credible, says David Cameron . Information they offer is seen as biased and selective, he says .
 repressive measures become more expensive not only at home, but also in terms of international reputation . As economic development progresses and middle-class societies develop, repressive measures are more expensive .
 Both Taiwan and South Korea discovered in the late 1980s that repressing rising demands for democracy and free expression would be expensive in terms of their reputation and soft power . Both countries found it difficult to repress rising demands of democracy in the 1980s .
 By beginning to democratize then, they strengthened their capacity to cope with economic crisis, he says . By contrast, they are able to cope better with economic crises, he writes .
 States have lost much of their control over information about their own societies, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the political effect of increased flows of free information is clear .
 States that seek to develop need foreign capital and the technology and organization that go with it . States need foreign investment and technology to develop, experts say .
 Governments that want to see rapid development will have to give up some barriers to information flows . Geographical communities still matter most, but governments must give up barriers .
 We are at such an early stage of the information revolution that any conclusions must be tentative . We're at such a early stage, it's not easy to conclude conclusions, says author .
 Some liberals are wrong in their predictions of an equalizing effect of the information and communications revolutions on the distribution of power among states, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Some liberals believe that the information revolution will equalize the power of states .
 In part this is because economies of scale and barriers to entry persist with regard to commercial and strategic information . And in part because with respect to free information, larger states are often well placed in the competition for credibility .
 Cheap flows of information have created an enormous change in channels of contact across state borders . Second, cheap flow of information has created a huge change in how people communicate across borders .
 Nongovernmental actors operating transnationally have much greater opportunities to organize and propagate their views, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 Political leaders will find it more difficult to maintain a coherent ordering of foreign policy issues, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says political leaders will struggle to order foreign policy .
 Open democratic societies and transnational actors will compete more successfully than authoritarian states for the key power resource of credibility . The information revolution is changing political processes in a way in which open democratic societies will compete with authoritarian states .
 Soft power is becoming more important in relation to hard power than it was in the past . credibility becomes a key power resource for both governments and NGOs . soft power is now a key resource for governments, NGOs and governments alike .
 Constructivists are correct that the processes of world politics within that structure are undergoing profound change . In short, geographically based states that realists emphasize will, continue to structure politics in an information age .
 The Internet is a vital part of the United States' social justice system . The U.S. government has been involved in the fight against information poverty in recent years .
 Saskia Sassen, “On the Internet and Sovereignty,” Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies, 551. Saskia . Sassen: “The Internet and sovereignty of the Internet are important issues .”
 I'm indebted to Alexandra Scacco for calling this attention to this case . She wrote: "Africa’s Expat Politics,” Foreign Policy , 51.
 Edward Kaufman, “A Broadcasting Strategy to Win Media Wars,” The Battle for Hearts and Minds, is 303 . Kaufman: A Broadcasting strategy to win media wars is to win the hearts and minds of Americans .
 International politics remains a realm of self-help where states face security dilemmas and force plays a considerable role . Chapter ALTERNATIVE DESIGNS FOR THE FUTURE .
 There are mitigating devices such as the balance of power and international norms, law, and organization, but they have not prevented all wars, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The logic of international conflict as described by Thucydides still applies in some parts of the world today . The logic is still relevant in some countries today, including Syria .
 There was a new world order in the sense that the bipolar system established after World War II had broken down . There was also a new bipolar system in the post-war era, the author says .
 But that was order within the anarchic state system, and it was not necessarily a just order . That was order in the anarchy system, not necessarily just order, he says .
 British historian Arnold Toynbee wrote at the beginning of the Cold War that the nation-state and the split atom could not coexist on the same planet . The split atom was created by the atom split in 1950s .
 In a world of sovereign states, where war is the ultimate form of defense and nuclear bombs are the ultimate weapon, he believed that something had to go, preferably the state . In the world, he said, "something had to be done to stop the state"
 Globalization and the information revolution present new challenges to state sovereignty, for better and for worse . And as we saw in the last two chapters, globalization and the info revolution present challenges to states sovereignty .
 Territorial state has not always existed in the past, so it need not necessarily exist in the future . The territorial state needs to be a territorial state, not necessarily a state .
 The large territorial state as the prime basis of international politics developed only after the Renaissance of the fourteenth and fifteenth century . Fragmented units and state systems have existed since the days of Thucydides, but the Renaissance came to prominence in the Renaissance .
 The Thirty Years’ War still had some features of a feudal war . It was thus both the last of the wars of feudalism and the first of the territorial state .
 The large territorial state as we know today has been the dominant institution of modem world politics for only three or four centuries . The state has been dominant institution for only 3 or 4 centuries .
 A number of futurists have predicted the decline of the territorial state . The territorial state is set to be replaced by the state .
 Their new world order involves structures that overcome the anarchic dilemma . The group's aim is to create a world order that can overcome anarchic dilemmas .
 Since World War II, there have been five major efforts to develop alternatives that go beyond the nation-state as the model for world politics . Since that time, the U.S. has been in the lead in developing alternatives to the model of the state .
 States would agree to give up their national armaments and accept some degree of central government . States would give up armament and accept central government in exchange for arms control . States could also agree to accept some form of government .
 Federalists often draw analogies to the way the 13 American colonies came together in the eighteenth century . Federalists drew analogies with the 13 colonies in the 17th century .
 Federalism has not proven to be a very successful design at the global level . Federalism is not a successful design, but federalism has proved to be very successful in the world .
 People want justice, welfare, and autonomy, and they do not trust world government to protect them . People also want justice and welfare, according to people in the world .
 Few people are convinced that a federal remedy would work, that it would be a cure for the problem of war . In addition, few people are also convinced that the federal remedy .
 Getting rid of independent states would not necessarily be the end of war . Even if the anarchic system of states is part of the cause of war, getting rid of them is not necessarily the end . Even though the anarchy of states could lead to war, it could not end the end
 As we have seen, most wars in recent years have been internal to states . Most of the wars have been fought in the Middle East, but not in the West .
 Because of the inadequacies of federalism, the idea of international functionalism was developed . International functionalism has been developed in the United States .
 functionalism suggested that economic and social cooperation could create communities that cut across national boundaries and thus eliminate war . Popular in the 1940s, functionalism was popular in the United States and Canada . The functionalism is a modern version of functionalism .
 The formal shell of the state would still exist, but its hostile content would be drained away . Sovereignty would then become less relevant, and though the formal shell . The state would then be less relevant .
 functionalist thinking gave rise to some of the specialized UN agencies such as the Food and Agricultural Organization and the World Health Organization . At the end of World War II, functionalism thinking became a model for the UN .
 Functionalism exists to some extent today, with a world full of transnational interests, nongovernmental organizations, multinational corporations, and so on . It's not just a matter of functionalism .
 Most states are reluctant to allow themselves to become so interdependent that they become highly vulnerable to others . But functionalism has not proven to be sufficient design for world order, he says .
 In 1950, Europe started the process with the Schumann Plan, integrating Western European coal and steel industries . In 1950 Europe started to integrate coal, steel industries in Europe .
 The Treaty of Rome established the European Common Market in 1957 . The Common Market provided a reduction of trade barriers and har' monization of agricultural and economic policies that culminated in the creation of the European Union in 1992 .
 NAFTA is the most significant example of regionalism in the Western Flemisphere . As we have seen, other regions have tried to emulate European regionalism . NAFTA is one of the most important examples of regionalistism in Western Europe .
 In 1965 General de Gaulle, then president of France, and later, in the 1980s Margaret Thatcher, set limits on how far regional integration could go .
 By the mid'1990s there was widespread ambivalence in the countries of the European Union over just how much sovereignty to cede to a regional government . The European Union was ambivalent about ceding sovereignty to regional governments .
 The coins of the new common currency, the euro, began to circulate in 2002, but not in all countries . The coins began circulating in 2002 but not all countries have coins .
 Efforts to create a new constitution for the European Union faltered when voters in Erance and the Netherlands rejected a proposed draft in referendums held in 2005 . The Netherlands and Erance voted against a proposed constitution in 2005 in a referendum .
 Despite speed bumps in the road toward greater integration, Europe has changed for the better compared with the earlier periods, study finds . But despite these speed bumps, there have been some hurdles in Europe's history . Europe's integration has changed since the early period, study says .
 The EU represents an ongoing and dynamic experiment in international relations . The EU is a dynamic experiment of international relations, says CNN's John Defterios . He says the EU represents a "dynamic experiment"
 As its members negotiate a thick web of multilateral institutions, a distinctly European identity has emerged . The European Union has emerged as its members continue to painstakingly negotiate multilateral agreements .
 Public opinion polls show that many EU citizens regard themselves as European as well as French, German, or Spanish . While national differences certainly remain at the policy-making level, public opinion polls .
 This fits with constructivist theory, which emphasizes the role ideas and culture play in the construction of political identities and beliefs . It is a form of constructivism that emphasizes the importance of ideas in political identities .
 EU members have chosen to increase their complex interdependence in the belief that the cost/benefit ratio favors cooperation over full national independence . EU members believe the cost of cooperation over national independence favors cooperation, rather than independence .
 In today's Europe, everybody may not be in the same boat, but the boats are lashed together in a variety of ways that are very different from earlier periods . In today’s Europe, Europe may not have the same boats as earlier periods, but it has a very different
 The European Union represents a new type of international polity but is only a regional one . The EU is a new kind of international Polity, but it's not a regional polity, it's a kind of regional one, says David Cameron .
 Falk argued there would be a gradual evolution of grassroots, populist values that would transcend the nation-state . Falk argued that grassroots values would transcend nationalistic borders .
 Anticolonialism, antiracialism, greater equality, and ecological preservation would lead to the creation of new regimes for handling the world’s dwindling resources . The U.N. should strengthen majorities in majorities in the United Nations, he says .
 The result would be international norms of peace, justice, and ecological balance and a new form of world order . The result of this would be an international norm of peace .
 Technological change and economic growth have accentuated ecological prob' lems . Technological changes have accentered ecological problems .
 Global resource supplies have become further stretched, and as biological diversity decreases, further harm has occurred to the oceans and atmosphere that are part of the global commons . Global resources have been stretched, according to scientists .
 Two-thirds have been signed since the first UN Environmental Conference in Stockholm in 1972 . The UN conference was held in Stockholm, Sweden, in 1972, to discuss the environment .
 UN conferences on the environment and global warming were held in Brazil in 1992 and 1997 . Major UN conferences in Brazil and Japan in 1997 were held .
 Environmental issues have spawned numerous nongovernmental organizations with transnational lobbying efforts . Environmental issues are also spawned numerous transnational organizations .
 Citizens and politicians in developed countries are expressing increased awareness and concern regarding matters of environmental degradation and protection . Citizens and . politicians in . developed countries . expressing increased . concern about matters of . environmental degradation .
 Falk overestimated how scarce resources would become and underestimated how much new technologies can compensate for the scarcity there is . In many countries, ecological concerns take second place to a desire for rapid economic development .
 Some theorists of organization in the information age argue that the information revolution is flattening hierarchies . Peter Drucker and Alvin and Heidi Toffler argue that this is replacing hierarchies with network organizations .
 More governmental functions will be handled by private markets as well as by nonprofit organizations, say experts . They predict that the centralized bureaucratic governments of the twentieth century will become decentralized organizations .
 Internet expert Esther Dyson argues that as decentralized organizations and virtual communities develop on the Internet, they will cut across territorial jurisdictions and develop their own patterns of governance . Dyson: As decentralized organizations develop, virtual communities will become autonomous communities .
 While nation-states will continue to exist, they will become much less important and less central to people’s lives, they’ll become less important . Nation-states are still important, but they will be less important to people's lives, experts say .
 People will live by multiple voluntary contracts and drop in and out of communities at the click of a mouse . People will be able to live in multiple communities and live by voluntary contracts . They will live in and around the world by living in a virtual community .
 The new pattern of crosscutting communities and governance will become a modem and more civilized analogue to the feudal world that existed before the Westphalian system of states became dominant .
 This vision of how to get beyond the nation-state leaves open questions about how the claims of virtual and geographical communities will conflict, and how issues of violence and security will be handled . Although we can discern trends in this direction, this vision of . the future of virtual communities leaves open
 New information technologies can be used for evil as well as good, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Today’s terrorists use computers and the Internet to recruit members, obtain instructions for building weapons, transfer funds, and expand their networks . Terrorists use computers to recruit, learn how to build weapons and expand networks .
 Remote hackers can create damage in other countries without ever crossing borders . Remote hackers are able to create damage without crossing borders, experts say . And remote hackers can also create damage from afar .
 Citizens may want stronger, not weaker, states whose governments can provide protection . In such situations, citizens may want strong, not weak, states to provide protection.
 As Hobbes pointed out centuries ago, the anarchy of states has its dangers, but they are less than a different type of anarchy in which there is no government to provide protection against nonstate actors . Hobbes: As Thomas Hobbes said, states have its dangers but they're less
 Contrary to the predictions of these five models, the natioii-state has not yet become obsolete . Contrary to these predictions, it is not yet obsolete .
 Just as gunpowder and infantry penetrated and destroyed the medieval castle, so have nuclear missiles and the Internet made the nation-state obsolete . The Internet has also made the country obsolete .
 People want three things from political institutions: physical security, economic well-being, and communal identity . But people also want physical security and economic security, they say . People also want to know their identity and physical security .
 So far the nation-state has provided more of all three than any other institution . Changes in international processes are shifting the locus of these values slowly, but they are slowly moving slowly .
 Multinational corporations, NGOs, and international organizations lack the force to provide for security and the legitimacy to provide a focus for communal identity . Multinational companies, NGOs and international groups lack the power to provide security and provide for the identity of the people .
 At this stage of human history, democracy has flourished only within the context of nation-states, says Julian Zelizer . Democracy has thrived only within a context of a nation-state, he says .
 The territorial state and its challenges remain central to world politics . So, despite a long tradition of efforts to design alternatives, the territorial state remains central to politics .
 Revolutionary changes in technology make the world seem smaller and more close-knit . The world is getting closer and closer to each other, with new technology .
 Many people react to rapid change with divisive ethnic, religious, and nationalistic responses . Yet at the same time, many people are reacting to rapid changes with divisive religious, religious responses .
 As we saw in Chapter 7, globalization can create economic integration and political fragmentation at the same time . As well as globalization, it can also create political fragmentation in the world .
 In the Gulf War, both Saddam Hussein and George Bush were watching CNN for the latest news . In the 1990s, CNN was a major source of news for both men .
 During the fighting in Afghanistan, both Osama bin Laden and George W Bush watched CNN and the Arabic station al Jazeera .
 During the Iraq War, television reporters were embedded with frontline troops and broadcast battles in real time to a global audience .
 Human rights problems and mass suffering in distant parts of the globe are brought into our living rooms on television . Human rights issues are brought in by the world's greatest suffering .
 People living on a dollar a day in poor countries are becoming more aware of the lifestyles of people earning millions of dollars a year .
 A high correlation between business and consumer sentiment across the world may sway global economic activity toward a common recession more than in the past . Kenneth Rogoff, former chief economist of the International Monetary Fund, says a high correlation could sway the global economy more .
 The World Wide Web makes more information available to more people, but people do not always seek the same types and sources of information . Similarly, the World Wide Internet makes more people available, but also makes people seek different sources .
 The Internet, cable, and satellite television encourage “narrowcasting’s” of information to specific groups rather than the common denominator that typified television network broadcasting . The Internet also encourages ‘narrow casting’ of information .
 But the metaphor of a global village can be misleading because global political identity remains weak . Global political identity is weak, says David Frum, the author of the book .
 In much of the world, national, religious, and ethnic identities seem to be getting stronger, not weaker . In many countries, national and religious identities are getting stronger . In the U.S. national identity seems to be stronger than ever .
 "Instead of a global village, we have villages around the globe that are more aware of each other," she says . Instead of global villages, we're villages that are aware of other people's needs, she says. "We're not just one village, but we're more aware
 Two popular oversimplified visions of the future of world politics after the end of the Cold War . This simultaneous process of integration and disintegration has given rise to two popular ideas of future .
 Deep ideological cleavages drove international conflict over the twentieth century . Fascism and communism were responses to the disruption of traditional life by modernization . Movements such as fascism and communism are responses to disruption of modernization .
 Industrialization tore people from their villages or small communities and made them available for mobilization by the large ideological movements . Industrialization forced people to leave their villages and small communities to be mobilized .
 Liberal capitalism proved more successful in producing a higher level of welfare and citizen participation . Over time, liberal capitalism proved to be more successful, however, .
 The end of the Cold War suggested that liberal capitalism had prevailed . It was the end of a Cold War era that saw liberal capitalism prevail in America .
 There is no one single competitor to liberal capitalism as an overarching ideology . Liberal capitalism is no longer one single ideology as a competitor to capitalism as a whole .
 Neither Germany and France nor the United States and Japan expect or plan for war with each other . Neither Germany nor France expect to plan or plan to go on to war .
 Kant’s liberal predictions were based on Kant's liberal predictions . Their complex interdependence forms large islands of democratic peace in the world today, he says .
 Post-Cold War world could be described as the return of history . But in another sense, rather than the ‘end of history,” the Cold War world has been described as a return to history . The Cold War could be called the end of history.
 The return of history means more normal circumstances in which a single ideological cleavage does not drive the larger conflicts in international politics . The return to history means the return to normal circumstances for the first time .
 China and Russia use capitalism and global markets, yet neither is liberal nor fully capitalist . Russia and China use capitalism but not liberal or fully capitalist, they say . Russia is the only country in the world to have a liberal or liberal democracy .
 In other areas, religious fundamentalism challenges the norms and practices of liberal capitalism . In the U.S. it has become a model for the future of American capitalism .
 We sometimes lump all religious fundamentalisms together, but there are many fundamentalisms, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 What many have in common is a reaction against and a resistance to secular liberal capitalism . What many share in common are a reaction to secular liberalism and secular capitalism, they say .
 The major response and competitor to liberal capitalism after the Cold War is ethnic, religious, and national communalism . National communalism is the major response to liberal capitalist capitalism .
 In 1993, Samuel P Huntington published an article titled “The Clash of Civilizations” that became a well-known counter to Fukuyama’s vision . Huntington published the article in 1993, which became known as ‘The Clash Of Civilizations .
 Huntington argued that the great divisions that would dominate conflict would be cultural rather than ideological or economic . Huntington: Cultural divisions would be the great source of conflict in the new world .
 Huntington proved astute in focusing on culture as a source of conflict . In contrast to realists who used balance-of-power theory to predict interstate conflicts would reemerge between Germany and its neighbors .
 As we saw in Chapter 7, cultures are not homogeneous or static, but overlapping and fluid . This is the case of cultures that aren't homogeneous but overlapping, fluid .
 More conflicts have occurred within the large ‘civilizations’ in Huntington’s map of the world than between them, he says .
 Some observers argue that Osama bin Laden’s terrorist attacks and his call for an Islamic jihad against the West prove that Huntington was correct . But one can just as plausibly see the events following September 2001 as a civil war within Islam between extreme fundamentalists and moderates .
 Many faithful Muslims have more in common with moderate Christians and Jews than with Osama bin Laden . Many Christians have more common with moderates than with bin Laden, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Both Fukuyama and Huntington’s visions suffer from trying to fit the post-Cold War world into one or the other pattern . Fukuyamas and Huntington's visions fail to fit one of the two patterns .
 As we saw earlier, not only are there multiple cultures, but there are very different types of states in terms of levels of economic modernization . As well as cultural differences, there are also differences in economic modernization levels .
 Fukuyama’s triumph of liberal capitalism and democratic peace fits well with much of the postindustrial world, he says . Fukuyamas' triumph of democracy and liberal capitalism is a triumph of postindustrial capitalism, he writes .
 Realism has much to tell us about relations among preindustrial and industrializing countries . Realism tells us about the relationship between industrializing nations and preindustrial nations .
 Huntington’s focus on cultural conflict fits better with the preindustrial world and its relations with the rest of the world, he says . Huntington: “I’m not sure what I’ve done with my life, but I think it’ll be a
 Ethnic and cultural conflict tends to rise when identities are challenged by major social changes that accompany modernization and globalization . As we saw earlier, ethnic conflicts tend to rise in response to social changes .
 People with similar ethnic characteristics asserting their common identity is a very powerful idea . When they seek to control a state we call it nationalism, it is a powerful idea, says David Cameron .
 Realists criticize Huntington by pointing out that such nation-states are in tension with transnational civilizations and religious cultures he focuses on . Realists argue that such nations are not compatible with the cultures Huntington focuses on.
 Egypt and Syria proved stronger than panArabism, and are currently struggling against Islamic fundamentalism . As we saw in the Middle East, nation-states such a strong nation-state, they proved stronger .
 It is instructive to look at the difference between Eastern and Western Europe . It's instructive for Western Europe to see the difference in Eastern and Eastern Europe .
 Under communist rule nationalistic and ethnic conflicts in the East were frozen for a half century . The East was frozen for more than a century under communist rule .
 The end of the Cold War and the removal of Soviet hegemony thawed many of the tensions in the U.S.
 Competition between Serbs, Croats, Muslims, and Kosovar Albanians came to the fore with terrible consequences in Yugoslavia . For example, with the end of the Cold War and the demise of its communist government, Serbs and Croats were at the forefront of competition .
 Throughout the former Soviet Union, many ethnic groups spill across borders, stirring up more potential for further ethnic conflict and revivals of nationalism . Many ethnic groups have spilled across borders .
 In post-Cold War Western Europe, intrastate conflict is negligible and countries that previously held strong national rivalries have formed a larger European Union . Western Europe is now less likely to suffer from intrastational conflict .
 Some Western animosities were exorcised through democratic processes . The debate that went on in West Germany at the end of World War II led to changes in textbooks and the new understanding of German history .
 The desire of many Eastern European countries to join the European Union had an important moderating effect on their leaders and peoples . Fortunately, the desire of joining the EU had moderated effect on Eastern Europe's leaders .
 The soft power of the European Union has helped spur significant economic and political reforms in Eastern Europe, at a pace once considered unachievable . The EU's soft power has been used to spur significant political and economic reforms in the region .
 Many Europeans do not want their national identity submerged completely in a European identity . Many Europeans want to avoid being submerged in the European identity of the European Union .
 One reason why the French support European integration is to tie the Germans down, says Francois Hollande . The French want to tie down the Germans, says Hollande .
 Many Western Europeans are concerned about the impact of immigration on their national cultures . In addition, many Western Europeans also concerned about how immigration affects their national culture .
 They fear migration from the north of Africa as well as from Eastern Europe . They fear migrants from north Africa and from eastern Europe .
 Experts point to September 11 terrorist attacks and subsequent attacks in Madrid and London as evidence that European citizens and leaders have failed to adequately address the political and economic grievances of Europe’s sizable Muslim immigrants .
 Many North African immigrants have not been successfully assimilated into French society . Riots in France in 2005 demonstrated that many had not been successful assimilated .
 Right-wing parties in Western Europe increasingly appeal to xenophobia . The problems of nationalism and ethnic tensions are not totally banished from Western Europe . Simultanesouly, right-wing political parties in the EU increasingly appeal .
 Europe cannot cut off all immigration from its poorer neighbors across the Mediterranean Sea . Europe's declining birth rates and porous borders mean it can't cut off immigration from poorer neighbors .
 Resolving the tensions between a desire to preserve a European identity and the need to better integrate immigrants into society will therefore be Europe’s next challenge . Europe's next challenge will be to resolve the tension between preserving Europe's identity and better integration of immigrants in society .
 The Diffusion of Governance in the Twenty-first Century . Private Public Third Sector . Supranational Transnational Corporations . Intergovernmental Organizations . N ongo vernmental Organizations (e.g. NGOs)
 National National Corporations (e.g. Oxfam, Greenpeace) National National Nonprofits are national national nonprofits . Twentieth-Century was a major source of funding for many of the world's largest charities .
 Governments will find their control eroding during the twenty-first century as information technology spreads and costs continue to decrease . As we saw in Chapter 8, information is power, and governments will find it eroding .
 In the middle of the twentieth century, people worried that computers might produce the centralized, authoritarian world of George Orwell’s novel 1984 . But the decentralizing effects of computers have proven to be more powerful, he says .
 How far and how fast the information revolution causes decentralization will vary across countries . Countervailing forces may arise in the future, and counter-forces may arise .
 The general proposition that governments are losing their monopoly over foreign policy seems highly likely . Governments will have to share the stage in world politics with nonstate actors described in Chapter 8 seems likely .
 This diffusion of power can have both positive and negative consequences, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 A benign vision paints a picture in which technology will encourage economic development and make authoritarian regimes less tenable . Technology will also encourage economic growth, making authoritarian regimes more tenable, it has been suggested .
 The result will be to speed the spread of the islands of democratic peace, writes David Cameron .
 A malign vision sees a new feudalism in which destructive individuals, terrorist groups, and otherwise weak states gain access to weapons of mass destruction, creating true anarchy, rather than the anarchy of the interstate system . The vision is that destructive individuals and terrorist groups gain .
 In such an insecure world, citizens may sacrifice democratic liberties in favor of Hobbesian autocratic governments that provide basic personal security . A negative reaction may slow down or reverse economic globalization, he says .
 The benign vision points out that because of transnational communications, there is much more awareness of what is going on in other parts of the globe and groups are better able to organize on a global basis .
 As we have seen, NGOs are able to mount transnational campaigns for environmental and human rights causes . As we've seen, it is possible to mount a transnational campaign for environmental causes .
 The Internet provides information to citizens that undercuts the controls of authoritarian regimes . The Internet is a tool to undercut authoritarian regimes' control of the Internet, says Amnesty International .
 The most impressive transnational actor, of course, is the multinational corporation . The world's largest transnational corporation, the U.S. government, is in charge of its own operations .
 By spreading investments around the world and making profits in different parts of the global market, the transnational corporation is producing a different type of world economy . The transnational company is producing different types of world economies .
 A large part of international trade is trade within multinational corporations . Trade within multinational companies is a key part of the global economy .
 Honda now produces more automobiles in the United States than in Japan . It transports American-made automobiles back to Japan . Honda now makes more cars in the U.S.
 The United States government has even pressed the European Union to accept Honda vehicles made in the United States . Honda vehicles are made in U.S. and sold in Europe . The European Union has also been pressed to allow Honda vehicles to be accepted in the EU .
 The United States defined the export of Japanese cars made in the United States to Europe as an American national interest . In other words, the U.S. defines the export as a national interest in Europe .
 IBM was the largest producer of mainframe computers in Japan . IBM/Japan does its research in Japan and hires Japanese employees . IBM was also the world's largest mainframe computer producer .
 IBM sold its personal computer division to the Chinese computer manufacturer Lenovo in 2004 . In 2004, IBM sold the division to Lenovo, furthering the globalized nature of the computer industry .
 A foreign company working inside the U.S. may be more important than an American company working in Japan, he says . He argues that in terms of what is good for the people living within the borders of the United States .
 Critics have said Reich is looking further into the future than is currently justified . Reich has been criticized for looking too far in the future . Critics say he is looking too long into future than currently justified.
 Three'quarters of American production is done by companies with headquarters in the U.S. Most multinational corporations have a predominant national identity .
 Transnational investment is helping to confuse identities, to confuse the question of ‘who is us,” says John Defterios . He says ecological interdependence might affect views of global problems .
 If the U.S. responded by excluding foreign firms from American markets, it would create inefficient firms that can no longer compete on a global basis . The United States would be unable to compete in the global marketplace .
 The trouble with protectionist responses is that they may hurt the protector as much as they hurt the other side . The trouble is that the protectionist response may hurt both sides of the fence .
 The Americans and the Japanese negotiated over domestic impediments to trade in the 1990s . The U.S. and Japan negotiated over the impediments in the 90s .
 The United States pressed Japan over something strictly within Japanese domestic jurisdiction . The U.S. pressed Japan on something that was strictly within its own jurisdiction . Japan's response to the issue was "a matter of principle"
 Japan had laws restricting supermarket size and other practices restricting access to foreign firms to the distribution system . Japan's laws restrict supermarket size .
 A number of Japanese politicians and consumers were delighted to have this American pressure because it benefited the Japanese consumer . The pressure was put on U.S. politicians and consumer advocates .
 In a sense, there was a transnational coalition between U.S. producers and Japanese consumers . "Transnational coalition" was formed in a sense of transnational cooperation .
 The Japanese government in turn pressed the United States to reduce its budget deficit . The U.S. trade deficit was related to the government budget deficit, the Japanese government argued .
 Americans and Japanese officials were dealing with each other not at water’s edge, but on matters that were deep within the sovereign jurisdiction of each country . In other words, Americans and Japan officials were talking about matters that are sovereign .
 The malign vision of the effects of technology on world order focuses on a different dimension of the transnational spread of technology . Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction is the focus of this vision .
 Technology can be spread through trade, migration, education, and the flow of ideas . Technology can also be spread via trade and migration, according to experts .
 Already 40 countries have the potential to make nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons of mass destruction . 40 countries could make nuclear or chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons of the mass destruction.
 The technology of chemical weaponry is nearly a century old; nuclear weaponry and ballistic missiles are half-century-old technologies . Chemical weapons are nearly 50 years old, and nuclear weapons are 50 years younger .
 Nonproliferation policies have slowed the rate of spread of nuclear weapons . To some extent, policies of nonproligion have slowed down the spread of the weapons, experts say .
 The problem of proliferation was exacerbated when the Soviet Union collapsed and successor states have been less able to control the outflow of technology . But the problem was exacerbated by the collapse of Soviet Union and its successor states .
 Three other countries signed the NPT but were widely viewed as trying to develop weapons anyway . Iraq, Iran, and North Korea were widely seen as developing weapons anyway.
 South Africa, South Korea, Argentina, Brazil, and Libya started down that path but changed their minds . Five other countries, including South Korea and Argentina, started down the path but later changed their mind .
 More than 30 countries could have produced nuclear weapons but did not . Three or four times more states were able to have nuclear weapons than actually had them .
 President Kennedy’s fear that 25 countries would have nuclear weapons by the 1970s . That is quite a contrast to President Kennedy's fear when signing the Limited Test Ban Treaty in 1963 . President Kennedy feared 25 countries with nuclear weapons would be nuclear weapons .
 In an anarchic world of sovereign states, nuclear weapons are the ultimate form of self-help . After all, in anarchic . world of . sovereign states . Nuclear weapons are . the ultimate self-helping form, says David Cameron .
 One of the alliances arose during the Cold War in which each superpower gave security guarantees to its allies . One was the alliances that arose during that era . Another was the alliance between the U.S. and Russia .
 Germany and Japan did not develop nuclear weapons because they had U.S. security guarantees . For example, Japan and Germany didn't develop nuclear arms because of that guarantee .
 American promises to prevent any country from using nuclear blackmail against these allies reassured the Japanese and the Germans that they did not have to develop nuclear weapons .
 South Korea and Taiwan each began to develop nuclear weapons when it looked as if the U.S. might withdraw from Asia in the 1970s in the aftermath of Vietnam . They stopped when the United States protested and promised continued protection from Asia .
 The Soviet Union constrained its Eastern European allies and Third World client states from developing nuclear weapons . Similarly, the Soviet Union also constrained its East European allies .
 In the early stages of the nuclear era, the superpower attitude on nuclear weaponry was highly competitive . In the 1970s and '80s, the attitude of the U.S. was competitive .
 The superpowers tried to use nuclear technology to earn points in the ideological competition .
 President Eisenhower announced with great fanfare the Atoms for Peace program in 1953 . Eisenhower emphasized the benign face of the atom to win more points for the United States .
 By 1968, the United States and the Soviet Union were able to cooperate to the point that they could agree on a nonproliferation treaty . The treaty was signed by the U.S. and Russia in 1968 .
 In 1977, the United States, the Soviet Union, and 13 other countries that supplied nuclear technology set up the Nuclear Suppliers Group . The group set up guidelines on what sorts of nuclear technology could be exported .
 A third reason why nuclear proliferation was curbed was the existence of treaties and institutions . Treaty and institutions curbed nuclear proliferation in the 1960s .
 Nonnuclear states have agreed to have inspectors from the UN’s International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna visit their peaceful nuclear facilities to ensure that they are not being misused . Inspectors will visit nuclear facilities in nonnuclear states to ensure they are peaceful .
 After Iraq lost the Gulf War, U.S. forces and UN inspectors dismantled its nuclear programs . U.N. inspectors dismantled Iraq's nuclear programs after the war .
 Two open questions for the post-Cold War world were the future of alliances, institutions, and security guarantees, and whether nuclear technology would flow from the former Soviet Union to would'be proliferators .
 Neorealists have argued that the spread of nuclear weapons may be stabilizing because deterrence will work . Kenneth Waltz argues that deterrence may work in the future .
 The trouble with this view is that it rests on a rational model of deterrence among coherent unitary actors . The trouble is that this view rests almost entirely on the rational model, writes Andrew Hammond .
 If the real danger of nuclear weapons in the post-Cold War period is likely to be loss of control, then rational models that provide the basis for confident predictions may be largely irrelevant . The real danger in the Cold War period may be losing control of nuclear arms .
 Many of the countries that will next develop nuclear weapons have an unstable record caused by coups and by armies splitting . Many of those countries that have a history of unstable military records .
 Nuclear weapons in the U.S. and the Soviet Union were equipped with elaborate technological devices—^permissive action links—that required a code from a higher authority to get access to the weapon . Nuclear weapons were equipped . in the United States and Soviet Union .
 Many countries developing new nuclear weapons will not have elaborate technological devices . But many of the countries developing nuclear weapons won't have these elaborate technological gadgets .
 The end of the Cold War and the transnational spread of technology may produce a larger prospect of nuclear weapons being used in some of the new countries trying to enter the nuclear race than was true .
 One of the greatest threats in the future will be transnational terrorists obtaining weapons of mass destruction, he says . And one of the biggest threats will be terrorists obtaining WMD, he adds .
 We know bin Laden and the A1 Qaeda network were making efforts to obtain such weapons . We know that bin Laden had made contact with scientists working in Pakistan’s nuclear program .
 Terrorists might get access to material stolen from former Soviet states and smuggled abroad . Fissile material is difficult and costly to produce, but it is difficult to produce .
 Even though they are unreliable on the battlefield, biological weapons are easier to make than nuclear weapons . They can be used to create terror among defenseless civilian populations, experts say .
 In 2001, terrorists turned hijacked civilian airliners into gigantic cruise missiles to accomplish that purpose . Terrorists turned hijacked passenger planes into gigantic missiles .
 If 9/11 terrorists had had access to a nuclear weapon, they could have killed hundreds of thousands of people . In contrast, however, if the terrorists had . had . access to nuclear weapons, they would have killed thousands of . people, experts say .
 In 1995, a religious cult in Japan, Aum Shinrikyo, killed a dozen people with sarin in the Tokyo subway system . A cult cult in 1995 killed 12 people in a subway system in Tokyo, Japan .
 Cult had already begun to expand transnationally . Cult had been carrying out experiments in developing biological weapons, and was investigating nuclear weapons . Cult was also carrying out tests on biological weapons .
 Terrorist groups could also wreak havoc by attacking information systems that control electricity for hospitals, air traffic radar, or banking transactions . Terrorists could also attack air traffic control radar, hospitals, and banking systems .
 Such attacks could be perpetrated with high explosives at the sites of key server computers . They could also be carried out transnationally by computer hackers tens of thousands of miles away .
 Deterrence does not provide adequate protection against terrorist threats because there is sometimes no return address against which to retaliate . There is sometimes there is no way to retaliate unless a fot' eign state can be proven to have assisted the terrorists .
 The worst case of terrorism in the U.S. before 2001 was the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City in 1995 . The bombing was purely homegrown .
 In other cases, criminal groups may take control of the government of -a state but behave according to international law and claim the rights of sovereign protection against interference in their internal affairs .
 In 2002, President George W Bush issued a new national security strategy that argued in favor of preemption in the face of terrorist threats . President Bush pledged to attack both terrorist regimes and governments .
 As transnational threats grow, states will question the Westphalian norms that make clear distinctions between what is domestic and international . States will also find themselves broadening their concepts of security and defense, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Many new threats will not be susceptible to solution by armies firing high explosives, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Close cooperation of intelligence, customs, and police agencies will play a major role . Private sector measures of protection and prevention of facilities critical to the global economy will also be implemented .
 Fukuyama’s vision of the future becomes less relevant if terrorists use weapons of mass destruction create anarchy of individuals rather than states . If democracies fail in these tasks, and terrorists using weapons of destruction create an anarchy, it will be less relevant .
 If governments rise to the challenge and contain terrorism, more traditional problems of interstate order still remain . The U.S. has been hit by terrorism in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The end of the Cold War certainly altered the international system, but claims of the dawning of ‘a new world order’ were undermined by the profoundly different ways people interpret the word order .
 Order refers to structure or distribution of power among states . Order refers primarily to the structure of state power . Order is a key part of order in the world .
 Liberals and constructivists argue that conflicts and their prevention are determined not only by the balance of power, but by the domestic structure of states; their values, identities, and cultures; and international institutions .
 liberals argue that institutions such as the United Nations can help prevent conflict and establish order by stabilizing expectations . In contrast to realists, realists argue that U.N. institutions can prevent conflict by establishing a sense of continuity .
 Order for liberals is tied to values such as democracy and human rights, as well as institutions . Order for liberal liberals is to be tied to democratic values, human rights and institutions, she says .
 constructivists remind us that any order is contested by various parties and thus is never a value-neutral term . Constructivists say that order is not a value neutral term, but it is a form of order .
 In the view of nativist or nationalist groups such as that led by Pat Robertson in the U.S. or by Jean-Marie Le Pen in France, “new world order” suggests a conspiracy among financial and political elites to dominate the world .
 In this view, multinational corporations enrich themselves at the expense of the rest of the world . In the view, corporations in league with the financial markets of Wall Street, London, and Tokyo, enrich themselves .
 In the view of certain Islamic fundamentalists, order is a purely Western concept designed to dominate the non-Western world . Order is a 'pure Western concept' according to some Muslims . Order was created by the West in order to dominate non-western world, according to Islamic leaders .
 These differing conceptions of order mean that a ‘new world order’ is tricky to define . A new world order would be difficult to define, says Julian Zelizer .
 None of these schools of thought is adequate by itself in understanding the causes of conflict in the current world, says David Frum .
 The realist emphasis on the balance of power is necessary but not sufficient when long-term societal changes are eroding the norms of state sovereignty . The balance-of-power emphasis is necessary, but it is not sufficient to maintain state sovereignty, says Julian Zelizer .
 Peace has broken out among major liberal democracies, but it is not a panacea when many states, including some rising great powers, are not liberal democracies . Peace is accurate, but peace is not panacea, writes Andrew Hammond . The view that peace is accurate is accurate but is not
 The Cold War exacerbated a number of Third World conflicts . Economic conflicts among the United States, Europe, and Japan were dampened by common concerns about the Soviet military threat .
 Rapid power transitions are one of the leading causes of great power conflict . As historians and political observers since Thucydides have noted, rapid power transitions have led to conflict .
 Such power transitions were a deep structural cause of recent great power conflicts . Germany’s rise before each world war and the relative rise and resulting rivalry of the United States and the Soviet Union after World War 11 .
 There is a strong consensus that the period after the Cold War was one of rapid power transitions with the rise of the U.S. and China and the decline of Russia . The United States and China are now the dominant powers in the world .
 Considerable debate remains over the description and magnitude of the transitions, however, and these debates indicate the unpredictability that makes such transitions a potential source of conflict . The transition is described as a "transition"
 French President Jacques Chirac, for example, called for a return to a multipolar world . France's former president called for the return of multipolar power .
 If the term multipolarity implies a historical analogy with the nineteenth century, it is highly misleading . The term 'multipolarity' implies an analogy to the 19th century . It is not an analogy, but it is a highly misleading.
 The order rested on a balance of power between roughly five equal powers . Great powers after the Cold War are far from equal. That order rests on balance between roughly 5 equal powers, rather than 5 equal power .
 Russia has declined faster and further since 1991 than almost anyone expected . But it retains an immense nuclear arsenal, though it has declined further and further .
 China has a long period of double-digit economic growth, but remains a developing country . China has risen faster than most anticipated, with long periods of double digit economic growth .
 Japan and Germany have not become the full-fledged superpowers that some incorrectly predicted in 1990 . Some incorrectly predicted they would be superpowers in 1990s .
 Despite its great economic progress of the past decade, India must overcome several hurdles before achieving its full potential as a major world power . India's economic progress has been great but must overcome hurdles to achieve full potential, experts say .
 The United States is the only military superpower in the world . The European Union is similar in economic scale to the U.S.
 Some realists warn that the rapid rise of China will present a hegemonic challenge to the U.S. in the twenty-first century . But the historical analogy is flawed .
 China will still be less than half the economic size of the United States in 2025 . Even if China continues to grow at a rapid rate of 9 percent, the U.S. will still grow at 3 percent . The United States is growing at a rate of 3 percent, but China
 While conflict between the two countries is possible if the governments mismanage their relations, it is far from inevitable . The U.S. and South Korea are unlikely to engage in conflict .
 Some analysts predict the world will be organized around three economic blocs — Europe, Asia, and North America . North America, Europe and Asia are among the blocs, analysts say .
 We have already discussed the problem with describing the world order as one of civilizations . And we have already talked about the idea of describing the order as a world order . We have also discussed the issue of describing a civilization as a civilization .
 Analysts have described the international order as an American world empire . In the aftermath of the 2003 Iraq War, other analysts described the world order as a world empire.
 The U.S. military has a global reach with bases around the world . Regional commanders sometimes act like proconsuls .
 The American economy is the largest in the world, and American culture serves as a magnet . U.S. culture is a magnet for people who want to live in the United States .
 It is a mistake to confuse politics of primacy with the politics of empire, says David Cameron . But it is not a mistake, he says, to confuse the politics with empire .
 The U.S. is certainly not an empire in the way we think of the European overseas empires of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . The core feature of such imperialism was political control . The United States is not an imperialistic empire, but it is a democracy .
 The term imperial imperial not only is inaccurate but can be misleading . The U.S. has unequal relationships with weaker nations, but it can be conducive to exploitation . Without formal political control, the term imperial is inaccurate .
 The United States has more power resources than Britain had atits imperial peak, but the U.S. has less power in the sense of direct control over the behavior that occurs inside other countries than Britain did when it ruled a quarter of the globe .
 Kenya’s schools, taxes, laws, and elections, were controlled by British officials . For example, Kenya's schools, tax, laws and elections were controlled .
 In 2003, the United States could not get Mexico and Chile to vote for a second UN Security Council resolution authorizing the invasion of Iraq . The U.S. failed to get Mexico or Chile to support a second vote authorizing the Iraq invasion .
 The problem with the metaphor is that it implies a control from Washington . But it fits poorly with the complex ways in which power is distributed today .
 As we saw in Chapter 6, the U.S. found it far easier to win the battle in Iraq than to manage the occupation . The United States won the battle but lost the war in Iraq, and the occupation in Iraq .
 In the global information age, power is distributed among countries in a pattern that resembles a complex three-dimensional chess game in which you play vertically as well as horizontally .
 On the top chessboard of political-military issues, military power is largely unipolar . But on the middle board of economic issues, the United States is not a hegemon or an empire . The U.S. must bargain as an equal when Europe acts in a unified way
 On antitrust or trade issues, it must meet Europe halfway to reach agreements . For example, on antitrust issues, the EU must meet with the U.S. It must also meet with Europe halfway on agreements .
 On the bottom chessboard of transnational relations that cross borders outside the control of governments, power is chaotically dispersed . Transnational relations include actors as diverse as bankers and terrorists, as well as bankers .
 It makes no sense to use traditional terms such as unipolarity, hegemony, or American empire to describe such issues, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "It's not a good idea to use such terms such a term like hegemony or empire"
 Those who portray an empire based on traditional military power are relying on one-dimensional analysis . The U.S. empire is based on a traditional military force, the author says .
 In a threc'dimensional game, you lose if you focus only on one board and fail to notice the vertical connections among them . The connections in the war on terrorism between military actions on the top board where the U.S. removed a tyrant in Iraq, but simultaneously increased the
 These issues are inherently multilateral and require cooperation for their solution . Representing the dark side of globalization, these issues are represented by globalization . These issues need to be solved by cooperation, the author says .
 To describe such a world as an American empire fails to capture the real nature of the world the U.S. faces, the author says . The United States is not an empire, but it is a powerful force in the world, he says .
 Another issue, often ignored by proponents of the empire model, is whether the U.S. public will tolerate a classical imperial role . Another issue is whether Americans will tolerate such an imperial role, he says .
 America was briefly tempted into real imperialism when it emerged as a world power in 1898, but the interlude of formal empire did not last . America's first formal empire was in the form of a formal empire in 1898 .
 Unlike in Britain, imperialism was not a comfortable experience for Americans . Americans were not comfortable with imperialism in Britain .
 The current distribution of power is one of multilevel interdependence, says the author . "The current distribution is one," he says. "It's a very complex problem. It's a big problem."
 World politics is like a three-dimensional chess game, says David Cameron . No single hierarchy adequately describes a world politics that is like chess chess game .
 None of this complexity would matter if military power were as fungible as money and could determine the outcomes of all areas, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "None of this would matter" if money were as easy to control as money .
 Military prowess is a poor predictor of the outcomes on the economic and transnational playing boards of current world politics . But military prowess is not a good predictor of future outcomes, says CNN.com .
 The U.S. has a more diversified portfolio of power resources than other countries . But the current world order is not an era of American empire in any traditional sense of the word . The United States has a diversified .
 Globalization elevates issues on the international agenda that not even the most powerful country can address on its own . Globalization is elevating issues such as international financial stability, global climate change, infectious diseases, and transnational drug, crime, and terrorist networks .
 The strongest military power the world has seen since the days of Rome is unable to provide security to its citizens by acting alone . The paradox of American power in the twenty-first century is that it is not able to protect its citizens from terrorism .
 Constructivist theorists are right that we should not overly constrain our understanding by trying to force it into the procrustean bed of traditional metaphors with their mechanical polarities . Constructivist theories are right to not over-indecorate our understanding .
 World order must rest on more than the traditional military balance of power alone . This added complexity means world order needs to rest more than military balance, alone . The added complexity of the world order must be added to the world's economic balance .
 The realist view of world order is necessary but not sufficient to explain today’s geopolitical order because it does not take into account the lorig-term societal changes that have been slowly moving the world away from the Westphalian systern . The Westpharian syst
 In 1648, European states agreed in the Peace of Westphalia that the ruler, in effect, would determine the religion of a state regardless of popular preferences . After 30 years of tearing each other apart over religion, Europe agreed in 1648 over religion .
 Order based on sovereignty of states, not the sovereignty of peoples. Order was based on state sovereignty, not people's sovereignty . Order was 'based on state's sovereignty, rather than people's' sovereignty, he said .
 The mechanical balancing of states treated as empty billiard balls was slowly eroded over the ensuing centuries by the growth of nationalism and democratic participation . But the norms of state sovereignty persisted .
 The rapid growth in transnational communications, migration, and economic interdependence is accelerating the erosion of the classical conception of order and state control . Now the rapid growth of transnational . communications and migration is accelerating, increasing the gap between norm and reality .
 This evolution makes more relevant the liberal conception of a world society of peoples as well as of states, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Order is based on values and institutions as well on military power .
 Liberal views that were once regarded as hopelessly utopian, such as Immanuel Kant’s plea for a peaceful league of democracies, seem less far-fetched now . Political scientists report virtually no cases of liberal democracies going to war with each other .
 Realists who saw Europe going back to the future have fared less well than those of liberals who stressed that the new Germany is democratic and deeply enmeshed with its Western neighbors through the institutions of the EU .
 Political scientists Edward Mansfield and Jack Snyder say young democracies can be more prone to war . Increased democratization in tumultuous regions, such as the Middle East, should not be expected to yield instant security dividends .
 Liberal conceptions of order are not entirely new and they do not apply to all countries, says Julian Zelizer . But they do apply to some countries, he says, such as Germany .
 The Cold War order had norms and institutions, but they played a limited role . It was a Cold War era, but it was a period of relative stability . It is not the first time since the Cold War ended in a war .
 During World War II, Roosevelt, Stalin, and Churchill had agreed to a United Nations that assumed a multipolar distribution of power . During the war, Churchill and Roosevelt agreed to the United Nations .
 The UN Security Council would enforce the doctrine of collective security and nonaggression against smaller states . The five great powers were protected by their vetoes .
 Even this abbreviated version of Woodrow Wilson’s institutional approach to order was hobbled, however, by the unforeseen rise of bipolarity . Even this version of Wilson's institutional approach is hobbled by bipolarity, says the historian .
 The superpowers vetoed each other’s initiatives, and the organization was reduced to the more modest role of stationing peacekeepers to observe cease-fires rather than repelling aggressors . Peacekeepers were stationed by the superpowers to observe peacekeepers .
 When the decline of Soviet power led to cooperation with the United States in applying the UN doctrine of collective security against Iraq in 1990-1991, it was less the arrival of a new world order than the reappearance of an aspect of the liberal institutional order that was supposed to have come into
 The doctrine of collective security enshrined in the UN Charter is state'centric, applicable when borders are crossed, but not when force is used among peoples within a state . The doctrine is state-centric but applies only when border is crossed, not when use of force is carried out in
 Let peoples within states vote on whether they want to be protected behind borders of their own . Let people within states decide on whether to protect themselves behind borders . Let peoples in states vote for their own sovereignty .
 But, as we have seen, self-determination is not as simple as it sounds . Self-determination does not always seem to be easy to achieve, it seems .
 Less than 10 percent of the states in today’s world are ethnically homogeneous, experts say . States are less homogeneous than 10 per cent of the world .
 Only half of U.S. cities have one ethnic group that accounts for as much as 75 percent of their population . Only half have a single ethnic group with as much of a 75 percent population .
 Most of the states of the former Soviet Union have significant minorities, and many have disputed borders . Many of the countries of the Soviet Union are minorities .
 Africa might be considered a continent of roughly a thousand peoples squeezed within and across fifty-some states . Africa is home to around a thousand people squeezed within or across fifty or more states .
 In Canada, the French-speaking majority of Quebec demands special status . Some agitate for independence from the rest of Canada .
 Once such multiethnic, multilingual states are called into question, it's difficult to see where the process ends . The country's multilingualism is being questioned by the courts .
 A policy of support for national self-determination could turn into a principle of enormous world disorder . In such a world, local autonomy and international surveillance of minority rights hold some promise, but a policy of unqualified support for such a policy could turn .
 International institutions are gradually evolving in such a post-Westphalian direction . International institutions like the U.S. have been evolving in the Westphalian way .
 International humanitarian law is gaining influence in the fight against dictatorial rulers . The notion of states having a duty to protect individual rights is gaining increased influence .
 Articles 55 and 56 of the UN Charter pledged states to collective responsibility for observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms . Already in 1945, Article 55 of the Charter pledged state responsibility for observing human rights . Article 56 pledged states that they would observe human rights, fundamental freedoms in 1945 .
 UN recommendations of sanctions against apartheid in South Africa set a precedent of not being strictly limited by the Charter’s statements about sovereignty . Even before the 1991 Security Council resolutions authorizing postwar interventions in Iraq, UN sanctions against South Africa were not strictly limited to the Charter's statements of sovereignty .
 In Europe, the 1975 Helsinki Accords codified minority rights, and violations could be referred to the European Conference on Security and Cooperation and the Council of Europe .
 Individual and minority rights are increasingly treated as more than just national concerns . Individual rights are now more important than national concerns, say experts . The U.S. is increasingly treating individual rights as more of a matter of national concern .
 In many parts of the world, human rights are flouted and violations go unpunished . In many, perhaps most, parts of that world, violations of human rights go unheeded .
 To mount an armed multilateral intervention to right all such wrongs would be another enormous principle of disorder . To mount such an intervention would be an enormous principle, he says .
 Intervention is a matter of degree, with actions ranging from statements and limited economic measures at the low end of the spectrum to full-fledged invasions at the high end . But, as we have seen, intervention is a bit of degree .
 Limited interventions and multilateral infringements of sovereignty may gradually increase without suddenly disrupting the distribution of power among states, experts say .
 The Security Council may act under Chapter VII of the UN Charter if it determines that internal violence or development of weapons of mass destruction are likely to spill over into a more general threat to the peace in a region .
 Such definitions are somewhat elastic and may gradually expand over time . Such definitions may be somewhat elastic . The definition of the definition of slavery is elastic .
 Nigeria and others did in the 1990s by sending troops to Liberia and Sierra Leone under the framework of the Economic Community of West African States . In other instances, groups of states may act on a regional basis as well as sending troops in Kosovo in 1999 .
 Such imperfect principles and institutions will leave much room for domestic violence and injustice among peoples, says the author of the book .
 The moral horrors will be less than would be the case if policy makers were to try either to right all wrongs by force or, alternatively, to return to the unmodified Westphalian system . But the moral horrors of righting the wrongs are less likely to be true than
 Liberals must realize that the evolution of a new world order beyond the Westphalian system is a matter of decades and centuries . Realists must recognize that the traditional definitions of power and structure in purely military terms ignore the changes in a world of global communications and growing transnational relations .
 World government is not just around the comer. Cne thing that is clear is that world government is . Not just around world government, it's around the world, says author .
 There is too much social and political diversity in the world and not a sufficient sense of community to support world government . There is not enough community in world to support global government, says President Obama .
 Reform of the United Nations or the development of new institutions offers new ways for states to work with each other as well as for nonstate actors to facilitate cooperation . Nonstate actors can also facilitate cooperation, says U.N. expert .
 In some instances, transnational networks of government officials will foster such cooperation . In other instances mixed coalitions of governments and private actors will do the job . The U.S. government has a history of cooperation in the past .
 Democracy is government by officials who are accountable and removable by the majority of people in a jurisdiction . Democracy is democracy by officials held accountable by majority, not just majority, majority of the majority .
 A citizen of the Maidive Islands would have a thousand times more voting power than a citizen of China . Using that formula, as we saw in Chapter 6, we saw that a Chinese citizen could have more voting rights than a US citizen .
 Minorities acquiesce to a majority when they feel they participate in a larger community . Minorities have to live with a majority in order to participate in the larger community, a study finds .
 In the absence of such community, the extension of domestic voting procedures to the global level' makes little practical or normative sense, says the author of the book .
 A stronger European Parliament may reduce a sense of ‘democratic deficit” as a European community evolves . But it is doubtful that the analogy makes sense under the conditions that prevail on the global scale . A stronger EU Parliament is not a good idea for a stronger EU community, says David
 Democracy has flourished in the context of nation-states. Thus far in world history, democracy has flourished . Democracy has thrived in nation-state states .
 Accountability, however, is not assured only through voting even in wellfunctioning democracies . Accountability is not only assured only by voting, but by citizens, it is also assured .
 In the United States, for example, the Supreme Court and the Federal Reserve System are responsive to elections only indirectly through a long chain of delegation . In the U.S. they are responsive only indirectly .
 In addition to voting, publics communicate and agitate over issues through a variety of means ranging from letters and polls to protests to protests .
 Interest groups and a free press can play an important role in increasing transparency at the local, national, and transnational levels . Interest groups can play a key role in helping to increase transparency at local and national levels .
 Private associations and codes, such as those established by the international chemical industry in the aftermath of the 1984 explosion of a plant in Bhopal, India, can create common standards .
 The NGO practice of naming and shaming companies that exploit child labor has helped consumers hold accountable transnational firms in the toy and apparel industries .
 In 1997 Asian financial crisis, accountability to markets may have led to more increases in transparency by corrupt governments than any formal agreements did . People have unequal votes in markets, but people have equal votes in the markets, the author says .
 Open markets can help diminish undemocratic power of local monopolies . Open markets reduce the power of entrenched and unresponsive government bureaucracies, especially in countries with weak parliaments .
 Efforts by investors to increase transparency and legal predictability can have beneficial spillover effects on political institutions . Moreover, efforts by investors can also be beneficial to political institutions, experts say .
 Hybrid networks that combine governmental, intergovernmental, and nongovernmental representatives are likely to play a larger role in the future . Hybrid networks combine governmental and intergovernmental representatives to create networks .
 We need to think harder about norms and procedures for the governance of globalization, says David Frum . Frum says we need to look at norms for governance of global business .
 Denial of the problem, misleading domestic analogies, and platitudes about democratic deficits will not do . Denial will not be enough for the president, says Obama .
 We need changes in processes that take advantage of the multiple forms of accountability that exist in modem democracies . We need new accountability systems, says David Cameron . The world's most powerful democracies are democracies, he says .
 International institutions are not international government, but they are crucial for international governance in a global information age . International institutions, not international governments, are crucial in the information age, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 You will live in a world that will be anarchic in the terms stated at the beginning of the book, the author says . We must hope not in the Hobbesian sense of a chaotic war of all against all, he writes .
 Order will be provided by the realists’ balance of power among states and by the liberals’ evolving international norms and institutions, says Julian Zelizer . Order is provided both by realists and liberals, Zelizer says .
 Justice and order are often at odds with each other, even in issues of self-determination . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in favor of the U.N. on Thursday .
 Robert Gilpin argues that international politics has not changed over two millennia . He argues that Thucydides would have little trouble understanding our world today . Gilpin: "Thricydide would be able to understand the world today"
 If Thucydides were plopped down in the Middle East or East Asia, he would probably recognize the situation quite quickly .
 Globally, there has been a technological revolution in the development of nuclear weaponry, an information revolution that reduces the role of geography and territory . There is increased consciousness of certain values and human rights that cross national frontiers, the author says .
 Immanuel Kant anticipated the changes in international politics in his eighteenth'Century liberal view of international politics . Similar changes were anticipated by Immanman Kant in his 18th century view of world politics .
 To understand the current world, we must understand both the realist and lib' eral views of world politics . We must also be alert to social and cultural changes constructivists emphasize .
 "We need to be able to think about different ideal types at the same time," says Drexler . We need to think differently about ideal types, he says .
 Reversing that produces complex interdependence, in which nonstate actors, economic instruments, and welfare goals are more important than security . Reverses that produces . complex inter-dependence .
 Those two views are at the opposite ends of a conceptual continuum on which we can locate different reahworld relationships . The two views of the two sides of the conceptual continuum can be found on the opposite end of the continuum .
 All three approaches are helpful to understand international politics in a changing world . Realism, liberalism, constructivism and constructivism are helpful and helpful to understanding international politics .
 The bipolar world is over, but it is not going to be replaced by a unipolar world empire that the U.S. controls alone . "The bipolar world was over, and it is over," says President Obama . "It's not a bipolar world that the United States controls
 The world is already economically multipolar, and there will be a diffusion of power as the information revolution progresses, interdependence increases, and transnational actors become more important . There will be an increase in power diffusion in the world, says the author .
 Formal or informal arrangements made between sovereign states, usually to ensure mutual security . Alliances are often made between countries to ensure security .
 Appeasement is the act of accommodating the demands of an assertive power in an attempt to prevent conflict . The act of appeasing a powerful power in a bid to avoid conflict is called 'appeasement'
 Western Europe’s appeasement of Hitler in the late 1930s is the classic example of the dangers of appeasment . Western Europe's appeasements of Hitler is a classic example, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Asymmetry Situations in which states or agents with unbalanced power capabilities are in opposition to one another . Situations are in which state or agents are in opposing power capabilities .
 The U.S. war against A1 Qaeda is widely regarded as an asymmetrical conflict . The United States has been fighting A1 al Qaeda in Afghanistan .
 Balance of power is a term commonly used to describe the distribution of power in the international system . A policy of balancing foreign powers to prevent one state from gaining a preponderance of power, or the balances of military power that existed in Europe in the nineteenth century .
 The structure of an international system in which two states or alliances of states dominate world politics is bipolar . Bipolar is the structure of the world's political system .
 Cold War division between the U.S. and the Soviet Union is often referred to as a bipolar system . The Cold War divide between the United States and the . Soviet Union was often called the "bipolar system"
 Bretton Woods New Hampshire resort where 1944 conference established the IMF and World Bank . Bretton was the site of the first meeting of the IMF, World Bank meetings . The conference was held in 1944 at the base of the World Bank and IMF .
 The Cold War lasted from roughly the end of World War II until the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 . The standoff between the U.S. and the Soviet Union lasted roughly between roughly the 1945 and 1989 .
 U.S. and Soviet troops did not engage in direct combat in the Cold War . proxy wars were fought on behalf of both sides around the globe . This was a "cold war" rather than a "hot shooting war .
 A collection of states agree on an institutional framework and legal mechanisms to prevent or suppress aggression . Collective security is a means of maintaining peace in which a collection of countries agree on a framework .
 Two examples of collective security actions under the auspices of the U.N. were the Korean War and the Persian Gulf War .
 Congress of Vienna marked the end of the Napoleonic Wars and established the general framework for the European international system in the 19th century .
 Constructivism is an analytical approach to international relations that emphasizes the importance of ideas, cultures, and social dimensions . Constructivism emphasizes the role of ideas and cultures in international relations . Constructivist is an approach to the world's most complex and complex relationships .
 John Ruggie, Alexander Wendt, and Peter Katzenstein are considered constructivists . They are considered by some of the world's most famous constructivistists .
 A foreign policy designed to contain a potential aggressor . Containment is a foreign policy aimed at containing potential aggressors .
 Containment was the cornerstone of U.S. foreign policy toward Soviet communism during the Cold War . Containment is a cornerstone of American foreign policy .
 Cosmopolitans value individuals over sovereign states . They limit the moral importance of national borders to individuals rather than borders .
 These are often phrased as “what if’ questions and are employed in the analysis of scenarios in international relations to explore causal relationships .
 The crisis was resolved when the Soviets removed their missiles partly in exchange for a secret agreement that the United States would remove missiles based in Turkey . The U.S. agreed to remove missiles from Turkey in return for the exchange .
 This theory lost credibility when countries like Singapore and South Korea developed rapidly in the 1980s and 1990s, it says . This theory was discredited when countries such as Singapore developed rapidly, it adds .
 Deterrence a strategy of discouraging a potential aggressor through threat or fear . Deterrence is a strategy that discourages aggressors through threat, fear or threat .
 Economic interdependence is characterized by reciprocal economic effects among countries or actors in different countries . Situations characterized by reciprocity of economic effects between countries .
 Woodrow Wilson’s blueprint for a settlement at the end of World War I . Among its most important features was a call for an international institution that would safeguard collective security .
 Game Theory is a theory of rational action that predicts how actors will react in certain game situations to obtain favorable outcomes . Game Theory predicts how players will react to certain situations in order to obtain a favorable outcome . Theory is based on a game theory that predicts what actors will do in certain situations
 Geopolitics is a theory of international politics that considers the location and proximity of a state a key cause of its behavior . Geopolitical is based on a theory that considers location, proximity of states a key factor in state's behavior .
 At its broadest, the term is used to describe worldwide networks of interdependence . Globalization is often used to refer to global networks of interconnectedness . The term is also used in the United States and Canada .
 It has a number of dimensions, including economic, cultural, military, and political globalization . Globalization is a key part of globalization, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is not a new phenomenon, it dates back to the Silk Road, but due to the information revolution, its contemporary form is “thicker and quicker” than previous ones . The information revolution is ‘thicker’ and quicker than before .
 IMF set up after World War II to lend money, primarily to developing countries, to help stabilize currencies or cover balances of payments . IMF is an international institution set up in 1945 . IMF was set up to help stabilise currencies and cover balance of payments in developing countries .
 INGO (international nongovernmental organizations) A subset of NGOs that have an international focus . INGO is a subset of organizations that have a focus on international issues .
 Interdependence Situations characterized by reciprocal effects among countries or other actors . Situations are characterized by reciprocity of reciprocity among countries .
 International institutions Institutions created to facilitate international cooperation . International institutions . Institutions . created to help international cooperation. International institutions. Institutions. created to assist international cooperation in the world .
 The United Nations, World Bank, and International Monetary Fund are examples of international institutions . The U.N. is one of the world's largest institutions .
 International law is a combination of treaties and customs that regulates the conduct of states . International law includes treaties, customs that regulate conduct of nations . It is also known as international law .
 International law can also apply to individuals who act in an international context . International law also applies to individuals involved in international events .
 Intervention External actions that influence the domestic affairs of a sovereign state . Intervention is the result of an intervention in the country's affairs .
 Most often this term is used to refer to forcible interference in another state’s domestic affairs . Most often it refers to 'forcibly interference' in a foreign country's domestic affairs.
 Jits Ad Bellem is a moral code of justifications that must be satisfied for a war to be considered a just war . A moral code is set out to be satisfied by a war that is considered a war .
 The elements of this have traditionally included having just cause; being declared by a proper authority; possessing right intention . Having a reasonable chance of success; and the ends being proportional to the means used . The elements have traditionally been included .
 In Bello is a moral code of conduct that holds states and individuals responsible for their actions during wartime . From the Latin “justice to go to war” his InBello .
 Augustine and Thomas Aquinas are historical figures in this tradition . Michael Walzer is a well-known modem theorist . Augustine is a historical figure in the tradition .
 League of Nations was founded at the end of World War 1 . Organization dedicated to collective security was founded in 1918 .
 Woodrow Wilson, the league’s chief advocate, called for its creation in his Fourteen Points at the end of the war . Wilson called for the league to be created after the Second World War .
 Liberalism An analytical approach to international relations in which states function as part of a global society that sets the context for their interactions . Liberalism is a view of the world's most powerful state of power .
 Classical liberalism has intellectual roots in the writings of Immanuel Kant, Jeremy Bentham, and John Stuart Mill .
 In the modern era, Woodrow Wilson and Richard Rosecrance are considered liberals . In the 21st century, they were both considered liberals, but not conservatives .
 The structure of an international system in which three or more states or alliances dominate world politics is Multipolar . Multipolar is the structure of a system that dominates world politics . The system is defined by the power of a single state to dominate world affairs .
 NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) created a free-trade zone in North America . NAFTA was a 1994 agreement among the United States, Canada, and Mexico . NAFTA is a trade agreement between the U.S., Canada and Mexico that created the free trade zone .
 A state’s perceptions of its goals in the international system . National interest . A state's perceptions of their goals in international system. National interest.
 Realists, liberals, and constructivists all have different perceptions of how states formulate their national interests . Realists and liberals have different views on how to formulate national interests in states .
 A belief that people belonging to a certain group, whether through shared ethnicity, language, land, culture, or religion, should inhabit a given territory and control a state . Nationalism is a belief .
 Neoliberalism is an analytical approach to international relations in which the actions of states are constrained by economic interdependence and international institutions . Ne neoliberalism is the result of an analysis of economic and international relations .
 Neorealism is an analytical approach to international relations in which the actions of states are constrained primarily by the structural balance of military power . Neorealistism is a view of an approach to the structure of the world's power systems .
 NGO In the broadest definition, any organization that represents interests other than those of a state or multinational corporation . NGO is a non-profit body that represents its own interests .
 Examples of well-known NGOs include the Catholic Church, Greenpeace, and the International Red Cross .
 A strategy used by both the United States and Soviet Union during the Cold War . The possession of nuclear weapons acted as a deterrent to the other side . The U.S. and the Soviet Union used nuclear weapons as a deterrence .
 OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) An organization of the world’s largest oil-producing states that tries to coordinate policy on oil production and pricing among its members . OPEC (OPEC) is a group of the largest oil producing states .
 The deployment of armed troops to prevent conflict or maintain peace in a state is called peacekeeping . Peacekeeping is a form of peacekeeping in the United States .
 Many peacekeeping operations are conducted under UN auspices, but peacekeeping can also be conducted by a regional organization or a group of countries acting outside the United Nations .
 Peace of Westphalia was the framework for an international system in which the sovereign state was the highest form of authority . The 1648 treaty ended the Thirty Years’ War and was the foundation for the international system .
 An analytical approach to international relations in which the primary actors are states and the central problems are war and the use of force . Realism is a view of realism in the international community .
 Carr, Hans Morgenthau, and Henry Kissinger are all considered realists . Carr, Henry Kissinger and Hans Carr are realists. Carr and Kissinger were realists of the Cold War .
 Describes how quickly a change in. one part of a system leads to a . change in . another part of the system . Describes a change of . one part in a system that leads to another part in another .
 Skeptics believe that moral categories have no place in discussions of international relations because of the lack of an international community that can sanction rights and duties . Skeptic believes moral categories should not be used in discussions . of international . relations .
 Social liberalism is the belief that person-toperson contacts reduce conflict by promoting understanding . The belief is that social interaction reduces conflict by reducing it to a level of understanding .
 Soft power is the ability to obtain desired outcomes through attraction rather than coercion or payment . Soft power can be used to achieve desired outcomes without coercion . The power of soft power is defined as the power of attraction over coercion .
 The idea that a state has a government that exercises authority over its territory is sovereignty . The idea is that a government exercises authority in its territory .
 State moralists believe that international morality depends on a society of sovereign states playing by certain rules, even if those rules are not always obeyed . The State of the State of Moralists are a group of state moralists around the world .
 Symmetry Situations in which states or agents with relatively balanced power capabilities are in opposition to one another . Situations are in which state or agents are in conflict with each other .
 The nuclear balance between the United States and the Soviet Union is widely regarded as a symmetrical conflict . The U.S. and Soviet Union are widely regarded to be symmetrical . The Soviet Union and the U.K. nuclear balance is widely considered to be asymmetrical .
 Thirty Years’ War was a series of European wars fueled by international, religious, and dynastic conflicts that took place from 1618 to 1648 . Thirty Years' War was the first European war of its kind .
 History of the Peloponnesian War is one of the earliest known works of history and international relations . Thucydides was a commander of the Athenian army .
 Transnational actor is a nonstate actor or entity that acts across international borders . Transnational actors are nonstate actors or entities that act internationally . Nonstate actor is an actor that acts in international borders.
 Treaty of Rome laid the groundwork for European integration . It led first to the creation of a European Comrnon Market and eventually to the European Union and the common euro currency . Treaty was signed in 1957 .
 Treaty of Utrecht established legitimacy of both British and French holdings in North America . 1713 treaty ended the Wars of Spanish Succession and established the legitimacy of the British government .
 Treaty of Westphalia established state sovereignty as the highest principle in the international system . The 1648 peace treaty formally concluded the Thirty Years’ War and established the state of state sovereignty .
 The structure of an international system in which one state exercises preponderant power is unipolar . Unipolar is the structure of a system that is dominated by one state .
 Some analysts refer to the current military power structure as a unipolar system dominated by the United States . Some analysts say the current system is dominated by U.S.
 The relative cost of changing the structure of a system of interdependence is relative . Vulnerability is a vulnerability to a system that is dependent on each other's strength . The relative costs of changing a system's structure are unknown .
 Can also be thought of as the cost of escaping or changing the rules of the game . Can also thought of being able to escape or change the rules, or escape .
 World Bank set up after World War II to provide loans, technical assistance, and policy advice to developing countries . World Bank provides loans and technical assistance to developing nations .
 WTO was created in 1994 to regulate trade and tariffs among its member states . WTO is an international organization that regulates trade .
 Excerpts from “From Our December 13 Pages, 75 Years ago,” International Herald Tribune, December 13, 1985 . The Unseen Vampire of War”: Excerpted from ‘From Our Dec. 13 pages, 75 years ago”
 Kennan: "The Sources of Soviet Conduct" is published in Foreign Affairs, 25: 4: 4 , 581. Excerpted from George Kennan's book, "The Source of Soviet conduct"
 Brian Catchpole, A Map History of the Modem World (Oxford Heinemann Publishers Ltd. Ltd., 1982), 13. Reprinted with permission from Catchpole .
 Brian Catchpole's 'A Map History of the Modem World' was published in 15.5 years ago .
 Brian Catchpole, A Map History of the Modern World, 69. The map was published by Catchpole in 1969 .