 Others are now using it to benefit their promotions, and it's obviously helping them achieve recognition . Others are using it now to benefit promotions .
 I think it's not asking too much to request that credit be given where it is due, to the authors of this work . The author of this article is happy to make clear that credit is given to the creators of the novel .
 Ex-Arkansas Governor Mike Huckabee is unacceptable, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says Huckabee is a candidate who is unacceptable .
 Huckabee has acquired some momentum as late, and has thus forced me to examine him on the issue that matter most in this space . The good news is that China is becoming much more a part of the mainstream .
 In its economic development and even in giving greater liberties to its people, the country has been given greater liberties . It has also been giving greater rights to its citizens .
 I'm sorry, but that's the talk of a man who was swallowed the ""engagement"" Kool-aid, and he's been drinking it for quite some time . The talk of an engagement is that of the man who has been drinking the 'engagement' Kool
 China's accession to the WTO is a vital step in its incorporation into the rules-based multilateral trading system . Take a look at a letter he co-signed regarding PNTR .
 This move will strengthen the rule of law and accelerate domestic reforms in China, says China's President Xi Jinping . The move is expected to strengthen domestic reforms, he says .
 The long-term political and social impacts of China's accession may even exceed the commercial benefits . Naivete like this has no place in the White House, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Duncan Hunter remains the best, followed by Tom Tancredo and Fred Thompson . Fred Thompson is the third-ranked Republican in the country .
 Stanley Kurtz's latest column on Stalinist North Korea is quite unique . Kurtz managed to be dazzlingly brilliant and shockingly ignorant at the same time and with the same words .
 Kurtz is one of the very few pundits who has never really signed on to the six-party nuclear talks . Now that Stalinist North Korea's nuclear dalliance with Syria is an open secret, Kurtz aims squarely at the Bush Administration for its weakness .
 Kim Jong Il has handed Syria extensive nuclear technology, perhaps even fissile material . The problem is that a combination of carrots and sticks has not stopped Syria from getting nuclear technology . Syria has been hit hard by the North Korean leader's regime .
 Kurtz's 2,200+ words on Stalinist North Korea were exactly zero . The number of times Kurtz mentioned Communist China was exactly zero. Simple, Kurtz said .
 Any nuclear missile launched from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union . President Bush needs to unambiguously promise retaliation for any nuclear explosion of North Korean origin on American soil .
 Allison: U.S. will only be safe if Kim feels “in his gut” that North Korea will be held directly responsible for nuclear terror . Allison: Even if material passed through a chain of rogue states and only eventually into terrorist hands, it will only get into terrorist
 If Kim feels as though he can escape detection as the ultimate source of a terrorist nuclear weapon, the path is open to likely nuclear terror on American soil within the next decade . The ignorance is jaw-dropping .
 Kim is not acting on his own, he is acting in concert with his de facto colonial masters . Kim is acting on behalf of the state of South Korea, writes CNN.com's John Daley.com .
 It is not Kim Jong-il who must face the threat of annihilation by counter-strike, it's the Communist Chinese regime that props him up . Any threat against him is utterly useless for this reason .
 North Korea is the source of U.S. proliferation worries . They are in the Krushchev role, not Kim; they are the source . Kim Jong-Hussein is not Kim, but he is in the role of the former Soviet leader .
 In fact, it is Communist China, not its Stalinist puppet, that killed off non-proliferation . China is not the puppet state of state of mind, but it is the Communist China .
 Stanley Kurtz is a brilliant writer and thinker, one of the very few outside of the anti-Communist community that I respect . So long as learned men like Kurtz continue to ignore this fundamental fact, they will miss the forest for the trees, and not only will nuclear proliferation
 I would have preferred he focus a little more on the national security threat of the Communist regime . That said and remember, remember, I say this as a Hunter guy I would rather he focus on the issue .
 If they wanted to buy something else that would have, in this case, certainly, more of an impact on our national security interests, I'd say, no, we'd have to think about that in a totally different way . But if they were buying something else, they'd have
 "There are things that we should have thought of in the first place, when we passed the PNTR, which I voted against, along with Duncan Hunter," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Fred Thompson: When you trade with people who are your potential enemy, I'm not for trading with them at all . Thompson: I was one of the strictest advocates of imposing restrictions on the Chinese for their behavior .
 Fred Thompson pushed hard for curbs, but he still voted for PNTR with Communist China after the curbs were voted down . They have devalued their currency which puts them in a favored position as well as our manufacturers .
 This is utterly wrong on so many levels that I can't get into all of them, but I can . I can remind everyone that ""China and India"" is just about the most ignorant geopolitical pairing imaginable . This is about the worst geopolitical pair imaginable .
 John McCain was terrible trust me, Senator says . No one who falls into that trap can be expected to steer the ship of state thoughtfully enough, in my humble opinion . If it were that much fun, we would have a lot more company over here .
 Alliance of All Burma Buddhist Monks urges people around the world to boycott the Olympic and goods from China .
 Statement also warned China that Buddhist monks in countries around the world would lead the boycott against the Olympics which are scheduled to be held in Beijing in August 2008 .
 Burmese people across the globe have been demonstrating against the Chinese government . They are calling for a halt to its investment in Burma and its support for the regime . The Chinese government has been criticized for its support of Burma's regime in recent months .
 China is currently the largest importer to Burma and the third largest market for Burmese exports . China is the largest market in Burma and is the biggest importer .
 Congresswoman Jo Ann Davis passed away over the weekend .
 Jo Ann Davis was one of the best anti-Communists in Congress . She took a sudden turn for the worse last week .
 They are the main economic, military, and political supporters of the military junta . The junta is based in Bangkok, Thailand .
 China has refused to press its closest ally to allow its people human rights, and used its veto power to block the UN Security Council from acting . For 15 years China has used veto power .
 As a result, the UN is making the same mistakes it made on Darfur and Rwanda, it says . The UN says it is making same mistakes as it did in Darfur, Rwanda and Rwanda .
 The report states that the children were all eventually released . The children were eventually released from the children .
 That's the kind of spunk we need when dealing with tyrants . If only we could get Western politicians to emulate them on any number of issues, when the Communists would like a certain policy or statement .
 Visit our site at china-e-lobby.blogspot.com or sign up for e-mail alerts here . Visit our website to read more about China .
 Hiatt: "Tell China that as far as the United States is concerned, it can have its Olympic Games or its regime in Burma" Hiatt suggests in Washington Post that the U.S. could have its own Olympic Games .