 The author discusses the behavior logic of USSR and USA in the final step of the crisis, which is ending the game with shaking hands . Through the study of the administrative idea and interest pursuit of the two countries, the author further discusses the behaviour logic of USA and USSR .
 The article concludes that the confrontation between great powers is irrational and risky . Combined with the analysis on structural dynamics of the chicken game, the article concludes . The article also concludes that .
 A ‘chicken game’ would force both sides to constantly hover on the edge of danger . The consequences of exerting extreme pressure are unpredictable, making the other side, or oneself, unsafe .
 In the era of globalization, countries, especially major countries, should actively promote the establishment of more positive international relations . In the world's first era, countries should promote more positive relations, writes David Frum .
 All countries should learn to remain calm and view international relations from a long-term strategic perspective . Keeping disagreements among different countries under control, keeping disagreements under control .
 After World War II, the Soviet Union and the U.S. launched a worldwide struggle for the sphere of influence . The two opposing camps relied on each other huge military strength .
 The two camps had already reached the limit of expansion, which was also the fundamental reason why both USSR and USA finally fell into the mire of war . To maintain the sphere of influence for a long time required the consideration of many factors such as economic cost .
 Soviet Union deploying missiles in Cuba undoubtedly caused a great crisis to the U.S. At that time, the Soviet Union deployed missiles in Cuban territory . The Soviet Union also deployed missiles into Cuba .
 The United States immediately exerted pressure and started confrontation with USSR at all costs . So once getting know the real situation, the U.S. began exerting pressure .
 The crisis was averted when the Soviet missiles were withdrawn from Cuba . Fortunately, the crisis was eventually averted .
 Nikita Khrushchev’s personal ruling philosophy played an important role in influencing the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The Soviet leader's personal rule philosophy played a key role in deploying the missiles .
 After Khrushchev came to power, he always regarded the Soviet Union as an excellent example in the socialist camp . He always regarded it as an example of socialism .
 Khrushchev had strong confidence in the Soviet Union and socialist forces . He was also confident in the development of the national-liberation movement in Asia, Africa and Latin America .
 In 1958, Khrushchev created the Berlin Crisis again, claiming that Berlin was “a malignant tumor” which needed to be surgically operated on, and asked the Western powers to withdraw their troops from Berlin within six months . In 1958 he asked the West to withdraw its
 In a word, Khrushchev had serious disposition defects in his diplomatic activities, especially his feisty and moody style, which caused his negative administrative ideas and also some serious impacts on the diplomatic activities of the Soviet Union . In one word, in a word Khrushchchev
 Khrushchev mis-underestimated the United States’ determination to retaliate so then began shipping missiles and bombers to Cuba . The strategic rivalry that had once been intense with the U.S. during the cold war ended in Cuba .
 The Soviet Union provoked a dispute with the U.S. in Cuba not only because of the views of Khrushchev alone . The entire Soviet leading group was involved in the dispute . The United States and the Soviet Union have been at odds for decades .
 The victory of the Cuban Revolution and the Bay of Pigs Invasion made the Soviet leading group realized that as the dominant force in the socialist camp, it was obliged for USSR to help Cuba stabilize its revolutionary achievements, support Cuba’s economic development .
 Soviet officials considered deployment of missiles in Cuba was necessary . They considered that they could easily lose Cuba if some decisive measures were not taken to protect it .
 It was this kind of thinking that accelerated the Soviet Union’s determined pace of deploying missiles and bombers in Cuba . The Soviet Union's determined pace in Cuba accelerated the pace of deployment .
 The influence of ideas is inevitably significant, but it is also crucial to analyze the behavior logic of the Soviet Union . From the perspective of the State Interests and Its Global Strategy Goals, it is important to analyze Soviet Union's behavior from perspective of interests .
 From the perspective of direct interest, Cuban military value was quite obvious . The Cuban military is important for the country's interests . The U.S. has been involved in the Cuban government for more than a decade .
 Once the Soviet Union deployed missiles in Cuba, for the United States, its early warning time of incoming missiles would be greatly reduced, from 15 to 2-3 minutes . For the U.S. it would be reduced from 15 minutes to 2 minutes .
 The Soviet Union could make up for its inadequacy of strategic forces if it set down missiles in Cuba . The U.S. would be doubling its strategic threat to the Soviet Union, author says .
 It would affect other countries’ perceptions of Soviet power and the strategic balance between Western camp and socialist camp, which, to some extent, enhanced the competitive advantage of the Soviet Union in its strategic struggle with the United States . More possibly, it would affect the perception of other countries'
 At the same time, the Soviet Union could put more pressure on the United States by placing missiles in Cuba . The two sides had not made an agreement yet for a long time, such as the Berlin issue and Treaty of Versailles .
 The United States’ Exerting Extreme Stress Against the Soviet Union Exerted Extreme Stress against the USSR 82 3. 3. 4. 5. 2. 4 . 5. 5 . 4. 6. 6 . 5 . 5th. 4th. 5th . 5
 Cuba had turned to be dependent on Soviet Union and the socialist camp . Cuba had been a huge trouble for the United States in a long time . The U.S. had been in the grip of the Soviet Union .
 Cuba’s allegiance to the Soviet Union was unacceptable for and strongly opposed by the U.S. Out of the hostility to socialism, Cuba's allegiance to socialism was unacceptable . The U.N. was strongly opposed to Cuba's policy .
 The Cuban crisis gave the U.S. an opportunity to completely solve the Cuban issue . While the occurrence of the crisis exactly gave the United States an opportunity, it did not solve the issue completely .
 The Soviet Union’s deployment of missiles in Cuba brought great threat and challenge to the U.S. The United States. From the perspective of safety interests, the United States has a strong interest in protecting Cuban citizens .
 The Cuba missiles fundamentally altered the complexion of the nuclear rivalry between the U.S. and USSR, which up to that point had been dominated by the Americans . The Cuban missiles were the first to hit the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 At a critical moment that could lead to radical changes in the world pattern, the U.S. had to worry that if it adopted the appeasement policy to the Soviet threat this once, more threats from socialist camp might follow .
 The behavior of the Soviet Union hid unimaginable danger, threatening the U.S.’s safety interests which is the foundation of the nation's permanence, says President Obama .
 In such a crisis, the U.S. had to make resolute and strong action rather than ignore it . Thus, the United States had to be resolute, strong action instead of ignoring it .
 USA repeatedly made negotiations with USSR and made rational decisions, though it was incensed many times by Khrushchev’s provocative act . USA repeatedly agreed to compromises and concessions at the same time . U.S. and USSR eventually agreed to a compromise .
 In general, the two sides stabilized at the extreme level, and fortunately, there was no outbreak of a nuclear war . Fortunately, there were no outbreaks of nuclear war in the 1980s .
 The ideas and interests are still vital analysis perspectives . While thinking about the reason for the two great powers’ eventual compromise, think about the reasons for the compromise .
 Khrushchev’s repeated concessions during the crisis were the result of his own ideas . From the perspective of the Decision MAKERS’ Ideas, Khrushchchev's ideas were the reason for his concessions .
 Kremlin received an urgent letter announcing a possible U.S. air strike and invasion of Cuba within 24 to 72 hours . The Kremlin received the letter on October 27, 2013 .
 Some related military intelligence vitally troubled Khrushchev and Soviet military . Also, some related military secrets vitally troubling Khrushchevitch and Soviet .
 They were afraid that if USA air stroke or invaded Cuba, the Soviet military would have to launch an unprecedented nuclear holocaust with the U.S. The Soviet military was afraid of a nuclear war with the United States .
 At that time, the affair had already backfired, and the escalation forced Khrushchev to make concessions . At that point, the incident had already been backfired . The affair was already under way, but it had backfired and forced the government to backtrack .
 Kennedy's personal ideas played a significant role in preventing a nuclear war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Kennedy's ideas helped prevent nuclear war .
 Kennedy realized this kind of action would risk too much . Kennedy realized the Soviet Union’s deployment of missiles in Cuba gave the U.S. a rare opportunity to attack Cuba .
 As an experienced leader, Kennedy showed his excellent prudence at that crucial time . Kennedy showed that he had a good sense of prudence, says CNN.com editor .
 He drew on his knowledge of history to reiterate his belief in not going to war and to analyze the huge military risk of attacking Cuba .
 Kennedy’s choice of blockade was certainly wise, because the blockade was the first step in military action . The blockade was a first step to military action, and it was a wise move, says historian John Sutter .
 At each stage in the crisis, Kennedy gave his opponent some time to reflect and react . Kennedy gave him time to react to his opponent's actions .
 Kennedy was always careful and never led to bridges being burned or relationships severed . Kennedy's countermeasures he had drawn up were always careful . Kennedy was careful not to burn bridges, relationships were severed .
 Kennedy displayed his prudence and reason during making political decisions . He was guided by the idea of thinking about not only his own country, but also other countries .
 JFK made great contributions to prevent a terrible nuclear war . Embracing the idea of mutual tolerance and harmony, Kennedy made great contribution to prevent war .
 Both USSR and USA’s efforts to avoid a nuclear war certainly had their interests in mind . USSR and U.S. had their own interests in avoiding nuclear war . Russia and USA avoided nuclear war in the 1950s .
 The United States and the Soviet Union do not choose to cross the death line of the Cold War . The destructive consequences of nuclear war in both sides made the U.S. and the . Soviet Union did not choose .
 According to intelligence estimates, the Soviet Union had about half the Soviet forces deployed in Cuba, with potentially catastrophic consequences that would kill more than 80 million Americans . The Soviet Union was believed to have about half of its forces in Cuba .
 If some actions of USA caused USSR’s powerful military to counterattack, it would cause serious damage to the interests of USA itself .
 At the same time, for the Soviet Union, it could not defeat the United States because of the huge gap in their nuclear powers . The Soviet Union could never defeat the U.S. due to the gap in nuclear power .
 The gap was stark, and the Soviet Union was also aware of its military weakness relative to the United States . If it really developed a nuclear war with the U.S., it would certainly be heavy losses for the Soviets . The United States was aware of the gap in economic and military
 Both USA and USSR took a step back at an important juncture, avoiding a nuclear war . All up, it was based on their own interests on security, military and many other fields .
 The game between USSR (or we say Russia nowadays) and USA, two major countries in the world, must always keep repeating . Conflict is the worst outcome; while the defection of one side and the compromise of the other seem to achieve a Nash equilibrium, but in fact this would
 It is the mutual compromise that is the best solution for this game. Therefore, it is a mutual compromise . The mutual compromise is best solution to this game .
 Even nuclear powers or hegemons cannot do whatever they want, especially when both sides in the fight are nuclear powers . Both sides of the war cannot be ruled out of doing so, especially if both sides are nuclear .
 A country should not threaten national security and core interests of other countries for the sake of its own unilateral interests, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: A country must not threaten its own national security for its own interests .
 The consequences of extreme confrontation are unimaginable and could bring the disaster of destruction to all mankind . And the consequences are unimaginable, he says .
 While making foreign policies, the country must be cautious, farsighted, and able to comprehensively evaluate the overall political situation . Hence, while making foreign policy, the government needs to be cautious .
 In international conflicts, constant confrontation between countries cannot solve disagreements and the key issue . Instead, negotiation and consultation are the best way to resolve conflicts and disputes, so as to avoid further deterioration of the situation .
 Nowadays, it is true that more and more people are living in peace, but many of the contradictions among countries, especially among the major ones, are sharp .
 The United States Since 1941, Wadsworth Publishing; 2nd ed, no.,pp:174. The U.S. Since 1941 .