 Romanian Communism Online Photo Collection, ID Resolution and 32866X16X17.X17 . Romania Communism Online photo collection . Romania's Communist Party is a collection of photos taken in Romania .
 The crisis was critical in reorienting Romanian foreign and security policies in a manner that caused significant shifts in the nature of the Cold War regionally and globally . Romania's subsequent campaign for nuclear disarmament and confidence-building measures within the Warsaw Pact, among others .
 The Cuban missile crisis constituted one of the turning points that determined the character of Romanian independent policy for the rest of the Cold War . Romania's independent policy was shaped by the crisis, which led to the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Bucharest’s early independent initiatives were poorly understood in Washington during the first half of the 1950s and for almost a decade thereafter . Bucharest's early independent initiative was poorly understood by the U.S. in Washington .
 Romania was the “least able” or likely to challenge Soviet domination in the 1940s, a cognitive bias dating from the 1950s that Romania was ‘least likely’ to challenge the Soviet Union . The initiative was dismissed, ignored or assimilated into prevailing parad
 It was not until 1963 that the ostentatious nature of that defiance finally overrode US intelligence doubts . The U.S. intelligence doubts finally overcame them .
 Romanian policy reorientation was recognized in the US, a decade after its first manifestations . It is hardly surprising that the even more consequential transformation following the Cuban Missile, during 1963 especially, also escaped notice by the US intelligence and academic communities .
 Within a year of that crisis Romanian policy experienced a tectonic shift from the mere reassertion of national control over institutions and policies to containment of Soviet military might regionally and globally .
 He lobbied Moscow insistently for the closure of the Soviet-Romanian joint ventures, describing them as purely exploitive and “no better” than capitalist institutions .
 By the end of 1953, Gheorghiu Dej had approached the West offering to settle outstanding claims with the United States . He had more success with Great Britain a year later, settling outstanding claims .
 The strength of the cognitive bias existing within the US intelligence community was such that, when not dismissed outright, these Romanian outreach efforts continued to be assimilated into current interpretational paradigms, making Washington very slow to respond . Washington was slow to react to the outreach efforts .
 These biases were intentionally exploited – and reinforced – by targeted Soviet disinformation . Soviet disinformation was intentionally exploited and reinforced by the Soviet Union .
 Epishev, had been the deputy chairman of the Soviet security apparatus prior to his appointment to Bucharest . He was appointed in 1991 .
 Yepishev was hurriedly assigned to the top diplomatic post in Bucharest immediately after Gheorghiu-Dej’s first request in August 1955 for the withdrawal of Soviet troops . After a career having nothing to do with diplomacy, he was assigned to Bucharest
 Thayer advised Washington not to respond to Bucharest’s outreach by concluding any economic arrangements with it during the rest of his tenure . Thayer said the information was an intelligence “coup”
 Romanian actions were regularly discounted in U.S. intelligence assessments by questioning their motivation and intent . In consequence, Romanian actions have been discounted in United States intelligence assessments .
 Since the Hungarian revolt, the Romanian regime has gone farther than the other orthodox satellites in the general direction of post-Stalin reform . The Romanian government has gone further in some ways than the others in general .
 It appears to be making sizeable efforts to improve living standards and increase trade with the West . It appears, however, to be trying to increase living standards .
 Rumania is gradually attempting on its own initiative to move toward autonomy, observers say . Some optimistic Yugoslav and Polish observers suggest that Rumanian is gradually moving toward autonomy . These developments have prompted some observers to suggest that .
 William Crawford as United States Minister at the beginning of 1962 . Washington began engaging closely with Bucharest in 1962 .
 Most of the analytical body was transferred to the CIA and the rest to the State Department . This was an all-encompassing body that was divvied up after Crawford’s departure .
 Crawford was one of the US government’s top experts on the communist world at the time of his appointment to the United States Legation in Bucharest . Crawford was uniquely qualified to judge Romanian developments within the Bloc-wide context . Crawford, as one of US government's top
 Crawford noted that the greatest obstacles to US-Romanian cooperation arose from the United States side rather than from the Romanians . Crawford also noted that cognitive biases formed at the end of World War II and during Stalinist period .
 It’s awfully easy back in the Department to recall the situation in a country as it was when you were there, and especially in the case of a Communist country where things usually move very slowly, and are unlikely to change much .
 Romanian leaders were obliged to travel with Soviet planes and crews since World War II . Romania was not allowed to produce aircraft, except what Moscow deemed necessary for its military purposes .
 Bucharest had been prompted to start preparing an independent air transport capability after July 1957, when the Soviet aircraft carrying Romanian leaders – minus Gheorghiu-Dej – crashed on landing at Vnukovo Airport in Moscow, killing one member of the delegation .
 Few in the RCP leadership believed it was completely accidental . No overt political backlash following the crash .
 Soviet crews and equipment were still responsible for transporting Romanian leaders during international excursions . As of October 1962, however, Soviet crews still had to transport Romanian leaders on international trips .
 Soviet authorities requested approval on 21 October 1962 for the party to overfly Chinese territory from India in order to briefly visit Moscow on their return a day later . This created a serious problem when the party overflew China from India .
 On the one hand, the request was made only 24 hours before the flight was to take place . On the other hand, it was made just hours before it was to fly .
 The Chinese Embassy in Bucharest said they could not give technical approval because of the military conflict and the presence of Indian military aircraft in the area . Romanian authorities immediately checked with the Chinese Embassy .
 Aboard the aircraft, the Soviet crew chief overrode Gheorghiu-Dej’s instruction to return to Delhi against spirited Romanian protest and proceeded with the flight . The Romanian protested against the decision to turn to Delhi .
 Beijing has extended approval along a specific route at a specific altitude . Beijing did extend approval along an altitude at specific altitude, according to the Chinese government .
 Soviet authorities at the delegation’s first port of call in the USSR deliberately misled the Romanians into believing that the Chinese had never approved the over-flight . The Romanians were not allowed to fly over to China .
 Soviet disinformation had the unintended consequence of persuading the Romanian leadership that the Kremlin had orchestrated the incident in order to achieve their physical elimination . Although possibly intended to drive a wedge between Bucharest and Beijing, it was believed by the delegation members .
 The passengers on what would prove to be the last flight that any Romanian Communist leader boarded with a Soviet crew thus arrived in Moscow deeply shaken by what they perceived as a purposeful attempt on their lives . The passengers were deeply shaken .
 Khrushchev’s out-of-character apologetic efforts to explain the scandal created by his placement of missiles in Cuba, without admitting that he had done so or that he lied to the Romanians about it .
 Khrushchev was trying to kill them and provoke a war into which Romania would be drawn unawares, and possibly a nuclear one at that . Bucharest had two very major problems, including the conviction with which the Romanian delegation left Moscow .
 Khrushchev ordered the Soviet Army and those of the Warsaw Pact member states to increase readiness for a possible U.S. military action . President Kennedy’s ultimatum and announcement of the blockade, Moscow felt it necessary .
 Moscow wanted to directly command the national armies of its erstwhile allies . This skirting of the national party leadership had been the practice and evident intention of Moscow ever since it created the Warsaw Pact .
 Soviet authorities had committed virtually the same transgression during the Berlin Crisis in 1961, when they ordered the army on alert without consulting the Romanian leadership . Soviet authorities also committed the same crime in 1961 when the Berlin crisis broke out .
 Bucharest ended the practice of sending its senior military officers to Soviet academies for “training” that same year . That action had prompted Bucharest to end the practice . Bucharest had also stopped sending its top military officials to Soviet military academies .
 Warsaw Treaty text binding all signatory countries to mutual consultation regarding important international political issues . Article 3 in the Warsaw Treaty is an article 3 in which all signatories are consulted on important international issues .
 Romanian officials say they had not been taken into the confidence of the Russians . They were not given any inkling of their plans to install missiles in Cuba, they say .
 They had soon recognized that they were merely pawns in a Soviet power play, if you will . They had to accept that they had been pawns .
 Russian claims were made about no missile emplacements in Cuba when first made . "Rude awakening greatly strengthened the nationalist tendency they were already manifesting," says author .
 Romania would redouble its efforts to exclude any inappropriate contacts between its senior military leadership and Soviet officers, the country said . The Romanian military said .
 The effort would include the creation of legal and constitutional barriers to any assertion of command over its armed forces by foreign or foreign-controlled domestic entities .
 Bucharest allowed no Warsaw Pact troop exercises on its territory . Subsequently, Bucharest banned all Warsaw Pact military exercises . Bucharest was the last member of the Warsaw Pact to take part in exercises .
 Bucharest was deeply offended that Moscow lied regarding its deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba, and seriously concerned about its possible implications . Both confirmed their own biases regarding Soviet behavior locally and globally . Bucharest is deeply offended by Moscow's decision to deploy nuclear missiles to Cuba .
 Romanian leaders were also extremely unhappy with this new demonstration of Soviet ability to command the Romanian military behind its back, especially after having so vigorously protested a similar demonstration the year before .
 The discovery that the very first ship that the Kremlin sent to challenge the United States blockade was named the “Bucharest” left many in the capital for which it was named believing that the USSR sought to make them the target of a United States nuclear strike .
 In the absence of Soviet documentation regarding Kremlin motivations for choosing the ‘Bucharest” one can only speculate on the reasoning behind it .
 Moscow wanted to place the U.S. “off-side” by providing it with targets unconnected with missile deployments . It is apparent, however, that Moscow desired to . place the United States ‘off side” should it act forcefully .
 East German passenger liner Völker Freundschaft was followed by East German students and Czechoslovak technicians . Confirmation of this came a few hours after Bucharest was allowed to pass through the line .
 The top party and state leadership had been cut off from most of this drama during their travels . That they had been cutting off from the most recent events only reinforced suspicions of corruption .
 Given their frosty relationship with Moscow since 1958, Romanian leaders found it impossible to believe that the string of Soviet-inspired decisions and events that led to their being among the least informed of the crisis could be coincidental .
 Khrushchev admitted he had informed Polish, Bulgarian, Czechoslovak and East German leaders of the deployments . He had requested those party leaders to place their armies on alert .
 Romania was in fact the only Soviet ally with a blue water navy that had not been informed of the missile deployments before they became public . Romania was the only NATO ally to have been informed about the missile deployment .
 The Bucharest came close to becoming the first test of the blockade and the center of the first intentional US-Soviet shooting incident in the Cold War .
 14 Soviet ships had reversed course, eight continued onwards but were still a distance from the quarantine line . One vessel, the Soviet tanker Bucharest, had reached that line and was being challenged by the United States aircraft carrier Essex .
 Kennedy and the members of his administration went round and round on what to do about the Soviet tanker . Facing the possibility of provoking a violent reaction from Khrushchev or losing the stare-down with the USSR and undermining U.S. credibility .
 Initially, the main debates were whether or not to board the Bucharest Bucharest; on whether to board her right-away, just before she reached Havana, or on her return; and on how to immobilize her . The main debate was over whether she should board Bucharest,
 The Romanian leadership set about developing approaches to encumber the USSR from capricious use of its military power in ways that might provoke war, especially of the nuclear variety, into which Romania might be drawn .
 The authorities in Romania created a set of mutually complementary policies designed to constrain the exercise of Soviet military power – at least when directly implicating the other Warsaw Pact members . Over the next year, the authorities in . Romania created . mutually complementary . policies .
 Bucharest had been involved in mediations since the mid-1950s . This was the first time it was announced as Romanian policy . The country has been involved with mediations in the 1950s .
 Repeated Soviet failure to consult with its allies on important policy issues became a constant complaint of Bucharest – both within the alliance and outside of it – throughout the rest of the Cold War . Repeated failures of the Soviet Union's decision to consult allies led to Bucharest's failure to
 As partial remedy, the RCP leadership sought to reform the Warsaw Pact into a genuinely egalitarian coalition . The Warsaw Pact now sought to be reformed into a genuine egalitarian coalition, writes Peter Bergen .
 Bucharest had been battling Soviet efforts to give the Pact a supra-state character or expand it from a purely defensive alliance against military aggression in Europe into an instrument of Soviet power projection . Up to that point Bucharest .
 Romania was responsible for blocking Mongolia’s admission into the alliance – sponsored by the USSR – in July 1963 . Thus, Romania blocked Mongolia's admission to the alliance in July .
 Bucharest circulated its objections to Mongolia’s admission in letters sent to all the other Pact members several days before . Not one of them supported the Romanian position at the summit meeting .
 Moscow quickly withdrew its support for Mongolian admission in the face of Romania's singular opposition . Romania’s opposition prompted Moscow to withdraw support for Mongolia .
 Moscow began seeking to create a permanent organ that would grant it centralized control over foreign contacts and policies of its lesser allies only at the beginning of the 1960s . Moscow sought to create the organ at the start of the 1950s .
 Romania saw this as a revivification of the Comintern and, in April 1964, expressed quite clearly that it would not have nothing to do with such a project . Romania saw it as an attempt to revivify the comintern .
 Within Warsaw Pact councils all of the other Bloc leaders lined up with the USSR against Romania on this point . Despite supportive murmurings from second tier leaderships elsewhere, the Warsaw Pact leaders backed the USSR on this issue .
 From 1962 until sometime in the second half of the 1960s Romanian advocacy of Warsaw Pact reform was accompanied by efforts to assert an Eastern European voice over Soviet nuclear policy . In order to encumber Soviet capriciousness in the deployment of its missiles that might result in nuclear war .
 Bucharest advocated a “two-key arrangement” of the sort that NATO employed, whereby US nuclear weapons deployed on the territory of another NATO member could not be fired without their approval . Bucharest said the new arrangement would be similar to NATO’s precedent .
 Bucharest developed policies to change the environment in which Soviet security policy was made . Given the unlikelihood that Moscow would relinquish sole control over its weapons under any circumstances, Bucharest also developed policies .
 First announced by Prime Minister Maurer in the journal of the socialist community in November 1963, it was reaffirmed in what has become known as Romania’s ‘declaration of independence” (actually a statement against Sino-Soviet polemics)
 The policy was formally announced by Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej at the alliance’s January 1965 summit meeting .
 Romanian leader counter-proposed a policy of disarmament, including unilateral reductions . In response to Soviet calls for a military build-up to answer escalation in the U.S. and NATO, the Romanian leader proposed a disarmament policy .
 Bucharest did not do this because it was mindlessly obstructionist or anti-Soviet . Bucharest not doing this because of it being mindless obstructionist, it was anti-Russian, says Ghihi .
 Romania wanted to avoid being drawn into a war of Soviet making . It did so because of a specific policy agenda against military build-up, escalation or competition with the U.S. and NATO .
 The fundamental lack of trust between the two sides is well-reflected in the repeated Soviet expressions of concern that Romania might leave the Warsaw Pact . The constant battle over the creation of supra-state organs within Warsaw Pact – repeatedly blocked by Bucharest – has been repeatedly blocked .
 The Romanian-Soviet and Romanian-Warsaw Pact intelligence cooperation began breaking down in 1962 and became essentially non-existent by the end of that decade . In regard to this latter contest, senior officers of other bloc state security services .
 Abnormal phenomena began appearing in Romania even from the end of 1962 . Abnormal phenomenon occurred in Romania even from the end of the year .
 This has been manifested in the first place through the limitation of contacts with Soviet institutions in Romania, says the Romanian government . This is something that was certainly observed by us. This is a result of the limited contacts between Soviet institutions, the government says .
 The Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej’s now famous message to President John F Kennedy was presented by Romanian Foreign Minister Mescu to United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk on 4 October 1963 .
 The full set of issues may have been shared with Moscow in what Gheorghiu-Dej characterized as a “very harsh” letter sent to Kremlin authorities after Cuba . Romanian leaders raised point with several other foreign interlocutors as well .
 Nicolae Ceau escu may have tried to invoke the Gheorghiu-Dej – Kennedy message with one of his own to Ronald Reagan during the Euromissile crisis in 1983 .
 Ceau escu’s letter, which he handed to Vice President George Bush, Sr. during a visit to Bucharest in September 1983, has not yet been published . Unfortunately, the letter has not been published yet .
 Romanians did brief the other Pact allies about it shortly thereafter; and then presented at least an approximation of its contents at the October 1983 alliance summit .
 Even if Ceau escu had meant to invoke Gheorghiu-Dej’s earlier letter to President Kennedy, the probability that officials in Washington could have made the connection was not very great . Ironically, even though Ceau Escu had intended to invoke the beginning
 The 1963 letter was held so closely that news of its existence did not leak until he wrote of it thirty years later . It may never have been filed, archived or even committed to paper . Raymond Garthoff pointed out that the letter may never be filed or archived .
 If no hardcopy was consigned to a specific data base then it is doubtful that knowledge of the message would have survived twenty years, four alternations of power, and six administration changes into Ronald Reagan’s presidency .
 U.S. authorities were unaware of the original tectonic shift in Romanian security policy sparked by the Cuban missile crisis . They were unlikely to perceive any echoes of the echoes of it twenty years later .
 He served as security sector reform advisor to Romania’s Presidential Counselor for National Security and to the Romanian Defense Ministry during 1991-2004 . He also served as advisor to Romanian defense ministry during the 1990s .
 The Soviet Bloc’s Clandestine War Against Romania was published in Romanian translation in 2011 . It was translated in 2011 by the Romanian publisher .
 Romanian-Warsaw Pact Relations During 1978-1989 and the End of the Cold War will be published in Romanian in 2013, and followed by publication in English in English .
 Gheorghiu-Dej adopted an apparently nationally-oriented stance defending Romania’s continued existence as an independent state in 1945, a precursor to later conflicts over independence .
 Soviet-loyal officers were being purged, and redundant nationally-oriented officers reactivated, by the first half of the 1950s .
 CIA: Romanian "arguments" are “potentially explosive’; they are ultimately concerned not with the degree of Soviet control, as in 1956 . CIA's Bureau of National Estimates: Romanian “arguments” were “Potentially explosive .” CIA:
 Romanian Foreign Policy and the Crisis in Czechoslovakia, 1968, Ia i, Center for Romanian Studies, 2000, 18.5.6.7.8.9.7 . Romanian Foreign policy and the crisis in Czechsoslovakia was a major source of tension in the
 Dokumentakh Rossiiskikh Arkhivov, 1944-1953 gg. Rogovaia, editors, Vostochnaia Evropa v. v. Vostnievia . Rogova .
 Statesman, 1953-1964, Volume 3, Philadelphia, Penn State Press, 2007, 389 pages .
 Bucharest put out its first feeler to Washington in 1953 but received no response from the U.S. Embassy in Bucharest . Bucharest was the first city to put out a request to Washington for help in 1953 .
 Academia România, Institutul de Istoria “Nicolae Iorga” , Institutuia ‘Nicola’a, istoria contemporan, isteria nou [new series] .
 Thayer reported that the Romanian prime minister and foreign minister were also present at his discussion with Gheorghiu-Dej . Thayer said that the foreign minister and the prime minister were present at the meeting .
 The prime minister had made a similar approach and offer the previous month . Prime Minister's offer was made in a similar way last month .
 The United States did not pursue relations with Romania before the end of the decade . The U.S. didn't pursue relations between the two countries .
 Epishev had been deputy chairman of the predecessor to the KGB during 1950-1953 . He was Deputy Chairman of the KGB in the 1950-53 period, during which he was deputy chairman .
 He said he saw no reason why the U.S. should assist the Romanians in achieving their objective of presenting this false façade . Thus, he said the United States should not reach any agreements with it .
 Thayer’s assessment carried considerable weight in the U.S. intelligence community . Thayer was a career intelligence officer rather than a diplomat when Eisenhower appointed him to the legation .
 The general tenor of Thayer’s reports and particularly his concern that Romania would gain in “prestige” by reaching an agreement with the United States seem to indicate that he was influenced by the “Trojan horse” active measures theme first reported under
 The State Department’s Office of Policy Coordination especially noted that Romania appeared to be the best candidate for furthering developing U.S. ties and influence in Eastern Europe at the end of the 1950s .
 Given resistance elsewhere in the State Department and especially in the US intelligence community, this stance is not universally shared nor uncontroversial . The stance was neither universally shared or uncontroversial, nor was widely accepted .
 Crawford went on to become the chief advisor on international relations to the Commander of the Supreme Allied Command in Europe during 1965-1971 . Crawford served as the Chief Advisor to General Lyman Leminitz during the war in Europe .
 William A Crawford, recorded interview by William W Moss, 12 March 1971, 12, John F Kennedy Library Oral History . Crawford was interviewed by William Moss on March 12, 1971 . Crawford's interview with Moss was recorded by Moss in March 1971 .
 The stipulation actually prohibited the production of German-designed aircraft . It was the only type the Romanian air industry was producing at the end of the war . The only type they were producing was the German-made aircraft .
 Romania’s entire civilian air fleet had been confiscated as “war booty” Romania had its largely German-designed military air fleet . Romania had been seized as ‘warbooty’ and its civilian fleet confiscated .
 Romania was reduced to the status of defeated enemy because its co-belligerency had been vetoed by the USSR despite its contribution of 548,000 troops to the Allied cause in the last eight months of the war . The USSR had vetoed co-operation with the Allies despite its
 This point of contention provoked run-ins between the ‘native’ Communists and Soviet authorities ever since 1944 . The “native” Communists and the Soviet authorities have been at odds for decades .
 It became an open issue in the bilateral relationship by 1955, when Bucharest began publicly addressing the topic . The relationship between the two countries was an open topic in 1955 .
 The delegation member killed was Romania’s foreign minister, George Preoteasa . The delegation was part of a delegation from the country .
 Moscow’s bad graces for promising Red Cross access to former Hungarian leader Imre Nagy while he was being held under Soviet guard in Romania after the 1956 revolt . The Red Cross had promised to get access to the former leader in Romania .
 The Soviet Bloc’s Clandestine War Against Romania, Bucharest, Military Publishing House, 2010, especially . chapters 7 “Dismantling the Mechanisms of Soviet Control 1953-1959” and 8 “Shutting Down Soviet Intelligence Networks 1956-1963�
 Romanian diplomat – later Ambassador to the Peoples Republic of China – Romulus Budura was sent to the Chinese Embassy in Bucharest with this request .
 The Chinese Embassy called him back in order to inform Romanian authorities that technical approval could not be granted . Having returned to the Romanian Foreign Ministry with political approval the Chinese Embassy returned him .
 The conference brought together members of Romania’s UN delegation at the time of the crisis . The conference also brought together diplomats working at the Romanian Foreign Ministry at the . time .
 Report on Talk between Nicolae Ceau escu and Nikita Khrushchev, Moscow, 8 June 1963 in Opris , 520. Report: Talk between Ceauau Escu and Khrushcheev .
 Khrushchev stressed that he told Ulbricht “in his ear,” thus, personally, personally . The former Soviet Union leader said he told him in his ear .
 U.S. intelligence erroneously believed that Soviet command of all Pact forces was an accomplished fact with the creation of the Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact was created in 1968 .
 This was never true for Romania and was fully accomplished for the other Pact members only in 1980 . Romania was one of the only Pact members to achieve this feat .
 The Defence Policy of a Reluctant Ally, P6270, Santa Monica, RAND Corporation, 1979, 17. RAND Corporation . RAND Corporation: "Defence Policy of the Reluctent Ally"
 Khrushchev himself referred to the deployment as his “adventure,” even claiming that he pressed the idea on Fidel Castro . The deployment was the first time the Soviet Union had deployed troops to Cuba in the 1960s .
 The U.S. never mistook the “Bucharest” for anything other than a Soviet vessel, Romanian officials say . Moscow’s peculiar linkage of Romania to the crisis was less meaningful to Romanian officials than the U.N. officials .
 Romania was the only sea-faring member of the Warsaw Pact that did not in fact have any of its ships in the area of, or heading to Cuba, at the time . Romania did not have any ships in or heading towards Cuba .
 Bucharest officials interpreted as confirmation of Soviet intentions in October 1962 . Less than a year later Moscow was publicly reported by Western observers as engaged in efforts to rid itself of the Gheorghiu-Dej leadership by any means necessary .
 Pravda’s intentional emphasis on the fact that Khrushchev and the Romanian leadership were attending the opera together in Moscow at the time was also considered evidence that they were being “set up” by the Soviets .
 Romanian mediation efforts in the Sino-Soviet conflict were well known by the early 1960s . Romania was involved in mediation efforts with the Soviet-Sino-Chinese conflict .
 Israel contacted the Romanian embassy in Warsaw in 1956 to request mediation with Egypt one week after Bucharest had offered peacekeeping forces to the UN following the Suez crisis . Israel contacted Bucharest in order to mediate with Egypt .
 Romania also began mediation effort with North Vietnam at U.S. request in 1965 . Romania also sought to persuade the People’s Republic of China that US-North Vietnamese contacts were to be desired . Romania began mediation efforts with the United States in 1965.
 For an inside description of some of these efforts see Paul Niculescu-Mizil, România i R zboiul Americano-vietnamez [Romania and the American-Vietnam War], Bucharest, Bucharest . For an .
 Joachim Schröter, likewise credited Romania with blocking Mongolia’s admission to the country, said the country's president .
 Mastny’s assertion that it was not the Romanians, “but the Soviets themselves who killed the idea that they had originally supported,” is mistaken in its implication that Romanian opposition was not primarily responsible .
 The existence of a written Polish position echoing Bucharest's objections has led many analysts to believe that Warsaw played a role in blocking Mongolia’s admission . However, the Polish delegation never raised any of the points in their written position at the meeting nor was that position circulated to other Pact
 Romania’s objections were circulated beforehand (and the Polish position paper seems to refer to them) and the Romanian delegation also raised its pointed questions during the discussion . In contrast, Poland's position paper suggests that Romania's objection was circulated beforehand .
 Romanians condemned Comintern as, basically, an evil institution in 1964 declaration . Romanians minced no words when condemning the Comintern in April 1964 .
 Some analysts maintain that Kádár’s 1963 proposal for a permanent Foreign Ministers Committee had the “clear objective” of increasing East European input into Pact decision-making . Some analysts say the 1963 proposal was to increase East European influence in Pact decisions .
 Moscow was rumoured to be interested in a move to Russia in the 1980s . This is not the first time Moscow has considered such a move in the past .
 Within less than two years Kádár supported Moscow’s position favoring more centralized control wholeheartedly . The Hungarian Prime Minister supported Moscow's position favoring centralized control .
 At the January 1965 summit, Gomułka repeatedly stressed that “All of the comrades present” – thus, including Kádár – “are in favor” at the summit, he said .
 Gheorghiu-Dej: "We do not nor will we agree to the creation of new organs of the Warsaw Pact" The Romanian Prime Minister said he would not agree to create new organs .
 Hungarian foreign policy had been described by Ferenc Münnich, Kádár’s co-leader in 1956 and prime minister until 1961, as a “prerogative of the Soviet Union” The attitude that rendered improbable any initiative from Budapest for democrat
 Kádár “never intended” to oppose Moscow, an analyst says . He says he “always made sure to inform the Kremlin about policy changes,” even in domestic policy .
 Bittman, Sejna and Frolik all defected from Czechoslovakia during the Prague Spring or immediately after the Soviet-led invasion in 1968 . The three defected in 1968 or 1969 .
 Stasi records also note that Romania shut down cooperation with the Stasi by 1963 . Stasi record: Romania closed cooperation with Stasi in 1963 .
 Markus Wolf met with the Committee for State Security that took place between 3-6 April 1967 in Moscow . Raymond L Garthoff, “When and Why Romania Distanced Itself from the Warsaw Pact” in Cold War International History Project Bulletin, no. 8 .
 Garthoff was informed of the message at the time, while working in the U.S. State Department and the National Security Council, by Secretary Rusk .
 Corneliu M nescu confirmed the message in several interviews, although he would not provide any further detail . The message was also confirmed by Corneliu . Corneliu Nescu would not reveal further details of the message .
 Garthoff suggested that no written record may ever have been deposited in administration archives given the extreme sensitivity of the matter . The case is believed to be the most sensitive in the world .
 M nescu first sought to meet with U.S. administration officials at the end of September 1963 . Scheduling difficulties delayed the meeting until 4 October .
 Vice President George Bush, Sr., Sr., was handed Ceau escu’s letter on 23 September 1983 . George Bush Sr. was handed the letter in 1983 . President George W. Bush, Jr. was given the letter .
 Some sources misplace the letter to August 1983, although it is quite possible that other, less formal, messages on the same topic were sent that month .
 Ceau escu sent a number of letters regarding nuclear missiles in Europe to Reagan and Andropov during 1981-1983 . None of which has been published to date .
 E. E., “Reagan envía al presidente rumano una carta sobre los euromisiles” , El Pais, 19 September 1983 . E.