 Thursdays 7.30 pm, Craylands County Secondary School, Basildon . Visitors are cordially invited to every meeting .
 EALING Fridays 8 pm, Memorial Hall, Windsor Road, near Ealing Broadway .
 4 Fulham High Street, Putney Bridge, SW6. F, Lea at above address, ; FULHAM & CHELSEA Ist and 3rd Thursdays in month 8 pm, ‘‘ Kings Head,""’ 4.F, F,
 Alternate Mondays (2nd, I6th & 30th January) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street .
 Mondays 8pm, Co-op Hall , Davenport Road, Rushey Green, Catford, SE6. SPGB, 80 Farm Road, Esher, Surrey LEWISHAM Mondays at 8pm .
 NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (4th & 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street) NOTTINGham alternate Tuesdays at Peoples Hall .
 Ist and 3rd Tuesdays in month 7.30 pm, 3rd January at 19 Kingswood Chase, Leigh-on-Sea and I7th January at 17 Cotswold Road, Westcliff-on Sea .
 SWANSEA 2nd and 4th Fridays (13th & 27th January) in month8 pm, The Crypt, St. Mary's, on January 13th & January 27th .
 Serine, 10 Beach Street, Swansea, is at 8pm a week . Barham Old Court, Barham Park, near Sudbury Town Station, Wembley. Serine is at 10 Beach St. Swansea.
 2nd and 4th Thursdays (12th & 26th January) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12. West Ham, West Ham .
 2nd and 4th Fridays (13th and 27th January) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SEI8.30pm .
 MITCHAM & DISTRICT Thursday 17th January 8pm, ‘White Hart,’’ Mitcham Cricket Green . Mitcham cricket Green .
 ORDERS for literature should be sent to the Literature Department, span, at the above address .
 CORSPONDENCE for the Executive Committee should be sent to the General Secretary, srs, 52, Clapham High Street .
 Ministry of Labour figures of the average carnings of manual workers are published every half-yearly .
 For men the £14 2s, Id. was for a working week of 48 hours, that is to say, that was for six or more hours’ overtime; also for night work and Sunday work . Id. for girls under 18, for boys under 18 .
 Being an average it included some industrial groups with carnings far above the average and some far below it . The average carnings were far above average and far below average .
 The top section was the motor vehicle group with £17 10s, 3d. a week . The lowest section was central and local government with £10 15s.d a week. The highest section was motor vehicles group with .
 If the motor vehicle inquiry had been made in November, with something approaching 100,000 on short-time, it would have been far below £17 10s .
 In any event it should not be thought that the £14 a week wage is an average for all 14 million men cmployed in all industries .
 If all the industries were included the average would be brought down quite a lot .
 Many workers, including craftsmen, are paid only their standard weekly rates or not much more . The general level of skilled rates is nothing like £14.50 .
 They obtained 34 craftsmen’s rates from the Ministry of Labour (as at November i, 1960) and found that the average for the 34 rates is only £10 8s.d. a week .
 Reynolds News is the Cooperative Sunday newspaper . When it tells its readers “ Don’t Shop at Sweatshops’’ it means the worst payers among the private traders .
 The Cooperative Agreement made in July.59, fixed a rate for men shop assistants ranging from £8 15s. in . Provincial areas up to £9 9s . in London . In July.60, the Union applied for a national minimum of £10 a week in cooperative societies
 Large numbers of orsilwavmen and — government workers get below £9 a week . along with the agricultural worker .
 The 1900 workers were employees of the French nationalised Renault motor car manufacturing concern . The workers were workers of the Renault car manufacturing company .
 Renault is a nationalised concern. This is a familiar feature of capitalist enterprise everywhere but the point is that Renault is nationalised . Renault is not the only company to be nationalised in the world .
 Nationalisation has Jost its appeal for most workers in Britain, but when the market becomes overstocked, even nationalised firms cannot continue to produce commodities for which there 1s no sale .
 They have to lay off workers who have become surplus to requirements . Workers have to be laid off in order to meet the requirements of the company .
 In the present case many of the workers at first declined to take their final pay packet and went to their benches as usual . They yielded to the foreman’s explanation that in view of the management's decision they could do nothing about it .
 Workers don't seem to object to slaving away week after week producing something, no matter what it is, so long as they draw a pay packet at the end of the week . Workers seem to be content with producing what they want, so much as they produce something .
 They wouldn't mind if they kept on producing cars so that there were so many of them that they had to run along on top of each other on the roads . The cars would be so much bigger than the cars they would have to run alongside each other .
 Is it not time for workers to start thinking about some other system? It's a system where goods could be produced to serve people's needs, where these needs could be assessed and arranged accordingly .
 Sunderland 'Corporation' erected a lot of prefabricated houses in the 1980s . The Sunderland ‘Corporations’ erected a number of prefable houses .
 Stipposed to last for a few years, until better accommodation could be found . They were stipposed until they were found .
 These houses are now overdue for demolition—many of them are damp and cold . Many of these houses are damp, cold and cold. Many of them were built in the 1970s .
 Sunderland atady has its hands too full with its present slum clearance programme to pay much attention to the plight of the people in its prefabricated slums . Sunderland atréady has been criticised for not doing enough to tackle the problem .
 Capitalist politicians have always promised to solve the housing problem . But the housing crisis has never been solved by housing reform .
 Under these conditions, society never even starts to solve the problem, says CNN.com.com .
 Salesmen forgot to make it clear when the contracts were signed . Perhaps the salesmen forgot about the contracts .
 Apparently a lot of people took on commitments which they could not fulfil and have piled up a great heap of bad debts . A lot of those people have piled on a pile of bad debt, it is claimed .
 Some hire purchase companies caught in fierce competition of the boom . Some seen to have fallen in with very uncertain clients .
 There have been rumours in the City about the stability of two of the finance houses concerned . Much talk of setting up a central record of creditworthiness, where the H.P. history of any buyer could be checked .
 But the central problem, the thing which causes hire purchase and all the other makeshifts, remains . The central problem remains.
 Workers want the better things in life, sometimes for the convenience of using them, sometimes because their possession carries social standing . Workers want to use their possessions for convenience or social standing, sometimes even for convenience .
 Hire purchase salesman lends a hand to buy the items . But few workers have the money to buy these things, unless they have to buy them .
 People accept a lifetime mortgage on a house, years of sometimes swingeing repayments on a car, washing machine and su on on . So they accept a life mortgage on house, car and washing machine repayments .
 "It needs only moderately bad times to come along to upset this precarious scheme of things entire," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The cut-throats in the hire purchase world have shown us that capitalism is just as unstablle as it was in 1929 . The hire-purchasing world has shown how capitalism is still as unstable as it is in 1929.
 There is no lack of experts to tell us that the way out of this is to relax government restrictions on H.P. It's not easy to say, but it's a good idea to relax restrictions, experts say .
 There is no lack of prospective hire purchasers to support this view . And there is no shortage of prospective buyers to support that view .
 The only solution is to have a world where things are made solely for use, not for purchase of any kind . To many schoolboys who scuff out the tocs of their shoes kicking an old tennis ball around a council school playground .
 There is of course room at the top for only a very few, very good, footballers . In fact, only a few very good footballers are allowed to top the Premier League .
 The rest have a hard time of it, on unremarkable pay and often under conditions of employment which an industrial trade union would not tolerate . The rest of the country's workers live on a low wage and are often under poor conditions .
 Most footballers are looking for another job in their thirties, with little prospect of doing much better than a salesman or a shopkeeper . Footballers are likely to be looking for a new job when they are in their late 30s, says Simon Tisdall .
 No professional player may publish a statement about the game without first having it vetted by his club — his employer . No professional footballer may publish such a statement before his club vetted it .
 Professional Footballers’ Association has asked to have the ‘slave’ transfer system changed to abolish the ceiling on wages . The PFA wants to secure a share of a transfer fee for the player involved in the deal .
 The bigger clubs can more easily afford to grant the players’ demands, and foresee that to do so would help to defend their high position at the expense of the dingier clubs, many of which are already in deficit . Many of the bigger clubs, such as Manchester City, are
 It is, therefore, in the lower divisions that resistance to the P.F.A. is strongest . The lower divisions are more likely to resist the lower ranks of the armed forces than the military .
 Indignant fans, outraged players, angry club officials, angry players have all had their say . Fans, players, officials, officials have taken to social media to express their anger .
 Nobody has regretted that capitalist society makes a business of football and that the game is played not for amusement and entertainment, but for investment . Football is played for investment, not for entertainment and entertainment .
 The Church of Rome is concerned with man’s spiritual life and not his political life, says the Catholic Church .
 Occasionally, however, its hypocrisy and cant blossom into the open, as was the case recently in Puerto Rica .
 This has aroused the ire of the Catholic Bishops of Puerto Rica, notably Bishop McMann, Bishop of Porce, the island's. second largest city .
 When recently the Governor stood for re-election, the antics of the Church were remarkable even for a country as backward as Puerto Rica . Puerto Rica is a nation with a reputation for being backward .
 Bishop McMann opened fire with a pastoral letter to be read in every church . Early in the election campaign, he opened fire .
 Having failed to terrify the Puerto Rican peasants by words, they are now literally putting the ‘fear of Christ’ into them . The government is trying to scare the peasants by putting the fear of Christ into them, they say .
 For a fortnight, at all Sunday Masses in San Juan Cathedral, the Pastor told his parishioners that they would have to confess to the sin of voting for the Democrats before they could receive Holy Communion . The Pastor said they would be punished for voting for Democrats .
 Before penitents could receive absolution, they had to promise not to vote for the Democrats again . And what is more, before penitants could get absolution they must promise to never vote for them again .
 In this so-called enlightened age of ours it is important not to forget the power of the Church . The Church is a powerful institution in the world, writes David Frum .
 So many aspects of Cuban politics seem familiar that there is a danger of failing to_see just what distinguishes the Cuban question from the traditional turmoil in that part of the world . What Can I Do?
 Spain's colonies in the New World fought for independence a hundred and fifty years ago . Their main source of inspiration was revolutionary France and the young U.S.
 A unified and coherent class demanding overthrow of the outmoded system on the strength of its mastery of the new productive and social forces . However, in one fundamentally important respect, they fell short of the requirements of real social change, writes David Cameron .
 As the present situation in the Congo shows, not all independence movements are the expression of a powerful embryo bourgeoise, ready to effectively take the place of the former Imperialists on the backs of the local working-class .
 The ousting of Spain from the Americas was due more to the weakness of Spain than to the strength of its colonies . Spain's ousting was due to the weakness of Spain's colonies, rather than its strength .
 The social vacuum, the rapid collapse into anarchy could not, in those days, become the concern of the U.N. Organisation acting as a broker and a policeman of international capital . It was not the concern that a United Nations Organisation acting .
 The high-flown language of the constitutions drawn up by the South American disciples of Washington, Jefferson and even Tom Paine was not matched by the level of economic and class development in their respective regions .
 A similar process began in the Americas, perhaps less spectacularly, and certainly without the formal annexation of territory as was the case in Africa .
 Britain, France, the USA and then Italy, Germany and Japan have poured capital in and drained profits out . The outcome of this process has, to a remarkable degree, run parallel to Afro-Asian developments, Britain has said .
 hides and grain, meat and coffee, sugar and bananas, were flowing onto the world market . Soon hides, grain and meat were flowing into the world markets .
 The precious metals that had provided the funds for Spain’s ‘ siglo de oro,” its century of supreme power and culture, were no longer of prime importance . The precious metal was used to fund Spain's "siglo de Oro," its century
 Tin from neighbouring parts of Bolivia was to become the source of immense wealth for the mighty foreign Corporations who were equally busy in their exploitation of copper and nitrates from Chile, and petroleum from . Bolivia .
 Countries, most of them larger than any in Europe, were to become dependent upon a single crop; coffee, there bananas or sugar . Countries became dependent on one crop, coffee or bananas .
 Guatemala in its time played the rdle of David to the American Goliath, is known as a banana republic . Guatemala is now known as the banana republic.
 Cuba's increasingly intimate relationship with the Russian Capitalist bloc may yet witness the paradox of the Havana cigar as status symbol of the Russian ruling class .
 As a “middle-class "" Robin Hood, Get Newsagents to sell the Socialist Standard . Get Subscriptions for the . Socialist Standard Get Libraries to display the Socialist . Standard everywhere . Sell and Display the Socialist standard everywhere .
 Castro fell from his pedestal when it became evident that in serving the needs of aspiring Cuban Capitalism the existing order of things would be upset, Castro said . Castro fell out of the way with the Cuban government .
 He was unmasked as the harbinger of ‘ Communism’ (read, Russian influence) in the Western Hemisphere . The Russian influence in Western Hemisphere was a harbinger .
 Lord Esher gives expression to his anxious thoughts in the suggestion that ‘patriotism’ is an attribute of the empty-headed .
 Of all the former Spanish colonies it was the last to break from the grip of the old country . The last of the former colonies to break free of Spain's grip on Spain .
 United States troops were not withdrawn from the island until eleven years after the signing of the peace treaty with Spain in 1898 . It did so to find itself a virtual colony of its erstwhile atly .
 The United States census of 1947 revealed that their industrial investments in Cuba were only slightly less in Cuba ‘than’ in Brazil; $64,000,000 . This figure later increased .
 Ciiban goveriment has been a succession of “ sirongmen,” as 7ime magazine likes to call them, who have depended upon American patronage . The Ciiban government has depended on American patronage for decades .
 Fractional alterations in U.S. sugar tariffs in Jine with pro-tectionist demands of Hawaii or Porto Rico have had overnight repercussions on the Cuban economy .
 Laws passed by the U.S. Senate actually reducing Cuba's sugar quota, as in 1951, could mean and often did lead to gross economic instability . In 1951, the guota was varied in favour of the Dominican Republic, Peru and Porto Rico .
 Out of bitter-experience there grew in the 1930's a significant labour movement . The 1930's labour movement was formed out of bitter experience . The labour movement grew out of the 1930s .
 The AnarchoSyndicalist school introduced the principles of trade-unionism at the turn of the century .
 In more recent times 4 far wider range of trades has become involved although at the price of Stalinist influence . The old Anarcho-Syndicalists did not compromise their class interests with the state requirements of a world power .
 Communists’ record in Cuba puts them in a curious position in relation to the current “togetherness “ of their home and mother “ countries . In fact, the Communists' record puts them into a rather curious position .
 Farouk to Castro’s Nasser, had been given Communist support in his early days of power . Farouk was given support from the Communist Party in Egypt's early days . Nasser had been in power for decades .
 The Communist-slanted Workers Federation of Cuba, T.U.C. of sorts, drew up a statement with which a Socialist could scarcely disagree . December of that year the second congress of the Communist-Slanted Workers. of Cuba drew up .
 The supreme task of the labour movement at the present time is to concentrate all its efforts and to use all is might towards the defeat of the Axis . Workers organised under the C.T.C. are willing to collaborate with all those in favour of national unity .
 Cuban workers wish to avoid strikes and disputes likely to interfere with production . Cuban workers want to avoid striking and disputes . The war is expected to last for the duration .
 The congress called upon workingclass youth to volunteer for service at the war-front . The congress also called upon the working class to volunteer .
 At this stage, however, it would be a mistake to regard Castro as a Caribbean Kadar . Castro is a mere puppet of the Eastern bloc, but not a mere dictator . Castro has been in power for more than a decade, but is not a dictator .
 He is attempting to play off one great power against another in the hope that advantages will accrue to the would-be élite he represents . Like many a Nationalist before him, he is trying to play a game of power .
 It is ihe universal demand of the Latin American bourgeoisie to free their respective national economies from the preponderance of Anglo-American capital . Latin American capitalists want to free themselves from the pre-capitalism of the United States .
 He considered it would be a valuable Opportunity to take advantage of their rivalry . Nevertheless, he considered it to be a useful Opportunity to use .
 Latin American rulers see how to-use their bargaining position to diversify their means' of production and to intensify or initiate industrial development .
 Castro man announced he had secured promises to establish thirty new industries by East European concerns . Of course, for small power to attempt playing off the great powers involves considerable risks .
 The overthrow of the Batista clique with its record of gangsterism in the Chicago tradition, has been followed by a vigorous and forward-looking régime under a new dictator . In Spanish is wryly called a “dictablanda ” rather than a
 The massive programme of nationalising most Western owned utilities, agrarian reform meaning the breakup and redistribution amongst the rural population of the great estates . The attack upon widespread illiteracy add up to a really serious attempt on the part of Cuba to enter the Capitalist arena on a more equal
 Imperialism is the culmination of a series of developments within Capialism . Characterised by the export of capital and the capturing of markets and sources of raw materials in economically backward countries .
 What in Europe is (according to Haya de la Torre whom we are quoting) ‘the last phase of Capitalism,” is in Latin America the first . However, what in Europe (according) is the last phase .
 For us IndoAmericans, imporied capital marks our first step in modern capitalist society . For us we are proud to be part of the world's first generation of immigrants .
 Antiques are a fascinating subject, but also a vast one, beyond the scope of this brief article . OQ This Business of Antiques ANTIQUES are a vast subject of interest beyond this .
 We can concern ourselves with such aspects as their collection by the élite of society, their haphazard donation or loaning to museums and, later, the production of ‘fake” antiques as a result of our commercial system . We can also be concerned with their collection
 Our story begins with the archeological efforts of Sir Arthur Evans at Cnossos on the Mediterranean island of Crete, who revealed an early Grecian civilisation of a high order .
 This Cretan civilisation, together with its contemporary cultures in other parts of the world, represents mankind’s first steps from tribal society . The civilisation, along with its . contemporary cultures . in other . parts of . the world . represents mankind's first steps to . tribal society
 Vesuvius eruption in A.D. 79 created a primitive museum for many fine examples of Man's early works of art later to be unearthed by archeologists . Two thousand years later, the eruption of Vesuvium in Italy created a museum for Man's earliest artworks to be
 Operations at Herculaneum were richer still in the artistic craftsmanship of the period . These excavations revealed floors of mosaic, mural paintings, gold and silver ornaments and bronze busts .
 During the period between the contemporary civilisation of Crefe, Babylon, and Egypt, Man's cultural activity portrayed changes in his development as he reacted to his material environment and then changing himself . Man's development as Man reacted to the material environment—changing it and then himself .
 From the 7th century B.C. up to the 4th century A.D. the pottery of Athens was symbolical of the Stage of ceramic achievement of this period . Byzantine art, a combination of Greek, Persian and Roman culture, was influenced by the rise of Christianity
 The "cult of the cross" is still with us, although religious items are not good sellers in the modern antique trade . Probably the ‘cult of . the cross” is on the wane, but probably the “cult . of the . cross’ is on
 Examples of Celtic art are provided by 8th century bronze shields of London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 Ireland . Tara brooch of Dublin from the 10th century is also shown .
 Craftsmen in Scandinavia also produced many beautiful designs in bronze and silver, their Viking ship incorporated a bronze dragon prow reflecting the early Icedandic sagas, recorded by William Morris in his epic poem-—Sigurd the Volsung . Craftsman in Scandinavians
 In the 12th century their pagan gods, Thor and Woden, overlapped in culture the rising Christian symbol, in a similar way that the Cretan culture influenced early Greek and Roman art . It is also interesting to note that in the . 12th . century their .
 The 16th century witnessed the introduction into Europe of Chines2 porcelain with its motif dragon patterns and the purity of the Ming dynasty productions . Ming dynasty ceramies were introduced into Europe in 16th Century .
 Josiah Wedgwood introduced his famous Jasper ware at Etruria in 1775 . Two hundred years later saw porcelain being produced in England at Bow, Bristol, Worcester, Derby and Derby .
 Much could be written of the beauties of Dresden Candelabra, Meissen Figurine, Sevres vases, Chelsea groups etc. But enough has been said in this context, we hope to explain the origin of antiques .
 We must now pass from the historical side of the subject to the economic for a continuation of our brief review . We will continue to discuss the economic aspect of the issue with a further review of the historical and economic aspect .
 Customs and Excise Department in that it must be at least a hundred years of age to escape customs import duty . A hundred-year-old can be imported into the U.S. without paying customs duty .
 Unlike new commodities, antiques have no exact price ticket range . Post-war demand, mostly from America, has produced a pretty keen market for certain items . Ruby glass ware, Staffordshire pottery figurine, early Wedgwood, pewter plates and tankards, Sheffield
 In such a transaction antiques represent the usual be-all and end-all of commerce . The British seller, whose patriotism melts, “like snow upon the desert’s dusty face” at every chance of a profitable deal .
 In any event the denuding of Britain’s art stores is no more cause for shedding working-class tears, than the loss of a few colonies from the British Empire . The loss of Britain's art stores will not be cause for shed tears .
 Art treasures may certainly change their geographical position, but, like the colonies, they remain in the ownership of the capitalist class of the world . Art treasures are still in the hands of a capitalist class .
 The collecting of antiques in England was largely initiated by the Earl of Arundel . He sent his agent, William Petty, on an art-hunting expedition to Greece in 1624 .
 Petty sent consignments of Grecian statues, bronze busts etc. to England, in a prodigious effort to denude Greece of its native art .
 Any reader visiting the British Museum will find the answer . Apparently this question fell on deaf ears .
 In addition to the ex‘stence of genuine antiques, there is the problem of ‘faked’ antiques thrown up by the cesspool of commerce, of faked antiques which originally graced the drawing rooms and china cabinets of bourgeois mansions of
 Some years ago, the writer purchased a three-piece set of china figurine that appeared to be Chelsea, complete with the well known “gold anchor” mark . The writer purchased the figurine years ago .
 Counterfeit Chelsea was being produced in Paris as early as 1850 . In Belgium there is a factory producing counterfeit Sevres and Dresden porcelains . The Chelsea porcelain was being made in Paris in 1850 .
 The difficulty of detecting these spurious wares by amateur buyers is spotlighted by the fact that experts themselves are at times deceived . Experts themselves are often deceived by the quality of their products .
 Museum also paid several hundred of pounds for a Sedan chair supposed to be a genuine antique which had genuine panels only let into a brand new chair!
 Antiques are a branch of commerce that bristles with pitfalls for the unwary . It is only an expert who can detect real age, for instance, by the Patina which is a result of the chemical action of light and air over the years .
 Private collections of antiques are a bugbear peculiar to a class-divided society . They are confined within the mansions of the wealthy in an ostentatious and snobbish display of opulence .
 Stubbs' painting of a grey mare and foals had been exhibited only once before . Another very beautiful painting by Stubbs had previously been exhibited in London .
 This state of affairs is, of course, the result of our class-divided society . It will only be abolished through the establishment of a class-less Socialist society, he says .
 To have one’s walls adorned with a Reynolds, a Rembrandt, or a Millais, tables in antique silver with Sevres porcelain, one must belong to the nonproducing class in our present social system .
 The shoddy goods of multiple stores provide a tasteless and cheap facade for Prefab, semi-detached and tenement homes of the mass of humanity .
 We see that it is the commodity nature of antiques that stands in the way of their social ownership . So long as they remain such they will be used as status symbols of false values in a snobbish world .
 appreciation of the arts is no biological peculiarity of the minority rulers of society, neither has it anything to do with the colour of one’s blood . But make no mistake, appreciation of art is not a biological peculiarity .
 It is simply a matter of having time to devote, and access to artistic productions, in order to appreciate them, says the author .
 This Socialism alone can provide and surely this is not an impossible task for modern man to achieve . This is not the only task that modern man can achieve, it's a job he can do, he says .
 It would be nice if prices of things they buy went down and the price of the thing they sell went up . What they mean is that it would be very nice if the prices of the things they bought and sold went down . The price of things you buy and sell should go down
 The worker would like to sell his mental ard physical energies to his employer at a higher price . He would also get more for each pound he spends, through lower prices in the shop .
 Manufacturers who sell industrial products would like to see prices go up and all othe prices (in. cluding wages) go down . Manufacturers want to see the prices of industrial products go up . They also want to raise wages .
 Trade unions often associate themselves with their employers in approving higher prices . One exception to this is the common practice of association with employers . Trade unions are often seen to be in favour of higher prices.
 The railway unions approve higher fares and the coal miners higher prices for coal . Thus the railway union approves higher fares . The coal miners also approve higher coal prices .
 France and Russia say it did not make any difference . Russia and France say it does not make a difference in the election .
 France cut the face valu2 of her currency by 100, and the Russians cut their rouble by 10.5% . Russia cut the value of its currency by 10% and France cut its currency value by 100%.
 All prices, wages, fares, etc. etc. were cut in the same proportion, so everyone was in just the same position as before . At the same time all prices and wages were cut .
 Some prices have not been reduced by this kind of government action but have fallen under the influence of trading conditions . But on some occasions prices have also fallen under influence of such conditions .
 The worker who could buy articles at lower prices had fewer shillings in his wage packet to buy the articles with . So the worker who can afford to buy cheaper articles had fewer money to buy them with .
 It was a time when unemployment was heavy and conditions were particularly unfavourable for trade union resistance to wage cuts .
 The official rate of exchange of the rouble will be 2.52 to the £ which will make it of higher value than the dollar and equal to about 8/8/Dollar . However, it is not tied to gold and is not freely convertible into pounds or dollars .
 Commentators in the newspapers mostly take the line that the aim of the Russian government is prestige, the satisfaction of having at least a nominal exchange rate greater than that of the dollar .
 There is already the long term purpose of making the rouble eventually a gold backed world currency acceptable in international trade as the pound and dollar have been .
 The Daily Telegraph tells of a Russian woman who got into the ranks of the rouble millionaires by a piece of private enterprise that landed her in jail for three years . Rouble Millionairess was jailed for a year and three years in prison .
 She ran an organisation. complete with a lawyer as secretary, a ‘scientific consultant’, an accountant, and a network of agents selling cure-all herbs at 45/a packet. She ran the organisation .
 When arrested in 1961 she had 700,000 roubles (worth about £60,000 at the old rate of exchange) and had just bought a country house for 300,000 .
 Forecasters were happy about the boom time ahead a year ago . Forecasters still confident that if anything went wrong the government could fairly easily take the steps that would put the economy back on expansion .
 The fact that they are all asking the question is itself a-pointer to growing uneasiness, made greater by the foreseeable but generally not foreseen collapse of motor exports .
 America and Canada are likely to have unemployment greater than in any year since end of war . There is the natural fear that British export trade may fall further and the jobless increase in number .
 Gone is post-war optimism based on the belief that they could always dip into the Keynesian remedies and keep everything under control . Gone is the hope that the government will always dip in to Keynesian solutions and keep things under control.
 Other sections of the capitalist class would have had the same idea . But before anyone accepts that the export problems of British capitalism can be solved by pushing into other markets, it has to be remembered .
 Canada has appointed a ‘super salesman’ to head its export drive . The American government is trying to boost their exports . Canada appointed a new Minister of Trade and Commerce .
 Sweden, too, is aiming to solve its problems by more exports, and their eyes are fixed on the market for their goods in Britain . Sweden also wants to export more goods to the UK .
 Russian exports are finding their way into many of the world’s competitive markets . And to add to the troubles of all of them, Russian exports have also been found to be found in many of those markets .
 Paul Bareau, the new economic editor of the Daily Mail, argues that the present troubles in this country are due to “excessive optimism and rashness of the years 1958 and 1959 .
 Restrictions on hire purchase should never have been completely removed . Restrictions should never be completely removed from the market, says the author .
 You take your choice between those who say that there is no need to worry because the government can always take action to put things right . Those who say the government did take steps but they were the wrong ones and had the effect of making things worse .
 The Rise of the Merchants Notes on Economic History . The EARLIER FEUDAL ECONOMY had to be curbed by the encouragement of manufacture trirough privileges and monopolies .
 Skilled craftsmen imported, industrial secrets purchased or stolen . Industrial secrets were purchased, stolen or stolen in the past . Skilled craftmen were imported, imported, stolen .
 Official supervision of the whole process of production was to be kept up to the mark . Consumer protection was also to be protected by subjecting the process of sale to inspection .
 Here are the traditions and customs of the older urban economy of the city . The city's urban economy has been transformed into a modern city .
 Another method adopted was the establishment of colonies and trading companies . The colonies were established as colonies, trading companies and colonies .
 The East India Company was given the right in 1661 to carry on war and make peace in non-Christian countries . The company was founded in 1660 and was given a right to make peace and carry on in war .
 Attempts to provide cheap labour so as to promote and strengthen industry . Attempts were made to provide cheaper labour to promote industry .
 Prohibitions on marriage were removed and payments were made to fathers of large families . One method was to encour. age the increase of population .
 Another was to cheapen the necessaries of life, so that wages could be kept down . Another was . cheapen . life, to keep wages down, and to keep people out of poverty .
 Foodstuffs were freed from import duty . High levies were placed on exported grain, or its export totally forbidded . These measures were opposed to the inlerests of the agriculturalists .
 The output of gold and silver was to be increased where possible by mining in the home-land, assisted by state subsidies if needed . Finally, state subsidies would be needed if needed to boost output .
 The prohibition of the export of precious metals, and similar measures, were to supplement and round off the expedients for increasing the national wealth . The attraction of wealthy foreigners into the country was to boost the country's wealth .
 A survey of mercantalist policy shows that its advocates placed great importance on money, but did not hold that money was an end in itself . They valued it for its productive effects .
 Charles Davenent, of 1961 the same school, says “ Foreign trade brings in the stock.” Foreign trade bring in the . stock. “
 It is necessary to remember that mercantilism differed greatly at different iimes and in different countries . Mercantilists differed greatly in different nations and countries, says historian .
 All the European rulers and statesmen from the sixteenth to the eighteenth century werc guided by the principles set out above .
 In England, mercantilism had a strong commercial trend . Agriculture and manufacture were not neglected, though agriculture and manufacture .
 Cromweli’s Navigation Law of 1651 decreed that no seerchandise from Asia, Airica or America should be imported, except in ships built in England, owned by English subjects, navigated by English captains, with at least threefourths of the crew
 Sea-borne commerce from England to other European countries was to be carried either in English boats, or in ships belonging to the country with which trade was being carried on .
 The conditions meant a practical monopoly of the seas for the English, to the detriment of the Dutch carryingtrade . These conditions were meant a practical monopoly for the English .
 By a treaty of £703, Portuguese ports were opened to British woollens in return for concessions to Portugal allowing the importation of wine into Great Britain . By the same treaty, the ports of Portugal were also opened to the UK .
 In Germany and Ausiria, owing to the devastation of the Thirty Years War, the nzed to increase the population was of paramount importance . The population was increased in the Thirty years of the period .
 The main concern was to hinder imports from countries whose manufactured goods were so cheap that the competition could not be met, the government said . The government was concerned about the cheapness of imported goods .
 A demand for laws to limit expenditure on clothes, food, furniture, etc. was a feature of mercantilism here . A demand was made for laws limiting spending on clothes and food .
 In ftaly. in conformity with the nature of the financial and commercial aristocracies of the republics of that period, the mercantilist school was especially interested in the balance of trade and monetary problems .
 In France, Jean Baptiste Colbert was the most successful exponent of the mercantile system . Colbert was controller general of the national finances in 1666 .
 French industry was a long way behind England. and even Germany. and the finances and administration were in a bad state. Not long before internal customs dues had been largely abolished .
 State subsidies. protective duties, and the establishment of technical schools. By such timulants a3 State subsidies . protective duties .
 Adam Smith considered the mercantilists as a school of united thinkers . Adam Smith's work was published in Smith's first published book, "Smith’s Mercantilistism"
 Mercantilism was essentially a vague principle of applied economics, stemming from the historical, economic, and political foundations of the period . Mercantillism is a vague economic principle that is based on the historical and economic foundations of that period .
 The economists of those days had to put forward the ideas of the balance of trade, attach great importance to money. study the effects of customs tariffs. examine the source of national wealth. and thus come to form a durable though somewhat loosely organised unity.
 Early capitalism was the period of history in which Capitalists and Workers make their appearance, showing a difference in the form of the class struggle from the feudal period before it .
 Bernal in the fast issue of the Sunday Limpire News before it joined the ranks of those fallen in the newspaper war . Bernal is one of the last of the newspapers to be taken down by the government .
 There could be an abundant society, with working tim2 reduced to four hours a day, three days a weck . There could also be an abundance of time-free society .
 In fact, people who didn't want to work would not necessarily have to work . If they wanted to, they could take monihs or even sears off work . People who wanted to work could take time off from work .
 Five per cent of the population could produce all the food that was needed for the rest . Another 10 per cent could make all the goods that were necessary . Another ten per cent can produce the goods necessary for all the rest of the food supply .
 They could explore all the fruits of lessure. the arts. the crafts. music and pamting. music . They could also explore the arts and the arts .
 In space exploration there would be all the adventure for the people who wanted adventure, says NASA . "In space exploration, we would be able to explore the world for the first time"
 And equal supe iv grow roses or something for the people who did not want adventure. And equal . The people who want adventure grow roses .
 Professor Bernal was simply giving facts which support our contention that the productivity powers developed within capitalism have now reached the stage when an abundant non-coercive society is possible—what we call Socialism . We believe that an abundant, non-corrupt society could be possible .
 Some of those supporting state capitalism may do so partly because they do not realise that a Socialist society is possible .
 One old woman found oui recently after claiming to be a Christian . But it would be unwisz to assume that those who claim to be Christians have got any great desire to follow this .
 A widow of 71, she was sentenced to seven years preventive detention at London Sessions . She was sentenced for stealing two brass ornaments from St. Peterborough .
 In a capitalist society the Christian churches hang on to their property as tightly as, if not more tightly, than anyone else . This unfortunate perhaps doesn't realise that in . society, in . a capitalist . society the . Christian churches hung on to . their property .
 I suppose you have no ambition except to go back to prison and indeed | am told you would prefer to go there as you have . no home outside . I suppose . you would rather go to prison as you . have no . home outside of prison .
 If this is true, it means that one of our fellow members of the working class prefers the inhumanities of jail to the joys of the ‘free” life outside it .
 Roy WELENSsKy, the Rhodesian Federal Prime Minister recently defended the present Rhodesian set-up in the Federal Parliament . This will take some explaining away by the advocates of our supposed). “never had it so good ™ society,” he writes . Sub
 Sir Roy was wide of the mark in giving this as a reason why the existing settlers’ government should be left in undisturbed control of Rhodesia . But he was not right in saying this was a reason to keep the settlers' government in control .
 The “substantial number of African businessmen ™. the developing African capitalist class. is in fact the main reason why the days of the settlers’ government are numbered.” “The “ substantial number of . African businessmen’s . entrepreneurs are in fact
 A government based on landed interests can hold on for a certain time  ia certain conditions when capitalism is expanding in a country . The government is based on land interests, but can't hold on to a government based in a certain period .
 It may lean over backwards, as it thinks. in its efforts to be fair to the growing capitalist class .
 JANUARY SS It I A IR, LUCRETIUS (about 100BC 50BC) Nothing can ever be created by divine power out of nothing . The NATURE of the UNIVERSE is the creation of the universe .
 The reason why all mortals are gripped by fear is that they see all sorts of things happening on the earth and in the sky with no discernible cause, and these they attribute to the will of a god . The reason for fear is they see things happening in the world and sky with
 When we have seen that nothing can be created out of nothing, we shall have a clearer picture of the path ahead, the problem of how things are created and occasioned without the aid of the gods .
 A thing cannot have a limit unless there is something outside to limit it, so that the eye can follow it up to a certain point but not beyond . But clearly a thing cannot be a thing without a limit, so something outside limits it .
 Since you must admit that there is nothing outside the universe, it can have no limit and is accordingly without end or measure . Since that must admit, there must be no limit, the universe has no limit .
 The dart cannot in fact have started from the boundary line . Whether there is some obstacle lying on the line prevents the dart from going farther on its course or whether it flies on beyond it .
 It would be a barren exercise to debate whether Wilde was a Socialist in the exact meaning of that term . Wilde was not a Socialist, but he was a Socialist, according to his work .
 There is in this essay much that the Socialist will agree with, and much more than could form the basis of a rewarding discussion . What is beyond doubt is that there is much of this essay that can be agreed with .
 Part of the essay has little to do with Socialism in any economic sense . Half of it is taken up by a diatribe against any attempt at dictation to the artist, whether by government .
 Wilde's sparkling prose is a joy to read his sparkling prose, and to see how he hammers his points home . Wilde keeps to what is directly relevant, but when he keeps to the relevant, it's a joy .
 Schools try to solve the problem of poverty by keeping the poor alive . They try to keep them alive by amusing the poor .
 It is immoral to use private property in order to alleviate the horrible evils that result from the institution of private property . Private property should not be used to alleviate evils such as murder, murder, rape, murder .
 If there are Governments armed with economic power as they are now with political power, we are to have Industrial tyrannies, then the last state of man will be worse than the first . If the Socialism is authoritarian, it will be authoritarian; if there are governments armed with . economic power
 With the abolition of private property, then, we shall have true, beautiful, healthy individualism, says the author of the book .
 Nobody will waste his lifc in accumulating things, and the symbols for things, says the author . Nobody wants to waste his life by accumulating things and symbols .
 This essay is a mine in which only half an hour's reading will reveal many Socialist gems . Most people cxistist, that Js all, that's all, this essay is an excellent example of socialism .
 Mr Andrew Boyd points out in his recently published book, geography is really about them both . But, as he points out, it's really about geography .
 Ii is another of those convenient compendiums so useful to anybody with an interest in keeping abreast of the world but who find themselves with so little time to do it .
 The book consists of 70 maps, clearly drawn and annotated in black and white . each with its accompanying page of background information . Each map is clearly drawn, annotated and clearly annotated .
 The subjects they cover are many and varied and provide an impressive picture in themselves of the problems and complexities of the modern capitalist world . The subjects cover many of the subjects and provide a impressive picture of the world .
 Strategy, trade, production, race tensions, nationalism, disputes and troubles of every sort, are translated into graphic terms . Strategy and production are translated to graphic terms in graphic terms.
 Of easy reference and readability. attractively produced and printed, it is in short an ideal repository of compressed information at a very reasonable price .
 The Sweet Life La Dolce Vita is now showing at the Columbia and the Curzon . S.H. and history— about chaps” is worth attention .
 The opening sequence sets the scene for this bitter, searing and uncompromising revelation of our diseased society . The film is set to be screened in cinemas in London .
 A helicopter is carrying an effigy of Christ low over Rome followagl by another occupied by a newspaper reporter and photographer . A newspaper reporter is also on the scene .
 We surmise in the meanwhile that this is a stunt and that the occasion is one of the not infrequent religious, holidays . Subsequently we learn that these two are attached to a scandal-mongering tabloid . We later learn that they are attached .
 We are left in no doubt of the relationship of the events -- two stunts both concerned only with the cynical exploitation of ignorance, fear and uncertainty .
 Eventually he finds himself alone in the company of a rich young heiress who takes him to her palace in her fabulous car .
 The rich young lady. sensing a common bond with one of these (for as we are made well aware. they are two opposite sides of the same coin) offers to take her home .
 The contrast between the affluence of the rich and the dismal quarters of the prostitute is driven home cruelly . The contrast is starkly stark between rich and poor in the prostitute's living quarters .
 The rich young thing. wearv no doubt of the boredom of her parasitical existence decides to fornicate with the young man in the prostitutes’ own bed. suffusing herself with the sensuous pleasures of promiscuity. as she imagines . The more .
 Of the coarseness of soliciting, soliciting and the squalor. the pimps, she knows—or wants to know—nothing . She knows, or wants, nothing. She knows nothing.
 The credulity and hysteria which follow lay bare the blind belief and ignorance which go with religion, says the author of the book .
 Others come out of curiosity, anxious not to miss any possible ‘modern’ miracles . Others come from curiosity, eager to see any possible miracles .
 The pent-up frenzy and the latent violence that is its accompaniment bursts forth at the end into the immolation and despoilment by the crowd of the tree where the vision is said to have appeared .
 Symbolic this of the brutality and violence underlying blind faith gnd belief so charactergstic of our time . Symbolic the brutality of blind faith and belief in our time, it is said .
 Another episode tak@s us into the palace of a rich aristocrat where a party is taking place . The utter depravity and stupidity of the people are hammered home in scene after scene .
 We are never ‘ allowed for an instant’ to forget that * these people are possessed of enotmous wealth and resources,’ says author .
 The great disparities of wealth ownership so characteristic of capitalist society are made clear for all to see . The social divide between wealth and wealth is evident in the film .
 These people are portrayed for what they are—useless, parasitic, diseased . These are portrayed as useless, parasitic and diseased. These people should be seen as a parasite, not a parasite .
 The final episode may be said to crown this unsparing condemnation of hypocritical capitalist morality with one code for the poor and one for the rich . 'The final orgiastic episode is said to be the final episode of the series'
 Kutchuk, now President and Vice-President respectively of the newly born Republic, made the speeches expected of them . Kutchu made the speech expected of him .
 The crowd cheered and went away to await the arrival of the contingents of Greek and Turkish troops . The crowd cheer and go away to wait for the arrival .
 The troops were greeted at the port of Famagusia by their respeclive supporters . The Turkish Army was greeted by supporters with @ries of “ Long live the Turkish Army” and “Long live the Greek Army’s .
 They then entered Nicosia to banner greetings of “ Frzedom and peace-loving soldiers, we welcome you to Cyprus” from whence they proceeded to their camps to prepare for whatever “peace-loving “ activities the future might call upon them to perform .
 The late Governor of Cyprus left Famagusta a few hours earlier . The reception in Nicosia was riotous compared with the departure of the late Governor . The late governor of Cyprus was killed in 2007 .
 Sir Hugh Foot and his family depart the island followed by the silent stares of the thousands of watchers assembled on the town walls to greet the incoming troops .
 23 Eoka men exiled to Greece under the amnesty terms following the London Agreement . JANUARY of 23 exiled men exiled under amnesty terms .
 Any doubts that Eoka had the sympathy and support of the majority of Cypriots must have been dispelled by the scenes .
 The six-mile journey from the airport to the Nicosia Stadium was a two-hour crawl . The stadium was packed to capacity, with the surrounding roofs crowded with people and women .
 Exiles were conscious that their struggle had not borne the fruit expected . Very adroltly he proceeded to draw the stings .
 The man who had so obviously benefited from what was regarded as a sell-out then said: 'I don't think it's a good thing for me'
 Anti-Makarios Ex-Eoka Fighters Association had boycotted the celebration . Eight of its members had been arrested and held for one night in jail for distributing leaflets attacking the London and Zurich Agreements during these celebrations .
 Greck Cypriots must live not with the memory of what they suffered or how much they were wronged by the British. nor how much their differences are with the Turks. nor should the soul be filled with bitterness at the negation of national hopes.
 John Clerides leader of the Democratic Union, afier calling new Republic a fraud said .
 The Akel* view was expressed by their paper Haravghi, which cal'ed for a policy of peace and friendship abroad in order to secure markets for our products .
 President repeatedly stressed his “friendsrip with all countries” policy . During the many press conferences thai followed, the President continually stressed his "friendsrip" policy .
 Turkish woman asked why, on national holiday, Turks had cheered in the Turkish contingent and the Grecks had celebrated the return of Eoka . Occasionally reporters would fire awkward questions .
 Eoka must work pzacefully for the common good, says Eoka . Eoka says it will work for the good of the people .
 President's training in manipulating the minds of the faithful in church was standing him in good stead . President's training in manipulating the . minds of . the faithful was standing by him .
 The domestic and foreign policy of the new Republic was as on2 would have expected . The new Republic's foreign policy was as expected, says on2 .
 All would be well, provided ‘the imprescribable rights of the working people were safeguarded” and friendship with all countries ‘ could be guaranteed” . ‘Friendship with all nations’ was guaranteed, he said .
 President’s Knowledge of the real world is as deficient as those of his many supporters who believed that, somehow or other, a change from colonial to selfgovernment would result in full employment, peace, and prosperity .
 "For nearly that long I have read your literature and listened to your speakers. For nearly that many years, I have been in touch with your speakers," she says .
 Your speakers repeat, parrot-fashion; “When the workers want socialism they will have it.” “The workers want it. When they want it, they will be able to have it,” the speakers say .
 This is dependent on the question, “How?”, to which you have no answer . Fine, but this is dependent upon the question "How?" How? How?
 Private capitalism has simply been succeeded by State Capitalism . Private capitalism is simply succeeded by state capitalism . I suggest that the SPGB thinks about this problem .
 Many workers are at present employed on useless jobs (bark clerks, insurance men, bus conductors) or directly harmful — ones . Besides that, many workers, are at least employed in useless jobs . This greatly reduces the number of workers available for the useful work of production and distribution
 At present the workers do this much more difficult job —of running capitalism —when it is not even in their own interests . And at present, workers do . This much more . difficult job . of running capitalism, when it . is not in the workers' own interests, he says
 The organisation is already here—the tool of the working class in the Socialist revolution . All that is lacking is a majority of classconscious workers, and we are doing our best to bring that about .
 B.W. says “ Do you envisage a time when it will be impossible to recruit a single soldier, sailor or airman; when at a General Election not a single vote will he cast” —presumably B. W. means for capitalist parties .
 When“ nobody” is prepared to join the armed forces or vote for capitalist partics these institutions, because of that fact, will have ceased to exist .
 As for Russia, the Soviet revolution overthrew the landed aristocracy, and brought in capitalism . The Soviet revolution was overthrown by the landed aristocrats, now by the state .
 Eorrorial, CoMMIT IEE ~ Party News continued from page 16 . It may interest readers to know that ca Socialist.
 Mectings will be held Monday fortnightly thereafter, all proceedings commencing at approximately 7.30m. All proceedings will start at 7:30m each week .
 Generally discussions will be held on Socialism and anything pertaining to it, and it is hoped 1o organise some lectures also . It is hoped some lectures will also be held .
 No one will he precluded from attending by virtue solely of views divergent from the SP.G.B.'s Obviously . Obviously. Obviously. The SP.B. will not be able to attend the event .
 You are cordially invited to attend any of the meetings and the Group members will be pleased indeed to welcome you . And all within the inevitable and necessary limits of an organised discussion Group-will have complete freedom of expression, you are invited to join .
 Comrade Gilmac is regularly at Head Office from 2 to 7m. from Monday to Friday . ComradeGilmac is at the head office from 2-7m. every week . He is also regularly at the Head Office every day .
 LEWISHAM LECTURE Room 1, Davenport Hall, Rushey Green, S.E.L.E., will meet at 6:30 p.m. on Tuesday .
 PADDINGTON LECTURES “The Olive Branch”, Crawford Street, WI . Wednesdays, 9 a.m. ET.
 The latter stated they were prepared to send a speaker to give an address on Nuclear Disarmament, or, if it was preferred, they could show a film .
 The Branch decided that a debate would he he a good proposition and immediately the local CND Secretary was contacted by telephone . The Branch of CND decided that the debate would be a good idea .
 He was advised that we accepted their proposition to debate and that the “Branch could and would make all the necessary arrangements” for debate .
 LONDON OUTDOOR MEETINGS Sundays Hyde Park 3 p.m. Sunday . Hyde Park is Hyde Park, London's Hyde Park. Hyde Park will be Hyde Park’s main venue .
 Thursdays Tower Hill, 12,30--2m. East Street, Walworth January Ist and 15th January 8th and 22nd January 29th . January 8, 8, 22nd and 29th Jan 29th Thursday, January 1st and January 2nd January 1
 Socialist Standard 1961 196] ¢ stated that he would have to put the matter before his committee . Islington Branch wrote confirming the telephone conversation, giving suggested dates and asked if the CND wished to hold the debate .
 The letter was acknowledged and it was stated that the Committee had agreed to the debate and that definite arrangements were awaited . All details were supplied .
 Three weeks later a letter was received stating that they had appointed a new secretary and a new committee who had reconsidered the matter and had decided against taking part in the debate . Three weeks after the letter was sent, the committee said they had been re-elected .
 The policy of the new committce is not to argue for or against any particular philosophy. The reason given by them was that they are not to . The policy is to not argue for a particular philosophy .
 We hope members will make every attempt to support this heavy programme . These will alternate with lectures and discussions .
 The Branch has recently ended a satisfactory outdoor Propaganda season at Beresford Square . The Branch ended the season with a successful outdoor campaign .
 It is intended to pursue this method of propaganda next year and to continue to obtain the services of speakcrs and the support of members .
 In socicty, there is an antagonism of interests, marifesting itself as a class struggle . hetween those who possess but do not produce, and those who produce but don't possess . That in sociology, therefore, there are antagonisms of interests .
 "Nee Darnpart Red hehe — Derma Red, SE6. a NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (ist & {Sth February) 7.30 pm, eyo Hall, Street Street, Street. London .
 7th February at 19 Chase, Leigh-on-Sea and 21st February at 17 Cotswold Road, Westclifl on-Sea .
 OLDHAM Wednesdays 7.30 pm, Street. D Deutz, 80 Bawdsey pices, Wed tone WOOD GREEN & yet pater wacx Peed . Peed Peed OLDham .
 ORDERS for literature should be sent to the Literature Department, SPGB, at the above address .
 Executive Committee should be sent to the Gereral Secretary, spGB, 52, Clapham High Street, London .
 LETTERS containing postal orders, ctc., should be sent to E LAKE, SPGB, at the above address .
 Postal orders and cheques should be crossed and made payable to the spas . Spas should be made payable of cheques .
 The Government, a coalition of Christian Democrats and Liberals, has precipitated this situation by its austerity measures . The Government's austerity measures have precipitated the situation, Labour says .
 Belgian local authorities are also to be empowered to impose additional income taxes . Local authorities will also be able to impose more income taxes of their own . Belgium's local authorities have been empowered to introduce new taxes .
 Belgian Opposition party claims workers will suffer a loss of £21 to £28 a year . Opposition party calls itself * Socialist’s claims that workers will lose £21 a year a year.
 The popular reason given for these austerity measures is the nced to mect the trade and finance deficit caused by the loss of the Congo .
 Even before the Congo crisis, plans prosperity in Africa are over, according to the EU . Congo's economy is growing very slowl, compared with that of her Common Market partners, she says .
 Eyskens’ austerity programme was designed to achieve a vast investment drive to modernise Belgian industrs and make Belgian products competitive .
 The most uneconomic of Belgian preducts is her coal, a chronic problem since the thirties . Belgium has been plagued by a coal shortage since the 1930s .
 Belgium has launched on a serious programme of reform of uneconomic mines including a number of closures . In recent months Belgium has begun a serious reform programme .
 Bur thes realise that their action is futile ws a means to achieve anything but ten temporary respite from the encroachments of their masters on their standard of living, and that they are jeopardising their chances of achieving even that .
 The strike weapon has a very limiied usefulness and at its best can only deal with . elisels and not ‘were being made to face the unpleaa> ,causes. At its best, the strike weapon only deals with elisel .
 Socialist Standard 1961: Belgium's period of peak the might of the State is. To use this we ron against sant fact that Belgium's . state of peak is. invite d’s . London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard .
 If at election times the workers ive their votes to the parties of capiiis, it ensures that the present type of situation will occur again . The workers' votes will be cast to the political parties, says the president-elect .
 It is these so-called “Socialists’ who foist such schemes as National Health services, unemployment pay . family allowances, and so on to politically ignorant workers as bits of . Socialism . on . on to workers .
 And it is the same political charlatans who seek to make capital from the present situation by using the strike as a means to achieve government office themselves . The strike is the result of a strike in order to gain government office .
 Governments do not develop reforms or pruning schemes because their attitude to the working class is necessarily either sympathetic or antagonistic . Governments are not developing reforms because they are sympathetic to working class, says Simon Tisdall .
 Governments administer affairs of a capitalist economy in the interests of the national capitalist class . Governments administer the affairs of the . economy in . the . interests of . the national . capitalist class, the government says .
 Belgian workers would be well advised to consider this fact in relation to the present situation . Change of government is merely a change of label, says the Belgian workers .
 Austerity, in a world of potential plenty, is always the lot of the working class under capitalism under capitalism . Austerity in the world is always a problem under capitalism, says Simon Tisdall .
 It is not enough to demonstrate against one type of capitalist government. It's not enough . It's the only way to protest against capitalism, it's the same type of government .
 The workers must organise consciously to abolish the present economic system and establish their own system of society—Socialism . The workers need to abolish their own economic system, the Workers' Socialist Party .
 ‘Mr and Mrs. Average’ (‘Mr. Average ‘) ‘’ is the average British couple . ‘The Average Couple'
 Average” are described as having a TV set, vacuum cleaner and occasionally a washing machine and a ‘fridge . Average’s are described by the average family as having an average TV set and vacuum cleaner .
 The acquisition of these goods is equated by advertisements, films and magazines to true, lasting happiness . The acquisition, however, can be equated to true happiness, the author says .
 Blank’s wasiing machine is the latest in a long-running series of machines to be used in the U.S. Blank's wasiings machine .
 The mere fact of possessing these goods, however, does not produce happiness as soon as the gadget is installed, says CNN.com .
 Young couple in Birmingham were driven to desperation by financial problems . Couple were 'Mr and Mrs' of a young couple, who clearly were ‘Mr. and Mrs.’
 He had bought a five-piece living room suite, washing machine, bedroom suite and TV set on hire purchase, and had redecorated his 15/a week house .
 On 28th December 1960, with the Christmas decorations still hanging gaily, the husband, wife and their 2 year old daughter were found dead in the kitchen .
 BOAC and BEA staff staged a four-hour stoppage on Wednesday, January 2nd . The strike is in support of a wage claim that has beein going through the laborious negotiating machinery .
 The aircraft workers are one of the few ways in which the employers and their own union officials can be gingered up is by resorting to a strike . This undoubtedly caused a lot of hardship to some passengers, but the unfortunate fact is that for the aircraft workers, striking is one
 BEA immediately suspended them for a further 24 hours, causing six times as much inconvenience to the public . BEA then suspended them again for 24 hours causing a further inconvenience .
 The only newspaper comment was typified by the Daily Mail of January 6th, which said that BEA was determined to push home the lesson to the strikers .
 On the Brink, Russia and the U.S. waxed indignant about each other's interference in the Laos disturbances . Russia and the United States waxed on the matter .
 Sheer hypocrisy of course, because they had both been dabbling their fingers in that particular pie . Sheer hypocritical of course . Both were dabbling in the pie .
 Since 1954, the U.S. has pumped between forty and fifty million dollars into Laos . Laos is one of the poorest countries in the world . Laos has been the source of millions of dollars since 1954 .
 China is probably interested in the strategic potential of Laos, as a buffer between her and SEATO member Thailand . China is likely to be interested in Laos' strategic potential, says China .
 The Americans, notoriously triggerneurotic in the Far East, seem to want the country more firmly under their control, and not simply neutralist . The U.S. seems to want to take control of the region .
 Laos dispute is a miniature of the clashing interests of two giant power blocs . The Laos dispute may be small in ‘ itself, but it is a mini-miniature of the China-Russia conflict .
 This must be the fear which overhangs every minor upheaval in the world . This is the fear overhanging every major upheaval, and it must be fear of the world's future .
 General De Gaulle came to power to joyful motor horns tooting the rhythm of Algerie francaise in the streets of Paris .
 This was an exuberant indication of the hopes of the general's supporters, that he would ruthlessly crush the FLN and SOCIALIST STANDARD .
 In the event de Gaulle, by resolving to come to terms with Algerian nationalism, has shown the more realistic assessment of the interests of French capitalism . De Gaulle has shown that he has a realistic assessment .
 In this, like many other politicians, he has disappointed a lot of his former supporters . He has disappointed many of them, including many former supporters, he says .
 Last month's affirmative vote for the general’s proposals gave the go-ahead to the organisation of another referendum, to be held in Algeria alone . Algeria alone has the right to hold a referendum on Algeria's sovereignty .
 The second referendum will be held . if security conditions in Algeria allow it to take place . The referendum is expected to be held in Algeria in the near future .
 This could mean that there will soon be further talks between the French government and the FLN, and that the end of the present fighting in Algeria may be in sight . This could be the end to the present conflict in Algeria .
 The questions in the referendum were loaded, the government hogged most of the propaganda . The French army was left in no doubt as to how it should vote .
 If this is the beginning of the road to peace in Algeria, there is no cause for another joyful tooting of horns . Algeria has been hit by a series of violent incidents in recent years .
 We all know that there will be other Algerias, with their own bloodshed and misery, with its own bloodshed . The Algerian state of Algeria has been plagued by violence in recent years .
 Some of the air and sea lines in this country were working overtime to accommodate all the people who were clamouring to emigrate to Canada .
 These people must have gone with great expectations of a country full of good things, where everybody was happy, they said . These people went to the country with great hopes, but they were disappointed, they say .
 It is now expected that this month, Canada’s unemployment will reach ten per cent. of its working population, which is the highest since the war, and several times higher than in Great Britain .
 The solutions which have been recommended for Canada’s slump are not new . The solutions for Canada's slump are also not new, say experts .
 Some economists favour higher import tariffs and a strong effort to replace imported goods with home products . Some economists say higher tariffs would be beneficial to the economy .
 ‘There is little hope that they will lose the illusions which they took west with them.’ But ‘there are little hope’ that they’ll lose their illusions,’ she says . ‘Little hope that the West will lose its illusions, she
 Where they go capitalism, and its problems, will be waiting to greet them, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 The Ministry of Transport and the various road safeiy organisations are still faced with the task of exhorting the restless tide of humanity to walk and drive carefully .
 One of the main difficulties is that of the separation of pedestrians and traffic, but since this cai Only be accomplished at enormous cost, it is not considered practical, and conse| quently palliatives and not remedies are preferred .
 There is a mistaken belief among some people that these road problems are only a recent phenomenon, but as long ago as 1846'‘The daily newspapers were complaining of the inadequacies of the principal thoroughfares and of the fact that all that could be done was to patch up
 In today’s battle of the roads one can see all the contradictory nature of capitalist society . The battle of roads is a battle between capitalism and the environment .
 Super-petrols are supposed to make cars go faster, not the prestige value of the bigger and faster cars . Mr Marples is making his appeal .
 The road problem is aggravated by the thousands of commercial and business vehicles which congest the h'ghways and bye-ways, taking back and forth goods which have covered the same ground several times before .
 There are also thousands of small, medium, and large size shops selling identical goods to the people in the already overcrowded towns and cities . Thousands of small and medium- and large-size shops sell identical goods .
 We can only wonder that the accident rate is not higher than the statistics show. We only wonder if the accidents rate is higher than statistics show .
 The attention of the new representatives had been drawn to the plea, uttered against the dismissal of Public Works Department employees in the Paphos district .
 Promises were given by the Minister of Labour in the transitional government . Promises “to see what he could do about it” were given .
 Right wing and left wing unions issued strike notices against wrongful dismissal . Combined right and left-wing unions issued strikes notices . Left and right wing unions then issued strike notice .
 1961 representative at UNO was placing the application of Cyprus for membership before the Security Council . Said a democratic system of government and the necessary machinery for safeguarding the human rights and the interests of all sections of the community “ exists in Cyprus”
 While the voice of organised labour was beginning to express itself, the body of employers had been reorganising . Employers were reorganising themselves, says Labour leader David Miliband .
 Even as the daily press relays as front page news the visits of diplomats presenting credentials at the Presidential Palace, there appeared notices on their back pages .
 Continued link-ups of employers’ associations have resulted in the association covering leading employers and most individual employers associations . Still the sackings continued, amid strong press reaction, with T.U. delegations making reptesentations to the Minister of Labour .
 President Makarios announced a scheme for the expenditure of £331,300 on new public works to seduce unemployment .
 We are in sympathy with (hose) dismissed from Public Works, and certainly we don't want them in the streets jobless. Then with cruel rony he said “ We are . in sympathy . with (Hose dismissed from public works, and . certainly we . don
 I want to make it clear that I am not going to give in to slogans of demagogues . But J.W. wants to make a clear that he is not going in to giving in . He said: 'I am not giving in to . slogans of . demagog
 Workers will be protected in the new state, but they must also work ‘,’, says the new government . The first pronouncement of a government after its election is to call on the workers to work harder .
 In this case it came rather later than expected, but rarely has such a call been so cruelly worded worded . In the case, it came sooner than expected .
 The “unemployed worker ” who out of sheer desperation is forced to send deputations to beg for work from his newly-elected government, is roundly berated by the leader of that government for not working .
 The grant was seen by the workers 4s a stop-gap measure which, apart from failing to secure the re-engagement of dismissed workers, would do nothing to relieve unemployment in the future .
 P Bryant, E Grant abolishing unemployment by means of foreign loans wore discussed continually . P Bryant and E Grant abolished unemployment by . Means of foreign . loans . Grant .
 SEK, PEO, and the Turkish Federation of Labour decided on an island-wide strike for 8th September . We Want Bread 8 Thz workecs’ rep-eszntatives negotiated up to the last minute with Minister of Labour and the President .
 Shouts of “We want work—we want bread” went up outside the House of Representatives, while a union delegation went inside to present a solution . But governmental concern was not sufficient for them to reverse thzir previous dismissal decisions .
 The strikers returned to work the following day to await the next move by the government . The government has not responded to the strike .
 The naively unrealistic ~ friendship with all countries’ policy was to bring immediate reaction from the United Arab Republic. “Friendship with all nations” policy was brought immediate reaction .
 The friction was caused by the declaration that Mr Zev Levin would be installed as the first Israeli ambassador to Cyprus . Mr Levin was declared as Israel's first ambassador in Cyprus .
 Arab League warns Cypriot merchants against trading with Israel . This came in the face of warnings by the Arab League to Cypriots against trading .
 The announcement of the appointment was like a slap in the face to Egypt, says Mohamed El Ghouri . The announcement was 'like a slap at the face' to Egypt .
 Since the Suez invasion launched by the British in 1956, Egypt had given full support to self-determination agitation . Egypt wanted to remove the threat of an unfriendly Cyprus on its doorstep .
 U.S. imperialism in every country and to continue exploiting it, the U.N. will continue to do so, it says .
 Cyprus Federation of Trade and Industry expressed concern in cable sent to President . Cyprus Federation expressed great concern in the deterioration in diplomatic relations .
 Cyprus's economic interests demanded the strengthening of ties between the Republic and Arab countries . This stated that the economic interests of Cyprus demand the strengthening . Cyprus is in the region to strengthen ties with Arab countries, the government said .
 A committee of businessmen trading with Israel expressed support for the 'bridge of friendship' policy . They requested a meeting with the President to put forward their viewpoint . In reply to this a message was sent to the President by a committee Of businessmen .
 Arab-Israeli dispute continues to be one of the main newspaper topics . No solution seems likely to satisfy all parties permanently . Trade pact signed with UAR at the end of September .
 President Makarios opened the Seventh Cyprus International Trade Fair . He stressed the importance of the island as a trade link between East and West . Cyprus is one of the most important trade links in the world .
 In doing so he was merely following the path mapped out for him by numerous government leaders in as many countries, he was engaging in the monotonous and dangerous pastime of market-grabbing . He said: "In doing so, I'm just doing what I'm doing,
 Economic Review for 1959 lays stress on continued unfavourable trend in terms of trade . Economic Review published in 1959 laid stress on the unfavourably trend in the terms of international trade .
 In spite of continued expressions of optimism in the future of the new sta’e, from the point of view of economic and political stability, and trade and foreign relations everything points to more storms ahead .
 Cyprus has mainly an agricultural and mining economy, the latter accounting for more than half the value of exports . Cyprus is mainly dependent on agriculture and mining, the majority of its exports are from mining .
 Agriculture can absorb no more of the labour force; already i accounts for over half of the workforce . Agriculture has already absorbed over half its labour force . Agriculture already accounts for more than half of Australia's workforce .
 Although the most important single activity, it is un economic and. heavily subsidised, it's not the only economic activity in the world .
 A large number of farmers, unable to pay off loans, are threatened with the enforced sale of their land . Many farmers have been forced to sell off their land after paying off loans .
 The question of capital investment to finance such projects has bzen the subject of much dispute . The question is whether capital investment can be used to finance projects .
 AKEL of couse advucate taking up taking up the offer, whilst others advise caution and consideration of sAher offers . AKEL advises caution, caution, consideration and consideration .
 The question of future intercommunal disturbances has recently been given prominence by the statement of a Turkish political leader, Mr Denktash, that attempts by Greek Cypriots to undermine the Zurich and London Agreements would lead to chaos and civil war .
 Scarcely a day passes without the Greck and Turkish dailies on the island throwing mud at each other . Greck is the latest of a series of Turkish media spat between Turkish and Greck .
 The prospects of even elementary political organisation involving both communities seem remote at the moment .
 The brightest hope, from the working class point of view, is . the . ndmirable demonstration of unity during the recent strikes and demonstrations, which the workers have threatened to repeat . The bright hope is the unity of the workers during the strikes .
 The Trades Unions have recently opposed the principle, imposed by the Constitution, of 2 70 per cent.-30 per cent. division of Civil Service jobs between Greeks and Turks as being discriminatory and introducing political factors .
 Enosfs are apprehensive that self-determination would sesult in Enosf . Their “present attitude appears to be in favour of independence,’s ‘present attitude’ is in favour .
 The present set-up suits them very well, giving them plenty of room of room for manguvre . Cyprus is now in the communist camp .
 Both groups have already formed vouth Ongamisations . True to the prinéiple of ‘catching them young’, both groups already have formed .
 Under colonial rule, there is often idemidication of the ruling class with tthe colonial power .
 The belief used to be current in the ‘left wing that after the achievement of national independence the resulting disillusionment would provide the experience necessary for the working class to see the class issme more clearly .
 Of course, this is mot believed by Russia who is just as aggious as any other country to woo the mewly independent states, to capture theur trade and to use them as counters imiernational diplomacy .
 In any case it is a fallacious argument and certainly mot bonne out by the facts. In any . case it's @ fallacious . argument . The facts are out of the facts .
 Atfems thet he fire organised a private amoy, during the Genmen occupation im 1943 . We are remuded that it was a fire organised by the Atfemers .
 After Greece tad been forced into te camp of Western ment, the Greek Civil War and its oxtcome lad resulted im 2 typical about face . After Greece was forced into a Western camp, it was a typical about-face .
 The struggle in Cyprus resulted in many fhundreds:of working class dead and wounded . As always the communist sittitude Was iMconsistent and wacilllating, but ution with a member of the Wester, as oppored to dhe Fasten Cupital
 The voice of its Capitalist Class, as yet young and weak, but strugglin to be heard, finds a ready mouthpiece in its government . The government has shown itself to tbe just as chauvinistic and trade conscious as any of the other governments set up as a result
 It has taken its place with the other capitalist states in a ‘world of actual and potential aggression, and will add its voice to the general discord which is called ‘trade and peace”, no doubt falling into line behind one or other of the major powers .
 This is mot a step forward for the working glass of Cyprus or anywhere else, and far from ther2 being any sign of them becoming sovialist . independence has thrown the nationalistic aspirations of Graek and Turk into relief .
 The natrodustion 10 is the Cyprus working class of sostalist knowledge with its clear-cut class issues, uncompl cated by nationalistic anguments, is badly needed to dispel these bars to its emancipation . Cyprus needs to overcome its nationalistic problems, such as national
 Academic economists do more good than harm, says Lord Brand . Lord Brand says academic economists are extremely valuable .
 Lord Brand would hesitate to claim that economic life has altered particularly (“1 do not think we have an easy time ahead of us in the next year or so” he went on to blame the politicians for not accepting the good Marx on Piece Work . Let us now consider a
 The quality of the labour is here controlled by the work itself, which must be of average perfection if the piece-price is to be paid in full .
 Picce-wages become, from this point of view, the most fruitful source of reductions of wages and capitalistic cheating . Picce wages are the most productive source of reducing wages, according to the economist .
 They furnish to the capitalist an exact measure for the intensity of labour . They furnish . to the . capitalist an . exact measure .
 Only the working-time which is embodied in a quantum of commodities determined beforehand and experimentally fixed. counts as socially necessary working time, and is paid as such. Only the . working time which is . embodied in the . quantum of . commodities determined before and after, it counts as
 Given picce-wage, it is naturally the personal interest of the labourers to strain his labour power as intensely as possible . This enables the capitalists tu raise more easily the normal degree of intensity of labour .
 He recalled the reparations chaos after the first world war, when the politicians insisted on exacting impossible reparations from Germany . The politicians (backed however by 3 out of their 7 banking economic advisers) insisted .
 He singles out Lloyd George—* Like most statesmen of the day, he knew little or nothing of finance”—yet Lloyd George had been Chancellor of the Exchequer . Yet Lloyd George was Chancellor of Britain’s richest and most powerful .
 Lloyd George boasted of squeezing Germany ‘till the pip squeaked ‘ and dared not back down for fear of losing political support among voters as blind as he was . Lord Brand says Lloyd George insisted on the mad policy because he had boasted .
 The statesmen appear not to have changed much since the Second World War . But in the second world war the statesmen appeared not to be changing much .
 Lord Brand tells how Churchill and Roosevelt adopted a plan to reduce Germany to a purely agricultural country . Lord Cherwell (a “highly intelligent” man) agreed to the plan .
 Lord Cherwell’s defence of his action was that the Brilish Government wanted.a loan from America and acceptance of this fantastic plan would make it easier to get the loan. Acceptance of this plan would have made it easier for the loan .
 LoRD BRAND'S COMPLACENCY about the altered picture of economic life reads oddly in the face of the motor car slump and the looming difficulties facing international trade and currencies . Capitalism 1961 .
 The years between the wars were spent creating currency collapse in one country after another and then laboriously re-establishing stable currencies . The years before the wars, the currency collapse was spent creating currencies collapse in countries .
 After World War II it was all supposed to be different but now Professor Meade is warning of the drastic remedies . He proposes that the dollar and the pound should ‘be cut adrift from their existing link~with gold’
 The Guardian in an editorial remarks “ Undoubtedly a period of chaos would follow” The Guardian said ‘undoubtedly’ a period would follow. Undoubtedly, chaos would be followed. The Guardian .
 Professor Meade feels sure stability would return at a new level of exchange rates within six months . He says stability would be restored at new levels of exchange rate within six .
 This seems ironical to the Guardian but only because they persist against all conscience in believing that Russia is not a great capitalist power, but something else . The Guardian's view of Russia is ironical because they think it's not a capitalist power .
 China is threatened with what may be a catastrophic fall of food supplies . Flood Havoc in China through floods and storms . Food supplies may be running out of supply .
 In a Socialist world such an event would be met by movement of supplies from elsewhere . In the Socialist world it would have been met by moving supplies from other countries .
 America, ‘Canada and other countries have masses of food they cannot sell profitably.’ Canada and ‘Other countries’ have ‘masses of food’ that can’t be sold profitably,’ says Mr. America . America’
 The American government wanted to give wheat away or sell it cheaply . The other exporting countries feared this would reduce world prices and cut into their own sales .
 Canadian sales of their surplus to China are likely to meet with objections from the U.S. government .
 This is a tribute to the genius and originality of Sir William Petty, the founder of modern political economy . Petty was born in London and died in 1946 at the age of 92 .
 It is in his Treatise of Taxes and Contribution, London 1662, that we find the . idea of surplus value .
 The determination of surplus Value depends on the determination of Value itself . This is his main point, as he says, as it does with surplus Value .
 Petty determines the value of commodities by the relative amounts of labour which they contain . He is concerned not with appearances, but with foundations, he says . Petty determines value of a commodity by the amount of labour it contains .
 China’s misfortunes, and for the past week they have been rushing to do just that . China's economic woes have been a major problem for the country's economy .
 Chicago soybean (spelt this way in America) market is the biggest commodity futures market in the world .
 The present bout of speculation in soyabeans and their products began three menths ago . Reports of crop disaster began to seep through from Chima, only big soya-bean producer apart from America itself .
 People in the trade saw then that if the usual Chinese exports did not reach Europe, Europe would not have been able to reach China . People in trade saw that if . usual . Chinese exports didn't reach Europe it would have been a problem, they said .
 The law should allow the labourer but just the wherewithall to live; for if you allow double then he works but half so much as he could have done, and otherwise would; which is a loss to the publick of the fruit of so much labour .
 In modern words, in receiving for six hours’ labour the value of six hours, the labourer would receive double what he receives if he worked for twelve hours and got only six hours . The labourer receives double the value he received if he had worked for 12 hours .
 The value of labour is determined by the minimum necessary for subsistence . Thus the value of labourers' work is determined . The labour value of a person's labour can be determined by their wages .
 To induce the labourer to produce surplus value and to perform surplus labour, it is necessary to compel him to expend all the labour power of which he is capable, as the condition upon which he may earn the necessities of life . The labourer's labour power is capable of producing surplus
 He divides the second from the first which, for him, as later for the Physiocrats, is the true form of surplus value .
 A ‘norm’ on output has been agreed with the Union and payment above the flat rate depends on exceeding the norm . I say that when this man has subtracted his food, I say . London School of Economics .
 For the off-peak period output is filled in largely by grecting telegrams received in advance .
 In the sorting office working on a 48-box fitting the norm is 2,400 an hour or 40 a minute . On a 72-box fit it is 1,800 an hour  or 30. a minute on a 72 box fitting . The sorting office in the UK works on
 Many sorters could reach 3,500 un hour and in larger fitting it wus not unusual to sort 2,500 an hour . Whether or not a sorter reaches the norm and by how much she exceeds it is determined by weight .
 Letters and postcards are stacked in small containers and then weighed . Letters were then weighed and then placed in containers to be weighed .
 A record is made and a duplicate slip placed with correspondence in the container . A duplicate slip is placed with the correspondence in a container . The record is then placed on the container and placed in place .
 Whoever sorts that particular container of work retains the slip . At the end of the duty has a number of these slips which, added together, show the total volume of correspondence sorted .
 The interest of other members of the staff flows from the fact that, again in common with industry, the P.T. services can win awards for outstanding work .
 These awards take the form of ‘banners ‘ and are accompanied by cash_payments of as much as 400,000 roubles .
 Seventy per cent of this cash payment is disbursed to staff as a bonus . The rest goes to the Union to spend on common welfare provisions and facilities .
 Petty says the value of the corn is determined by the labour time which it contains, while rent is equivalent to the total product after the deduction of wages and seed, equals the surplus labour represented by surplus product .
 Petty also shows that the individual character of the labour is of no consequence . Petty also showed that individual character is not a matter of consequence in the labour .
 As a final tribute to Petty, we quote the following extract from Volume III, of Capital . We quote the quote from Capital.
 Good Reading Questions of Today I/Racial Problem 1|Russia Since 1917 I/Is Labour Government ie the Way to Socialism 4d, Nationalisation or Socialism 64. 4d . I/Russia since 1917. Russia since 1917 . Russia Since 1917. Labour government ie the way to
 The Communist Manifesto and the last Hundred Years . The last hundred years of the Communist Party .
 Writers who are closer to feudal times assume that ground rent is the normal form of surplus value, whereas profit is still vaguely combined with wages .
 These writers take their departure from a condition in which the agricultural population still constitutes the overwhelming majority of the nation . The landlord still appears as the individual who appfopriates at first ° «» hand the surplus labour of the direct producers through his land monopoly .
 These writers could not yet face the question, which contrary to them, seeks to investigate from the point of view uf capitalist production . Private ownership in land manages to wrest from capital a portion of the surplus value .
 John Locke is probably better known for his philosophy than he is for his contribution to political economy . Locke was probably best known for philosophy than for his contributions to political economics . Locke's work was published in 17th century .
 He follows William Petty in that he regarded human labour as the principal source of wealth, though he regarded both labour and land as the important factors .
 He believed that the laws of nature established personal labour as the natural limit of private property . Personal labour is the limit arising from the physical limitation on the amount of labour an individual can perform .
 Ground rent is a transfer from one person to another of the profit that should have been the reward of one man’s labour . Ground rent was no different from usury and due to the unequal distribution of the means of production, it was a transfer of profit to another .
 Money, therefore, in buying and selling, being perfectly in the same condition with other commodities, and subject to all the same laws of value, let us next see how it comes to be of the same nature with land, by yielding a certain yearly income, which we call use or
 Locke’s importance is that he is the voice of the juridical theories of capitalist society as opposed to feudalism . For land produces naturally something new and profitable, and of value to mankind; but money is a barren ' thing and producés nothing'
 His work in philosophy was the basis upon which the thinking of subsequent English economists rested . His work was based on his work on philosophy and philosophy .
 Sir Dudley North is best known for his Discourses upon Trade . He is the author of the Discourses on Trade . North was born in 1913 .
 This is mainly concerned with commercial capital, and as such is outside the scope of these notes . This is not all about commercial capital .
 The importance of North is that he reflects in his writing the period in which he lived, North says . The importance is that North reflects the period he lived in, he says .
 From 1663 to 1798, wheat prices were falling, except for the years 1708 and 1709 . Wheat prices fell in 1663-1798, except from 1708-1709 .
 Industrial capitalists and landowners were concerned about, and did in fact bring about, a reduction in the rate of interest . Industrial capitalists .
 Up to 1760 it was considered to be in the national interest to maintain and increase the value of land . It was considered a national interest in maintaining and increasing land value .
 The landowners gradually lost out to the money lenders and financiers of the period . The landowners eventually lost out on the land .
 The financiers, with the establishment of the credit system, and the system of the State debt, became predominant in society . The system of State debt became dominant in society, says the author .
 Petty, in his works, refers to the complaints of the landlords regarding the fall of rents . Petty's works refer to the landlord's complaints about the fall in rent prices .
 He defended the monied interests against the landlords, and placed the rent of money and rent of land in the same category . He said: "Rent of money, land and money are the same categories"
 Moneylending at interest was one of the main means for the accumulation of eapital . It was in this form that capital gave landed property its first set-back, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Gold and silver serve not as gold and silver in themselves in themselves, but only as forms of exchange value . Observation is remarkable, for his day, remarkable. On price and money his .
 The physiocrats had to try and understand the conditions in which the landlord was being forced out, to the advantage of finance capital which was growing .
 U.N. officials report that 300,000 people are slowly starving to death in the Congo . Two hundred people are dying every day .
 This is still further proof, if it were necessary, that it is not enough to be merely against capitalism, or colonial, ism, or the rule of a particular imperial power . One must have constructive proposals as to what is to replace the system to be destroyed .
 We pointed out that this would only entail the Congolese people exchanging one set of masters for another . We pointed to the fact that it would only mean that the people of the Congo would not be able to be masters of another .
 It would be hard to argue, in face of the mass-starvation, that the Congolese people are better off today than they were a year ago . It's not easy to argue that, despite the mass starvation, the people are still alive today .
 In fact the new Congolese masters cannot even agree among themselves . In fact, they are not even agreeing among themselves. In fact they can't agree among them .
 In the new Congolese ruling class, each of which calls in help from foreign states, Russia, America, Ghana, and Belgium among them .
 The system of food-growing and ‘fooddistribution has in some parts (notably Kasai) almost entirely broken down . Kasai is one of the poorest countries in the world and has suffered from malnutrition .
 Before you go, have a look at MacLean’s magazine for November 19:h, 1960 .
 A favourite place for their holidays is Frenchman’s Creek in Jamaica, where millionaires and their wives can have peace and privacy for two thousand dollars a week . A Calgary oil millionaire flew a party of his friends to England to watch his horse run in the Derby .
 A Toronto manufacturer had two swimming pools put in his backyard, complete with lighted fountain, hi-fi music and a Japanese teahouse, for 30,000 dollars . The pools cost $30,000, including $1,000 for the design .
 A Montreal construction business tycoon often flies to Florida or the ‘Caribbean islands in one of the family’s two private planes . Once he couldn't get a favourite Chinese dish in Miami, he rang up his usual resturant in Montreal and got them to make
 This carries the stories of some of the families of Canada’s 327,000 unemployed workers . This is the story of families of those who are jobless .
 It tells of the bitterness of men trying to make ends meet on unemployment pay . The film tells of men struggling to find work on unemployment .
 The stories are much the same—mounting bills which cannot be paid, threatening letters from hire-purchase companies as the payments fall behind . The despair of men combing fhe town every day for jobs and being everywhere refused .
 In a system run by the capitalists you would expect the capitalists to be well off . In this case, the capitalists are expected to be very well off, says Simon Tisdall . He says the system is run by capitalists, but it is not a democracy .
 Capitalism in Canada works out much the same as capitalfsm in Britain . In other words, capital in the U.S. works out the same way as in Britain. Capital in Canada is much more like a British capital .
 Emigration will give you a change of scenery, but it can't change your class-position in society . Emigration is not a solution to the problem of classlessness in society, says the author .
 Oxford Tory, the Conservative undergraduate journal, published by Oxford University, is the current number one of the party's undergraduate journals . In 1961 1961 the Socialist Standard was published by the Conservative Party .
 Conservative M.P. for Ayr Burghs is again agitating for the introduction of flogging for crimes involving violence .
 Sir Thomas said that “peace »nd justice’ were the “keywords” of Hitler's policy, and also that ‘Herr Hitler is absolutely honest aud sincere,’ at the time when Hitler had already set up a dictatorship and begun his campaign to
 Earl Attlee made a name for himself as a calm, quiet, pipe smoking, doodling, ruthless chief . Now that he is in retirement, his views are much sought after by the newspapers, radio and so on .
 If there was one thing for which the last war Was suppose to have been fought, it was to ensure a peaceful world . The last war was supposed to be fought to ensure the world was peaceful .
 Earl Attlee, as Deputy Prime Minister in the wartime coalition, played his part in promoting that idea in the minds of war-weary workers . Yet here we are, fifteen years after, still apparently looking for peace .
 Many politicians have a seemingly infinite capacity for explaining away, and promising to remedy, the malfeasances of capitalism . Politicians have an infinite capacity to explain away and remedy, and promise to fix capitalism's malfeasance .
 Whatever the strife and poverty which may be evident at any time, there is never a shortage of smooth politicos . Each with his solution to the world’s problems and the hope of better times ‘to come’
 The State Department displayed its famous trigger-neurosis over Laos, over which the U.S. State Department displays its famous "trigger" syndrome . The Laos crisis is not the first time the State Department has been involved in the country's troubles .
 A popularly touted solution to this flare-up was the recall of the 1954 Geneva Conference . The Geneva Conference was a popular solution to the problem .
 This, we were invited to believe, would do something to settle the Laos disturbance . This would be something to do with the Laos crisis . This, however, would not settle the issue .
 Now we have evidence that the disputes in Indo-China are as rife as ever . The disputes are still rife in the region, says CNN's John Defterios .
 The new trouble spot, Laos, was established as an independent state by the Geneva Conference as part of its supposed peace making efforts .
 This is all that capitalism's representatives have to offer . Nevertheless, this is all capitalism's representative has to offer. Nevertheless, it's not the best of capitalism .
 CNN.com's John Defterios has been at the centre of a debate about the world's problems . He says the government can only ever manage to suppress one aspect of a particular problem, which is simultaneously in evidence, or about to emerge, somewhere else .
 For years, Greek Cypriot nationalists fought the British forces on the island . They took occasional time off to kill Turkish Cypriots or their own traitors .
 The Zurich Pact seemed to have put an end to the fighting in Cyprus . Then came the Zurich Pact which, when the various disagreements had been hammered out, seemed to put a end to fighting .
 Apart from the odd settling of a score which was made during the emergency, all is peaceful on the island . Now, apart from the . odd settlement of a . score which were made during . the emergency .
 We have already mentioned Laos, the war in Algeria goes on, and the Belgium Congo is still in bloody confusion . The Belgium Congo has been in a state of chaos for years .
 If an international conference were to settle these conflicts, similar problems would spring out somewhere else . And we know that, if . an international . conference were settled, such a conference would be a disaster, he says .
 This may make the conference look sick as a pacifying instrument, but we can depend on it that it will not prevent the politicians from offering it as a remedy when the world’s next sore spot breaks out .
 At home, the working class are familiar with—and, sadly, receptive to—the excuses and nostrums which flood from the organs of capitalist Opinion as fast as the events which provoke them . The working class is familiar with .—and sadly, . receptive to . the excuses and
 Opposite solutions are proposed for the same problem . Sometimes, directly Opposite Solutions are proposed . Opposite solution is proposed for same problem. Sometimes, direct solutions are also proposed .
 The government has stated that, to stabilise the British economy, they must impose some strict controls over hire purchase facilities . The government wants to impose strict controls .
 In contrast, there are many spokesmen fox the industries which thrive on H.P. who take the vicw that the way to stabilise the economy is to remove, or to relax, those restrictions .
 Neither side has any interest in pointing out that the H.P. boom, and the recession which followed, is an example of the ’ fundamental anarchy of capitalist society’ Neither side wants to point out that . the . ‘fundamental anarchy of capitalism’ of capitalist
 At least one firm in the domestic appliance industry felt the cuts extra keenly because, when the restrictions were off, they invested in a lot of extra productive capacity to enable them to exploit the market which had opened before them .
 When the squeeze came, this production—and a lot of workers-became redundant . This production was made redundant by the squeeze .
 In their ‘eagerness to exploit the boom’ the financiers trusted their weight to as creaky limbs as their forebears did in the twenties .
 Whatever other changes there have been, the basis of capitalism—production for sale --remains . The basis for capitalism, production for sale, remains, the author says .
 There are anomalies and upheavals, try as the politicians may to explain them away . And with it remain the anomalies . Try as politicians may try to explain it away .
 Wars, uneasy peace, booms, slumps and poverty are part of capitalism because they spring from the roots of that society . Wars, unease peace, and slumps, are all part of the reason for capitalism, the author says .
 These are the people who produce our wealth, suffer capitalism's wars and insecurity . These are those who produce the wealth and suffer from capitalism's war, insecurity .
 London’s Tube stations were recently imposed by the House of Lords . Only a little comment was made from one or two newspapers and a few from the Lords .
 The subject of this censorship was a poster issued by the Family Planning Association . It was withdrawn when the Transport Commission received some objections to it .
 We Spent a fortune on Tube fares, our eyes grew sore on advertisements for corsets, for films starring curvy B.B. or toughslugging Westerners . We spent a fortune .
 We saw posters which exhoyted the rush hour workers to partake of gracious living by drinking a certain Brown Ale . The posters included candelabra in the background .
 Nothing in the pot-pourri of sex, violence and alcohol had raised a murmur of protest . Apparently, nothing in this pot of sex and violence had raised any kind of protest.
 "We examined it closely, searched diligently for something in it which a reasonable person might object to," the author says of the book . We examined the book closely, searching for something that might be objected to .
 It is difficult, then, to imagine the majority of Tube passengers objecting to this advertisement .
 We can only assume that it was removed because of a minority of religious purgers, who pressed their point in a barrage of protest .
 A more subtle method of suppression, this, than of yore, when Catholics would reduce to human charcoal any burglar or peasant who had difficulty in grasping the Papal chemical formula .
 Calvinists burned a scholar who rejected a theory which held that there was a being called God, who was three people—and at the same time only one . Or when Calvinists would burn a . scholar who . rejected a complex theory which . held that . there was . a being
 The spread of materialist knowledge has made it harder to whip up hatred over theological disputes, but still reprehensible . Materialist knowledge makes it less likely to whip-up hatred .
 Human progress depends upon the decisions of conscious people, not upon gags applied to society by a sanctimonlous minority . For human progress, human progress depends on people's decisions, not on gags .
 The Catholic Church is as helpless as any other Organisation in these matters . The Catholic church is helpless as well as any organisation in the world, it says .
 Much of the religious opposition to birth control is roused by the fact that it is an attempt to shape our own environment, instead of leaving it to the will of a mythical supernatural being .
 Birth control is at present only a method of spreading out workers’ relative poverty, an attempt to prevent ourselves slipping too far into degradation and dire need . In fact, birth control is only a way to spread out worker’s relative poverty .
 Whether we practice if or not. whether 'we have two children or 16 we remain workers. Whether we have two . children or sixteen we remain . workers. depending on our wage to I've. Depending on my wage to . I've had two children .
 In underdeveloped countries, birth control . is often given official backing, but the o'der established capitalist nations leave it :1s a matter of personal choice .
 We should remember that man’s future lies within his own society . Birth control could be a factor in fashioning the sort of world that man desires, says author .
 This depends upon man’s social knowledge and his rejection of, for example, religious theories with their threats of hellfire and purgatory . But this in turn depends upon the social knowledge of man's social knowledge .
 When he has reached that stage, he will be facing the many aspects of living a civilised life in a developed society . There will be no bigots to decide what he may or may not do, he says .
 East Street, Walworth February 5th and 19th February 12th and 26th . Thursdays Tower Hill, 12,30-.2m. at Tower Hill .
 Society as today constituted is composed of two classes, the capitalist class and the working class . The capitalist class is the most powerful class in the world . The working class is not the only class in society, it is the capitalist .
 This is due to workers, in numbers, overwhelmingly preponderate . It is the capitalists who are the circumstance that the capitalist class owns (in the form of the land, factories, machines etc. etc.), the means of producing the . means of life . The capitalist class is the
 The workers, on the other hand, have no such means and implements of production, and to secure food, clothing and shelter and provision for their famil’es. They must offer for sale to the owning class their mental and physical energies. The workers .
 The price paid for these energies are at a level that will roughly purchase the necessities of life . The cost of these energies is at a low enough level to support basic necessities .
 Work is bought for working spells more than sufficient to produce the value of the wages paid for them . But those very energies are bought for more than enough to produce a higher value .
 In a five-day working week this value may be produced by the end of the third day; the value produced on the fourth and fifth day therefore, is a value . For a socialist analysis of war read SOCIALIST PARTY AND WAR .
 This excess is thus congealed in the products the workers have produced for their masters . The surplus value congeals in the workers' products, as it were, in their work .
 Surplus value, with the sale of the commodities incorporating it, is realised as profit; which, by continually flowing to the capitalist class, enables them to further capitalise their businesses and live without the necessity of working . The capitalist class is constantly capitalising their businesses .
 The capitalist class enjoys benefits denied to that much larger section, the working class . Thus one sees the capitalist class as a relatively tiny section of the community, but a section which enjoys benefits .
 The State apparatus, the machinery of government, has carried out its appointed function of preserving the social set-up, and conserving the masters’ monopoly of the wealth produced by the working class . Added to the economic advantage of ownership of the productive means goes the political advantage of a
 As a force intended to be the last resort “‘ persuaders ” of large numbers of people, the Army is provided with weapons and taught how to use them . The Army is trained to be a force that can be used as a last resort to persuaders .
 The Army is an efficient repressive force through its trained ability to maim or kill . The result is that, in cases of threatened subversion etc., the Army is a repressive force .
 Years elapse without such measures being applied, this remains one of the purposes behind the Army’s existence . Whether or not years elapse, this is still a part of the Army's purpose .
 There, then, lies the capitalist need for armies in the country of their being, says the author .
 Each national capitalist grouping also needs an armed force to defend or further its interests outside its homeland . But each national capitalist group also needs a force to protect its interests abroad .
 Behind each of these national groupings, whatever the nation encompassing it, lics the pressure of competition . Behind each national grouping, whatever nation encompassed it, the pressure is on .
 Each nation contends with all others in quest for markets by which to sell its commodities . American capitalism contends with Russian, British with German, French with Japanese with Japanese .
 There is a struggle for markets, but for each competitive needs as cheaper fields of exploitation, economical trading routes, and all the other advantages that will enable their possessors to offer their commodities at competitive prices . Hence between the national capitalist factions, there exists a struggle .
 Often the acquirement of these advantages can be effected only by filching them from rivals . The acquirement can be done only by taking advantage of rivals .
 From the diplomatic moves, the changing strategies, there come the international crises, the tensions, the cold wars . Too often to end in a hot war, the Cold War often ends up in hot war .
 It is then that the Army of cach country concerned is ordered, with the other armed services, to carry out its function as the protector of the foreign interests of its native capitalist class .
 Not that the protection of capitalist interests will be the reason given for hurling masses of young men, mostly members of the working class, into bloody conflict against other workers, similarly mainly workers .
 The various propaganda machines will manufacture high-sounding excuses for the government, including the Obama administration, to blame .
 The task for each army is to wreak havoc, destruction and death upon the armies of the “enemy ” countries . Augmented now by hosts of wartime conscripts, the task is to destroy and kill the enemy .
 Man kills man so that his masters’ trading interests are furthered or at least protected from damage . One can scarcely expect a socially progressive and enlightened development among men trained to carry out the antisocial act of war .
 Certain it is that many of those whose military job is to make “good soldiers” are of necessity tyrannous . Not far different to “The Army Game's” Sergeant-Major Bullimore .
 Major need no fear that “The Army Game ” will in any way harm the Army. However, the Major need have no fear . The Army Game will be a free game for the Army .
 At the last two General Elections we heard much about the wonderful affluent conditions in which we were living . The last two elections were held in the same manner . We are now back to normal .
 Hamlet said “ promise-crammed ” but as he himself tartly added ‘* you cannot feed capons so’, These promises have now come home to roost .
 All the old and wellworn phrases and threats have now been dusted and polished and taken out of storage . All the other old and . well worn phrases and . threats are now dusted off and polished, taken from storage .
 It would be interesting to hear the comments of the recently sacked motor workers on that last bit . The comments would be made by those recently sacked workers .
 If this purpose of profit-making is threatened, production eases off, and workers are put on short-time or sacked . If this is threatened it will be increased production will ease off, or be reduced, workers are sacked .
 The revolutionary requires no other justification than that of expediency . The revolutionary needs no justification for his actions, he says .
 They have paid much lip service to Justice and other figments of the popular mind, but that has been only because they have required the assistance of thosc who were to gain nothing from revolution . and who had therefore to be inspired with empty phrases and confused with humbug.
 The Socialist asks no more. But the highest sanction revolutionaries ever have required has been—opportunity, The Socialist .
 Against the might. of the strong few shall be put the might of the many weak ones. The strong few will not be put in the hands of the weak ones .
 Before that might capitalism and private ownership will go down for ever . But before that might might capitalism go down, it will be private ownership .
 No part of the Socialist Standard seems more difficult to the avcrage worker than the proposal to abolish money, price and trade . The Socialist Standard, February, 1911, SOCIALISM -’ HARD TO GRASP - was published by the Socialist Party .
 So deep has the idea of commerce been driven into the working class that they have come to believe themselves formed for the sole purpose of working and increasing trade . The working class believe themselves themselves formed to increase trade .
 In capitalist production the toiler Is, indeed, just a piece of mechanism, necessary to the progress of trade, and he has been taught that such is all he is fitted to be .
 His brain, stored with capitalist ideas, cannot get away from the notions connected with capitalist methods of production and exchange . The information that under a Socialist system no wages would be paid comes to him as a shock, he says .
 From the Socialist Standard, February, 1911. iicaccoceeciieccscaera ee eee . Get Newsagents to sell the . Socialist Standard . Get Subscriptions for the Socialist . Standard Get Libraries to display the .
 Bob Rose, February 12th “THE ATLANTIC DECADE” February 19th ‘ GERMANY—KEY TO EUROPE’ Speaker : V Phillips, February 26th ”BLACK AND WHITE IN S AFRICA"" Speaker : C May.
 Bethnal Green Town Hall, Heath Road, E. E. London, hosts the HACKNEY Lecture . J ean and D McCarthy will give the talk at the end of the session .
 W.C. Conference, 1961, is being held at Conway Hall, Red Lion Square, London, on March 3lst, and Saturday and Sunday, April 1st and 2nd .
 Sending delegates are asked to contact Head Office immediately if their delegates need accommodation during Conference . Provincial branches sending delegates to the Conference are asked for accommodation .
 London members are happy to assist wherever possible, but arrangements can best be made if good notice is given beforehand .
 Indoor meetings are being held by many branches in different parts of the country . The notices in this issue are worth special study .
 No other organisation can offer lectures of the range and calibre of the S.P.G.B. lectures . The lectures give an opportunity to keep abreast of current developments .
 We would like to emphasise the choice of meetings in London, particularly on Sunday nights during February .
 At Head Office, 52, Clapham High Street, the films are subjected to Socialist analysis and debate . Head Office is at the head office of the Head Office of the Socialist Party .
 On February 19th a highly topical meeting is being run at Denison House, Victoria on the Crisis in the motor car industry . Wednesday “ April 7 pm . See March Socialist Standard for more details .
 MAHATMA GHANDI HALL 41 Fitzroy Square, Tottenham Court Road . Public meeting will take place at the end of the month .
 Ist and 3rd Thursdays in month 8 pm, ‘Kings Head,’’ 4 Fulham High Street, Putney Bridge, SW6. ‘ Kings Head’s’
 The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, is open at 7.30pm on March 6th & 20th March .
 NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (Ist ‘ 7.30 pm, treoples Hall, Heathcoat Street) NOTTINGham alternate Wednesnesdays at 6.30pm .
 2nd and 4th Mondays (13th & 27th March) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road, Southend .
 SWANSEA 2nd and 4th Fridays (10th & 24th March) in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St. Louis, 8 pm. 2nd & 4th Friday 8pm .
 Mondays 8pm at Barham Old Court, Barham Park, near Sudbury Town Station, Wembley . The show will be held at 8pm each Monday .
 2nd and 4th Thursdays (9th & 23rd March) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12. West Ham, West Ham .
 2nd and 4th Fridays (10th and 24th March) in monih 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SEI8.30pm .
 ‘White Hart’ is ‘Mitcham Cricket Green’ Thursday 16th March 8pm . Mitcham cricket Green is Mitcham's favourite cricket match .
 The committee meets at the spcp Head Office at Clapham High Street, London, S.W.4, at 7.30m.
 Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament was launched three years ago . Its declared aim was to get the British Government to abandon all use of, direct or indirect reliance on, nuclear weapons .
 World-wide agreement to ban them and promote a reduction of armaments . This was to be a Step to world-wide . agreement to Ban them .
 Mr Wayland Young says CND may be faced with a new situation which will rob them of their best propaganda point . He thinks that the Campaign may by now have passed .
 Possibility that it may be will weaken CND and help Gaitskell and the Government . This ‘general all-round agreement’ has not yet been reached by the H-Bomb governments .
 President and his acceptance by Mr Crossman as a supposed “ progressive” influence more likely to reach agreement with the Russian Government . Mr Gaitskell’s acceptance of the President as a ‘progressive’ influence is likely to help Russia reach agreement .
 By doing this CND will take its place with the long line of humanitarian campaigns to lessen the horror of war by opposing each new and more horrible weapon as it came along .
 A new decade has seen the accepted weapons grow more destructive . None of them have succeeded and they have failed to do so .
 All of the hundred or so countries in the United Nations have undertaken to settle their disputes by peaceful means and refrail from the threat or use of force but no. government treats this as more than a . pious Aspiration, and so it would be with a new declaration .
 In peacetime the Powers might agree to suspend further tests and manufacture, or even . promise to destroy their bombs, but if large-scale war broke out it would all begin again .
 If it switches its emphasis to general disarmament the campaign will come up against the varying and contradictory aims of the diverse elements that came together to ban the bomb .
 They can no doubt all agree on an ambiguous phrase like “ stop-’ ping the armament race” since this has the attraction from the point of view of the general body of the propertied class in all countries that it holds out hopes of cutting the cost of
 Dissension will once appear if one group in CND presses for unilateral general disarmament, by Great Britain on its own .
 None of those CND supporters who think in terms of war with “ conventional weapons ” in an H-Bomb world have explained how they would meet a demand for immediate surrender under threat of a H-bomb attack .
 Lord Russell declared that it was better to be “slaves” of an enemy power than to be dead . Lord Russell, however, accepted the logic of the position and tersely declared that .
 The Neutralists and Pacifists are the Neutralists in CND . Other elements of CND are the Pacifist and Neutralists .
 The colonies held down by foreign armies, the scores of ‘neutral’ countries overrun in great wars are sufficient answer to this . The colonies are held down .
 Tibet, like Japan and China in an earlier phase, first wanted to be left alone and asked foreigners to keep out, but capitalist greed and arms dictated otherwise . Tibet is now the most isolated region in the world .
 Abyssinia overrun by Italy, Hungary kept down by Russian troops, is other example . Abyssinia was invaded by Italy and Hungary by Russia . Hungary was also occupied by Russia in the early 1930s .
 When we come to those who are loosely called “ pacifists ” we are dealing with several quite different points of view . We are talking with several different views of pacifists .
 The term is often applied indiscriminately to those who can . want to keep out of confused statements made on_ their behalf by their Chairman, Canon Collins, as for example in correspondence in The Times last November . Canon Collins is often used in correspondence with the Times .
 CND logically ought to be telling them sO. and Pacifism a particular war as did Ramsay MacDonald in 1914 . But if it is immoral, risky and futile, those arc reasons for each and cvery government to give them up unilaterally .
 The British Government and its propagandists, in the build-up for World War II, were not so foolish as to use that discredited slogan again . But the British Government did not use that slogan again.
 Second World War was proclaimed to be for “defence of democracy and human liberty ” against Hitlerism . Instead the second war was proclaimed as “the defence of democracy’s human liberty’ Instead the war was declared to be ‘defence’ against
 Most of the no-more war army was converted, to ‘just one more’, including some, like Lord Russell and Mr Morrison who had opposed World War I . The fate of those who, using the term more strictly, can properly be called pacifists is different but
 Their best-known spokesman . was Gandhi, who many still believe to have triumphed in India . They preach peace’ where there is no peace, they advocate nonviolence .
 I have no place in the new order where they want an army, a navy and an air force, and what not. I'm not interested in an army or navy, I'm sure it's not a navy or air force . I'm very happy with the idea of an air
 Gandhian pacifists have a dilemma: The propertied class need armaments to protect their property and the functioning of their trading and profit seeking system . Capitalism cannot disarm, says Gandhi .
 Gandhi tacitly admitted when he justified the use of police against strike pickets . If they gave up reliance on force their privileged position would vanish overnight, he admitted .
 National capitalist groups need armaments to protect interests of each national capitalist group in the ceaseless struggle over markets, mineral resources, trade routes, strategic frontiers and so on . They likewise need armament to protect the interests of the interests .
 "The ones that disarmed on their own would be the immediate prey of the others," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "They disarmed themselves and would be immediately prey of others," he says .
 If, as an impossible hypothesis, we are asked to conceive of them all disarming, the wealth of the propertied class would slip from their grasp . And if, as a possible hypothesis, they would be disarmed, it would be impossible .
 They are pacifists, unilateralists, multilateralists, supporters of UN and international agreements, dealing wtth the effects and not the cause . They are all of them, pacifists and unilateralists .
 There can be no secure peace while capitalism lasts, and the beginning of wisdom for the working class of all . countries lies in recognising unitedly that they have no interest in their governments’ wars . No matter what the professed aim and no matter what weapons used .
 The only way out is for capitalism to be replaced by a Socialist social system in which all people will co-operate to supply the needs of all, without buying and selling, profits and wages . Workers who are immersed in capitalist habits of thought but one to which all must come .
 Those who are oppressed by the thought of inevitable war should see our need to achieve Socialism, without which no tolerable future for the human race is conceivable . Those who want to avoid war should be aware of the need for Socialism, writes David Cameron .
 A Parable by LEO TOLSTOY I see mankind as a herd of cattle inside a fenced enclosure . 1961 Socialist Standard 1961 A difficult concept to 37 ‘ wae’
 The cattle are trampling underfoot what little grass there is and goring each other to death in their struggle for existence . Consequently, the cattle have trampled underfoot and gored each other .
 I saw the owner of the herd come to them and when he saw their pitiable condition, he was filled with compassion for them, and thought of all he could do to improve their condition . I saw him fill compassion for the animals, and he thought he could help them .
 He asked his friends to help him cut grass from outside the fence and throw it over the fence to the cattle . So he called his friends together and asked them to assist him in cutting grass .
 The calves were dying off and not growing up into serviceable cattle, he arranged that they should each have a pint of milk every morning for breakfast . Then because of the calves dying off he arranged for them each to have a milk each morning .
 "Because they were dying off in the cold nights, he put up beautiful, well-drained and wellventilated cow-sheds for the cattle," he says . "Because of the cold, he was putting up beautiful and well ventilated cow sheds"
 He put corks on the horns of the cattle, so that the wounds they gave each other might not be so serious . Because they were goring each other in the struggle for existence, he put the horns on the cattle .
 He reserved part of the enclosure for the old bulls and the old cows over seventy years of age . Then he reserved a part of it for the animals over seventy-years-old, he said .
 Another 139,830, most of whom must be presumed to have perished, were listed as missing, and 36,425 were injured . Another 37,000 people were listed missing, most presumed to be dead, as well as 36,000 injured .
 These figures are from a recently surveyed report by the Japanese Welfare Ministry .
 A recently published book, No High Ground, by Knebel and Bailey,* purports to tell the secret history of the planning and dropping of this bomb . No. High Ground is published in the UK and Australia .
 To those already painfully aware of the inhuman machinations of capitalist politics, in or out of war, none of the revelations will come as a big surprise .
 All too easily we remember the Passchendaeles, the Stalingrads and the Koreas—battlefields to which our rulers were prepared to despatch thousands to their deaths in the defence of their interests . We remember the Battle of Passchenderaeles and the St
 There are those naive enough to imagine that the sole blame and responsibility for the first atomic bomb rested with Truman . Nonetheless the atomic act of annihilation deserves singling out both for its unique horror and for some of its lessons .
 At this time, the project was so secret that not even Truman, Vice-President though he was, had any knowledge of the atomic bomb .
 General Groves said Truman's choice was revealed by the words of the oragniser of the production of the bomb . Groves: 'What real choice Truman had was to make is revealed by Groves' Groves .
 Japanese rulers (many of whom are still hale and hearty to-day) had no less compunction in sending thousands of their subjects to their doom .
 Part of a proclamation issued by the Japanese cabinet after the dropping of the bomb . This, the last insult, is part of the proclamation .
 Before this, too, the Japanese cabinet had rejected’ a demand for surrender knowing that the Americans had made preparations to unleash an unparalleled assault on their mainland . This would inevitably result in very high casualty rates .
 100,000 casualties were likely to be, to one observer, a conservative estimate . The Japanese government had a full-scale plan to hand to invade the Japanese mainland . In anticipation of this possibility they had a plan for invasion .
 Hospitals in the Philippines, the Marianas and Okinawa were to have 54,000 beds ready . Hospitals were expected to be ready for the operation .
 The scientific advisers came to the same conclusions as political advisors . The political advisers came from the same sources as political advisers .
 In April 1945, Secretary of State Stimson urged Truman to appoint a committee to advise him on atomic policy . The committee was appointed by President Truman in 1945 .
 This is in turn appointed as scientific advisory panel with the leading atomic scientists on it . This is also appointed as advisory panel .
 This committee was asked to prepare a report on the possibility of an atomic bomb explosion . Committee prepared report on possibility of atomic bomb detonation .
 They advised that the bomb be dropped on Japan as soon as possible, WITHOUT specific warning, and that it be delivered on a target susceptible to maximum damage .
 Two billion dollars had been spent in secret, It was imperative to see if the thing worked . Whether an atomic bomb explosion would bring Japan to its knees was, to the American leaders, a moot point .
 This would put new heart into the Japanese leaders and place them in a better bargaining position . This would be good news for the world, and it would put them into a better negotiating position .
 Far better to drop the bomb for if it were a failure no one would be the wiser and pressure could be continued as before on orthodox military lines . Far better than dropping the bomb than dropping a bomb would be a failure, says David Cameron .
 This was the policy laid down by the Allied leaders and no qualms of conscience on the part of any scientists could make them change it . If you sup with the Devil, sup with it, If you . sup with . the Devil. This was . the policy .
 It .was. the Russian Bear, who was beginning to demand too much and was . generally making a nuisance of himself . The Russian Bear was . beginning to demanding too much .
 On the eve of the Hiroshima explosion Truman was on his way back from Potsdam aboard ship . Truman was aboard ship when he was killed .
 On being asked if he had made a deal with Stalin he replied “If the Russians had been somewhat difficult at Potsdam it did not matter because the United States had now developed an entirely new weapon of such force and nature that we did not need the Russians—or any other
 In their description of the aftermath of the Hiroshima explosion the authors give us the following cameo . In their account of the explosion they give us a cameo .
 The nose and other facial features suddenly dropped off with the mask, leaving only a pink, peach-like face front with holes where the eyes, nose and mouth used to be . The nose, eyes, mouth and mouth disappeared from the mask .
 A society based upon class ownership of the resources of production, the aim is to supply a ruling class with profits, privilege and power for the preservation of which they are prepared to destroy, mutilate, lay waste and annihilate .
 The myth about Keir Hardie’s attitude to war is very persistent . M, JUDD. misery, pain, the pain of war .
 At an anti-Polaris rally in Glasgow last December, the Co-operative Movement representative had only to refer to him, “.. . if we could get Keir Hardie here . .”, to have his words drowned by applause .
 Whatever the sentiments of the audience may have been, it was certainly in error about Hardie’s atiitude to war . The audience was in error .
 In 1914, with the Great War drawing near, the Second International called for “ Peace demonstrations ” throughout Europe . The Second International held peace demonstrations throughout Europe in 1914 .
 Sentimentality and emotionalism were offered in place of the sound education and organisation needed by the workers . Sentimentsality and . emotionalism was offered in . place of . the sound . education and . organisation needed to be effective .
 Second International collapsed, its unsound base giving way beneath the strain . Two days later the War began and the Second International began .
 In In the Labour Leader Hardie proclaimed, “The I.L.P. will at least stand firm.” Hardie said in a speech at the end of the speech .
 For the I.L.P. turned out to be standing firm on Socialist Standard 1961 one issue, that was on the question of party unity . For the first time, the party stood firm on the issue of unity .
 The flag hoisted by Hardie and his fellow ‘Labour Leaders’ was a clear and unmistakeable Union Jack . To preserve this unity, to retain the greatest number of members within the fold, the most opportunist .
 In articles directed at his electorate in Merthyr, Keir Hardie made his position clear . Hardie's position on the Scottish Parliament is clear .
 Hardie was prepared to support a long, drawn-out conflict in Europe . He wrote that we must see the war through, but we must also make ourselves so familiar with the facts as to be able to intervene at the earliest possible moment .
 Time after time Hardie fed workers 40 the lie that they were part of a ‘nation’ and as such were bound up in the quarrels of their masters . As such as being bound up with quarrels with their masters, Hardie said .
 Hardie was a patriot and proud of it. Not “International Working Class Solidarity”, but “ Class Collaboration “ was his rallying cry,” says Hardie .
 Although he was a patriot, Hardie would not appear on the official Government recruiting platforms . Hardie refused to appear on official Government recruitment platforms .
 In the first place he could not stomach the crude jingoism and Imperialism that emerged from these platforms . He wished to remain free to present the I.L.P. version of the events that had led to Britain’s involvement in the war .
 Hardie claimed he was instrumental in securing more recruits for the Armed Forces than Liberal opponents . This in Hardie’s view was the “right method “ and belief in this method led Hardie to boast .
 1 would resent more than anything the spectacle of young, strong, flippant upstarts, whether M.P.s or candidates, who had the audacity to ask’ me to do for my country what they had not the heart to do themselves . ‘1
 Of all causes. this surely is the one in which actions speak louder than words . Of all . causes. of all causes . this surely . is one of which actions . speak louder . than words. of the words .
 Hardie was so determined to prove his point that he tried on a number of occasions to obtain the relevant recruiting figures . Hardie tried to get the relevant figures from the relevant club .
 Two weeks later Hardie was able to proclaim that he had obtained the recruiting figures for -his constituency . Hardie had been able to make good his boast that he'd obtained figures for his constituency .
 Ample evidence exists to prove that in supporting the War Hardie in no way acted as a renegade . Ample . evidence exists . to prove . that he supported the War . Hardie .
 His actions were in fact in concord with the actions of his colleagues in the party leadership . These actions were never repudiated, but were endorsed and underwritten by the party as a whole .
 More than fifty murders were known to have been committed in England and Wales in the eight weeks up to the end of January of this year .
 Homicide Act of 1957 relaxed the death penalty, but for various reasons it is impossible to draw strict comparisons . This is pretty well double the rate at which they Were Occurring before they were . Occurring .
 Some of the recent murders were connected with sexual assaults upon very young girls . Others were linked with robberies sometimes involving several thousands of pounds .
 There was a demand, inside and outside Parliament, for a stricter death penalty . There was also a demand for a stronger death penalty in the country .
 This is a wholly emotional attitude, which disregards the fact that revenge is useless to the murdered victim . This is the attitude of revenge, rather than revenge, that is useless . Revenge is futile to the victim, says the author .
 The other argument for the death penalty is quite unsupported by evidence . The argument is that it is a unique deterrent to would-be murderers . The death penalty should not be a deterrent to murderers, the author says .
 Debate on the best method of punishing murderers takes no account of the basic cause of their actions . The debate on best way to punish murderers has no effect on the fact that they should be punished for murder .
 We must examine the brutalising influence of poor living conditions, of periodic wars, the impossible personal relationships which poverty forces upon us . To find that, we must examine our social organisation, we need to examine our society .
 The hanging fiends are just as far off the mark as the worried reformers . The hanging . fiends were just as . far off-the- mark as reformers, they are .
 Neither group wants to alter society's basis; but that is the only effective method of tackling the murder problem . Neither group want to alter the basis of society, but that's the only way to tackle the problem .
 Mirror-Odhams deal was really big stuff, and it was accompanied by what can only be called some big stuff lies .
 On 26th January, a press conference was given details of the prosposed merger between Odhams Press and Thomson Newspapers . The merger is due to take place in January .
 Sir Christopher Chancellor, Odhams’ chairman, stated definitely that no bid had been made by the Daily Mirror . Odham’s chairman said no bid was made for the Mirror .
 Mirror director issues comprehensive denial that any bid had come from them . Mirror director issued a comprehensive denial at the same time that the bid had been made .
 Mirror had made known their intention to bid THE NEWS IN REVIEW lor Odhams some days before the merger was announced . We now know that the Mirror had, in fact, made known that they wanted to bid The News In Review .
 This merger was actually designed as a defensive move against the might of the Mirror’s financial resources . The merger was designed to protect the Mirror from the financial pressures of the company .
 Most of the day-to-day events of capitalist society are influenced by some sort of commercial interest . But most of the events on which the newspapers report and comment are also influenced by commercial interests .
 Christopher Patrick Sullivan stole two mailbags at King's Cross Station . He was released from Dartmoor Prison after serving seven years’ preventive detention .
 As a punishment for this theft, Sullivan has gone back to Dartmoor, this time for ten years . It was Sullivan’s eighth conviction .
 To the bigoted ~upholder of the sanctity of private property over broad human interests, justice will have been done. To be a bigoted bigoted, justice has been done, says the author .
 In practice, the view that there is equality before the law is fallacious, it's fallacious . The view that equality before law is not true in practice, he says . In practice it's not true, he writes .
 The wim of the Jaw and of the punishments (nat enforce it) is mainly the protection of property . Most offences against the law concern property, and most offences are against property .
 As the ownership of most property and especially the Ineans of life and the privileges that arise . are restricted to a relatively small social class, then the whole structure of law and punishments Must be biased in favour of the interests Of the privileged class .
 The majority of those who are underprivileged, in the sense that. they own very little, accept this situation .
 The retribution of the law attempts to coerce into faw-abiding conformity a minority of criminals . It is not the law's only solution to the problem . The law is supposed to be used to punish criminals .
 Crime must be understood in relation to the social context in which it happens . Crime must also be understood as a crime must be seen as a result of social context . Crime is not a crime, it is a crime that happens in a social context, says the author .
 It is not that the malignancy of human nature creates anti-social human beings. It's not that human nature . It is human nature, it's not human nature to create anti-society human beings, it says .
 The case of Sullivan is a tragedy and in its cruel sadness we all have a share . Sullivan is the case of a tragedy that we all share, says the author .
 The Portuguese monarchy was overthrown in 1911, and after 15 years of political instability Dr. Fernando Cabarro was forced to step down .
 Amongst those who supported him were Captain Galvao and General Delgado . Amongst the supporters of the president was Captain Galavao .
 The regime in Portugal, Britain’s “oldest ally," is one of dictatorship, where only one party is permitted and opposition is suppressed .
 Salazar, is the top job, with that of President merely the state figure-head . Salazar is the president of the state, with Salazar being the figurehead .
 General Delgado stood for the Presidency in 1958, but was defeated, and in 1959 sought political asylum in Brazil . In 1959, he sought asylum in the country . Delgado was defeated in 1958 .
 Salazar redrafted the Constitution so that in future the President would be chosen not by the voters, but by the hand-picked Parliament . The Constitution was redrafted by Salazar to allow the President to be chosen by the Parliament . Salazar: "In future the president would be
 Captain Galvao was commissioned to report on the Portuguese colonies of Angola, Guinea and Mozambique in 1947 . His report was presented to the National Assembly in 1947.
 The report was suppressed and, shortly afterwards, Galvao was imprisoned . The report is suppressed and Galvão was * imprisoned .
 The facade of-medical care, behind which even minimum sanitary conditions did not exist . The very high infant mortality and the mortality rates amongst workers, 40% not being rare, were rare .
 He says that he wants to lessen the economic gap between Portugal's tiny minority of wealthy families and her desperately poor working population . He also wants to have universal suffrage both in Portugal and the colonies .
 Portugal is the least industrialised country in Europe . Delgado may well have been reflecting that it is essential to have an educated working class in order to develop .
 The Socialist sympathises with aspirations to political democracy, but there is no guarantee that Delgado’s aims would be achieved if he succeeded to power in Portugal, nor is there any guarantee that in a private property society, democracy will remain in being .
 He may be dangling carrots in front of the donkey's nose, in order to obtain personal support . He may, like many political candidates, be dangling a bunch of carrots .
 You may have thought there was only one Kent, the county next to Sussex . The county of Kent is one of the UK's most populous and most populous .
 The Express revealed that they had had no regular income from the Civil List since 1942 . The former Duke of Kent was killed in 1942, when he was killed .
 It is true that King George VI and Queen Mary made payments to the ~ Duchess out of their “ private “ forttines.” It is also true that Queen Mary and Queen George VI made payments .
 The Duke of Kent and Princess Alexandra appear from the papers to be able to afford fairly expensive visits to nightclubs and long winter sports holidays .
 The royal family have a rent-free set of rooms at Kensington Palace . Besides the family’s country house in Buckinghamshire, they have a’ rent free rooms at Buckinghamshire .
 Duchess of Cambridge finds it difficult to keep a full staff of servants’ at both places . And the Duchess finds it hard to keep full staff .
 This is a question for debate among those who support the capitalist system . This is not the answer to the question: 'What is the value of capitalism?'
 Royal figureheads do a public relations public relations job for the ruling class . The ruling class pays them accordingly .
 For when there is no ruling class, there will be no need to have a public relations staff for them . The ruling class will not need to be public relations for them, he says .
 Too few hands THAT wasn't the end of the worries of the Sunday Express . Too many hands were raised in the hands of the newspaper .
 On the same day, same page, there was an article pointing out the dangers of either’ King (of the Daily Mirror group) or Thomson (who rules a large newspaper and television network) getting control of Odhams.
 If Thomson were to win, he would control 17 daily papers, three Sundays, 25 weeklies, 46 periodicals, 62 trade and technical journals, plus Scottish television . Thomson would control newspapers, periodicals and television .
 If King wins this battle he will control an even larger empire, so the danger is proportionately greater . King will control even more of a larger empire than he has ever controlled .
 Beaverbrook papers are worried that such giants might threaten the profits even of the Express group .
 The situation the Express claims to fear, where a newspaper owner might be tempted to stem the free flow of news or threaten full freedom of expression, has existed for years . Only very wealthy men, multi-millionaires, can now run national newspapers .
 Multi-millionaires are not going to allow ‘full freedom of expression’ to Socialists, who want a new society which would abolish their power . Multi-millionaires will not allow Socialists to ‘free speech’ in their new society .
 Tt ill becomes the Express group to grumble at this situation only when they think they might not benefit from it now .
 Notice the terms used in these quotes, There is nothing about health or illness in the general sense. Notice the words used in this quote .
 The very thing Which is suggested~by the name Ford is size, is size . Now this is quite appropriate, because the very thing which is suggested by the name is size. Ford's size is the size of the car .
 The group as a whole makes about one-fifth of the world’s motor cars . It has factories in many countries .
 Ford in England started in 1908 with a sales office in the West End . It now employs more than 40,000 workers in plant capable of producing almost half a million vehicles a year .
 In 1959, the company’s sales ran to £233,180,000, It Owns an enormous factory at Dagenham, as well as the Kelsey Hayes Wheel Plant and Briggs Motor Bodies .
 It has its own oundry—said to be the most modern in Europe—turning out cylinder blocks and heads and other castings .
 Fords are currently hatching an expansion programme, involving a £70 million factory at Halewood, on Merseyside . The expansion programme is set to take place at the £70million factory .
 The company’s report for 1959 was full of high spirits and optimism, with regret expressed only to the customers who, clamouring for new cars, had to wait their turn .
 Nobody at Fords had been put on short time and nobody had been sacked, although by then the clouds had started to gather over Dagenham . Up to the end of last year, nobody at Ford Motor Company had been on short-term contracts .
 The report for the first half of 1960 carried warning words about strong competition in America and the expectation of lower profits in the future . The report was published in the summer of 1960 .
 In January of this year, Fords announced that more than 16,000 of their workers would shortly start working a three day week . In January, Ford announced that 16,00 workers would soon start working three day weeks .
 The lovely new machinery, some of it installed in the post-war expansion scheme, was soon working at half capacity .
 Fords are not in trouble on their own, B.M.C. have about forty thousand on short time, Vauxhall nine thousand . StandardTriumph about seven thousand more than a year ago .
 The motor car recession has struck all sorts of firms, large and small, as well as the makers of components and accessories . This means hard times for the motor car workers .
 This argument would not survive a prolonged slump in the car world . It is poor consolation to short-timers that, however bad their conditions may be, there are others in worse straits .
 At the time of the great Ford takeover, we heard a lot of false theories about the motives for industrial investment . We heard a few false theories of the motives of industrial investment in the 1930s .
 People thought that the American company was taking over with the intention of deliberately allowing Ford in England to decline. Man, people thought that . The American company thought that it was taking . over with . intention of . deliberately letting Ford in . England decline .
 These opinions are the sounder because they take account of the fact that the realisation of a profit is the motive of capitalist production, and at the same time is the end to which commodity distribution is organised . The opinions are sounder .
 Ford wants to work in the European Common Market and Dagenham the European Free Trade Area . Perhaps Ford want their Cologne factory to work the EU Common Market . Ford's Cologne factory has a factory in Cologne, and its factory in London, Germany, is in the UK . Dagen
 Rising stocks become a threat to profitable sales . Here, too, is the reason for the plans for expansion, and for the slumps .
 This is something over which the administrators of capitalism have no control of capitalism . Many large companies, including many large firms, are not in control of the world's most successful companies .
 Tower Hill, 12,80--2m. East Street, Walworth March 5th March 12th & 26th March 19th . Tower Hill will be held on Tower Hill at Tower Hill .
 They have spent a lot of money on market research, on advertising and on ‘planning their production,’ But in the end, the essential anarchy of capitalist society beats them to it, he says .
 When a market opens up, each interested firm must do its best to capture it . It means gearing its production to a high rate and investing millions of pounds in development schemes .
 Ford, as we have seen, is sinking £70 million in new plant on Merseyside . Ford has already announced plans to build a new plant in the area .
 Ford could be more vulnerable to the ravages of a recession . On the other hand,’ it could sometime make Ford more vulnerable .
 They foresaw that storms were ahead, but were powerless to avoid them . Then, even though they foresaw the storms, they were quite powerless to escape them .
 Reginald Maudling, the President of the Board of Trade, put it neatly in the House of Commons debate on the car depression .
 The record of the car industry offers plenty of proof of the validity of Mr Maudling’s words .
 Proof, also of the falsity of the assurances of the smug economists who were so fond of telling us that the days of boom and slump were over, is proof . Proofs also, also, of . the falsities of the . assurances of . smug economists that told us that
 In 1956, the industry was in slump, which it had climbed out of by 1959 . In 1959, it had recovered from the slump by climbing out of the slump .
 This is typical of capitalist industry, with the built-in compulsion to join in the trade war which dominates its every move, writes Simon Tisdall . This is a typical of capitalism, he says .
 Perhaps Mr Lindsay would not accept that capitalism must, therefore, make enemies of us all . Perhaps he would rather accept that . capitalism makes enemies of all us .
 It is the capitalist basis of society which is the sand in our gearbox . But that, in fact, is what it does, says the author .
 Fords are an example of a complex, sophisticated industrial unit, parts of which are evidence of humanity’s ability to create abundance for itself . Fords were built in the 1930s and are now being used in America's largest car factories .
 Capitalism sends it on its way shuddering and wobbling, just like a stalling car . But capitalism sends it wobbles, just as it does with capitalism .
 The slump in Canada, the growing depréssion in U.S.A. and the troubles of the motor industry in ‘Britain and most other countries’ will-give plenty of scope for this kind of evasion by delay .
 The form it will take will be the demand for more information, the setting up of committees of inquiry, urging employers to be more enterprising and workers to work harder and strike less .
 The unemployment of car workers is something strange and surprising, something never before seen by mortal eye, yet in its essentials it is exactly what has happened before in that and every other industry at intervals for a century and a half .
 Unemployment in Welch, West Virginia has been continuous for several years . Decline of coal industry is due to decline of the coal industry but not all of the “distressed areas” owe their troubles to the growth of rival fuels .
 Mr Kennedy has set himself the formidable task of promoting an expansion much more impressive than that which followed either the 1953-54 or the 1957-58 recessions .
 It will otherwise be impos‘sible to absorb today’s unemployed plus new additions to the Jabour force . But even if more of their unemployed find work elsewhere, the depressed areas will inevitably lag far ‘behind the rest of the economy’
 The long-term answer may lie in the massive development of a whole region pioneered by the Tennessee Valley Authority, but Mr Kennedy will doubtless wait before plunging into new projects on this scale .
 In fact the manufacturer is interested in making more profit by reducing costs . He will pay little regard to the convenience of the worker and will be prepared to waste labour .
 Employers' interest is to avoid having costly machinery standing idle for two-thirds of the 24 hours . The use of more expensive machinery and plant has led to an increase of night and shift work .
 Percentages for those on permanent night-shift, whose rhythm of life is less disturbed, are generally slightly lower . except for stomach trouble .
 Marx noted this a century ago and it is still to be observed . Industry in all countries gives innumerable examples of work being carried on by methods which take up much labour in spite of the existence of (Machines and processes by the use of which labour could be saved)
 He said labour-saving machines would be produced in one country and not used there but sold in other countries . He remarked on the seemingly inexplicable happening .
 The explanation was and is that the employer is not interested in the amount of labour he uses but in the cost of the labour-power he pays for, remembering of course that in buying the workers’ mental and physical energies at their value he is obtaining some unpaid labour .
 High wages have caused a boom in the industry producing vehicles and equipment for mechanical handling of materials . This is the age of mechanisation in industry, of recognition that in his new found prosperity, the working man is a valuable property to be used with the utmost economy .
 Rival manufacturers are racing to be first to flood a particular market, speed becomes more important than cost . It pays one of them to use a faster but more costly method of production if it enables him to have his commodity first in the field .
 I Chapter XV, (see particularly Section 2) and remarked incidentally on the very different scope for the use of machinery there would be under Socialism than under Capitalism. I .
 International politics can never for long present a simple choice of issues for governments . Each overnment is likely to have behind it ‘Joint Shop Stewards’
 The ancient friends shall become enemies and enemies become friends . Then as soon as soon:as one problem is settled others emerge which may require that the ancient . friends shall . become enemies, then as soon .
 No country wants any one of its allies to become too strong . Added to which, alliances are formed because of the greater strength that comes from unity, unity .
 After the war it was the American government that took the lead in trying to get Europe to unite so as to form an economic and military group strong enough to stand up to Russia . Europeans were invited to consider the absurdity of European frontiers and customs barriers .
 The European Economic Community is a fact for the six countries France, Germany, Italy, Holland, Belgium and Luxembourg . Some American interests are becoming as worried about European trade competition as some British industries .
 The City Editor does not doubt that Kennedy shares the report's apprehension and omitted it only because it might give offence .
 The problems presented by this single European market can be lessened for U.S.A. and British capitalists by operating inside the customs wall, but this means a double investment of capital .
 The interview did not mention that Russia is itself an exporter of cars’ and commercial vehicles . Perhaps if Russia were to “advance big credits” to unemployed British motor workers they would buy some Russian cars .
 Fred Evans died in harness delivering the Western Sucialist to a news stand in Los Angeles when he collapsed and died of a heart attack . Evans had just delivered the Western Sustain to a Los Angeles news stand .
 He was a tower of strength to the W.S.P. on the West Coast . He was an indefatigable speaker and propagandist. He was also a great speaker, propagandorist .
 He visited England a few years ago and spoke on our platform in ‘Hyde Park’ He also visited England and spoke to us at Hyde Park . He has also visited the country and spoke at a few times before .
 He also gave considerable assistance and hospitality to two of our comrades who visited Los Angeles during speaking tours .
 He visited England thirty years ago and met some of our older members, He had been ill for many years and lost both his wife and daughter in the last few years . Over the years he gave & great deal of financial help to the S.P. of C .
 A full account of these two old comrades will appear in the Western Socialist, but we wish to add our tribute in this brief note .
 We have seldom found a British trade union in the right— and the present strike affords no welcome exception . But in the matter of their conduct of the fight, we have . little to say, but in the . matter of the . conduct of their fight, the . present strike
 The limitations of their union are shown by their compromising, in the midst of a “winning fight,” for a 2) hours reduction . These men demanded a reduction of 43 hours per week, und the limitations of the union .
 Those who know anvthing of the printing trade do not necd to be told that this 5 per cent. reduction does not anything like counterbalance the increased output per head .
 The speeding-up and the development of machinery in all departments have been astounding . New processes are discovered almost daily, and new processes are found almost daily . The speeding up and the . development of . machinery in . all departments has been astounding, says the author .
 The Physiocrats Notes on Economic History . ‘ ALTHOUGH the Mercantile system was . abundantly criticised, it was a long time before opposition to it became formed into a new doctrine. ‘
 He graduated as a doctor of medicine and became a physician to Madame de Pompadour and Louis XVth . He was also a physician for the French President and the French monarch .
 Quesnay’s teaching is something more than economics; it appears to be part of a general philosophy . The professor's teaching is more than just economics but philosophy .
 He wanted to have social and moral phenomena regarded as being no less ‘natural” than physical phenomena . The laws governing the former as well as the latter were to be seen as mechanical Jaws of nature .
 The natural right of human beings in primitive society, he “argued, was the right to property,” he said . “That is the free disposal of goods which the individual had made or appropriated by means of his own labour.”
 When men entered into the social contract, it was essential that they should not lose the right each of them had to earn his own living, the author says .
 The individual has the right to foster his own economic interest and to shape his own future as best suited to him . Bound up in this right is another natural right of the individual, he says .
 This following of self-interest, according to Quesnay, leads to the establishment of a ‘natural order’ in the economic association of huma beings .
 He endeavoured to study the laws of the economic ‘natural order’, which were to be deduced by reason from the general plan of nature .
 This doctrine of “natural order ” is important to him for two reasons . He says it's important to maintain the doctrine of "natural order .
 People who, in their economic life, act consistently because they are guided by Cc) 4 * motives of self-interest, resemble atoms with fixed properties . People who act consistently on the basis of Cc. 4* motives of themselves resemble atoms, say the economist .
 The phenomena that result from their mutual contacts (in the market and elsewhere in society) are mechanically determined like those that resulted from the mutual contacts of the atoms . The phenomenon is mechanically determined by the interaction of atoms .
 Political economy, like the realm of material nature, is governed by natural laws, says Quesnay . It follows, says the economist, that political economy is governed in accordance with natural laws .
 Quesnay answers to the question of what activity of the individual it is that regulates the economic machinery, and upon what foiindation economic life depends, he says . Agriculture is a major source of economic activity, and agriculture is agriculture .
 Not money, trade, traffic and industry, but the tilling of the soil is the true source of public welfare . Not money or trade, trade or industry, it's the tills of the . soil that makes public welfare, not money .
 The agriculturist renders them possible by nourishing those who engage in them, and he supplies the raw material without which they cannot be undertaken . The agriculturalist is the man who nourishes those who work in agriculture .
 Commerce, industry and transport are to be considered as dependent upon agriculture . Agriculture is a vital part of commerce, industry, transport and transport .
 The countryman gets hides, leather, and in the end his boots and other articles from his oxen, wood, from the trees on his farm; and so on. The countrymen gets hides and leather, leather and leather from their oxen; wood from their trees on their
 He should not himself undertake the work that transforms these basic materials, but should have it done for him by various specialists (the tanner. bootmaker, joiner, etc.) whom he must support out of his agricultural surpluses . But, they said, to avaid the
 The only productive, the only creative labour is, therefore, labour on the land . The land is the only source of labour, and the only productive labour is labour on land .
 It is true that work which transforms materials derived from land, or moves them from place to place, can.enhance the value of these things . But the cost of the supplementary labour is really defrayed by the agriculturist, who must feed the workers .
 The increase in value thus produced is, therefore, according to the cost of the labour and is equal to the expense of maintaining the workers who do it . This is the case, and therefore, the value of production increases according to labour .
 The tanner, joiner, etc. who shape the raw material derived from land work merely earn their own keep in the form of wages . They make nothing new. They make no new. It is the only thing new.
 All they do is 'js to' ‘js to’ ‘add’ not to “create” says Quesnay . The agriculturist’s work is a work of creation, he says .
 Landworkers appear to be the only “productive” class, according to Quesnay . Landworkers were chiefly of tenant farmers as contrasted with landowning nobility .
 The land Owners, on the other hand, form an ‘owning’ or ‘distributive” class, while the industrialists and craftsmen comprise a ‘sterile’ class . Land Owners form a “owning or distributing’s
 The wage carners make up a fourth, a ‘passive’ class, with no activity of its own . These three classes are considered to he the ‘active’ classes of the population .
 Agriculture cannot continue to be prosperous unless grain realises high prices, says Quesnay . Only then can agriculture provide a large “net product""* and thus become able to provide large incomes for the landowning class, the manufacturers and the working class .
 Quesnay rejected the mercantilist theory of the balance of trade . It was essential, therefore, to do away with all restriction upon the export of grain .
 The Physiocratic system also gave a picture of the formation of value and of price . The system was also used to explain value and price .
 In certain connections Quesnay emphasized the nature of value as utility but with his doctrine of net product, value and price are derived from cost . In some connections, he emphasized the value of utility as utility .
 In his view the transformative labour of industry added to goods only so much value as this labour itself consumed . Only an amount of value therefore is equivalent to its own cost, he says .
 Quesnay wages represent nothing other than the cost of replacement of the labour power that has been expended . It follows from this that wages are nothing more than the replacement of labour power .
 A young man buys a second hand car and packs in his family and takes them for a spin . He packs them in to show them off the car and shows them off .
 Carbon monoxide seeps from the broken pipe, through the rotten floor and kills the family’s baby son . The baby's death was quietly killed by a broken pipe in the family home .
 Workers in the British car industry are being sacked or put on short time because the owners of the industry cannot find sufficient markets for their goods . That car was bought and sold at a time when workers in the industry were being sacked .
 Perhaps he believed all the talk about the affluent society and decided to get in on a little of it himself . Perhaps he was getting in on the rich and famous .
 Perhaps he fell for the advertising line that a car denotes status, gets you you the job, the girl, the smiles of the passers by . Perhaps he simply fell for a car that denotes status .
 Not owning a car now almost indicates that you are either fabulously wealthy and eccentric, or that. you are practically down and out . Perhaps he knew that not to own a . car now seems to be a sign of a . eccentricity or that he is practically down . out .
 The profit making basis of capitalist society means that we must deliberately turn out inferior goods . The vast majority of people can only afford something very much less than the best . Yes, you've missed the point .
 The working class have to live with the second or third hand because their purchasing power is not sufficient for them to acquire the first class stuff . Sadly, rather than face this fact, many _workers take refuge in a life of putting on the style .
 This is a typical result of our capitalist world. And if the style demands a car, it sometimes does not matter that it is an old and dangerous one, it is a good style . This is the result of the style demanded a car .
 The Socialist Party needs funds to get the Socialist message over as powerfully as possible . They need funds in order to get their message over strongly .
 We must apologise for two printing errors which resulted in some sentences in the February Sociatist STANDARD reading rather strangely . Victoria, B.C. ee .
 A more subtle me‘hod of suppression. this, than of yore, when Catholics would reduce to human charcoal any burglar or peasant who had difficulty in grasping a Papal chemical formula about bread and wine turning into fiesh and blood .
 D McCarthy lems like transport congestion in a humane fashion . World which is not cluttered up with articles which do nothing to enhance our happiness and welfare . D McCarthy . McCarthy .
 ‘Ihe last of the films is being held on Sunday, | March 12th. Road, and Head Office film lectures, ‘‘I’he last film lecture will be held on March 13th . Road Road is the first of three films to be shown
 A further meeting is being held on Sunday, Marci 19th, at 7.30m., on Capitalism, UNO or Socialism, —Speakers—Comrades P Bryant and E Grant .
 Demonstration for Socialis meeting is being held at St. Mary's Hospital on Wednesday, April 19th .
 Both these meetings will be successful if all comrades support them in every possible way, bringing as many friends along as possible, being available to sell literature, and most of all arriving in good time .
 Pancra is large, comfortable and centrally situated . Town Hall is large and comfortable and central situated .
 QUTDOOR PROPAGANDA will be zeiting off to a good start in April . The more Comrades there are who supoort the meetings and sell literature, the sooner workers will hear about the case for Socialism .
 It is hoped to feature some articles on the American Civil War in the April issuc. The April issue will feature some of the articles .
 Make sure of the April issue (and also for every following month) of the SociaList STANDARD, obtainable from 52, Clapham High Street .
 Ist and 3rd Mondays (6th & 20th March) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street . Ist, 3rd & 4th March (7.30pm)
 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road. 2nd and 4th & 24th April (formerly Basildon and Southend)
 SOUTHEND (see under South East Essex SWANSEA Isc) and 3rd Monday (3rd & 17th April) in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St. Peterborough, Essex, 8 pm .
 2nd and 4th Thursdays (I3eh & 27th April) in month & pm, Salisbury Road pee Manor Park, E12. West Ham, West Ham .
 2nd and 4th Fridays (i4th and 28th April) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SEI8.30pm .
 ORDERS for literature should be sent to the Literature Department, spcp, at the above address, Clapham High Street . CORRESPONDENCE for the Executive Committee should be . sent to General Secretary, spos, 52, clapham . High Street, Cl
 The Strategy of attrition of that war, and the way in which it organised the resources and population of the Union into an all-out effort, was a fore-stage of the two great wars of thc twentieth century .
 Modern warfare is one hundred years old this month . It is hardly too much to say that modern warfare is a 100-year-old anniversary .
 The bitter fact is that the world is no safer for peace today than it was in 1861 . The world is still no safer today than in 1861, says historian David Perry . He says the world needs to be more secure for peace than it is now .
 War. actual or potential, is as much part of our lives as any other aspect of modern society . War. Actual or potential is as important as any aspect of society, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 We know that all over the world national powers, great and small, have bases and forces in readiness for a future conflict . Although we are at present living in a period of peace, we know that national powers are prepared for conflict .
 Soviet Union has developed accurate intercontinental missiles of fearful destructive power . The Soviet Union developed the missiles in the early 1950s .
 By any standards of sanity, it is incredible that a society which possesses such enormous productive potential should devote so much of its resources to making weapons of destructon .
 London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 . 1961 Socialist Standard . 1961 . Socialist Standard 1960 .
 Weapons are not produced to satisfy a government’s destructive impulses . Weapons are produced not to satisfy government's destructive impulses. Weapons are made to satisfy those impulses .
 They are produced to prosecute the armed conflicts which in turn are caused by the economic rivalries of capitalism . The armed conflicts are produced in turn to prosecute by the state of capitalism, it is claimed .
 Weapons of war are an inevitable product of capitalist society, author says . What it amounts to is that weapons of war were inevitable, he says .
 Those who support capitah_ ism wish governments would voluntarily deprive themselves of the most powerful weapons available, are baying for something even more remote than the moon . Those who wish that governments . voluntarily deprive . themselves of most powerful . weapons available .
 The unilateralists, the pacifists and some members of the Labour and similar parties fall into this category . They include unilateralists and the unilateralists .
 Nazi Germany, nuclear weapons-these are only some of the issues upon which we have been urged to concentrate our efforts at the expense of our Socialist integrity . Nazi Germany and nuclear weapons are among the issues on the agenda of the Socialist Party .
 We have rejected these appeals hecause we know that such problems find their roots in capitalism propotty basis . To end them. x must establish 4 Secsalist society in which the world’s wealth 1s owned hy the world. 1s .
 By the time it ended, between 750,000 and 1,000,000 men lost their lives, and many more wounded . Out of a population of 31,000-million, up to 1,500,000 died in the conflict .
 In many ways, it was the fore-rgnner of the total warfare we know today . The war was the precursor to total warfare, and was the beginning of total warfare .
 The Civil War is a4 phenomenon of the Jast decade . Civil War interest in the Civil War has been revived in recent years .
 Chicago boasts of a successful hook store where only Civil War items can be bought . The store is located in the city of Chicago .
 Socialist searching through the mountain of Civil War books, is hard put to apply his yardstick of histurical materialism .
 What seems to vecupy the attention of the various authors, for the must part, is the spectacular bravery and dauntless courage displayed by Union warriors and Rebels alike . The Union soldiers and Rebels are depicted in the book .
 Social forces underlying the conflict, with the exception of the Slavery issue, are buried in a mass of drum and thunder history . The social forces behind the conflict are still hidden in the history of slavery .
 It is easy for the casual reader to think that the North was engaged in a crusade to wipe out slavery while the South was imbued with the “ noble” ideal of saving it through secession . It's easy to be left with the thought that the .
 This might have been typical of the average ideology of the War, but it was certainly not a basic force in its origin .
 The idea of opposition to slavery on moral grounds becomes ridiculous when one regards the low moral conscience of Northern industrialism . Then tov, the idea of opposing slavery on morality becomes ridiculous .
 There was no revulsion at the horrible mills and mines where men, women and children toiled long hours for a pittance . At the periudic crises which threw the workers on the streets to starve, at the universal blacklist for those who spoke .
 Massachusetts abolished slavery in the early 18th century . It was not opposition to slavery on moral grounds that prompted Massachusetts to abolish it .
 Lincoln and his party, a century and a half later, were not concerned with the morals of slavery . Nor were Lincoln's party, nor were its party members concerned with slavery's morals, slavery .
 The Emancipation Proclamation was issued as a war measure against the Rebels . It did not apply to those slave States loyal to the Union .
 The conditions for this type of labour did not exist in the North, whereas in the South, the cultivation and ginnine of cotton for nine months of the year filled the bill . There were, however, serious contradictions which prevented the peaceful co-existence of the Southern and Northern economic
 The American South was basically a commodity society in which goods and services were produced for sile on the market with a view to profit . The American Southerners were a slave-free society .
 The South fought to maintain the chattel status of its Negroes, but mainly because . this type of labour was vital to its . economy . The very system was falling apart largely as a result of Congressional laws which favoured Northern interests .
 The control of Congress by the North resulted in high tariffs on imported manufactured goods . High tariffs interfered with the important trade of Southern raw cotton for English textiles .
 The development of Northern seaports and railways also brought about a loss of trade to the South from the Western agricultural regions . Long ship hauls down the Mississippi to the Port of New Orleans became unnecessary .
 The South desperately needed new land to replace that used up by their wasteful one-crop system . The South was losing out in its bid to bring in frontier areas as slave states . And tlie South, which desperately needed . needed new . land .
 As its losing economic war with the North and ifs internal contradictions progressed, the beneficiaries of the Southern plantation system became fewer, their holdings ever larger . The beneficiaries of this plantation system were fewer than ever .
 Of 9 million Southern whites, of which a mere 10,000 were the actual ruling class, the problem was how to maintain dom’nance under universal white suffrage . In 1860, the South was crumbling, but the problem faced was how the white ruling class would maintain their status
 Support came from the professional class and the clergy with their One or two personal slaves . Support was from professional class .
 As an added bonus, there was a lift to their spirits to be had by identifying themselves with the Southern aristocrats .
 The elections of 1860 tore any government from the hands of the Southern rulers . The elections were held in the South's capital in 1860 .
 The plantation capitalists knew that. their social system could never prosper With a government they could not control. The plantation capitalist knew that . their social . system could . never prosper with a . government they . could not . control .
 They had no more need for the North, since their system was barred by soil and climate from expanding in that direction . The North was barred from expanding into that direction, and the North was not .
 There was Mexico to be conquered, Central America, Cuba, and even the vast continent of South America —all offering vast areas of land for the smooth operation of their economy .
 Their backs were to the wall, they had nothing to lose, so they took the plunge and the hot war began . Their backs had to be on the wall and they had to take the plunge .
 The South, as an‘oligarchy, was better prepared in 1861 to begin a war than the more industrialized, but highly disorganized North . The South was a better prepared than the North in 1861, but was disorganized .
 The Negroes inflicted defeat after defeat upon the army of farmers, mechanics and sailors of the North . Productive work falling on the Negroes, the Rebels could put their entire fighting strength .
 The united South faced by a North, divided, and to a considerable extent dominated, by the border states which were loyal but which were certainly not in favour of Abolition . The united Southerners faced a united North and a divided North .
 The North found it difficult to raise the 300,000 men requested by Lincoln . Lincoln's request was met with a refusal to meet the request .
 Morgan made a fortune by selling thousands of previously condemned rifles to the War Dept. with a profit of $18.00 on each . The relatively developed North prevailed, and under such ruthless and capable generals as Sherman and Grant .
 The socialists of the period, for the most part, actively interested themselves in the cause of the North . The socialists were active in the North, but not the North itself .
 Karl Marx worked within the | International Workingmen’s Association to rally the workers to the support of Lincoln . Karl Marx was working in the International Workers' Association . Lincoln was assassinated in 1818 .
 Socialists gave their support to what they regarded as a progressive type of capitalism . Whatever the validity of the motives which influenced the socialists of the period, they definitely gave their . support to . what they . regarded as progressive capitalism .
 Looking back, we can question some of their views and the emphasis they gave to the chattel slavery issue . It shows that their all-out support of Northern capitalism was unwarranted .
 More than half of the Union Army were under 19 years of age and more than 300,000 were between 15 and 16 . With peace, the youngsters went out in the world to resume or begin the task of earning a living .
 Many of them were soon to dot the Boot Hills of the new towns and mining camps and to help write the blood history of the West . Many of these men were shortly to dot . The West's blood history will be written in the book "Bloody West"
 Socialist Standard 1961 found a new foe, warlike and pitiless, but in industrial rather than military warfare . Those who returned to the industries .
 Alan Pinkerton, a spy of Lincoln’s, now became the Jeading industrial spy and strike breaker in the land .
 He was instrumental in bringing about the exposure of the Molly Maguires . By worming his way into the inner circle of the society, he was instrumental .
 Ten of their members were hanged and many more sent to prison . Ten of the members of the Union Army were hanged . Many more were imprisoned for their crimes .
 Many more veterans were to witness the same generals who had led them to “victory ” now march upon them with their former brothers-in-arms, to shoot, kill and jail them . Many more of the veterans .
 It was-a rude awakening and was to teach them that the war was not fought for them, as they had thought, but to build an economic system that would enrich a handful . It was a rude awakening .
 The two RB-47 airmen who were released by Russia recently gave their own stories to reporters at an American air force base . The two airmen were released after being shot down over the Barents Sea .
 Previous reports of the incident had claimed that the aircraft was unarmed . One of the reporters recalled that previous American reports had said that the plane was unarmed. Previous reports said that aircraft was armed .
 The aircraft as such, was not armed with an offensive weapon of any sort . The aircraft was not equipped with any offensive weapon .
 We carried two 20-millimetre automatic cannon . cannon which were mounted aft, pointing to the rear . cannon .
 How automatic cannon, whether pointing up, down, forwards or sideways, can be anything else than offensive weapons was not made clear . This was a defensive weapon purely to protect us from attack from the rear, he said . How automatic cannons can be pointed up or down or sideways can be
 An aircraft carrying automatic cannon is armed as an aircraft, not as a submarine . An aircraft with automatic cannon carries a weapon, not a submarine, is armed .
 The airmen’s statement would be to over-simplify the matter. But merely to point out the absurdities of the Air Force would be too much to say .
 U.S. airmen are only repeating what their masters, the American ruling class, have always said . For these airmen, they are repeating what they've always said, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "No country, to judge from its own propaganda machine, ever attacks another," says Putin . No country, "to judge from the self-proclaimed state of Russia," attacks another, he says .
 Governor of Kenya refused to release Jomo Kenyatta and gave two reasons for his decision . Sir Patrick RENISON gave the two reasons .
 Kenyatta’s refusal to “make any statement or reveal his thinking about the great issues which Kenya is facing,” in spite of the fact that six Ministers, including three Africans, had visited him in August . The political campaign for his release has roused many
 The Governor of Kenya isn't going to release Kenyatta because the Kenya Africans have made it plain that they want him to be released . Leaving out the long words, the first one means simply that the Governor of . Kenya isn’t going to . release KenKenyatta
 Governor can hardly expect anyone to believe that he would have released Kenyatta if there hadn’t been a campaign demanding it . The Governor is hardly expected to believe anyone would have been surprised by his release .
 This must be the first time a political leader has been kept in exile because he refused to take up a political stand . Dictators have often put people in jail, or kept them in exile, be | cause they have ‘made statements’ or | ‘revealed
 Socialist Party opposed to any attack on democratic freedoms, whether it is jailing for political reasons, restrictions on the right to vote, or any other weapon in the colonialists’ armoury . Socialist position is straightforward, We are opposed to attacking democratic freedoms .
 It is the old struggle between land and capital. But we are not blind to the real nature of the struggle in Kenya, it is .
 On the one side are in Kenya, it is the cld struggle between capitalists, whether they are those who hope to establish full-scale industrial capitalism in Kenya or those who have already established it in Great Britain .
 We welcome any extension of democracy in Kenya which this struggle between two rival propertied classes has produced or will produce . We welcome all of Kenya's democracy .
 That has been seen in Germany, in Italy, in Spain, in Czechoslovakia and the rest of the world . That's seen in the Netherlands, Italy, Spain, Italy and the Czech Republic .
 An irate letter-writer in the Sunday Express-recently told how he had parked his car beside a parking meter in accordance with the instructions on the meter, went to the theatre, and returned to find his car vanished .
 Eventually, after very considerable frustration, annoyance, and expense, | found it at one of the police yards miles away . Police found it in a police yard yards away .
 The ouly explanation | could get from the police, was that | had committed the offence of being on the royal route to the cinema- although how I was expected to know this is beyond my power of reasoning .
 The removal of one’s car, however, is only one of the minor inconveniences that may follow if one gets in the way of a royal progress .
 In Katmandu, for the visit of the Queen and the Duke of-Edinburgh to Nepal, a new road was built from the airport to the royal guest house .
 So much respect paid to religion when it conflicts with convenience of the ruling class . So much for the respect paid .
 Religion, of course, is maintained by ruling classes because it helps to keep the rest of us in our places . It's maintained by the ruling classes, but it helps keep us in places .
 Perhaps it is naive for us to expect a ruling class to take its own propaganda too seriously . Perhaps we should expect us to take it seriously too .
 E Mankind under Capitalism should have created a world befitting the dignity of manhood . Capitalism is a constant endeavour that has marked man's life since his biological emergence .
 He has learned to observe, and, to a large degree, understand surrounding phenomena, to connect causes and effect . He has also learned to make and use tools to harness natural forces to his own ends .
 Those who rule seek to confine education to what will do no more than preserve the existing order of rulers and ruled . But the latter part of humanity’s history has seen the arrival of class-divided orders of society .
 On the whole, man under capitalism has not learned to study the economic foundation of his world to probe into its shams and anomalies, says the author .
 The social system has long outlived its justification as a phase of social evolution . It hangs on with its spoilation of personalilies, its unnatural relationships and its sordid purpose . And so, with the acquiescence of nearly everyone, the social system is accepted .
 Nothing so determines the character of man as his manner of securing his means of living, says the author . Nothing so much determines a man's character as how he secures his living, he says .
 Of legitimate ways of securing these means under capitalism under capitalism there are only two--the employment of each of which is dependant upon the sucial class to which each man belongs . This is only one of the two legitimate ways to secure employment under capitalism .
 By his very position in capitalist society, therefore, this person becomes a parasite, an exploiter . By his position in capitalism society, he is a parasite and exploiter, he says . He says: "By his very . position, however, he becomes a . parasite, he
 "No matter if his inclination be one of kindliness, his survival as a capitalist entails expropriation trom his fellows," he says . "No no matter if he is kind, he must expropriate his fellows"
 To remain a contending factor in the competition for markets he must offer the commodities produced by his workers at competitive prices . More, to remain in the . competition for . markets, he must . offer the products produced by . workers at . competitive prices, he says .
 Wages must be kept as low as possible; output pushed to the highest reachable peak . Wages should be kept low, says German Chancellor Angela Merkel .
 He becomes a fevered participant in the capitalist rat-race, the ruthless strikebreaker . He becomes the hard business man, the hard .
 As a man he may have repugnance towards the thought of war, as a capitalist he may quite well find justification in a conflict which has for its aim the preservation of markets and market accessories from the hands of foreign rivals .
 This is the way in which the existing order forces the capitalist to behave. This is how he behaves in the capitalist world, he says .
 He gets off lightly compared with the men and women of the working class . But he is not the only person to be compared to the working-class, he says .
 These are the people, overwhelmingly exceeding in numbers the members of the capitalist class, who daily are compelled, by the necessity of getting a living, to sell their energies to the capitalists .
 Each and every one oi of these workers cannot escape the brusa with waich capitalism tars thei. But, however “ posh, ™ respectable “, y 55 or “ degrading ” the means of their getting a living, each and every worker
 Ine better-paia workers smug witn a tancied superiority and an imagined exclusiveness trom working-class dependence on wages . But they are nonetheless just as reliant as other workers on their salaries .
 Struggling to maintain the appearances expected of tneir ‘good position’ they lead lives, very often, of gilded poverty . Struggled to maintain appearances expected to be a good position, they live lives of poverty .
 The foreman, once ‘one of the men’, has accepted promotion because of his inability to manage on his former wages . He accepted promotion to become a foreman because he was unable to manage .
 Expected by his employers to prevent slacking and to maintain output, he must now boldly show himself as committed solely to the interests of production, the overseer with the whip, or, to preserve continued popularity among his former bench-fellows . He must resort to the under-
 'For the sake of a ‘bigger shilling’, they take a job that nauseates by its unhealthy conditions, its tediousness, or its lifeless repetition . Very often, for the sake . They take jobs that nauseate by their unhealthy conditions or tediousness .
 Sufferers often feel that for all the dayto-day striving they never reach a condition more comfortable than that of just getting by . And, although the cause may be unknown to the sufferers, it is frequently felt that it is often felt that the cause of the condition is unknown
 Post office clerks, curt or nice shop assistants, unashamed “behind. time” bus drivers and conductors are examples of the human products of capitalist society .
 Critics are members of the working class themselves, and in all cases the creatures of capitalism . And ever commenting on the faults of these are the critics, says the author .
 Not recognising that here is behaviour engendered by capitalist environment, they condemn what they call the basic nature of the offenders . They condemn 'basic nature' of offenders, not recognising the behaviour of capitalist environment .
 Instead of being helpful and courteous to the public they are disinterested and curt, they are curt . Instead of helping and courting the public, they're disinterested, curt. Instead of helpful, they’re disinterested .
 The universal compulsion upon the working class to go to work is the most nauseating of tasks in order to get the necessary wages to exist upon . Ironically, this is true when one considers the universal compulsion .
 Of course it's nice to think of men doing well-loved work with happy heart, and with no thought of repayment . Of course, it is nice to . think of . doing well . work with happiness .
 Of course, there are many of us who feel the revulsion against the indignities, the incongeniality and the oppressiveness of our Occupations . The reasons we keep at these Occupations (and a proof of our wageslavery) is because, ‘to keep alive
 The salesman in whom smooth falsification has become so much a part that he cannot eradicate it from his behaviour outside business, he can't eradicate it . The salesman is deceived into believing that the training he receives is not to make him a killer .
 The youngster is attracted to the violence of the age and experiences a thrill in embarking upon a little violence himself . The youngster devises and uses the most diabolically destructive weapons in the name of "defence"
 Sometimes the clash between capitalism and the ideals of mankind produces ideas which contrast with those promoted by ruling class propagandists .
 Oppression, anomalies, inequalities, cutthroat practices and preparation for wars that threaten to imperil the whole of mankind, brings into being the rebels against these ills . For instance, the existence of Oppression and anomalies, . inequalities, . and . preparation for war that threaten
 Most of those express themselves through political or humanitarian organisations which lack the sound sociological knowledge which alone can promote action that will eradicate the anti-socialist behaviour objected to . Most of these organisations are political or socialists .
 These rebels remain, ardently protesting against the horror of nuclear -war, pleading that votes for particular individuals might serve beneficent ends, but missing altogether and failing to deal with the real cause of the trouble . Thus these rebels remain .
 The seed of capitalism, as of all social orders, is the seed of its own destruction . But within the womb of capitalism is the seeds of its destruction, writes David Frum .
 The soldier . 1961 around them, and to base upon scientific fact their efforts towards a social reconstruction. There are some who have sought to understand the world. There were some who were seeking to understand .
 Later, we set sail for new horizons, also to find the same old wage slavery elsewhere . We set sail, also find the . same old wages slavery elsewhere. We find it again, also in the .
 Such auctions of working class “ property” never hit the headlines . But, such auctions of such property never hit headlines .
 The Cavalier painting with the £182,000 touch is a recent Franz Hals write-up . They prefer such stories as the recent write-ups of Hals .
 Rubens painting Adoration of the Magi from the late Duke of Westminster's collection realised £275,000 in June 1959 .
 Westminster Diamond Tiara sold for £110,000 . The following day's sale saw bidding begin at £40,000 and close on the selling price . The Westminster diamond Tiara was sold at auction for £100,000 at the end of the day .
 A collection of porcelain belonging to the Marquess of Exeter, was sold in July for a total of £21,250 . A 45 piece dessert dessert service from the above collection, realized 4,800 guineas . A total of 45 pieces were sold for £21
 Christie’s 1959/60 season turnover was £3,500,000, a substantial increase on the previous year . A diamond and sapphire necklet belonging to the Earl of Harewood was knocked down for a mere £28,000 .
 Messrs Christie's have been providing opportunities since 1766 . Their records must show the handling of a sizeable proportion of the wealth of the ruling class .
 Sales can often equal 5 or 10 weeks’ wages of a member of the working class . One nod of the head at the sales can often amount to 10 weeks' wages .
 The assumption that those who collect, can afford to pay the piper is never in doubt . It runs through most of the sales literature of these firms .
 Ministry's separate Index figure for “housing “ costs has risen continuously for 10 years and particularly since 1956 .
 It is now a third higher than in January 1956 and two-thirds higher than it was in 1950 .
 People assumed to spend over nine times as much on all other items of expenditure as they do on rent, rates, etc. This sharp rise has had comparatively little effect on the final Retail Price Index . People assume they spend nine times more on other items than on rent and rates .
 Many people will find that they spend far more than the assumed proportions on rent etc.; which would not of itself invalidate the Ministry's assumption because there are some rents which represent a very much smaller percentage .
 With the rapid rise of housing costs in recent years it is probable that a larger proportion than the official 8. per cent of expenditure goes on rent, rates, water charges and repairs .
 The average increase of rents since 1938 has been far less than the per, centage increase of food prices, clothing prices, or drink and tobacco .
 Economists giving their views on the course of trade and business prospects are curiously like doctors telling the relatives how the patient is fairing—probably for the same reason, that they are not sure . American Depression .
 Christie's literature is of course written for the ‘ haves” in society . Christie’s literature is often written for ‘has’ in society. Christie's work is written for 'has' in society, not the haves .
 The vast majority, the * have-nots, need a world in which auction sales and all other commercial paraphernalia will be thrown overboard and the means of life made accessible for all,’s’
 If governments and their economic advisers could make exact diagnoses and prescribe specific and certain remedies, they could be equally confident . And if they could make specific and specific remedies they could, they should also be confident, they would be equally sure .
 As it is, they are never quite sure whether things are getting better or worse . But as they are, they will never quite know whether things have changed or worse.
 If they fear the worst it is best not to say so because something may turn up . In any event spreading gloom may itself help on a downward slide .
 The reassuring statements of last autumn have slowly given place to admissions that American industry is in a rather bad way . So it is not surprising that the reassuring statements were given place by last autumn .
 President's council of economic advisers told Congress that it would be unreasonable to expect recovery until after mid-year . But only a week later the news of six million unemployed was the worst since before the war .
 The chairman of the council disclosed other reasons for>not taking an optimistic ‘view. And’ the chairman of . the chairman . disclosed other . reasons for not taking an . optimistic view. 58 SOCIALIST STANDARD, APRIL 1961 .
 He pointed out that even when the upturn in business does take place it will not be the solution to the longer term problem of a growing gap between production and productive capacity .
 Treasury announced in February that investment in manufacture has been rising very fast . Building of new factories this year is expected to be 40 per cent higher than last year .
 The first is that all countries are engaged in the same competitive rat race of hoping to be better off in the future but not now . The second is that the world is engaged in a competitive rat-race of hope for a better future .
 The second is that a sudden burst of 40 per cent more factories will be followed by a slackening off of factory building and by a burst of additional output when they are completed . This in a situation in which the “sellers market ” phase after the war has long since
 No examination of the ideas of physiocracy would be complete without a reference to those who took up and developed Quesnay’s teachings .
 Turgot was appointed ControllerGeneral of the Finances in 1774 . Author of work on the subject of physiocracy, (Reflections on the Formation and Distribution of Wealth)
 Another of Quesnay’s pupils who became political chief of the physivcratic school, was the Marquis Victor de Mirabeau, generall, known as the elder . The Marquis was also a member of the Royal Family of the French .
 The physiocratic doctrine soon spread from France to other countries, but made little impression in England . It had immense influence in Germany, where Karl Friedrich, Margrave of Baden, aided by Schlettween, made an unsuccessful attempt to put in practice .
 Leopold I, Grand Duke of Tuscany, endeavoured to introduce a ‘land tax’ in his duchy . The land tax was introduced in the 17th century .
 Joseph If, Catherine, and most of the other monarchs of the period, were affected and influenced by physiocratic ideas . Joseph If and Catherine If were influenced by physiological ideas .
 After Quesnay's death in 1774, dissensions broke out among the French physiocrats, chiefly because of Condillac . Condillac insisted that commerce and industry were fruitful” as well as agriculture, which was unorthodox to others .
 The disputes that followed paved the way for the collapse of the movement . The disputes led to the end of the revolution .
 The dismissal of Turgot from office as a result of the poor condition of the State treasury, the bad harvest of 1775, the rise in the price of bread, and the bread riots all over the country all helped this collapse .
 The French revolution brought the birth of Modern Capitalism to the realm of the past . The ideas of the Physiocrats did not escape criticism, even in the country of its origin .
 Linguet wrote ironically about conditions of the period, appzars to defend chattel slavery against wage slavery, and ridicules all the physiocratic ideas of property .
 It is poverty which drives them to market to dance attendance upon the masters who might wish to buy them . Poverty compels them to kneel hefore the rich, and to beg of them permission to enrich them .
 They must find someone to sent them or dic. They can live only by renting their hands, they must find a person to send them .
 Believe me, for his interest, and for your own, leave them in the persuasion where they now are. That this cur which bays at them has more power itself alone than all they together. Leave them in .
 Trenaman & McQuail, Methuen 30/A Hestony of Mopenn France, Alfred Cobham, Pelican $'their fold, society society society. $1,000 .
 Necker shows that the development of the productive forces of the workers merely permits the worker to devote less time to the reproduction of his own wages and more to the enrichment of his employer . Necker in his work shows that .
 Neck2r derives profit and rent, the wealth of the capitalist class from surplus labour . The importance of this is that Neck2R derives profit from profit and rents from surplus work .
 He sees it only as relative surplus value produced not by the prolongation of the working day but by a reduction of the necessary labour time . But he sees it as a result of a reduction in the necessary time .
 The following quote from his Administration of French Finances snows the class position of his time . The quote is from the President of France during his administration .
 That class in society whose fate seems as though . seems . fixed by social laws is composed of all those who, living by the labour of their hands, receive the imperious law of the proprietors .
 Their mutual competition and the urgency of their wants constitutes their dependency . These circumstances can be no way change. The circumstances can't be changed .
 In assessing the value and place of physiocracy in any history of political economy, we must take into account the economic development of France and other countries where the doctrine was accepted . We must take to account the development of the doctrine .
 physiocracy can be seen as 4 link in the chain that leads up to and influences later economists . For us today. physiocracy. can be . seen as a 4-link in the . chain that . leads up . to . and influences . later economists. for us today .
 Its weakness has been shown by Marx in Volume 2 of Capital as already mentioned in these notes . Finally, its weakness was shown in Volume 1 of Capital .
 RA LONDON OUTDOOR MEETINGS Sandays Hyde Park 3ax Fast Street, Walworth April 2nd & 23d April 19h April 16th & 30th Tharsdays Tower Hill, 12,30—2 p m London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist
 Strong nationalist parties grew up and at Brussels Conference last year they made their surprise demand for independence within six months . They made the surprise demand at the Brussels Conference in January last year .
 The climb-down in Brussels was followed by the elections in June, in which the nationalists swept the board . The climb down in Brussels followed by a series of national elections .
 Unitarians and federalists had a decisive lead but no section of them had a clear lead . The federalists and the unitarians had to fight it out in the ring .
 Mr Legum indicts the Belgians, reveals Tshombe as a vicious fop . disposes of the notion that Lumumba was baking a troubled pie for Moscow to stick its thumbs into .
 Mr Legum’s suggested remedies are essentially old hat and. not surprisingly. ignore the commercial nature of society which is the real causz of the strife in the Congo . The real cause of the unrest is commercial society .
 It is the more welcome because it does meet the principle points of difference between us, even if | I am right in my submission that it promptly runs away from them again .
 J feel that a means-test of any variety should be repugnant to both of us . But I want to know about it and J feels that it should be a good thing to know .
 Administrative tyranny against communal freedom, stateism against decentralisation; indeed, syndicalism versus the commune . These are not trivial points for they involve the tremendous issue of administrative tyranny vs communal freedom .
 Quality craftsmanship beats factory products in length of life four or five times over, says farmer . Mass-production of everything is a recipe for mass production .
 In food products and manufactures alike it is recognised that it costs six times as much to sell an article as it does to make it .
 Socialism would avoid them . by leaving production and consumption to loosely articulated small units . The difference is in transport costs, insurances, marketing charges, agency profits, wholesale and retail percentages .
 The definition we gave was that everything that is in and on the earth would be the common possession of all mankind . The definition was that all of the world's possessions would be common possession, all mankind would have to own .
 In our property and privilege ridden society it is not easy to give a helpful illustration of what we mean, but we will try . We will try.
 Air is the common possession of all mankind, you can breathe as much of it as you like without anyone raising an objection . Air is a common possession, and no one can object to it being breathed in .
 You can drink as much water as you like at a public fountain . Similarly, you can drink water as much as you want at public water fountains .
 The point I wish to make here is that there is nothing to stop such development except the fact that the workers are in the main indifferent to the development of the country .
 There are the orthodox co-operative societies, of course, numbering in membership ten millions, a quarter of ‘the population, owning the means and instruments of production and distribution .
 The business of any genuine co-operative group is not to beat anything or anybody, but to cooperate . Co-operation groups must cooperate not beat anything, but cooperate, says co-op leader .
 As it stands, however, the co-operative societies, after a-century-and-a-half’s dedicated membership rise to the giddy height of “save up for summer holidays ” But fall lamentably short of any co-op commonwealth — whatever
 The competitive ratrace is still held sacred. Not because there is anything at all in the way unless the competitive rat race is held sacred . The sport is still being held sacred, even though there is nothing in it .
 The one is possible only where control of the means of production is direct and immediate . Democracy only only where the people are in direct and effective touch with public affairs .
 The other cannot be more than an impersonal power process to be rendered quite ghastly by modern automation and atomic energy . The other can be more . than a power process .
 With the present drift towards a totalitarian economy, and in trades-union politics the one-party state. your own utopian belief in a miraculous ‘dawn’ upon the morrow of an equally miraculous release of pent-up proletarian virtue is as abstract and full of heles
 The people with the intelligence to build up the new society will also have the intelligence not to expect the impossible . The new society is built up by the intelligence of the people who will be able to build it up, it says .
 The Literatur3 Committee finds out from branches what literature they require . The local branches do the assessing .
 They make an estimate from experience of what further supplies are required . They then estimate what supplies will be needed .
 SOCIALIST STANDARD, APRIL branches and individuals . They then obtain from the printer the total amount they have arrived at and proceed to fulfil the needs of the .
 There is no administrative tyranny in this, it is purely a technical problem, it's a technical issue, says the BBC . There are no 'administrative tyranny' in this case, it says .
 Production in cach area will be based on what individuals in that area nced— they will make their own assessment of what they need . Production will be made based on the needs of those in the area . Production is based on that assessment .
 The articles will be available in suitable places in the crea and all that people will have to do is to go there and take what they want . Experience will enable the production assessors to have available sufficient in quantity and variety .
 We used the evxample of a self-service store in the limited sense that people can go there and take what they want of what is available . People can go to the store and take whatever they want, but not what they need .
 While the new society is getting on its feet there may be people who. still . still affiicted with the possessive inclinations of the past . may want to low themselves up with more than they need . In that instance, of course. they nave to pay for what
 These arrangements are just technical questions which can be dealt with by groups of people at given centres who are interested in this kind of work . These arrangements can be handled by groups who want to deal with technical questions .
 In the future society there will be no isolated communities, split off from the rest of the world, says the author of the book "In the Future Society, there will not be isolated communities"
 They will all be part of a world Socialist system, decentralised but each working in harmony with the rest of the world . without statism or tyranny, to enable everyone to live a useful and satisfactory life .
 If there aro occupations that are necessary but uninteresting then some method of sharing will be devised . If there is no need to be an occupation that is uninteresting, it will be a form of sharing .
 A great deal that is mass produced nowadays will be unnecessary in the future . A great amount of mass produced today will probably be unnecessary, says the author .
 The mass produced article is as a tule the cheap the cheap and the short-lived and the lacking in variety. Mass produced articles are as well as the cheap, the short and the variety.
 Whether mass production saves an appreciable amount of labour in the long run is questionable . Mass production saves a lot of labour, but it's questionable whether it saves it all .
 "The aim will be to limit that kind of work as much as possible," says Mark Hughes . "Obviously the aim is to be able to limit it as much of possible" says Hughes .
 If mass production still operates it will only be in operation in instances where it is essential for the benefit of the community . The accent will be on craftsmanship, and if mass production is still operating, it will be in service to the community, the author says .
 We agree with Lord Amwell’s description of orthodox co-operative societies as just capitalist concerns in which petty investors have neither . nor influence, though they can make a lot of nyise at times . More than this we cannot say, but we agree .
 Socialist Standard 1961: 'We do not believe in any miraculous dawn' Socialist Standard was published by the Socialist Party in 1961 . The Socialist Party was founded in 1968 .
 We believe in the developmeni of understanding, which will be transferred into action by the mass of the population who suffer under the present system . We are committed to the development of understanding .
 Socialism can only be established when the 1961 6l majority of society understand it. want it. and take action to bring it about. The 1961 majority of the population want it .
 There is no other way, but there are plenty of roads into the morass of confusion and disillusion . There is plenty of ways to get into trouble with the world's most powerful politicians .
 Orphaned very young, he eventually entered a naval training school, then as sailor and musician, travelled the wide world for the better part of twenty years . He travelled the world as a musician and sailor and travelled as a sailor .
 Bill was the last to question the justice or sanity of the social system . OF such stull is capitalism made. and Bill was last to ask the justice . of the system .
 He chose civilian life and by the early twenties had settled in a London suburb to raise a small family . Having survived the tirst world war-toend-wars he chose civilian .
 Trained to worship at the shrine of service and security he became a post office worker . Trained as a member of the guard of honour, he now works in the post office .
 He had served his king and country; he would now serve neighbours in the role of conscientious workman . He would serve his neighbours as conscientious workmen .
 If. the social system has anything te offer jt perfect preles one would assume Bill’s rake-off was worthy of attention—certainh worthy of Bill.
 "He worked hard. pinched nothing, acknowledged his station” doffed his hat to the vicar, was faithful to his wife and suffered children—his own and everyone else’s— with immemeasurable patience . He worked hard and suffered with patience
 I'm afraid. is the point at which. dear reader you are in for a shock. I'm sorry. This is not the first time I've seen this article .
 True he squandered good money on ten fags a day, a weekly flutter / on the Pools and a pint or two at thy/ local on Sunday mornings . True he spent good money a day. A pint or a pint of beer at the local pub .
 He did. in fac. challenge the staty qi and put his findings to his father in no unceviain terms . He did . in fac in fac . challenge to his . father and put the findings to him .
 Discussions played merry hell with the sanctuary of Bill's apathy but to no avail . Discussions play merry hell in the sanctuary but no avail.
 Bill either wouldn't or couldn't sec the pyint—or more precisely, the pointlessness . Bill or not Bill wouldn't have been able to sec sec sec. The pointlessness of sec securing a pyint was a mistake, but it was not .
 With typical humility Bill swallowed pride when the second world war-toend-wars blew up and his son contracted out of it . Bill swallowed nis pride when he swallowed his pride and accepted it .
 His sen. summoned by telegram, found fem picking at charred and shattered remains of his paltry goods and chatiels . Discussions continued in letters or during their infreyuent meetings when his son visited Gome while doing land work in various parts of the country .
 His hair changed colour overnight. humour drained from his personality . His hair was dyed dyed black .
 Three sears later he way pensioned off ay a worker . Months more he languished on fits bob a week, then died . Three sear years later he was pensioned .
 No hope is held Out of a ‘peace treaty’ except with America . Hie estate totalled £47.4million .
 Britain would hurl her might in vain. and who could inflict damage, where they can inflict it all, with impunity. and where they could inflict all the damage with impunity .
 They could starve us out by Stopping their own and Canadian wheat at the grancrics . Stopping them out could be a way of starving us out of the food supply .
 It is admitted that on the day when the U.S. and Canada join hands the “mother country ” has voted fo submit . The U.N. should not have to submit .
 On that dav the treaty hecomes in all eves what from the first it must he in reality -waste paper . On that . The treaty he comes in all . eves . what from . the first . it must . he must be a waste paper .
 No responsible person Suggests a treaty with that country . Yet it is Germany that has made the British Liberal Government increase its annual Naval Estimates £14,000,000 in five years .
 A treaty with Germany would bring peace no nearer because, in the face of conflicting interests (without which they would nof fight in any event), the treaty would not be worth the cost of its inscription . Just as a treaty with America brings peace no closer because the two could not fight
 The humbug. therefore. of the cry ‘of ‘Peace” and “ Disarmament,” is apparent, says the author .
 The British Liberal Government are voling the enormous sum of 75.00.00.) for war . The Lib Dems say they have peace if they have to fight for it, but they want war .
 They talked about capitalism, war, poverty, ugliness, man’s inhumanity to. man and the way to resolve these social ills through Sociatism . They talked .
 It could be said that Bill had to learn the hard way, but he learned in the end . Bill had a tough time, but it was a good thing for him to learn, he says .
 One might be tempted to dismiss Bill as a felic of the past, but nothing could be further from the truth . Nothing could be wrong from the fact, says the author of the book .
 There are millions of Bills in the world today, all destined to receive the same treatment until they challenge the system that mocks their every virtue as "good " human beings"
 The Lot of the Miner Deer down in the efficient modernised, mechanised and electrified mines . Men still grovel, sweat and inhale black dust .
 Coal companies have all the public's support for any small inconveniences met with while extracting Our Coal . They have all . The public's . support for the project .
 In their clean trim offices where thexsupporting beams never collapse, they think mining has reached the millenium . In their offices they think . the clean trim . offices where . thex support beams never . collapse never collapse .
 Peace is possible only at the cost of crushing armaments -- or national extinction . So they scream “peace ” by waypofof a soft answer to turn away wrath . The result will demonstrate that peace . even as the capitalist understands it, is possible .
 One-half of the Labour Members in Parliament came up to scratch to save the face of their party by voting against the Liberals' immense Naval Estimates .
 Keir Hardie says the party were bribed, the Osborne Bill being the price of their defection . Hardie should know, and he should know .
 We wonder how many would have opposed the Estimates had they been really in danger . But we wonder if they were in danger.
 Ken Hardie says the Trade Union Act was the Liberal Govern ment’s bribe to get Labour MPs to vote for increased armaments . Hardie: ‘How many would dare have gone back to their Liberal constituencies with the confession on their lips that they had helped to defeat a
 There are better jobs outside the pit they think, which only shows the extent of their ingratitude . There are also better jobs out of the pit than they think .
 In an age that reaches for the myon, mining of coal a mile under See without turning men into moles, would seem rather a small order .
 We are a paradoxical society; aspiring to dizzy heights we plumb the depths of human exploitation . But ours 1s 4 society is 1s . We aspire to dizzying heights but plumbs the depths .
 At the end of the last century after a life-time of study that saved untold millions, Louis Pasteur commented regretfully on this terrible and characteristic feature of our advanced civilization .
 Jarge numbers of medical workers all over the world are busy curing diseases and wiping out plagues and fevers while other men are devoting all their skills to designing bombs which can shrivel whole cities . Another section of the industry sees profits threatened and resists progress .
 "The complexity of the antagonisms and contradictions in any one trade would fill a book" The complexity of this trade is the subject of a book .
 The miners’ employer, anonymous shareholder though he is, views the goose as coldly and dispassionately as the former mine-owner did . He levels the machine against the worker as keenly as his nineteenth century counterpart did, when-he sees the possibility of increasing profits .
 To tend it the man must go at the machine's speed and this proves a great strain . To tend the machine, the man has to travel at the speed of the machine . This is a huge strain on both physically and mentally .
 He may work fewer hours but the pace during those SOCTALIST STANDARD, APRIJ hours has become fiercer . The pace of those hours has also increased in recent years .
 The muri now works for the machine; he has hecome the appendage of a machine . He has he come to be an appendage to a machine, the muri .
 The miner is free to change his occupation and let us admit he is the best judge of whether the change is a good one .
 It is a sad, as well as a safe thing to say, that he has only thrown off some of his shackles . But it is a . sad, but a . safe thing, it is sad, that it is also safe to say . It's a sad thing to
 A sensitive ear can still detect above the din of the bright and busy factory . A rattle and clink of chains can still be heard in the factory . The rattle of chains is still a sign of life inside a factory .
 As happens every vear the TUG ‘s pre budget recommendations have been placed before the Chancellor of the Exchequer . As in past recommendations platitudes abound .
 The T.U.C. says it is based on a need for long term planning . It would appear that this year's remedy is economic expansion with an export drive .
 Government should take a 'calculated risk' by controlling non-essential imports, the T.U.C. says . The T.A. says for the export drive to succeed not only physical controls are needed .
 T.U.C. warned that although the measures suggested may be unpopular the alternatives could be worse . The T.A.C.'s further warning was that although it was unpopular, the alternatives may be worse.
 It would appear from all this that the workers have very little choice either wav. The workers have little choice but to live with their families, says CNN.com.com .
 The nature of capitalist. production compels all other capitalist nations to introduce the same measures . The contradictions of the system with all its disasirous consequences is made more obvious .
 Wit London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 BRANCH MEWS ccrcinecs from pore 64 month .
 The first, on Vridas, April Tth, deals with post-war Germans, and the second, on Friday, April 28th. subject, is the eventful year of 1848 .
 Events last month were a film show and a visit to the Tate Gallery . The usual get-together at 2 member's heme in the evening .
 The next canvass in the Actom ana will he held on April 9h time and meeting place to he announced .
 Attendance of members at Branch meetings has heen remarkably high of late . Attendance at Branch meeting has been remarkably high this year .
 Islington Branch continucs to hold successful lunch hour meetings every Thursday at Tower Hill . Tower Hill Branch continues to meet with members of the public .
 Attentive audiences of two to three hundred are hecoming a regular feature of this feature series .
 The branch view seems to have been justified that members need to brush up their knowledge of contemporary religious theories . The branch views seem to be justified .
 Further lectures will be arranged later, covering Modern Nos-confosmism . So further lectures are scheduled for later dates .
 At the end of February, Comrade Bryant talked to the branch about Automation . At the same time, he spoke about the importance of Automation.
 A full fetaihy fromm the feremeh secretary. All, welcome. vind five A wri interested .
 At the beginning of the outdoor season in May, we shall try a canvass in Portsmouth and follow this with a meeting on the sea front in the aftermoun . We shall try to canvass  in Portsmouth before the start of outdoor season .
 Writers' classes are held in Wembley on alternate Friday evenings .
 Emphasis is on improving our style of writing by applying the yeneral principles of journalism —forceful presentation and economy of words . Emphasis has been laidehere on improving .
 We hope that the results will show themselves shortly in better articles for the Sociauist STanpagp .
 For seme time, fairl regular letters have passed between them and London . The pair have been married for more than a decade .
 The Soctalist movement over there is small and scattered . But it is an uphill struggle against isemendous odds, since the Soctist movement is small .
 Most members will already know of the demonstration for Socialism meeting being held at St. Paul's .
 This is a very special occasion and calls for the enthusiasm and practical assistance of all London comrades . This is an important occasion for the London comrades. This is not the first time we have seen this kind of occasion .
 From Monday, April 10th. until the meeting date, » programme has been arranged for advertising the event by distriouting handbills .
 The urgency and necessity for the wort, cannot be too strongly stressed . The urgency of the worts cannot be overstated .
 Daumier illustrates the inhumanity of capitalism and the savagery of the French ruling class in crushing working-class Paris May 1871 .
 Peter Hall, 10 Spring Grove Terrace, Leeds 6, is editor-in-chief of the Bradford & Leeds-based publication .
 EALING Fridays 8 pm, Memorial Hall, Windsor Road, near Ealing Broadway . Catt at above latter address, EALing Fridays 8pm .
 Alternate Wednesdays (10th & 24th May) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street. S.P,G.B, 2, 2: Davenport Road, SE6, NOTTINGHAM .
 Sooty 8th & 22nd May (formerly Basildon and Southend) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road, Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex .
 The Crypt, St. Cottis, 19 Kingswood Chase, Leigh-on-Sea, Essex, is at 8pm on May 5th May .
 Mondays 8pm at Barham Old Court, Barham Park, near Sudbury Town Station, Wembley, Wembley . P Mellor, 13 Waterloo Place, Brynhill, Swansea, Swansea .
 2nd and 4th Thursdays (Iith & 25th May) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12 .
 2nd and 4th Fridays (12th and 26th May) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason's Hill, SE18 .
 First Day of May is a time to reflect upon its significance for the working class .
 For the better part of fifty years we have devoted either the editorial or leading article of the SociALIst STANDARD to May Day . May Day is May Day, May Day.
 We do not need to check on every past issue to know what all those editorials have said . We do need to look at past editorials from the past . We need to find out what editors have said about the paper .
 May Day comes and goes, each May Day, of the widening gulf between the present and the past . If there is any essential difference to be found between them it will be in their growing awareness of widening gulf .
 All those editorials will have spoken about the origins of May Day in the struggles of workers in the past . May Day is a day of remembrance for those who lost their jobs in the workplace .
 Of the way in which it has gradually been losing its meaning for them in the present . Of course, of course, they are losing their meaning for the present. Of course they are also losing their way in the future .
 Of how its message has been distorted and degraded over the years by so many people and parties claiming to be Socialist—but who are far from being so . Of how many people . claiming to . be Socialist . but who are . far from . being so, the Socialist Party has been
 The event was born in the spirit of the international brotherhood of the working class . It has become an occasion for displays of the crudest nationalism and military pageantry . Above all, they will have reflected on how an idea that, for all its shortcomings, at least had some
 May Day reminds one of the few occasions to enthusing workers to come together and demonstrate politically . May Day is one of few occasions in which workers come together to demonstrate politically.
 May Day gives * the opportunity to engage in discussion with them as individuals . May Day is May Day, May Day .
 This year we are holding two open-air rallies, one in London and the other in Glasgow . This year's rallies will be held in London, Glasgow and Glasgow, and will take place in November .
 Each of the meetings will be followed by a large indoor meeting in the evening .
 The cause we stand for is international Socialism. In a world of sordid nationalism and political reformism, the cause is international socialism. We stand for international Socialism .
 The total rose from 79,020 in 1900 to 100,609 in 1905, while between 1905 and 1907 there was a further striking increase . The figures were published in 1907 .
 Evidence was given showing that the speed of punching. shearing. bending. and squeczing machines had increased . As regards engincering. the increased speed of cutting tools was referred to .
 In iron and stcel works, and in tinplate works, the Committee told that improved machinery had led to increased speed .
 There was something of a diversity of opinion as regards Piece Work, but generally the evidence was that piece work, task work, and bonus systems of payment tended to cause undue hurry .
 May Day, 1961, is a mental thing worth demonstrating for, more confidently and more effectively than ever before, this May Day . This May Day is 1961 .
 Azikiwe, the Govéfnor-General of Nigeria, put on the uniform of a fieldmarshal and addressed the two houses of the Nigerian Parliament . He was the Governor of Nigeria .
 Governor-General said the Government intended to seck expert advice on how to establish an air force . In the first speech from the throne by a Nigerian governor-General, he said the government intended to seek expert advice .
 The new Nigerian ruling class are losing no time in building up armed forces to protect or extend their interests both at home and abroad . Nigeria's new ruling class have built up an army to protect their interests .
 The Nigerian government has established its rule over the people of Nigeria, writes Fem Fem Femi Oladeji . "They have established their rule over their people," he says .
 The idea of gay, fashionable Paris, the city of elegance and spacious boulevards, took a hard knock recently . Paris has been hit by a series of incidents in recent weeks .
 The French capital has a history of living conditions in Paris . The city has been hit hard by the rise of Parisians in recent years .
 Of 2,700,000 Cdwellings in the Parisian area, 800,000 have been condemned as unhealthy . Of some 2, 700,000 people living in the area, the Paris area has been declared unhealthy . The Parisian city has a population of around 2,
 Of the homes in the city itself, only 17 per cent have a bathroom, while in the “suburbs the figure sinks to just over ten per cent .
 There is already a “housing drive’s in progress to “solve” the slum problem .
 Millions of French immigrants have been born in Paris in the last five years . Thousands more stream in every year from the provinces . 600,000 in the past five years have been in France .
 There is more to Paris than the tourists at the Arc de Triomphe and the Champs Elysées ever see . Paris is home to the world's most famous landmarks .
 One would have thought clerics were the last people to be able to accuse anyone else of taking fiction for reality . One of the last things to be accused of being taken for granted by anyone else .
 Easter is a Christian celebration . Get your Easter greetings cards here. Get your cards here .
 After making Christmas the excuse for an intensive,two months’ sales campaign, they appear to be starting on Easter . They appear to have started on Easter. After Christmas, they will be launching an Easter campaign .
 All that remains now is for the supermarkets to put up large notices reminding shoppers of their duty to fast during Lent .
 The usual products of Commonwealth Prime Ministers’ conferences have been toothy photographs and solemn, empty communiques . Astonishing, then, was the campaign to expel South Africa .
 Racial discrimination is quite detestable, but it is only one of many types of suppression . Racial suppression is not the only type of suppression, it is suppression of racial discrimination .
 Premiers making a pact with their consciences . Premiers' decision not just a pact, it was a pact between them and their conscience .
 The Commonwealth, despite the unctuous propaganda about it, is nothing more than a world-wide trading tie-up . City Editors anxiously looked into the commercial effects of it all after South Africa’s withdrawal .
 The ganging-up against South Africa may have been partly inspired by political motives, but was also a reflection of the South African industrialists’ opposition to Verwoerd’s policies . The gang-up was partly motivated by political reasons .
 Let no one think that it was the result of charitable concern for the African underdog . Let nobody think that . It was a charity effort to help African underdogs, it was .
 President Kennedy was fascinated by the ruthless energy of President Kennedy . The Washington Whirlwind is the story of the Kennedy presidency .
 White House correspondents tell us that Kennedy is busy because he is building a new America . There are hopeful murmurings about — young aspirations, new frontiers, and so on, There are nothing new in this.
 Eisenhower was described as the man to bring probity and courage to U.S. government . Eisenhower brought probity, courage and probity to the United States .
 Eisenhower era left behind a sticky unemployment problem; during the first quarter of this year there were 54 million people out of work in the United States .
 Kennedy administration will find that American capitalism has turned up a few other problems . It will find the Kennedy administration sorts these problems, it will find .
 Whatever the personal characteristics of a leader, his actions and reputation are largely governed by the conditions of capitalism which he tries to control . Whatever the . actions and his reputation are . governed by . the conditions which he . tries to . control, he said .
 Perhaps it is as well for United States capitalism that the President is so lively that he's so lively. Perhaps it's as well as United States capitalist that he is lively.
 Mr WeEDGWOOD BENN has fought a furious fight against his transfer to the House of Lords . Mr WeedGWOOD has been kicked out of the house of Lords by the Labour Party .
 Despite his struggles, the government showed that they were determined to have him kicked upstairs . Some lobby correspondents whispered that Mr Macmillan personally gave the thumbs-down .
 The P.M. is said to be at odds with Lord Hailsham and doesn't want to set a precedent which might bring him back to the Commons .
 Mr Benn’s constituency used to elect Sir Stafford Cripps, who was an opponent of royalty, titles and the rest .
 By the time Labour achieved power in 1945, they had dropped their old pledge about the Lords .
 'It is Mr Benn’s bad luck to have been bord the son of a peer. Now, they do their bit towards helping the Upper House alive by supplying their share of life peerages,’ Mr Benn said .
 Alan Brown gave up the whip because he thinks that the party is too soft on unilateralists . Mr Brown was not bothered by such discomforts, he says .
 The Labour leaders know that British capitalism must have the most efficient weapons and armed forces possible . Object to the “eat-our-cake-and-have-it ” attitude of the unilateralists in the party .
 Tories also have splits, on colonial policy and other issues . But it is as well as well to be reminded that the Tories have their splits . It is also important to remember that the Conservatives have their own splits, too .
 Whatever incidental quarrels they may have, they all agree about wanting capitalism to stay . "Capitalism is here to stay," says the president of the U.S. Senate .
 Tanganyika has just achieved its independence, and as the politicians there have been telling the workers that this is the most glorious event in their lives, they had visions of celebrating the -great occasion .
 We will make nothing of Tanganyika and we will set no example in the world unless it be by renewed efforts of hard work. We will set ourselves apart from the rest of the world, he said . We will not set ourselves an example of the people we are trying to emulate
 It is just as logical that our way of looking at things should produce one set of consequences as it is that the outlook of the pro-capitalist organisations should produce another . It is also logical that the views of pro-capital organisations should be produced another way .
 As an organisation founded upon class consciousness and Socialist understanding, what we say about wars, crises, housing, racism, crime and poverty must be fundamentally different from what those organisations founded upon patriotism and ignorance say about these things .
 In the relationship of leader and follower are to be found the expression of all the prejudice, alrogance, and ignorance which make the continuation of capitalism possible . The relationship of a leader and a follower is found to be expression of prejudice and ignorance .
 "No leader can advance further than the concepts and limited objectives of those who follow," says President Barack Obama . Obama: "We are not going to be able to advance further"
 It is therefore this situation that controls the leader, not the other way round, it is the leader . The situation is now the situation in which the leader controls the situation .
 They are at all times the products of events, and their popularity rises and falls according to how they act in given circumstances . They rise and fall depending on the circumstances of the person they are involved in their life .
 It Is not a question of betrayal, but the inevitable disillusionment that comes trom ignorance . It is not the question of “betrayal’s betrayal,” but ‘disillusionment’ that comes from ignorance .
 Capitalism, with its minority class Ownership of the means of production, the profit motive, and the seething antagonisms which it generates throughout the world, prevent any fulfilment for the working-class in terms of peace and happiness . Capitalism .
 Having trusted their leaders of kinds and not having yet achieved socialist understanding, they end up bewildered and frustrated . Having trusted leaders of all kinds, they often end up confused and frustrated. They end up having to rely on their leaders to achieve socialist understanding .
 This pitiful process is already showing itself in those parts of Africa where capitalism is just coming into its own . This is not the first time capitalism has come to an end in Africa .
 As capitalism develops in Africa it brings the same problems and property conflicts common to capitalism everywhere, Nationalism . The expression of the rising capitalist interest throws up the “leaders” who are the agents through which the conflicting factions press their property claims .
 Once more the question of which group of blood-suckers, land-owners or industrialists, shall rule is rallying the workers around .
 Nothing dismays our Opponents more than when we tell them that we have no leaders and are opposed to the very idea of them . "Nothing dismays [opponents] more than . when we say we have . no leaders," she says . "We have no leader and are
 Despite the hundreds of leaders in the world (political, religious, trade union) and their utter failure to do anything about the plight of the world, that the faithful persist in believing that we can’t do anything without them. It is truly amazing, despite the .
 The ultimate logic of leadership and its ideal personification is the dictator . The dictator is the ultimate personification of leadership, the author says . The author says the dictator is a dictator .
 Lenin, who was probably the champion verbal acrobat of all time, was able to . ‘ negate democracy while posing as its supporter. Lenin,’ he said .
 The Soviet Socialist democracy is in no way inconsistent with the rule and dictatorship of one person . The will of a class is at times best realised by a dictator, who sometimes will accomplish more by himself .
 This contempt for the working-class was not shared by the founders of scientific Socialism, Marx and Engels . Engels and Marx were contemptuous of the working class, Engels said .
 The Marxist view is found in the Communist Manifesto, the joint work of Marx and Engels . Engels and Marx always addressed themselves to the working-class, not to any elite . The Marxist views are found in Marxist view of the working class, not elite .
 All previous historical movements were movements of minorities or in the interest of minorities . They spent their lives teaching and explaining, which, of course, is the last thing a leader can do, he says .
 The eee movement is the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority, in the interest of the vast majority . It is self-confessed and independent in the interests of the majority .
 What is true in the political field also holds good in the industrial side of the class-struggle, says David Frum .
 We have already mentioned trade-unions; a few points in elaboration are worth making. We also mention the importance of trade unions .
 The proper function of a trade union is to organise its members in the fight for better wages and conditions of work, says Simon Tisdall . The trade union should organise members to fight for a better wage and conditions, he says .
 To the extent that nationalism dominates the thinking of trade union members, so they will support the capitalists of a particular country against the international interest of their own class, writes David Cameron .
 They fall for the idea of doing what is good for their masters' country, writes David Cameron . "They get involved in the capitalists’ affairs of markets and production efficiency"
 As a result of trusting leaders, since the war workers have lost many opportunities to increase their wages, workers say . War workers have also lost opportunities to raise their wages .
 Even now, unofficial wages in some industries are well ahead of the trade union rate . There is a discrepancy between what workers can get when labour is relatively scarce, and what the unions accept as sufficient .
 The term “ human nature ” can only apply to those characteristics which are unalterably human . In fact, the need for food, air, water and so on, and some biological peculiarities, is unalterable human nature .
 There is a lot of evidence to show that, when the conditions are right, human beings do not behave in an anti-social manner . There is also evidence that humans behave in a positive way when they are in the right circumstances, says the author .
 Jens Bjerre spent several‘months living with the Kung Bushmen at Samangeigei . He spent several ‘months’ living with them .
 This natural feeling of solidarity within the clan begins in their childhood . This is the first time a clan has been united by a family member .
 Even though mothers for preference look after their own children, they are often seen looking after other children . Even suckling them if the child is hungry and its,own mother is not on the spot .
 The older children eat sometimes with one, sometimes with another family . They eat according to where they happen to be when they are hungry and when food is ready . Older children eat with one or another family, depending on where they're hungry .
 The children help collect firewood and food for the older people who cannot travel far . Sometimes they even sleep alongside them to keep them warm at night .
 These Bushmen are primitive people —they are, in fact, probably the oldest surviving human race . But they know that, were they to adopt the very forms of behaviour which so many in our “civilised society call unchangeable “human nature ”, they would
 The people of the world will establish Socialism because they want to live cooperatively, in a free and abundant society, says President Obama . The world will become socialism, he says .
 The Kung Bushmen will continue to practice the "virtues" which they have kept up for so long . They will, in fact, practice the “virtues “ which the Kung Bushman have . kept up,’s been doing so long. ‘They
 In this issue is a quotation from the SociaList STANDARD May 1911 about the increase of accidents in industry in the years 1900 to 1907 . The increase in accidents occurred between 1900 and 1907 .
 The accident figures continued to increase and in 1913 reached 208,949 . In 1913, the deaths had decreas2d to 1,091 .
 If the mines, railways and other industries are added, total deaths number about 1,300 or 1,400 a year, and the number injured is more than doubled . The number of people injured in accidents is also doubled .
 In the mines over 200,000 workers every year suffer injuries which disable them for more than three days . On the roads and railways a further 7,000 or more are killed each year and over 300,000 pedestrians, drivers and passengers injured . Over the whole field injuries have increased since
 Government publishes documents dealing with changes in production, trade, wages, profits and national income and expenditure . National Income published in Spring of each year .
 Much of the newspaper comment consists merely of quoting impressive looking figures to support the theme that everything is getling very much better for everybody . Much of these figures are quoted merely of quotes supporting the theme of everything getting better for everyone .
 ds 4 growing disbelief in the accuracy of the figures themselves . As many readers know very well that their own standard of living isn’t changing much, if at all .
 Much of the difficulty arises out of that ingrained capitalist habit of expressing nearly everything in terms of money and price, which is most misleading unless due allowance is made for the fact that prices can change, and for twenty years have been changing upwards . Much of this is due to an ingrained capitalist
 Expenditure on rent and rates increased between 1956 and 1960 by about £400 million a year . It does not mean people were moving into larger or better houses but that they are paying more for the same house .
 National income jumped from £5,000 million in 1938 to £20,000million in 1960 . The real increase after discounting higher prices is somewhere in the region of fifty per cent .
 The real increase in the amount available for “consumers ” goods and services, (food, clothing, housing, . housing, entertainment, travel, etc., etc.) has increased by a smaller amount, probably between 35 per cent and 40 per cent .
 Population has increased by over 5,000,000 since 1938 . Then a further adjustment has to be made because this is spread over more people . The population has also increased by more people, according to the BBC .
 The real increase per head of the population is about 25 per cent or 30 per cent, not at all a striking achievement for a period of twenty years, though quite a normal one for British capitalism . After allowing for this, the real increase is about .
 The way in which this modest advance has been made is also interesting, it's also interesting . It's not the first time the technology has been allowed to be developed in the U.S. market .
 The increase is due as much to increased numbers of workers as well as increased output through improved machinery and processes .
 Unemployment is about one and a quarter million less than in 1938 . Many more married women go out to work, and workers stay on to a later age . There are probably about four million more workers in civil employment than before the war .
 Average industrial weekly wage rates have gained about 16 per cent on the price level for a somewhat shorter week . While many workers are rather better off than before before the war . Many workers, especially clerical who have actually lost ground .
 Od. a week average earnings of adult mala workers in manufacturing and some other industries are typical of the working class as a whole . Average earnings of adults in manufacturing, some industries, are typical .
 Seven months ago I reported that the ground and first floor maisonette at Castlemaine House, the seven-storey block of flats which Mrs. Mrs. Castlemaine lived in, was moved out of the block . Seven months later I reported on the loss of the
 James’s Place, was in the market at £128,750, making it just about the most expensive home of its type in the world . The most expensive house of its kind is in St James's Place in London .
 I now reveal who is to be the occupier of this home wtih its own garden backing on Green Park . The house is to have a garden backing of Green Park and has its own private space .
 City banker, Walter H Salomon, 54, will move in with his wife, Kate, and two children in July . Mr Salomon will live with Kate and her family in July with their two children . He will be joined by his wife Kate, Kate and their children .
 The study, drawing-room and library opening on to a terrace, are in antique pine panelling .
 Each of the four bedrooms has a bathroom; there is a wrought-iron staircase, luxurious staff quarters and a huge kitchen . Staff quarters and huge kitchen also feature .
 Hampstead Council is cutting its housing list from 1,799 families to 1,328 families . The same issue of the Evening Standard reported that the council is cutting the housing list . The council is also cutting the list of 1,800 families .
 The Chairman of the Committee is quoted as saying that he is agreeably surprised by the number they were able to eliminate because they have moved away or for other reasons .
 May 1961 93 hope of getting Council accommodation or have found decent accommodation and are quite happy . May 1961 was 93 when she was 93 .
 L.C. wants to speed up the work of modernising their pre-1914-18 war blocks of flats . Six thousand of which lack baths and have other defects, six thousand of the flats lack baths .
 ‘three-year wait’ between approval of modernisation schemes and the actual start on the work . But there are obstacles, one of which is the “three year wait” between approval and start on work .
 It is ironical to go back to the optimism of the reformers who started the movement to solve the housing and slumclearance problem over a century ago . It's ironical that it is not the first time the government has been forced to tackle the problem .
 Shaftesbury Act of 1851 aimed at providing lodging houses for the working class in towns and populous districts . Terrens Act was passed in 1868, when it was passed . The next great step was taken in 1869, when the Terren's Act was also passed
 This dealt with improvement or demolition of unfit houses . This brought into prominence the second part of the Housing task, namely, in addition to the provision of new houses, the maintenance of the old .
 Sometimes they exist behind the decaying red brick walls of gaunt Victorian houses . And these, because they are frequently shielded from public gaze, are the most difficult for authority to deal with .
 Housing Minister describes visit to such a Victorian slum . Mr Brooke, the Housing Minister, has been describing a visit to the slum.
 He found three floors of utter squalor, cut up into flats without proper kitchens or lavatories . A basement used by two women of, to say the least, rather doubtful probity .
 We are told that this is an ‘urgent reform’, one brought to light by Mr Brooke’s personal injunction . Mr Brooke's personal injunction prevents the publication of this article .
 Since England was the first country in which large-scale industry developed, it was only to be expected that capitalist political economy would appear and flourish here . H Wealth of Nations Notes on Economic History .
 The introduction of spinning machinery (Wyatt 1783, Lewis Paul 1741, Arkwright 1769); the steam engine ; and later of the power loom (Cartwright 1785, Jacquard 1802); and similar transformations in the methods of industrial production, induced changes .
 Adam Smith established a new system of economic doctrine . Adam Smith was the man who, under these conditions, established an economic doctrine. Adam Smith set up a new economic doctrine in Smith's work .
 Smith spent three years in France, where he became known personally to the physiocrats, and was greatly influenced by them . Smith spent his time in France where he was influenced by physiocrats .
 Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations published in 1776 . For ten years after his return from France, he devoted himself to economic study .
 Adam Smith defines the wealth of 4 nations in the opening of his inquiry . Adam Smith defined the wealth in his work for the first time in Smith's work .
 The annual labour of every nation is the fund which originally supplies it with all the necessities and conveniences of life which it annually consumes, and which consists either in the immediate produce of that labour, or in what is purchased with that produce from other nations .
 Labour which is not devoted to the production of useful things, which have an exchange value, is to Smith unproductive . Smith: 'Labour which does not produce useful things which have exchange value is to be unproductive'
 The wealth of a nation is greater accordingly as a larger proportion of its inhabitants are engaged in useful labour . Wealth of nations is greater if a large proportion of their inhabitants work in useful work .
 This in turn depends upon the amount of capital devoted to the employment of workers (the wage fund), but above all, upon the productiveness of labour . This is in turn dependent on capital's capital .
 Productiveness of labour increased mainly by division of labour, says Smith . Smith says division of work increases productiveness of work . Smith: Productiveness is increased by divisions of labour .
 The further the division of labour is carried, the more is production carried on with a view to marketing . He illustrates this thesis by the many processes required for the manufacture of such a simple thing as a pin .
 For the purpose of the market there must develop an acceptable means of exchange, or instrument of trade —in other words, money . In other words money is an acceptable form of exchange .
 Commodities are exchanged in the market by means of money as the medium of exchange, and thus originates an exchange-value or price of goods, as distinct from their use-value . Commodity prices originates from the exchange value of goods in a market, rather than
 The division of labour is the starting point of the economic process and its development; it is the cause of the exchange of goods . The exchange value is decisive for the distribution of the goods, since it settles the question who can buy them .
 Adam Smith builds up his economic system, and so do all the capitalist schools that follow him . Adam Smith's economic system is based on the premise of Adam Smith, the economist .
 The laws that regulate the formation of exchange-value are held to be also laws in accordance with which the wealth of nations comes into being . They are the primary laws of economic motion, according to Smith .
 By formulating this conception of the nature of political economy, Smith made an important step forward in capitalist theory . Smith's theory of political economic theory is important to Marxists .
 For the first time a study of the laws of exchange-value was undertaken . The Mercantalists and Physiocrats had made productive circulation the basis of their reasoning .
 Theory of value and the theory of prices became the basis of economic theory in general . The theory of value is now the basis for economic theory .
 Prices are the determinants of the production of goods, the law of prices decides what goods shall be produced . Since prices decide which would-be purchaser has sufficient purchasing power, the laws of prices also determine distribution .
 President Kennedy has been shown on British T.V. threatening to use the might of the American armed forces to protect the democratic rights of Laos . President Kennedy was shown in the UK on a British TV show .
 He appears. so young, forthright and sincere, but perhaps, after all, it would be just as well if we were to critically examine his claims that the U.S. stands for democracy in Laos . The Russian Government is attempting to undermine and destroy its work by Communism .
 Civil war has been going on in the country since the middle nineteen fifties but only became world news when Kennedy threatened to enter the affray openly with United States troops . Civil war was started in the middle of the fiftieth century .
 Until now the United States has encouraged the Royalist faction but they have recently been opposed by another faction—Pathet-Lao . The U.S. has been encouraging the Royalists but they are opposed by the Pathet-lao .
 Laos is part of an ancient civilisation overrun by the French at the time of the general European scramble for colonies . The French incorporated Laos into their former colony of Indo-China .
 Religion’s ministers and .precepts develop great influence in the community of people . But as so often happens when a whole community is caught in its grip, religion's ministers and precepts become influential .
 The population becomes more pious as their material poverty increases . They seek the excuse of dogma, creed or belief to explain their intellectual poverty .
 All totalitarian regimes are destructive of the things of the spirit of man, but of all totalitarianisms the clerical is probably the most harmful . All totalitarianisms are probably most harmful, says Julian Zelizer .
 The factions never seem to have been compressed into any sort of seclusion . The factions seem to be at odds with each other in the past .
 Large numbers of half-castes have resulted from the occupation of the country by the French military . Half-caste populations have resulted in the French occupation .
 Laotian soldiers who deliberately fired over one another's heads for fear of taking human life are gradually being taught by their “ betters’s” to aim straight and kill .
 The country is torn with civil strife carried on with arms and ammunition provided by the Russian and American Governments . Russia and the U.S. governments have provided arms, ammunition .
 The United States bears the entire cost, $40 million a year, of the Royalist army . The U.S. bears the full cost of the army .
 The whole of Laos, both Pathet Lao and Royalist territories, are ruled by one ruling-class feudal family . This alone makes nonsense of Kennedy's claim that Pathet Lao must be opposed because they are communists .
 The charge is absurd because the ruling-class of the Pathet Lao territory have never shown themselves to have particularly different ideas from their relatives who rule the Royalist territory . It is absurd to say that the ruling class of the Lao province has never shown itself to have different ideas
 Both sides of the family run the usual pattern of Asiatic feudalistic governments normal for undeveloped areas in that part of the world .
 Prince Souphannavong, the Pathet Lao Leader, is half-brother to the Prime Minister of the Royalists . He is the brother of the Pathen Lao Prime Minister, the Prince of Lao .
 A third brother who lives in Siam acts as elder Statesman to both sides . A_ third brother . lives in the country .
 They are more concerned with exploiting their subjects, which they do with the inefficiency usual with that type of adminis tration, than in theoretical and alier theories of communism and democracy . They do not have a theory of communism or democracy, rather of communism .
 Pathet Lao and the Royalists are puppets of Russia and America, respectively, respectively . The Royalists and PathetLao are puppet masters in Russia and the U.S. respectively .
 Laos and China signed Treaty of ‘peace and neutrality’ in 1956 in Peking . Laos and Chinese signed treaty of peace and neutrality in 1956 . Laos, China signed a treaty of 'peace and neutrality' in 1956 at the request of the French president .
 This was regarded as another failure for American policy in Asia and even a retrogression from the position already established at the time in Laos . This was seen as a failure for U.S. policy in the region .
 If Laos gets out of the clutches of America and really becomes independent, then it will drive a wedge between the two American bastions of South Viet-nam and Thailand .
 If the Chinese controlled Pathet Lao takes over the whole of the country, then Laos becomes a hostile wedge and S.E.A.T.O. (the American controlled South East Asian Treaty Organisation) becomes nullified for then the Chinese bloc will extend to the borders of
 Laos is a so far untapped vast reservoir of wealth in coal, copper and tin . Laos is an almost untapped resource of coal, tin and copper . Laos has a long history of political and economic instability .
 There are 204,000 sq. kilometres of valuable hardwood forests just waiting to be cut and exported . The forests are just waiting for cutting and exporting to the world .
 The British ruling-class squandered health and lives of so many soldiers in fighting the Chinese nationalist insurgents for the tin and cash crops of Malaya a few years ago . This must alone be worth fighting for, remembering that the British ruling class squanderered the health and . lives
 The struggle for Laos will bring greater power and wealth to one or other of the two great powers concerned . The struggle is likely to bring greater wealth to either side of the border .
 To the internal ruling-class it is already bringing wealth in the form of assistance amounting to millions each year .
 Each side is a puppet of a capitalist overlord greedy for power and profits . Capitalism will come to Laos in the form of mines, plantations of cash crops, and the development of industry .
 To enable capitalism to thrive there the Laotians will have to be shaken out of their lethargic happy state . The Laotian economy will need to be re-shaken from its lethargy happy state, says the author of the book .
 Happy workers contented with their existing standard of living are not satisfactory subjects for gapitalism . Happy workers are not happy with their standard living, says David Cameron .
 In place of laughter, song, and making love, must come the tax collector, conscription, wage-slavery, the chargeland, the foreman and the boss, the boss .
 For budding aotian ruling-class, there will be stocks and shares, shares, rent, interest and profits . But there will also be rent and interest, interest, and profits.
 Certain Students raised objections to my views and reported me to the authorities . I was eventually called to account for it. Certain Students . raised objections .
 No more than about 5 per cent of students come from the working class . The bulk of the students are from the propertied class with a more pronounced orthodox, bourgeois outlook .
 I was asked to send in-the manuscript of a brochure The Social Question—Its Being, Origin and Solution, which I had prepared, which he had prepared . He was asked in-to-send in- the manuscript of the brochure .
 'Without warning or getting a chance of answering the charges, | was ordered forthwith to stop lecturing and publishing my writings, and suspended from service. Soon afterwards, without warning or a chance to . getting a . chance of . answering the . charges, he was . ordered forth
 1 had to give up his living at Innsbruck and move to Vienna, where he was “graciously “ given a small job and a pension many times less than would have been my due .
 All this happened in this boasted democratic welfare state Austria, “while the “great socialist leader” Dr. Dr. Martin Martin was in power,’s ‘socialist leader’ Dr. J. Martin says .
 The unsoundness of that party’s policy is also glaringly demonstrated by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Dr. King says he is disappointed by the results of the election .
 As a result of Press reports of a conference of “socialist catholics” in November 1959, at which I gave a lecture on Marxism, I received a letter from comrade Frank, expressing a desire to meet me . Frank wrote a letter to me after a meeting in November
 I also had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of his son on a visit to Vienna, when we had a most interesting and heartening discussion . We subsequently had some talks, and I also made the acquaintance with his son .
 Not the smallest obstacle is the dull apathy of the masses of the working class, says David Cameron . 'They seem to use their undoubted talents for nothing but making profit for, and increasing the wealth of, their masters'
 Comrade Frank has also made available to me copies of your publications SOCIALIST STANDARD 1961 @ Subscription form To SPGB Literature Dept 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 Pe a I ES a a) 6 issues 4/post free | 2 issues 7/
 "Let me express my deep admiration for the fine work of so many devoted comrades," says President Obama . "I am proud to be able to continue my work in the United States"
 A group of workers in the English-speaking world saw through the monstrous nature of capitalism and saw the way out of its quagmire years before the first worldwar . The S.P.G.B. was a revolutionary movement .
 A word on the false friends and the betrayal of the Marxian teaching . And now a word on false friends, and the betrayals of Marxian teachings .
 The life of modern industry becomes a series of periods of moderate activity, prosperity, over-production, crisis and stagnation, says David Frum .
 The uncertainty and instability to which machinery subjects the employment, and consequently the conditions of existence, of the operations become normal, owing to these periodic changes of the industrial cycle .
 Except in periods of prosperity, there rages between the capitalists the most furious combat for the share of each in the markets . Except in the periods of prosperous, there is fierce competition between the rich and the poor .
 If the bankruptcy of the big selfstyled ‘socialist’ parties and their betrayal of scientific socialism were ready clear when Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. spoke, Dr. King would have been able to find out if he had lived in a socialist state .
 Karl Renner declared that two of the largest worldempires, namely the Russian and the British Empire, were under the leader of the working-class . The leaders of these pseudo-socialist /communist parties have now sunk the last vestige of the revolutionary content of Marxist theory
 Russian workers are today unfortunately as far away from socialism as their English brothers . Renner lived to see his ridiculous assertion belied, for it must be evident to even the politically little informed .
 What it really does can at best be described as a kind of leftist bourgeois reform politics —no more. What really does is what it really means is leftist bourgeois reforms .
 "Anybody observing the attitude of their leaders must come to this conclusion," he said . "I'm not surprised. Anybody observing this will be true," he added .
 Austria now recogog. nizes the Dollfus Concordat (concluded on May Ist 1934 between Austria and the Vatican) It now even recogogs . nizes a . 1934 Concordat, although it had previously refused to . do so .
 Even the financial claims of the Church are being recognised . Church property and estate confiscated under Josef II returned to the Catholic church, plus hundred million schillings annually .
 On the occasion of the annual Conference of your party, I send fraternal greetings to all delegates and other participants, and hearty wishes .
 We here shall continue to add our bit to the furtherance of the great cause. We will continue to be committed to the cause .
 Exhibition, Morris & Company 186/—1940. At the Victoria and Albert Museum in April there was to be seen an Exhibition . Morris & Co. 186/2040.
 On show were specimens of textiles, tapestries, wall papers, etc., produced by the firm of which William Morris was chief partner and designer . William Morris, who died at the age of 92, died in his home .
 These art and craft products are considered to be the most artistic of their period . Artworks considered to have been the most creative of their time .
 Exhibit 61 (an order book) quite clearly showed. But such fine work was not for the homes of the great multitude, as Exhibit 61 showed .
 Morris says that under capitalism ‘Art for the People’ is just a phrase but that under Socialism goods will be produced for use and not for profit . Art will be part of daily life and work in such ways as a free people living in a democratically owned society wish .
 Morris wrote a number of essays and gave Jectures on Art and Socialism . Morris was a member of the National Socialist Party .
 Art, Labour & Socialism was a clear statement on the subject and it is possible that before long we may republish it . It has been out of print for many years now, but it has been possible that it may be republished .
 She excelled in this work but regarded it as no more than a necessary duty . She was the only person in the world to excel in her art form .
 She had a fine, resonant voice, and it was a pleasure to listen to her . The singer's voice was a great pleasure, and she had a great voice, she said .
 The slim, attractive girl on the SPGB platform, clearly enunciating the socialist case, commanded respect . At street corner meetings, she commanded respect.
 "In the lecture hall, her material was thoroughly prepared and delivered with economy," she said . "I'm glad that she's been able to get a lot of the attention she deserves," she added .
 "Her learning was wide and deep, yet she was severely critical of her own ability," she said . Her learning was "wide and deep," but she was "severely critical" of herself .
 Many women, unfortunately, still accept and delight in playing the role of the ‘second” sex . Many women still accept playing the roles of the "second" sex .
 "She expected to be treated as an equal and the standard she set for herself was the highest," she said .
 Lisa Bryan has hardly begun to describe Lisa Bryan, the author of the book, "Lisa Bryan" Bryan is best known for her role in the documentary "Lisa" Bryan .
 Socialism for her became inseparable from her whole person, affecting all her feelings and attitudes, she said . Socialism for herself became inseparably from her entire person .
 To know Lisa was to make a friend, Lisa's friends were many and diverse . Her friends were to know Lisa, and her friends were diverse, she said .
 Staunchly independent, independent, asking little for herself, her humanity consumed her . She was a woman who "humanity consumed her," she said .
 She was consistently loyal to her friends, unstinting with help when they were in trouble, cheering when their spirits were low . She was also loyal to their friends, and cheered when they had low spirits .
 Art for Everyone is done to give all men some pleasure for the eyes and rest for the mind in the aspect of their own and their neighbours’ houses . The practice of the arts must be mainly kept in the hands of a few highly cultivated men .
 Sirs, 1 believe that art has such sympathy with cheerful freedom, openheartedness and reality that she sickens under selfishness and luxury, that she will not live thus jsolated and exclusive .
 I will go further than this and say that on such terms I do not wish her to live. I will also say that I will not wish the woman to live, I will say .
 I protest that it would be a shame to an honest artist to enjoy what he had huddled up to himself of such art . It would be for a rich man to sit and cat dainty food amongst starving soldiers in a beleagured fort, he says .
 I do not want art for a few, any more than education, or freedom for the few, I say . Art is not art, but education is education, freedom is freedom, he says . He says .
 The Influence of Television Television Television and the Political Image by Joseph Trenaman and Denis McQuall, Methuen, 30s. The influence of television television television and the political image was influential in the 1960s .
 In the last few years, a new word has crept into the English language: Durincincinc . Durincin is a word that has been used in the past few years in the U.S.
 Psephology is the name given to the business of putting voters under the microscope and probing their innermost electoral reflexes . Psephologists are probing the inner workings of the electoral system .
 Where once people simply voted at election time, now every cross must be checked and analysed . Now all crosses must be seen and analysed to make sure they are true .
 Good Reading Questions of Today I/Racial Problem — I|Russia Since 1917 I] Is Labour Government the Way to Socialism 4d.d. Is Labour government the way to socialism 4d .
 Communist Manifesto and the last Hundred Years — //Principles and Policy 6d. Nationalisation or Socialism 64, Socialist 64, Communist Manifeste 64 . Socialist Party: The Communist Party of Russia, Russia, China, Russia and China .
 They closely studied the campaign on television and at the same time sampled political Opinion among the voters in the two Yorkshire constituencies of Pudsey and West Leeds .
 The authors conclude that television had little effect on the outcome of the 1959 election .
 The party has been trying to patch up-the differences that exist within the party on these issues . Hence the recent almost frantic attempts to patch-up-up the differences .
 The viewers had on the issues of the campaign tended to increase as a result of their watching television . Whatever know. ledge the viewers had . on the issue of the . issues of . the campaign .
 Television and the Political Image is not light reading, and it's loaded with statistical tables and graphs which demand close study . It is loaded with statistics and graphs that demand close scrutiny .
 If the power-conscious parties can find out why the working class vote as they do, they are a long way towards winning an election . Doubtless, we shall see many more such works, for the sake of political parties .
 Labour's problem in 1959 was to convince everybody that their promises were not rash bribery . If Trenaman and McQuail were any guide, Labour's problems in 1959 were to convince .
 The Tories, it seems, must still work hard to persuade us that they really care about the aged and needy .
 The psephologist adds up his figures to discover the reasons for the working class preferring one type of capitalist subjection to another does not make it cleaner .
 Mr Gaitskell and Co. have been forced to defend the last Labour Government who set the example by themselves imposing such charges . Instead of being able to make a concentrated attack on the government-imposed charges on the health service .
 Labour did not relate profit to the plight of workers in the way they now seek to do . It was not noticeably Labour policy when in office to relate profit .
 Socialists have never supported these so-called social services, seeing in them nothing but an endeavour on the part of capitalism’s administrators to give the master class the cheapest and most efficient labour force possible, under the conditions prevailing at the time .
 Thousands of children are starving in Toronto, Canada, according to the report . This is not the first challenge to society to meet the paradox of want in the midst of plenty .
 When man was the slave of nature, shortage and want could be explained in intelligent terms, but to-day, when his productive capacities are virtually unlimited, he must find some other answer .
 If Danish agricultural standards were to be practised on the available cultivable land, there would be enough food produced to give an excellent diet to probably seven times the world’s present population .
 However capable man may be of producing wealth, it is ultimately the question of ownership which decides whether or not he will partake of that wealth .
 Food, like every other commodity in our modern world, is produced primarily for profit . The fact that it eventually may satisfy hungry children in Toronto or elsewhere is incidental and of secondary importance . Food is produced for profit, and the fact it eventually satisfies hungry children is incidental .
 The answer to the News Chronicle's question will not be found in the speeches of politicians and economists . If it could, it would not be asked after a century of Parliamentary Statutes and fact-finding Commissions .
 One of the Paddington Comrades wrapped individual copies in cellophane for protection .
 It is hoped also that the ihandbills (which were also distributed) advertising the April 19th meeting at St. Mary's .
 Coventry members are still very active and are in contact with Birmingham Branch with a view to holding some joint outdoor meetings in Birmingham during the summer .
 For a small group this is very good work and the group hopes to form a Coventry Branch .
 Correspondence has been returned from their addresses, without details of change . Correspondence was returned to their addresses without information being returned .
 A full report of our successful meeting in St. Louis, France, is published here .
 We can nevertheless give the essential details, An audience of 400, plenty of questions and lively discussion, and a collection of over £25. The audience was 400 and there were plenty of people asking questions .
 At both these meetings, the support of as many comrades and sympathisers as possible will add to the success of the demonstration . The support of comrades will add. to the . success of this . demonstration .
 In Glasgow, at Queen’s Park, meetings will be held, followed by an indoor Rally at St. St. Mary's in Glasgow, Scotland .
 Their efforts resulted in the sale of literature to the extent of £13 14s.d. They sold 350 SociaList STANDARDS and 89 War pamphlets . The sale of the literature was £13.14 .
 London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 for War pamphlets . May, Epanety, May, May . May .
 Montrose in Scotland and Aberdare in Wales have enquiries . Among these enquiries were requests from Montrose, Scotland, Aberdar in Wales .
 Tower Hill, 12,30—2m. East Street, Walworth May 7th & 24th May 14th May 21st . Tower Hill is Tower Hill on Tower Hill .
 Friday May 19th — “THE JEHOVAH WITNESS” Speaker : J, Law ue MITCHAM LECTURE The White Hart .
 Alyerian tragedy continues its melancholy course. The Alyeran tragedy continues to be the tragedy of the year .
 Ist and 3rd Mondays (Sth & 19h June) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven ms, High Street . The coffee room is located in Craven's High Street.
 2nd and 4th Mondays (12th & 26th June) inemonth 8 pm. South East East East London (formerly Basildon and Southend)
 SOUTHEND (see under South East Essex pe ppg a pea gy nla era une) in pm, pt, St. St. E. Essex .
 2nd and 4th Thursdays (8th & 22nd Sune) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, £12.50 .
 “White Hart’s” will be held at Mitcham Cricket Green, H 9 Milne Eltham, SE9 MITCHAM & DISTRICT .
 CORRESPONDENCE for the Executive Committee should be sent to the General Secretary spGe, 52 .
 Postal orders and cheques should be crossed and made payable to the spcs. SPOR. at the above address . Postal orders should also be crossed . Cheques and checks should be made payable .
 Rising to high drama at one moment, it topples over into anti-climax and something often close to farce the next . The show is often close-to-farce and often farce-close .
 We are still too near to know the full story of the “four days “ last April” last April . We're still too close to the event .
 de Gaulle continues to implement the plans he has been working towards since he came to power in 1958 .
 The Army has played into his hands, its morale and self-confidence shattered, at least for the moment . The Army's morale and confidence has been shattered, but it's not yet clear whether he will succeed .
 The way has been left wide open to the objective he has sworn to achieve before ne dies, he says . He uses the word decolonisation as though he was talking of getting rid of a disease of France .
 Wiser to the ways of the world of modern capitalism and more far-seeing than many of the ruling-class he represents, he says .
 He knows that no Power in the modern world can hold on to its possessions according to the old imperialist traditions of the past . He knows no Power can hold onto its possessions in modern times .
 In three years of his administration almost the whole of the former French empire has been granted independence . In the three years he was in charge of the French empire .
 Of the former important territories of that empire, only Algeria remains . Algeria is one of the last important territories to remain .
 Daddy's Algeria may well be dead, but nobody knows what the new one will be like . Nobody knows what new Algeria will look like .
 De Gaulle is staking all on an independent Algeria still within the orbit and influence of French capitalism . He has successfully achieved with the great majority of the other former French territories, as well .
 What is supremely important now for the French ruling-class is to retain control over the Saharan oilfields and the vast deposits of natural gas . Not to speak of the mineral wealth they also hope to discover in the future .
 Nobody can say what the talks at Evian between the French and the FL will bring . The talks are expected to take place in the next few days .
 Nobody knows what the European setilers will do, particularly fanatics among them . There is already evidence that these latter are prepared to go to any lengths to frustrate de Gaulle’s plans .
 Nobody knows what is in the minds of the leaders of the F.L.N. before they met for the first time .
 There is still a terrible possibility that the next news to come out of Algeria will be of carnage and devastation as well as the last seven years of its sufferings only a prelude in comparison .
 We know that history will catch up with Algeria as it will with East Africa . We know history. by which we mean the inexorable demands of capitalism. by . which we . mean . by which . we mean in this case, the inexistent demands of . capitalism . will catch
 Mr Khruschev was the star turn at this year’s Moscow May Day parade .
 Gagarin’s exploit, Commander Shepard's flight, and the arrival of the Russian Venus rocket shot, have puit spaceships right back in the news . The launch of the first mission to the moon was in 1961 . Commander Shepard was the first woman to fly on a
 Russia and U.S. are feverishly applying the knowledge which their space probes give them to the production of more accurate missiles . Russia and the United States are feverish applying their knowledge .
 Some of these were paraded before Gagarin in the Red Square on May Day . Some of the photos were taken before the Russian spy chief .
 The quest for more accurate and more powerful weapons is the main incentive in space programmes of the great powers . Incidentally, they may also gain knowledge which has little or no military value .
 Capitalist society is bound to distort human knowledge for inhuman ends, says author . Capitalist societies distort knowledge, distort it for inhuman purposes, he says .
 Scientific investigation can only come into its own when this world is sanely organised . Scientific investigation only comes to its own in a sane world, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Milan sold Jimmy Greaves to Chelsea for £16million from Chelsea . The Italian club paid £10million for the former Chelsea defender . The fee is believed to be around £30million .
 This is why they can afford such enormous wage bills, and can offer irresistible financial bait to British footballers . This is the reason they are able to afford such huge wage bills .
 Greaves put it on record that he did not want to leave England, but Milan were offering him such a high signing-on fee that he really had no choice in the matter . Greaves was offered a huge fee by the Italian club for his services .
 English fans moan as their golden boys take off for sunnier lands . Helpless, they moan as they leave England for the sun .
 They blame the clubs, the Football League, the Italians, for being a lot of poachers, they say . The Football League and the Italian League are among those who blame poachers .
 The social system in which whoever pays the most money takes the best choice. But the millions who weekly cheer their favourite club, support, almost to a man . The majority of the fans support their local club, Manchester City .
 When he was campaigning for the U.S. Presidency he seemed so calm, so cool tempered, he seemed calm . He said: 'He seemed calm and cool tempered'
 Lots of Republicans thought that he might want to be too soft on the Russians . Republicans thought he might be too hard on Russia .
 President Kennedy inherited the plans for the landing which the Eisenhower administration had laid . Kennedy inherited plans which had been laid out by Eisenhower administration .
 He chose to go ahead with the invasion, and when it failed, he pointed out that his predecessor must take part of the blame . He chose not to blame his predecessor .
 This is the sort of ruthlessness and cynicism which we have come to expect from capitalism’s leaders, says David Cameron . ‘This is the kind of ruthless and cynicism we have to expect,’ he writes .
 Kennedy promised an era of sanity and calm judgment in foreign policy . American workers voted for him . Kennedy promised to restore sanity to America's economy .
 The signs are that Kennedy will be reviled not so much for the fact that the whole thing was a flop . The working class will forgive almost anything but that .
 Penguin offered £450,000 worth of shares to the public at the same time . The more prosperous of whom applied for them to the tune of £67 million . Penguin offered shares worth £450k worth of .
 People who tried to get Penguin shares are known, in Stock Exchange jargon, as stags . Now a lot of the people tried to buy Penguin shares have been known as 'stags'
 Lady C. C. in the City columns . She was a gamekeeper in the 1930s, and Lady C., in the 1950s .
 The stags have been rampant lately. in shares other than the Penguin issucuc. Penguin shares are up for grabs in recent weeks .
 July “‘Standard”’ A ee ae eee SOCIALIST STANDARD, completing a newspaper coupon—and which are likely to rise quickly on the Stock Exchange . Wednesday 19th July 7.30 pm MASS SOCIAList RALLY CONWAY
 The idea is to sell the shares at a profit before the cheques have had time to be cashed . The idea of selling the shares before cheques had been cashed is to make a profit .
 Ecosomists have since told us that JUNE 1961 85 it aggravated matters in 1929-—and that it could never happen again . Many sage ecosmists have said that J June 1961 85 was the worst thing to happen in the world .
 The stags have shown that capitalism is the same old animal as ever was . The animals have shown capitalism is still the old animal that ever was, says the author .
 The Myth of Moral Rearmament has been making a lot of noise lately . MoraL REARMAMENT—that high pressure political religious movement—has been making lots of noise .
 The premier of its latest film, The Crowning Experience, was shown a few weeks ago in the West End of London .
 Full page ads caught the reader's eye in such respectable newspapers as The Guardian and The Times . Full page advertisements have caught the viewer's eye .
 According to Ivan Yates in The Observer, this publicity offensive represents their most sustained effort yet to support in the U.S. According to Yates, this is the most sustained attempt yet for support in support of the Democratic Party .
 A costly campaign it is, too, and quite clearly the wherewithal is not lacking . The campaign will be the first of its kind in the UK since 2008 .
 The outstanding name of the movement is, of course, Doctor Frank Buchman . Buchman officially launched the movement in 1938 at East Ham Town Hall .
 Buchman’s speeches talk glowingly, almost gushingly, of his chief's Swiss ancestry . Buchman's folk brought up “with democracy in their blood ”.-whatever that may mean .
 Buchman’s conversion came when he was visiting Keswick, Cumberland, during a holiday on doctor's instructions . Buchman's conversion came during a visit to Keswick during a doctor's holiday .
 He entered a little church and listened to the service and suddenly he was aware of his own faults, he said . He said: "Suddenly he entered a church and . listened to . the service ... suddenly he became aware of . his faults."
 He sent letters of apology to members of the board of a children’s home against whom he had harboured ill-feeling . He was then all set to carry his ideas to practically every part of the globe .
 Buchman's sctivities were to lead to the formation of the Oxford Group in 1928, when a number of Rhodes scholars and other Oxford students were given this name after a propaganda visit to South Africa .
 Moral Rearmament was launched ten years later, in face of the threat of the second world war . Moral rearmament launched 10 years after the Second World War was launched in the 1930s .
 Jater. Such was the new cry, and perhaps here was the beginning of the political side of the movement which was to be more obvious Jater . The new cry was 'Jater. Jater'
 Jiterature is a movement that publishes lashings of jiterature . It holds its meetings and congresses, and holds meetings, and publishes laments . When a person has received the message loud and clear, he becomes “changed” and supports the movement .
 The Observer article of March 26th claims that there has been disappointment at a recent falling away of influence in England . And what support this movement has, though, is what support it has .
 There is a considerable zeal and enthusiasm among Morai Rearmers, many of whom have given every penny they possessed and have surrendered themselves completely to the task of spreading the message . Nevertheless, it must be admitted that there is . there is a . considerable zeal .
 To say that it is a religious movement is to state the obvious, and as with religion generally, there is a vagueness which the high powered techniques and sweeping statements fail to mask, in fact, serve only to accentuate .
 Gabriel Marcel, for example, talks airily of a ‘community life based on faith” and that last word gives the reason for the vagueness . Gabriel Marcel is a Catholic priest who has been married to a woman of faith in the past .
 It must be so, because its basic assumption of the existence of the supernatural has not one jot of scientific evidence to support it, says author .
 This is not to doubt the sincerity of the bulk of “ Buchmanites,” of course, of course . The bulk of the Buchmaniteites are sincere .
 Socialist Socialist Standard 1961 was published by Geoffrey Williamson in his illuminating book Inside Buchmanism . Just to talk to Buchmanists is to see how fervent and conscientious they can be .
 Such people are comparatively easy meat for such movements as Moral Rearmament . They are aware of the terrible problems of modern society, and lacking knowledge of their origin .
 Moral Rearmament is the answer to the question: 'What do you think of the moral compass?' Or to put it a little more kindly, they turn to moral rearmament for answers .
 Only when the world’s people “ listen to God” and become guided by Him, will we have harmony in the human family . That only when people become guided to God, they will be guided by him, she says .
 The world. awaits an inspired answer from statesmen as well as the ordinary man... guided... by that added help which sees and recognises the Supreme Plan .
 As nations listen to God and obey His orders, nations find a pattern that makes plain God’s will for Government .
 It goes to show how relative their ‘absolute’ standards can be when the occasion demands . Which just goes to . show how . relative their absolute standards .
 With the outbreak of war, the word “ patriotism ” began to appear in the M.R.A. vocabulary . Although the movement came under fire in some quarters on the grounds of army-dodging, the more astute capitalist politicians, particularly in America, were
 National Defence Handbook You Can Defend America and Buttle Together for Britain were produced by the same team .
 In England alone, they claim to have distributed some five million books and pamphlets during the war .
 In the post-war years, an openly political note has sounded in M.R.A. propaganda with a heavy “anti-Communist ” bias .
 Some following seems to have been captured in the new Capitalist States like Burma, like Burma . Adenauer and Schuman were both influential in Burma .
 Claims have been made for the success of their ideas in the field of international politics . But charges which have recently been levelled at them seem to have most force .
 M.R.A. has supporters in many countries and is not without influence, but it is about as useless as any other reformist movement and shows the same ignorance of Capitalism .
 On the industrial field, M.R.A. has served only to worsen confusion in workers’ minds and blind them further further to their interests . M. A.R.'s M. R. has led to a series of scandals in the past, including the collapse of
 In 1948, Warwickshire mineworkers’ president is said to have claimed that M.R.A. had given ‘real teamwork and better output’ in the British Coal Industry . In 1952, a French Iron and Steel Boss paid tribute to the part M
 Many workers should have been sufficiently gullible to fall for this gigantic fallacy that is Moral Rearmament . What a tragedy’ indeed that many workers . should have fallen for such a fallacy .
 They are discouraged from thinking for themselves and are told only to ‘tune in’ to some mythical God, Spirit, Intelligence—call it what you will. Quite openly they are discouraged . Quite openly .
 His followers seem ready to quote his words parrot fashion and to treat his most commonplace utterances as world-shatteringly important . His followers appear to be willing to quote him parrot-style and treat his words as important .
 Their hysterical “anti-Communist” outbursts, their denial of the class struggle on the one hand, and their fanatical religion on the other, are a menace to Socialism and even to the limited capitalist democracy that we enjoy today .
 It may seem comfortable to relinquish responsibility for one’s thoughts and actions and shut out the uncomfortable world of reality . But it's not comfortable relinquishing responsibility for your thoughts or actions .
 On this Continent, the pressure of capitalism on the working class is not minimized by welfare-state palliatives . Socialist Comrades: On this continent, capitalism does not minimize the pressure on working class .
 "Today, all the problems, whether of the homeless families, or of the young, or the old, of increasing criminality, etc., etc., not only remain, but are accentuated. Today, all of the problems ... are accentuating," says mayor .
 Life is getting harder for the workers, more difficult. and more insecure. and insecure. And more insecure . Life in the United States is becoming more and more difficult .
 One need not detail the daily reports of domestic tragedies caused by want and misery . One need only look at the newspapers’ headlines, and leading articles, such as “ This Lost Generation” “Courage to see things in their real light”
 The working class of all other European countries is in no lesser plight. The working-class of all European countries are in no greater plight.
 You have read of huge strikes in Italy and of demonstrations in Belgium against the further lowering of the workers’ fiving standards .
 In France, unemployment, cuts, short time working and strikes are on the order uf the day . The French government has been hit by a wave of short-time working cuts and strikes .
 The Abbé Pierre campaign in Paris to arouse the well-to-do to a realization of the terrible plight of the French capital's poor and homeless outcasts .
 A glance at the world in general reveals a sadly sick and chaotic sociciy . The film was released in June 1961 .
 Behind the facades there exists 4 tortured humanity and 80 much happiness, seems paradoxical . That behind the fine facades, there is also a tortured humanity .
 Workers can no longer fail to fail to sce the real CAUSE of all the trouble commercial rivalry . Workers can't fail to . fail to failed to . sce commercial rivalry is the real cause of the trouble .
 Not one of capitalism's apologists or statesmen would lay his finger on the root cause of the social dilemma . Of course, not one of the . apologists would lay . finger on capitalism's . problem . of capitalism .
 Not one would point out that what is in all logic to be done, is the removal of private ownership barrier in favour of common ownership by the people as a whole .
 Many of capitalism's cada a to have been in the “ resistance “M.M.m. movement . The resistance to war has suffered for their Opposition to war . Many of the world's most powerful corporations have suffered from war .
 The only genuinz Opposition movement in the world to capitalist war was and is today the revolutionary organisation of the S.P.G.B. and their companion parties . But the onlygenuinz opposition is today's revolutionary organisation .
 All others were not opponents to war as such; they were only on the wrong side of the warmakers’ line-up . All others are not opponents . They were only opponents to the war but they were on wrong side .
 The gap between Marxist theory and practice could not be better illustrated than by the extension of the capital penalty in Soviet Russia . The capital penalty was extended in the Soviet Union .
 The fact that 44 years after the Marxist Revolution it should be necessary to reintroduce the death penalty for a number of crimes is surely a very much more important propaganda point for the West .
 The opponents of Socialism are able to make speeches and write articles sneering at Socialism on the strength of what the Russians are doing . Over and over again the opponents of . Socialism are . able to . make speeches ... sneering . at Socialism because of what Russia is doing .
 If we say that Socialism means the end of war, they retort that the Russians have Socialism, and they also have one of the biggest war-machines that have ever been built, they say . The Russians also have a huge war-machine that have never been built .
 If we say s% means the end of wage-slavery, they retort that the Russian workers still have to labour for wages . The Russian workers are still labouring for wages, they say .
 Russians' own reports reveal widespread crime in the Soviet Union . If we say it means it means the end of crime, they show the Russians’ own reports revealing widespread crime .
 If we say it means the end of money, they point triumphantly to Russia—they have Socialism, and they have found they can’t do without money . If you want to know more about Russia, call the U.S. on CNN.com/Heroes .
 From both sides of the Iron Curtain the flood of lying propaganda is endless . The flood of lies is endless, says the author of the book .
 The Russians maintain they have Socialism, hoping to secure the allegiance of the world’s workers, and make ‘the task of any states which go to war with Russia much more difficult’
 The Western world also maintains that the Russians have Socialism, because they hope that their own workers will turn against Socialism . Western world hopes that Russian workers will see that they are no better off than themselves .
 Capital punishment in Russia has now been exiended to further offences . Capital punishment has been extended to further offence offences .
 It has been decreed for persons convicted of large-scale theli of “state and public property,” for forgers, forgers and for criminals who “terrorize “ fellow-prisoners.” Now it has been . forged, and for
 British newspapers have not been slow to make capital out of the news . The British newspapers are not slow to take advantage of the situation .
 Strenuously maintain the opposite. But this has to be done in face of the capitalist monopoly of the Press, pulpit, radio, cinema, and television .
 Monpay, ApriL 24th was a notable day in the history of France . Monpay was a French military strike over Algeria .
 At five o'clock all industries, all public services, all organised labour ceased, and there was a nation-wide strike lasting one hour . The strike lasted for an hour .
 All the trade unions --communist, social democrat, right-wing, left-wing -- joined the demonstration . The demonstration was held in support of all trade unions .
 The revolt of April, although led by four generals, was a movement of the French settlers in Algeria and their sympathizers . The answer, of course, is Algeria, the answer to that question .
 Their position as a propertied class depends on their keeping the Algerian land which they or their forerunners seized . Their position is to keep the land they seized or seized from Algeria .
 The French capitalist class was prepared to support these landed settlers . While the Algerians themselves could be subdued without too much expense, the French capitalists were prepared to back them .
 A whole rebel army is in the field, and large-scale military operations are necessary to keep Algeria from falling into their hands . Large-scale operations are needed to keep the rebels in control of Algeria, says Abdel Abdel Nasser .
 A new Algerian moneyed class, which is the mainspring of the rebellion, is growing up . Algeria's moneyed classes are growing up, according to Algerian President Mohamed El Tou Toure .
 It is in the interests of the French capitalist class to cut its losses, says Philippe Coste . The French should give Algeria independence to escape the crippling financial burden of the Algerian war, he says .
 The General was brought to power by a movement which had its Origin among the settlers in Algeria . The necessities of the ruling class dictate his course. Even though the General was . brought to . power by the . movement .
 There have been two more attempted coups in Algeria since de Gaulle took power . The very men who at first supported him, and who now, of course, regard him as a traitor .
 French ruling class forced it at last to come down on the side of the former . Basically it is a conteyi between the new Algerian capitalist class and the landed settlers, with the selfinterest of the French .
 The massive strike carried out by the French trade unions was in support of the French ruling class against the settlers . When the workers devote half ihe tire and energy which they now give to fighting for the interests of their masters, they will be irresistible, he writes .
 Lord and Lady Brownlow are soon returning to London after spending the winter months in Jamaica . The couple will soon be back in the UK after spending most of their winter months away .
 Property-owners throughout the ages have been at pains ‘to make this clear to the non-property-owners’ So insistent have property-owners always been on this point that we would be tempted to believe them—if only they showed they meant it by giving up their
 Until a couple of centuries ago human knowledge of the physical universe and — of man’s historic development — was scattered and very limited . Of man's historic development, ‘Man’’ was scattered, very limited. Until a few centuries ago .
 The principal guides were religious works and teachings, 'the most familiar being the Bible' 'The most familiar is the Bible,' says the author .
 The idea of the World and Universe coming to an end, and being reborn again, stemmed from man’s primitive struggles with nature, the observance of life and death among plants and animals, the waxing and waning of the heavenly bodies .
 The strong religious theories and dogmas influenced ideas about society, say the author of the book . The book is about how religious beliefs influenced society .
 It was when the class struggle became more acute that suppressed groups cormbined theories about new societies with religious ideas on the ending of the world .
 Politics in 'those days were never far removed from religious hair-splitting and supplication and supplicence,' says George W. Bush . 'Politics in those days was never far from . removed from . religious hairsplitting,' he says .
 In the 16th century Germany was in a state of upheaval . The creed of one Protestant group, the Anabaptists, included a belief in the return of a divine power .
 Anabaptists under John of Leyden, took over the town of Miinster and attempted to set up the millenium on earth . The dramatic outcome of this movement was in 1535 .
 The adventure was an experiment in a commonweal society which was stamped out in mass bloodshed . The feudal landowners, aided by the Church, stamped out the experiment .
 In England at the time of Cromwell a similar but smaller group called the Fifth Monarchy men exisied . In England, a similar group of men also ex-ex-officials .
 Successfully hampered by the magnates and Cromwell, they awaited the Restoration to gain a place in history . The Restoration was completed in 1783 .
 Frustrated then at every turn they took to the murder of legal gentry, and followed this up by a comic opera attack on the Tower of London . Frustration then became so much worse they attacked the Tower and took on the murder gentry .
 With the opening up of the United States the ideas of the Millenium took on a more peaceful form . The opening of the U.S. helped open the doors to the world of ideas .
 In North America, where land was_ plentiful, colonies called themselves the Lord's Elect set up their Edens . The Edens practised mutual aid, pooling of resources and strict living .
 Others more colourful awaited, which they hoped was to be the second -coming under some self-appointed Messiah or Shiloh .
 Known as the Christadelphians, they laid down very definite views on their God's plan for mankind which they based on biblical study . They laid down their views based on Bible study .
 They claimed that the old earth would pass away with Christ's return, and a new world with no evil, oppression, or wars, would be the reward of the believers, with an everlasting life thrown in .
 Conscientious objectors were conscientious objectors in the American Civil War . They made a name for themselves aS conscientious objector in the war .
 Pastor Russell, living in the U.S.A., had formed another group based on Christadelphian theories . By 1872 Pastor Russell had formed an organization based on his theories .
 Bible Students were worldwide, linked to their chief, Russell, by a system of publications and pamphlets that embodied Russellite theories . These groups called Bible Students worldwide were worldwide .
 Judge Rutherford had American know-how on sales pressure, publication and organisation . After the death of Russell in 1916, the mantle of leadership fell on the shoulders of Judge Rutherford .
 Bible Siudenis turned their propaganda to eyecatching and shock tabloids . Bible Students were banned in the United States during the first World War and Judge Rutherford was jailed .
 Such statements as, “ Millions now living will never die” (in a world still numbed by the World War losses) or “ Religion is a racket” were lacking proof .
 The Rutherford clique tightened up on the old members and widened the base of membership . Rutherford's clique has tightened up .
 The original select class were quietly pushed out and the members eventually became known as Jehovah’s Witnesses . The name was a more comprehensive name and helpful in making new members .
 "They renounce the conventional ideas of heaven and hell, the immortal soul, and the holy trinity" The group renounces the idea of hell and hell . They renounce traditional ideas of Heaven and hell and the immortal souls .
 Witnesses argue that Man was created and lived under perfect conditions, but fell under the influence of a fallen angel, namely, the devil . Backed up by Biblical quotes, the Witnesses say that Man lived under a perfect condition, but was created by the fallen angel .
 Since then the world and its social systems have fallen more and more under the sway of the devil and his legions. Since then, the world has fallen more than ever, says the author of the book .
 The Witnesses proclaim that Armaggedon cannot be far away . The Witnesses say the day of Armaggedons is not far from the end of the day .
 The faithful, they say, will survive the final struggle in which the devil will be made captive, and ‘this system of things” swept away .
 Christ will rule the earth, supported by some 144,000 spiritual beings who once lived on earth . The rest of men will not die, and under the theocratic order ’ the earth will flourish as a garden. Christ will ruled the earth .
 When the earth is fruitful again a resurrection of all the dead will take place, says Jesus Christ . The Bible says that when the earth becomes fruitful again, a resurrection will happen .
 All will enjoy the paradise on earth and so remedy past sins by acknowledging Jehovah and Christ . All of the world's sins will be remedied by acknowledging Christ and Jehovah .
 After a thousand years the devil will be released to tempt the wavering . However, after a thousand . years the . devil will tempt the wavering .
 "This is the final struggle and the devil and his followers will be finally condemned to death," says Pope Francis . This is the last struggle," he says .
 Many may howl with laughter at these theories —at the same ‘time as they are swallowing other dogmas, religious and political, that are just as unreal as unreal . Many may laugh with laughter, but others swallow dogmas that are as unreal, as they swallow other dog
 Perhaps that is why we are hearing so much about trouble in the Tory ranks . Perhaps that's why we hear so much of the trouble in Tory ranks.
 There is at the moment no immediately obvious choice to take over from Mr Macmillan . It is strange, as the article pointed out, that there is no obvious choice .
 When Churchill was Premier, everyone knew that he would one day hand over to Eden . Eden is now the Prime Minister of England .
 Socialist Standard 1961 thrusts at the weak links in Darwinism . But Macmillan has not brought on any bright bright thinkers .
 'They are the type of religious opposition | to keep materialists on ‘their toes’ 'They’re the type . They’ll be the kind of religious . opposition to materialists . They are the . type of . religious opposition .
 They have been scourged by dictatorships which have tried to keep them from their domains as if they were the plague . They have also been scoured by the dictatorships . The dictatorships have been trying to stop them from being kept out of their domains .
 The Jehovah's Witnesses may be painstaking in argument, energetic, skilful in propaganda, but after all this they are supporting some theory that has no basis in fact .
 The case pivots on a manlike conception of a god, a deity with human emotions and ideas, a god made in man’s image .
 The grimness of capitalism has driven ‘hese people to feel that man cannot help himself; he must forever wallow in blood and hatred, never growing up, always dangerously infantile.’ ‘Hese people’ say that man is ‘never growing up
 In ‘spite of the setbacks, heartbreaks, and mistakes, Man learns step by step to deal with his problems. Man learns to deal by step,’ he writes .
 There are many who look. as if they have a chance of one day stepping into his elegant shoes . That is the final answer to the Witnesses of Jehovah, and to all other purveyors of religious theories, JACK LAW .
 The Director should bother its head about the matter of the next Prime Minister at all, says The Director .
 He has been in the job for barely four years and is hardly cool from his last smashing electoral victory . He has barely been in charge of the White House for four years .
 Some political correspondents say that not only Mr Macleod is a sharp boy; Macmillan himself has shown a crafty hand over Africa . Some political journalists say that Mr MacLeod is the perfect man for Africa .
 Prime Minister’s problem is to bring his wilder and woollier supporters to accept the realities of modern British capitalism, on issués like Africa .
 Gaitskell, who has a similar problem over nuclear armaments, has not shown up half as well as Macmillan . He has also failed to find a way to deal with the issue .
 The recent history of colonial nationalism must have convinced many influential sections of the British capitalist class that the most economical way of dealing with the nationalists is to give them what they ask and to make the best of it .
 This policy is much less ruinous than the sort of warfare which the French have waged over Algeria and the British over Cyprus . Then, they should be able to continue to invest money in the newly independent territory and so keep their influence with the native government .
 LennoxBoyd made the famous “never™ speech in a debate on Cyprus . The sharper British statesmen must shudder when they recall the speech . Lennox Boyd's "never™ was a never™ speech"
 It is better for the colonial powers to do a deal with a rising nationalist movement rather than to suppress it . The colonial powers must realise that it is better to deal with the nationalist movement than suppress it.
 This is one of the reasons for the sudden changes of front which we have seen recently over colonial affairs . De Valera and and Makarios were reviled by every popular news-rag, reviled as terrorists . They are now respected politicians who are welcomed to the conference table .
 Willingness to come to terms with the independence movements may be, for the capitalists, the saner course, but the Tory Empire men do not appreciate it . Tory empire men don't appreciate it, writes David Cameron .
 Macmillan did his best to soothe everyone, saying that Blake's espionage had done no irreparable damage . The spy chief said that Blake had not done any irreparable harm .
 Lord Parker said Blake brought a lot of British intelligence work to nothing . This is impossible to reconcile with the words of Lord Parker, when passing sentence, that Blake had brought British intelligence to nothing. This is not the case, says Lord Parker .
 No member jeopardised his majority by pointing out that all nations have spies . No member of the House of Representatives made the comments .
 Nobody said that spying is one of the results of the involved diplomacy of the various capitalist powers., who are all the time working to extend their influence and power . Nobody said spying is a result of the . involved diplomacy .
 Not one honourable member suggested that, whilst armed forces exist, they are bound to need powerful weapons, and to keep their latest methods of organised murder a close secret .
 There was not. in other words, one voice, however small, raised to say that espionage is part of the sordid way of capitalist ‘life, that most . capitalist nations have their own spies—whom they regard as heroes, while scourging their Oppos
 All sides of the House united in defence of British capitalism . Only discordant note struck by a few Labourites and Tories who think that perhaps the government is not vigilant enough in this defence .
 Some government supporters may even have been a little irritated with Macmillan over the matter .
 "There he waS,sO smooth and assuring, so full of honeyed words and all the time letting all that scandalous espionage go on behind his back," he said .
 The Tories have found little in the Budget to cheer them up with the Budget . The Budget was announced by the European Parliament on Tuesday .
 Budgets can often win a few votes, even for an unpopular government . We all know that Budgets often win votes even though they are unpopular . Budgets are often used to win votes for unpopular politicians .
 This year's Finance Bill gives the government power to introduce payroll tax and vary excise rates by ten per cent either way . The Finance Bill also gives the power to vary excise tax rates by 10 per cent .
 There is every reason for them occasionally to swap policies. Because they are all basically working to the same end, there is no reason for swapping policies .
 But let us always remember that there is no concern for high flown principles of democracy and freedom in this, It is simply a matter of national housekeeping for their capitalist class .
 A short time ago he had the unusual distinction of stroking his eight to a third consecutive victory . But there are some signs that the tide is not running so well for him now .
 We all know that Dapper Mac is a clever political oarsman, who is well capable of pulling his crew together . We are delighted to see him back on the political stage .
 In any case, the other possible eight is squabbling on the bank about nuclear disarmament and doesn't seem able to agree on who they want for their captain .
 Adam Smith established an elaborate theory of the formation of value and of price . Adam Smith argued that under primitive conditions, when there is little capital and when rent has not yet come into existence, the value of goods is determined solely by the amount of labour embodied in them .
 It follows that as the measure of the exchangevalue of goods it is their “natural price ” that matters . Things, like water, which have a great use-value, have no exchangevalue, like diamonds, have a very high exchange-value .
 Not the utility of an article, but the amount of labour that has been expended in producing it . The utility of the article is the amount that has to be spent on producing it, not the utility it provides .
 Labour expenditure price swings to one side or the other of the labour expenditure price . In accordance with the fluctuations of supply and demand this market price swings .
 The distribution of wealth is effected in accordance with the constituents of every price . The worker receives the equivalent for his labour, and the capitalist and the landlord receive equivalent for the cooperation of capital and land .
 All the commodities which compose the whole annualcproduce of the labour of every country must resolve themselves into the same three parts, and be distributed among the different in-. habitants of the country, either as wages . profit on capital, or rent for land .
 Smith’s theories on the laws of distribution may be briefly phrased as follows . Smith's theories are based on his theories of distribution .
 The more capital there is in a country, the greater is the demand for labour, and the higher therefore are wages . G. G.
 The more capital there is, the lower is its rate of profit; the more capitalists there are, the greater is the tendency to underbid one another . The more money is made, the less profit is made .
 The more labour there is in a country, and the richer it therefore is, the lower in general is the profit of capital . Consequently, the more labour is in the country, the less capital capital is made .
 Increase in the productiveness of labour the division of labour and the expansion of manufacture leads to a fall in the prices of the products of industry . Increase in productiveness leads to the increase in the production of industry.
 The products of agriculture automatically exchange for larger quantitics of industrial products . That is, the former become dearer .
 This rise in agriculture prices is attended or followed by a rise in rent . Rent also rises concurrently with an increase in capital, for since more capital and labour are applied to land, and land is therefore used more effectively, the income from land necessarily increases .
 Economic activities when perfectly free develop. harmoniously, and free competition must be left to do its work. Free competition must not be allowed to interfere with free competition, says David Cameron . Free competition should be left out of politics, says Cameron .
 Competition forces everyone to follow his own economic aims, to develop all his forces, and to produce as cheaply as possible, Consumers are suppli¢d with goods at the lowest prices, 0 London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard .
 At the same time, it results that everyone engages in the occupation which comes most natural to him . "Everyone engages in an occupation which is most natural," he said .
 Division of labour takes place along the lines that ‘are most economical’ Division of Labour takes place in the U.S.
 By virtue of its own mechanism, society ‘can get the better of that selfish outlook which is hostile to society.’
 "Everyone becomes enabled, by the pursuit of his own advantage, to enjoy his natural rights," the author says .
 Our natural wealth being limited to coal and iron, we are entirely dependent on the means of survival to a prejudiced, vindictive capitalist world . We are all dependent on means of surviving to a vindictive, prejudiced capitalist world. We have no choice but to live in a prejud
 I would be pleased to know my fears are ungrounded, and would be grateful for a reply . I would like to hear from the author of this article .
 England, for example, is deficient in many types of natural wealth which are essential to a modern society, says the author .
 Even those countries which ure naturally rich often find it to their advanlage to import raw materials or manufaetures . Even. those . countries which . ure . naturally rich find it . to their . advice to their advantage is importing raw materials .
 The modern process of producing and distributing wealth is an intensely social and cO-Operative act, which no country can opt out of . The modern society produces and redistributes wealth, it is said .
 Any attempt to set up Socialism in one country must come to grief, for that country would be forced to enter into commercial relations with the capitalist part of the world . Because of this, any attempt to . set up socialism in one . country must . come to . grief, says the
 The very fact of that country trading with others would mean that its “ Socialism ” was at an end, the author says .
 In the presence of Our Lords Spiritual and Temporal, . and the Premiers of the five Dominions of “ dur” Mighty Empire, and the ani Monarchs of many lands, . The Stock Exchange himself .
 The King's name and his robes, his crown and his palaces, but they have stripped him of every vestige of power . That question was fought out many years ago, our capitalist masters fought out . They have left the King his name, his robes and his crown, but
 There is today, in this country at all events, no institution of capitalism that the cupitalists themselves are not fully able to maintain, or that they trust to other hands than their own . There is no institution in the country that is not fully able to maintain, says
 Behind the person of the King the capitalists can hide the fact that it is they in reality who rule . The King is the King of the Kingdom, not the king of the West .
 By parading their kings before the workers at every possible opportunity, the capitalist) awaken and Stimulate and nurture that spirit of reverence, which is so deadly an cnemy to the growth of revolutionary ideas, and so detract attention from themselves .
 Stock exchange speculators and the financiers who manoeuvre take-overs can, within limits, accommodate themselves to the fluctuations of markets and production . But the manufacturer has them always on his mind. The Manufacturer’s Dream .
 When demand Jeaps he may suffer the anguish of knowing that if he had expanded more he could sell more and make more profit . When demand drops he may find he has stocks of unsaleable goods . The manufacturers’ dream of heaven is a market that steadily grows .
 People just don't understand the problems that a sudden boom and an equally sudden slump bring to the industry. People just need to understand the problem of the boom and slump, says the author .
 As long as the demand is there the overseas dealers keep clamouring for cars . "You have to keep supplying them. You have to sell them," says Ford chief executive .
 At any moment there may be thousands of vehicles in ships or on railway sidings awaiting shipment . Then overnight the market goes soft, and the pipelines are choked with cars nobody wants any more .
 The ‘trade cycle’ of alternate expansion and contraction is how capitalism has always operated . The motor firms and other manufacturers may go on hoping, but there isn't anything they can do about it . The “trade cycle, of alternate growth and contraction, is how it has
 Already there is talk of another set-back for motor cars later this year . Cotton industry is facing trouble again, as well as furniture industry and clothing trade .
 For many years politicians and economists claimed that with the lessons learned from the depression of the ‘thirties, governments could handle the problem, but fewer now confidently hold that view . Fewer now confidently believe that the problem is solved by governments .
 One popular business theory was that firms could gain stability by extending their activities into several different fields, but the experience of the oil companies shows the flaw in this remedy .
 For some years now the oil companies have been hit by overproduction of oil, recently agitated by the Russian drive to invade Western markets and by the opening of the Sahara oil fields . The Sahara oil field is one of the most important oil fields in the world, according to experts .
 The Royal Dutch-Shell group of companies found new outlets by developing methods of producing chemicals from oil, including fertilisers, industrial chemicals, plastics and resins . The group also developed new forms of fertilisers and industrial chemicals .
 There is some danger of surplus manufacturing capacity being created as the result of an over-optimistic assessment of profitability . Perhaps when there are too many chemicals the research chemists will develop another new industry, to turn the surplus chemicals back into oil .
 Tipping publish the results of a new aatempt to estimate how the wealth of the country is distributed .
 Of this, nearly £31,000 million was owned by three million persons possessing over £2,000 each . The remaining £9,000million was . owned by the other 32 million persons aged 20 or over .
 In the top capital group there are 20,000 persons with more than £100,000 each and an average holding of over £250,000 . In the bottom group are 16 million persons with less than . £100 each and £50 each .
 They warn that their figures are very rough owing to the difficulties of handling the material .
 They think that there has been some redistribution during the past twenty years but have not found it possible to give even a rough cstimate of its extent .
 Mr Frank Bower, M.A., gave a definition in 1908 which was in harmony with that given by Marx half a century carlier . Mr Bower gave the definition in . 1908 .
 A fall in the value of money, with a rise in the cost of living, caused by a comparatively permanent excess in the amount of money in circulation over that which is needed to perform the transactions of the community .
 Inflation usually means the artificially high prices caused by an over-issue of inconvertible paper money . Inflation is usually caused by over-issued paper money.
 They were describing what would happen if an inconvertible paper currency replaced gold and convertible notes, and if notes were issued in excessive amounts . They were talking about what would take place if the currency replaced the gold and convertibles .
 Keynes used the term Socialist Standard 1961 to mean something different again . Keynes used it to mean 'Socialist Standard' for the first time . Keynes was the first to use the term 'socialist standard' again .
 For him it was a question neither of currency nor credit, but of whether there are unemployed workers, idle factorics. and reserves of materials .
 Government’s action in expanding the note issuc is merely the passive one of secing that Sufficient notes are available for the practical convenience of the public . Committee on the Monctary System in 1959 said bank notes are in effect the small change of the monetary system . Committee
 The total volume of production in this country is about 50 per cent. above the level of 1938 . Those who hold such views have yet to explain why it has been ‘convenient’ for the government now to have in issue over four times the amount of notes then in circulation
 Financial columnists go in for the sport of guessing what sort of budget it is going to be . Earty each April the financial columnists predict the budget it will be .
 It is like backing horses, but with a difference; for after a race you do know which horse won . After a race, you know which race won. Backing horses is just like backing a horse, but it's like backing them, but not backing them .
 Columnists rarely agree what kind of budget it is when the budget comes out . Not so with the columnists, who, when budget is announced, can rarely agree .
 This year on the 11th April the Telegraph headed its column “ Chancellor puts Checks on Inflation”; but the Mai/ found the budget “ inflationary,” as also did the Express . The reader can take his choice .
 The confusion is partly the result of the “ experts’ not being able to make up their minds what effect, if any, particular governmental policies for managing production and trade will have, but it is also a by-product of conflicting views as to the meaning of inflation .
 Human astronauts are too few and disorganised at the moment to insist on union membership . Human astronauts need to be more organised and more organised .
 If an Astronaut Union meeting were held to discuss the matter, there would be more chimps there than men . And there would also be chimps .
 They accept the truck system of payment, fully satisfied with a weekly wage of bananas . The truckers are happy with the weekly wages of bananas.
 They demand no danger money and can easily be bribed with a full length cover story in Life magazine . Life magazine can easily bribe them with a cover story .
 Mechanisation and mass production have reduced most factory jobs to a simple routine . Mechanisation has reduced most of the jobs in factories to a routine routine .
 The animals could be farmed in colonies and crossbred to produce strains suitable for all conditions . They could be crossbred and farmed to make strains suitable to all conditions, experts say .
 Industrial psychology is already a science, industrial psychology is a science . Naturally they'd have to be kept happy, but industrial psychologists are already here .
 National Veterinary Service could be set up to make sure a sick chimp could go back to work as soon as possible . National veterinary service could help a sick chimpanzee return to work .
 British law would have to be extended to cover the chimpanzee . The chimpanzee should be able to sue his master for the loss of five bananas .
 As a reward for work, patience and obedience, he would look forward to a life after death in which he would be introduced to a Gorilla father image who presided over a banana plantation .
 He would learn modesty and cover up his bottom. read good books and bz BOOKS prevented from reading bad books about his promiscuous ancestors. He would also learn modesty .
 Our modern age would be far better served by chimp workers, says author . None of these things is impossible with careful scientific breeding and conditioning .
 For it's becoming increasingly obvious that in our modern age, human beings simply don’t belong . For it’s becoming increasingly clear that in . our modern . age, we simply don't belong to the world, it's become increasingly obvious .
 CAPITALISM has solved the problem of production. P MCHALE, Waste Making. Capitalism has solved production problems. PCHALE: Capitalism is the answer to the problem .
 The system of capitalism, which already exists over much of the world and is rapidly capturing the rest, has given birth to sufficient productive potential to satisfy all the reasonable demands of mankind . The system is already existing over the world .
 All that now remains to be done is to bring in a system in which these potentialities can be realised to the full . All that must be done now is to realise the potentialities of the new system .
 The Russian capture of the U-2 plane was followed by the collapse of the summit meeting, Wall Street stock-market prices advanced during seven successive days . On the other hand, in May, 1960, when the U.2 was captured, Wall St. market prices advanced .
 But even the unprecedented spending on arms cannot solve their problems, says CNN.com . "Even spending on weapons cannot solve problems," says CNN's John Defterios .
 Consumer goods are deliberately made worse, so that they will wear out sooner, and therefore have to be replaced . One reason is that consumer goods are made worse is to be made worse so they wear out faster .
 A guided-missile expert is quoted as pointing out that there was no technological reason why television sets could not be built to last for cight years without repair . While (according to Packard's carefully-marshalled evidence) the quality of TV sets was in fact deteriorating .
 Mous advertising campaigns plugging the new style of things are often made to feel out of date . Another waste-making device is regular changes of style, so that with enorFor a socialist analysis of war read SOCIALIST .
 Whirlpool board chairman told engineers at a conference that ‘an engineer's principal purpose as an engineer is to create obsolescence” Yet a further means of pushing goods is the never-never .
 The result is that many American families now have a load of unpaid debts . The result of the debt crisis is that families are struggling to make ends meet with their debts .
 One “ solution ” is for the wife, including wives with young children, to go out to work as well as the husband . The wife should go to work, even if she has young children .
 A doctor in the same city said many of his patients’ aches and pains were caused by money problems . And a doctor said money problems were also a factor in many of the aches .
 You may disagree with the author's conclusions, but the whole book is thought-provoking . The author's conclusion is that the book is a thought- provoking book .
 Watford, Hertfordshire, is claimed by its Press to be one of the most prosperous in post-war Britain . Worker's Prosperity in 1961 .
 The sort of criteria applied are the number of vacancies at the local Labour Exchange, wage rates offered, and enquiries for juveniles leaving schools . The criteria is based on a number of job vacancies and wage rates .
 Income fax returns, rents of shops. increase of population and price of house room . Increase of population . increase of rent or mortgage repayments .
 ‘Prosperity’ brings many unpleasant and disagreeable results. Unfortunately, this * prosperity’ has many unpleasant results. ‘It is not the only thing that can be said to be the result of this prosperity.’
 In some ways, it is a miniature of what is happening on a national scale in Great Britain these days . In some way, it's a mini-miniature of what has happened in Britain's history .
 A further 50,000 West Indians are coming to Britain this year, not as tourists looking at ruins, but workers seeking jobs . By the same token, a further . West Indians will come to the UK this year to work in the construction industry .
 The employers, through their Govern. ment, can easily control this foreign emigration . Employers can easily turn it on, or off, as required, like a tap . The government can control the emigration of foreign workers through its Govern. Mentorship .
 Government in 1904 boasted that any Jew landing at London docks with C15 in his possession might remain here, or when the successive American Govcroments at the turn of the century admitted emigrants by the million .
 It is not quite so easy to keep them ill at work once admitted, as all the historical cases show . It's not quite as easy as it was once admitted .
 Some employers are making Special provision for housing for their workers . The unskilled (and paradoxically enough, even skilled puilding Workers) are finding accommodation hard to get .
 A local scribe has warned the large number of Easter Brides about their chances of a roof in “ prosperous ” Watford. Watford .
 Before the war, there were houses galore for renting . “I haven't Iet a house in years,” one agent told me .
 Advances on mortgages are granted only to applicants in permanent and secure employment . Advances are granted to applicants only to apply for mortgages in permanent or secure employment. Advances only granted on mortgages to applicants who have secure and permanent employment .
 Another house advertised this week is a good semi-detached home in North Watford with garage space . Another house is advertised in Watford this week .
 So many young Watford couples fail to realise just how much they will eventually pay for the house of their dreams . The cost of the house is often too much to realise .
 Borrowing only £2,500 on that terraced house Bob and Sylvia would, during those 20 years, repay the staggering total of £4,560 . The couple borrowed the staggering amount of money from the house .
 Do not think the Building Society is doing you a favour in lending you the money, they get it back with gold-plated interest . The Building Society gets the money back with interest .
 Just as sellers seek the highest price —buyers chase the lowest, and there may be those who hope to . hope that new towns and estates will supply their need .
 At least 4,000,000 dwellings in this country today are over 75 years old . At least four,000 homes in the UK are over the age of 75 .
 This has been dropped, and is not reaching anything like that figure today . This has not been dropped and has not reached that level today . It is not the same level as it was in the 1980s .
 The present position is that slums are growing faster than rebuilding is taking place, says the government . Slums in the city are growing more rapidly than rebuilding are taking place .
 He can pay up to £6 a week repayments, which includes £3 a week interest . He can either move further afield where rent and mortgages are lower .
 If he wants the higher wages, he must pay fares, or run a car and spend time in monotonous travelling . Then, if he wants to pay fares or spend time running a car or travelling, he would have to run the car .
 Since January the Branch has held no less than 16 indoor mectings . At least one valuable lesson, which we have all learned is to look at our own writing with a far more critical eye .
 The average audience has been 30, with collections of over £1] at cach meeting .
 Nine different speakers took part and there were good ‘questions and lively discussion’ on nearly every occasion . Nine different people took part in the event .
 Carshalton x Branch News DEMONSTRATION FOR SOCIALISM . Wednesday June 14th at 7.30pm Public Hall, High Street, Carshallton . J D'Arcy for the Socialists .
 That working pcople won't leave the telly for a serious political meeting. That working PCople won’t leave the show to watch TV .
 They were attracted by an_ intensive publicity campaign, embracing a serics of Icaflet raids on Islington and St. Peterborough .
 Red-white posters all over London, and advertisements in political journals and local newspapers . St. Pancras homes; concentrated displays of striking red and white posters .
 Comrades Young and May outline the case for Socialism, answer a stream of questions, and reply to a lively discussion . For nearly three hours, the audience heard Comrade Young, May and May answer to questions .
 Comrade Young quoted facts and figures exposing the fallacy of the “ You’ve never had it so good” argument . Comrade Y. Young said: “You’re never ever had it . good’s never been so good.”
 The gap between the wages of the workers and the wealth they produced had greatly widened . The gap in wages and wealth has greatly widened in the past decade .
 Workers still believed they could solve their problems by voting for reformist partics . Tragically, workers still believe they can solve problems with reformist parties .
 They would always remain wage slaves until they voted for an international Socialist society, with no wages, no money, no national states, and where goods would be produced for human need, not profit . The Socialist society would produce goods for the human need not profit, not profits .
 To Labour and Communist questioners, Comrade Young said that nationalisation was a form of capitalism . He said nationalisation of nationalised industries was a 'form of capitalism'
 Comrade May said the way to abolish war, both nuclear and conventional, was to abolish the capitalist system that bred it . Neither had the state capitalist system operating in the Sovict Union and other so-called Communist countries, he said .
 There could be no guarantce of permanent peace without a world-wide system> of common ownership and social quality . The world could not guarantee permanent peace if it were to have common ownership .
 Weather was kind to London's May Day, allowing us to hold an outdoor rally in Hyde Park . The weather was kind for the rally .
 Comrades Ambridge, D'Arcy heard the case for Socialism . Members made the best of some unaccustomed sunshine to notch up good literature sales .
 In the evening we followed up with an indoor meeting at Denison Housc . Comrades Grant and Baldwin spoke .
 Four members of Wembley Branch sold twenty copies of the SoctaList STANDARD in one hour’s canvass of the Fratton area of Portsmouth on May 14th .
 A meeting was commenced at 3.30m. and continued until almost 8 oclock, apart from a short tea break . In the afternoon of the same day, comrades from Camberwell and Kingston Branches on the front at Southsea were joined .
 It was still fairly early in the season, there was an average audience of about fifty, taking a lively interest and asking many questions .
 The previous Monday, Comrade Ja Touche showed us some colour slides of the West Indies and gave us some useful general information on that area . Comrade J Touche also gave us a look at the West Indian coastline .
 The Olive Branch, Crawford St., W1 Wednesday 14th June 9 pm “THE State of Israel” Speaker : J Keys MITCHAM Lecture .
 Political freedom is something of such importance to the working class that it loses To Strike or not it at its peril . The working class loses political freedom to strike or not to strike at any peril .
 Ist and 3rd Mondays (3rd & 17th July) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street . Ist, 3rd and 17th Mondays (July 3rd & July 3rd July)
 Friday 8pm, 80 Farm Road, Esher, Surrey, Surrey . C Skelton, SPGB, c/o above address, KINGSTON upon THAMES .
 LEWISHAM Mondays 8pm, Co-op Hall, Rushey Green, Catford, SE6.
 NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (Sth & 19th July) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street, London . Nottingham alternate Wednesnesdays at Peoples Hall .
 SPGB, 76 Ladbroke Grove, WII, SOUTH EAST ESSEX (formerly Basildon and Southend) 2nd and 4th Mondays (10th & 24th luly) in month 8 pm .
 Ist and 3rd Monday (3rd & I7th July) in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St. Mary's, 8 pm . Ist & 3rd . Monday (July 3rd & July 7th) at 8pm each .
 2nd and 4ch Thursdays (13th & 27th July) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12. West Ham .
 2nd and 4th Fridays (14th and 28th July) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SEI8.30pm .
 ORDERS for literature should be sent to the Literature Department spas at the above address .
 Executive Committee should be sent to General Secretary, secs, 52. 52.
 Postal orders and cheques should be crossed and made payable to the spas. at the above address .
 After years of being convinced that it would fail, the Government has now belatedly realised that it may after all be here to stay . The Government was convinced for years that the Government would fail .
 So late have they left it, and so long have they dithered, that if they are to do something about joining they must do it quickly . If they are not to join the ranks of the world's elite, they must join quickly .
 It will be impossible for them to jump on the bandwagon at all . Otherwise, it will be difficult for the club to get on board .
 Mr Macmillan’s somewhat panicky efforts to get matters straight with the Commonwealth and his undignified haste to prepare the ground at home .
 It is clear that the issue of whether Britain should go into the Common Market is causing a lot of heart-searching in many quarters .
 As far as industry is concerned, to the giants like I.C.I. the whole question is academic . As far from industry, the whole issue is academic. As far . from industry .
 They are going into the Common Market regardless of what decision the British Government may take . They will go into the common market regardless of the British government's decision .
 The only thing they are afraid of is being left outside of Europe is not being left out . Confident of being able to compete on equal terms with the Europeans, they are confident they can compete with them .
 Many industries and firms that are afraid of meeting European competition are violently opposed to going in, say experts . But they are very much afraid of facing European competition .
 The majority of agricultural interests share this view, worrying whether their system of protection will disappear once the British market is thrown open to efficient Dutch production and fast rising food surpluses .
 Commonwealth countries like Australia, Canada and New Zealand are worried about food shortages . Britain is largely self-sufficient in foodstuffs save for those of tropical origin . Australia, New Zealand and Canada are also worried about their agricultural outlets .
 These are only some of the conflicting economic interests which the Government is called upon to resolve .
 The usual policy of British Governments when conflicting inlerests are at loggerheads is to make a show of compromise that is only a temporary camouflage for the dominant capitalist interest to have its way in the run . The Common Market is itself in no mood for compromises, writes Andrew Hammond .
 For the British Government, then. the long prevarication will soon have to end-——a decision must be made one way or the other .
 But this may be only part of Mr Macmillan’s softeningup tactics and the opposition may be stronger than he thinks .
 Whatever the outcome, it will throw interesting light on the political strengths of the various sectional interests in present-day British capitalism . The outcome of the vote will throw an interesting light into the political interests of the British capitalist .
 The economic forces of capitalism, driving society's development towards ever larger units, will eventually win the day . But much more interesting will it be to watch how the economic forces will eventually prevail, says David Cameron .
 Race hatred, with its violent undertones, still festers in ‘the Deep South’
 When we remember this, the ‘sit in’ victories seem to have been too easy, the 'sit in' victories seem too easy . The ‘sitting in” wins seem to be too easy. The 'sit-in’s’ victory seems
 Colour bars cannot be justified by scientific argument, because there is no evidence lo support them . Colour bars can't be justified in scientific argument because of lack of scientific evidence .
 "Here is fertile ground for the ignorant, vicious mobster to flourish unhealthily," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Racial freedom cannot be safeguarded by the military victory of one capitalist state over another . Racial freedom is not a matter of race versus race, it is a matter matter of national security .
 Capitalism, with its anomalies and insecurity, breeds many brutal and inhuman ideas . Capitalism breeds the most brutal ideas, the author says . Capitalism is not the only solution to the world's   inhumane ideas .
 The Freedom Riders are tackling something which may be bigger than they think . Freedom Riders may be tackling something that may not be big enough for the first time . They are tackling the issue with the Freedom Riders .
 'Even after the wars which were supposed to eliminate them, there are still enough conflicts of interest in Europe to Start another -international blood bath.’
 There is no reason to think that a third world war need begin anywhere else . Third world war needs to begin in the Middle East, it is said .
 Kennedy did not see Macmillan until after his important talks with de Gualle and Khruschev . Kennedy was in France at the time of his visit to the Soviet Union .
 It showed that the days are gone when Britain’s gunboat word was law and that international capitalism has new bosses to sort out its problems .
 Eisenhower was one of the latest of the exponents of top man-to-top man chats, but when he left office the world was as far from a secure peace as ever . Eisenhower left office in 1953 but the world remained secure when he died .
 In truth the representatives of the ruling class rarely, if ever, talk peace . In truth, they rarely talk peace. In truth they rarely do so .
 If Kennedy can be taught anything in this way, he is probably learning fast . Kennedy can learn fast if he wants to be a successful politician .
 Lorp Home is a charming and amiable fellow, according to the people who know him .
 An expert at disguising any inner feelings which may embarrass his host . He is an expert in disguising his inner feelings .
 Lord Home must have needed all his resource during his Portuguese visit to Portugal .
 At any time he touched on the massacres in Angola, it was doubtless with the greatest of delicacy . It at any time . touched upon the massacres . It was doubtless . with the . greatest of . delicacy.
 Foreign Secretary did not go to Portugal to discuss ways of expanding democracy . Instead he went to Portugal for talks on expanding democracy in the country .
 Some governments, like the British, profess a deep concern for freedom . True, some governments -- like the UK -- profess a strong concern for free speech . But the U.S. government has a problem .
 We may sometimes wonder at their cynicism, but we would be wrong to blame them for the faults of an entire social system . We would rather rather than blame their cynicism for the failings of the social system, we say .
 Support capitalism with one hand, and hold up the other in horror at its brutality and suppression . Support capitalism in a world of economic freedom . Support the British government with the support of the British Labour Party .
 President of U.S.D.A.W. made the headlines recently for his statement at the Bournemouth Conference .
 The contract to build a replacement fur the Queen Mary will go out to shipbuilders . Then perhaps Trade Unions will discuss at Conferences what they are really there for, NEW CUNARDER this month .
 The government are sinking £18 million in the venture to keep British shipowners in the scramble for the transatlantic sea traveller . There seems to be little prospect that the new Cunarder will be very profitable .
 Cunard argue that the best way of boosting British prestige is to build a 75,000 tonner . The ship would be the first of its kind in the world .
 Some workers may object to the government’s subsidy because they think that it comes out of the income tax and other taxes which they grumble about so much . Some workers think that the subsidy comes from income tax .
 However much the State takes from a worker's wage packet, he still receives, on average, about enough to live on . However, however much they leave in it, they still receive, average worker receives, average wage packet .
 The attitudes which political parties have struck about the new Cunarder may cause some surprise . The attitudes of the political parties are striking may surprise some .
 This is not the first time the requirements of capitalism have persuaded political parties to abandon what they call their principals . This is the case of a political party abandoning its principals .
 Russian bloc in Cuban affairs must be seen in context of their desire to penetrate a Latin American economy which hitherto had been the exclusive preserve of Western Capitalism . The Russian bloc is keen to penetrate Latin American economies .
 The U.S. trade in Latin American exports and imports is still only about 2 per cent of the region's total trade . The United States and Western Europe have the highest share of Latin American trade in the region .
 Russia has embarrassingly large exportable surpluses of petroleum and her highly industrialised satellites, East Germany and Czechoslovakia, urgently need outlets for manufactured goods and capital equipment . Russia has embarrassed to have large exportables surplaces of petroleum .
 Within Russia there is a growing demand for sugar, coffee, beef and bananas . Meanwhile within Russia there are growing demand lor foodstuffs .
 Latin American countries are dependent upon the export of one or two main crops or raw materials only . Most Latin American nations are dependent on one of their main crops, raw materials .
 An important factor contributing to this decline has been the hardening of United States tariffs against so many of the products that she herself produces . Yet it is just these commodities that have suffered a prolonged decline in price in recent years .
 This last fact is rather depressing, because it indicates a lack of class interest among a section of the working class . The last fact of the British working class is depressing, it says .
 Those interests exist and sooner or later they operate, whether they are openly recognised or not . But those interests exist, and sooner than later they will operate .
 He sometimes manages to screw a little extra out of his job in expenses, free entertainment and the like . He also manages to get free entertainment from his job .
 Tell him that this is exactly what the docker, with his militant attitude and his little fiddles is doing, and you will find yourself in argument with an angry man . Yet tell him that he is doing exactly what he's doing, he will be angry .
 Transport strikes, for example, can cause a lot of suffering to the workers whom they leave stranded . Transport strikes can also leave stranded workers with no one to blame .
 The strength of a strike is often measured by the inconvenience which it causes . The strike, in fact, is a weapon. But there would be no point in coming out if the strikers’ labour was easily dispensed with, the strike . The strikes are a weapon, and the
 We all know that we go to work because we must have London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 wages in order to live . We must have a minimum wage of 1961 to live. We have to live on minimum wage rates of 1961 .
 Our employer does not give us our wages as a favour, or because he thinks we have done a good job . So does the docker and the dust— man, man, our employer .
 They are the price of something we have sold to him, they say . The price of our working ability is what we have been sold to them, he says . They are price of selling them to him; they are also price of working ability .
 Whenever something is sold, there is immediately set up a mutually antagonistic relationship of buyer and seller . The buyer's interests are in paying as little as he can for whatever he is buying and the seller's are in getting the highest price he can .
 This applies to the sale of a worker's labour power, it expresses the division of interest between employers and employees . This expresses the unity of interest among the working class, says Labour Party leader .
 This is what forces Stiff Collar to ask for his rise, and to work his expense account . This is why he has to work harder for his job .
 Workers should strike only for something which is of value to them as workers, he says . Unhappily, this does not always happen .
 There are strikes by one set of workers against another, often over trivial disputes . We have all heard of the demarcation strikes in the shipyards, when men downed tools over who should bore holes or chalk lines .
 There have been strikes by “ white ” workers against the employment of “ coloured “ workers . Last October, for example, the dustmen of Westminster City Council threatened to strike because a Jamaican had been promoted .
 W.W. wants the coal because it is at present about sixteen shillings a ton cheaper than Welsh coal . Welsh coal is at least 16 shills a ton less expensive than Welsh .
 We might have expected the National Coal Board to contest the application; it is a threat to one of their big markets . We, might have . expected the application to contest, but it is not expected to be contested .
 Mr Robens was dead-heated in his protest by the leaders of the National Union of Mineworkers . The union leaders also had strong words to say on the matter .
 Welsh miners are anxious to keep their jobs, which they fear will be jeopardised by the cheap American coal . The next day, a delegate conference at Porthcawl passed a motion which threatened to use the miners’ “ industrial strength ” to prevent the importation
 A monthly average of 455,000 tons, including bunkers, went out in 1960 . A monthly monthly average was 455,00 tons . The U.S. government spent $1.5 billion on the project .
 Cheap coking coal means lower steel prices, which means that more British steel may be sold and that their jobs may become more secure . Most of them probably agree with the theory that cheap coal means low steel prices . More British steel could be sold, and more jobs may be more secure
 The working class throughout the world, whatever their job or colour of skin, should realize that only one sort of strike is worthwhile . The strike is necessary for the working class, regardless of their jobs or colour, skin .
 Such strikes are worthy of wholehearted support from all sections of the working class. That is one which is aimed at protecting or advancing their interests against their capitalist employers, says the Labour Party .
 Strikes directed against other sections of workers can only damage working class interests as a whole . Strikes attack the very unity in which workers must find their strength . Strikes are directed against each other, rather than against the working class in general .
 The miners who are resisting the imports of American coal are fighting their employer’s battles . The miners are fighting the import of coal from the United States .
 The National Coal Board want to protect their markets, and at the same time they would like to take over the markets which are exploited by the coal industries in other countries .
 They would also like to control the market for fuel in this country, says David Cameron . Cameron says they want to control market for central heating in Canada .
 The steel companies are no different from the steel companies, who are all in favour of making their own product as cheaply as possible and exporting as much of it as they can . But they would not like to see cheap Japanese steél pinching the market in Great Britain .
 Capitalism is rife’with divided interests, The working class should ignore them all, save one . The working-class, who depend for their living upon selling their mental and muscular energies, should ignore all of them .
 When they have come to grips with that, they will get down to some fundamental question of society. ing of society . That one is their own interests as a subject class, he says . When they come to terms with that they will be able to find out more about society's interests
 Sir Thomas Moore advocates a return to flogging and more frequent hanging as the answer to our troubles . But he only supports these punishments in cases of petty vio'ence .
 Where a dictator is able to carry out a long and wide campaign of violence, then Sir Thomas is all for it . Sir Thomas agrees with the tyrant’s brand of politics, provided he agrees with it .
 In the early days of Hitler's regime he was an outspoken supporter of German Nazism; and he is still a loyal champion of Spanish Fascism . In the 1930s he was a staunch supporter of Spanish fascism .
 This is only the latest of a long series of trials of political opponents which Franco's courts have held since he came to power in the Civil War . Franco has shown himself more successful at violence and killing than his opponents since he became president .
 Sir Thomas's contention that Franco seized power in order to forestall an attempt to put a ‘stranglehold on freedom” in Spain . These thirtytwo farm workers, and the thousands of others in Franco's political jails, would no doubt be interested to learn .
 To defend Franco on these grounds is like giving a medal to a man who saves a child from drowning, only to stab it to death immediately after . But, of course, political freedom need not be Sir Thomas's concern. Political freedom is not his concern.
 If the Communists were in power in Spain, they would probably ally themselves with Russia . Russia is now the main overseas enemy of the British ruling class . The Communists would probably be allies with Russia in Spain .
 Franco and his Fascists, on the other hand, would come in with the British ruling class in any war against Russia . Franco and the Fascists would come into the same way with Britain in any fight against Russia, says historian .
 Sir Thomas supports Franco, and Mr Butler goes to Spain as Franco’s guest . He says it is a shame that Franco Spain has been left out of things for so long .
 Just as state control was applied here to rescue the coal and rail shareholders from the complete loss of their investments, so nationalisation—or municipalisation—is used for the same purpose in other countries .
 Johannes Semler, who took over the Borgward car firm in February, said today that the firm would have to cut its staff by another 2,500 people .
 Borgwards was taken over by the Bremen municipal authorities earlier this year after it ran into financial difficulties . In March the board empowered the management to dismiss up to 2,500 workers, Borgwards .
 It tries to persuade industrial concerns to move to Durham, or open new works there .
 This offering of human beings as promising raw material to employers bent on the extraction of surplus value is surely degrading both to the men themselves and to those who planned and those who read the advertisement . It is not the first time that human beings have been offered as raw material .
 One of the many advantages of Socialism is that human beings will be considered as human beings, not simply as so much factory-fodder . One of many advantages is that people will not simply be factory-dodder .
 The next time you hear of a handful who get £120 and £140 per week after tax, remember that this is by no means the whole story . Millions more who get less than £20 and millions more who even get under £10 .
 The directors’ fees, the share dividends are only part of the real income of the owning class . Besides the actual money, which is taxed, there are the large allowances on the expense accounts, which are untaxed .
 Treasury investigated the role of On Expenses on expense accounts . Treasury has released some evidence showing what has been happening in the US .
 A corporation owned luxurious facilities on a subtropical island, including its own fishing cruiser, and aircraft to take its execulives and their guests down there, was allowed $375,000 . A corporation which owned a fishing cruiser and aircraft was allowed to pay $375K .
 Supply firm had its own yacht, ranch and hunting lodges, SOCIALIST STANDARD, and given a tax-allowance of $473,140 to cover its expenditure on them and on night club entertainment .
 If we can't be sure of anything, it is that ordinary workers in these firms never saw these sub-tropical islands, or the hunting lodges, it's said . It is not known how many of the workers at these firms saw the islands, but it's likely they
 E A Lesson in Futility from Aldermaston and Weathersfield, treks from London to Holy Loch . E a Lesson In Futility is a travel guide to the Holy Loch in Scotland .
 Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and the Direct Action Groups seem to be more intensely active as the days go by . The campaign for nuclear disarmament and Direct Action groups are more active .
 "No one can reasonably oppose a spirit of protest against intensifying hideousness in the instruments of war," says David Cameron . No one can oppose a 'spirit of protest'
 To treat the subject in isolation from its causes is to make of C.N.D. an endeavour of impotence and futility, campaigners say . But to treat the issue in isolation, they say, as do the campaigners, in isolation .
 On occasions like the Aldermaston and Wetherfield marches, were organised public protests against nuclear weapons . Yet throughout the whole proceedings there was no expression of antagonism towards the social system of capitalism .
 The leaders were cheered for their references to a capitalist world turning to nuclear disarmament for humanitarian reasons . The leaders —Supporters without exception of the existing social order — were cheered to the echo .
 It is not inconceivable that governments will eventually give up the thought of waging nuclear war . Governments will eventually decide not to engage in nuclear warfare .
 The latest development in H-bombs has made these weapons so widely destructive that use of them might well mean the destruction of the coveted markets and the extermination of the coveting capitalists themselves .
 To avoid the danger of destroying themselves and the very market expansion they are seeking, the various capitalst groupings, through their governments, may revert to " conventional" warfare .
 The colossal funds which governments have provided for the development of nuclear weapons reveals the financial lengths to which they will go to ensure the armament supremacy .
 Socialist Standard 1961 would be prepared to spend huge sums on “ conventional ” weapons . And, now accustomed to greatly increased provisions for defence .
 With or without the bomb, war takes a sufficiently hideous toll in bloodshed and misery . We know, in’any case, that with or without a bomb, War takes a hideous toll .
 In a capitalist system which compels, from time to time, a resort to force, wars will inevitably arise . And in the capitalist system, wars inevitably arise. And in a capitalist . system, it compels from time . time to . time, it will always be necessary to
 To denounce ‘the bomb’ whilst acquiescing in the social set-up that brings it into being is contradictory and absurd . To denounce 'the bomb' while acquiesceing in social set up that brought it in being is absurd .
 The object of the working class should be the ending of a system which, at worst, offers universal annihilation through H-bombs and, at best, brings death to millions through other destructive alternative weapons . The working class must end the system which offers universal . annihilation through . H-
 U.S. backed invasion of Cuba by a force of United States trained exiles became yet another issue that could have ‘triggered off world war’
 As the invasion was under way, the American President warned Russia that “in the event of any military intervention by outside force the United States is ready to protect this hemisphere against external aggression ” America’s “ egg-heads ” had hardly recovered from their exertions
 Much more important still has been the harmful effect upon the American alliance and the less committed countries within its sphere of influence . The U.S. alliance has been at risk of losing its influence in some of the world's most important countries .
 The Guardian editorial of the 22nd April summed up these feelings and did not mince its words in the process . The editorial was published in the Guardian .
 The editorial went on to say that the U.S. had made Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. famous for his work in the United States .
 The Guardian regretted that U.S. has facilitated Russia's aim of posing as the “ protector of small nations” struggling to free themselves from foreign tutelage .
 Russian gapitalism is a latecomer in the world arena . Like Germany and Japan before her, Russia is latecomers in the global arena .
 The American bloc, which West Germany and Japan form part of, is on the defensive . The U.S. and West Germany are the only two countries in the Cold War era .
 It is not democratic rights nor the aims of Socialism that motivate their policies . It is the maintenance of power, trade and class privilege that each government has as its function .
 In January, the SOCIALIST STANDARD carried an article which pointed out that for a small power to attempt playing off the great powers as a means of fostering its own economic development involves very considerable risks .
 The chief risk is that in freeing itself from subservience to one overlord it may well well be forced to succumb to another . The risk is not that it will be able to resist its overlord .
 Experience elsewhere in the field of bourgeois national revolutions of recent times has not been encouraging, writes David Frum .
 Throughout the former colonial or semi-colonial world, embryo capitalist classes or would-be capitalist intellectualmilitary élites are asserting themselves . The embryo capitalist class is asserting themselves in the former colonies .
 Their aim is to supplant the foreign interests who, in the process of exploiting the natural resources of those parts, brought into being this rival social class . But just as the old powers find it necessary to disguise their rapacious motives under the cloak of the ‘struggle for democracy
 As regards the claim of human dignity, it is true that with the ousting of the former colonial power, many an African, an Asian or a Latin American need no longer feel humiliated just because he was born where he is born and was what he was, That is an advance .
 In the eyes of his employers he will not even be an inferior man. That is that . That is . that in the . eyes of . his employers . He is not even being an . inferior man, he says .
 He, that is to say his ability to work, will become a mere commodity, to be bought and sold on the market . He is to be sold and sold in the form of a commodity, he says .
 The Socialist measures working-class progress in terms of its heightening awareness of its needs and aspirations . Consciousness in short, of its liberating rdle in history, is Consciousness .
 The Nationalist teaches the worker to identify himself with his ruling-class . The Socialist says that the worker has no country and should recognise his common bonds with workers everywhere .
 Each new state that is set up has as its number one task the inculcation of a sense of differentness into its schoolchildren and of their loyalty to a piece of territory quite arbitrarily arrived at .
 For the past year or so fierce argument has raged among Castro's admirers as well as among his critics in the outside world . Castro's critics have been divided over the Castro regime's policies .
 Those who have viewed the scene through Bolshevik eyes have felt the necessity of ‘explaining’ the social forces behind the Cuban revolution in the set terms of Leninism . Those who’� have . felt the . necessity to “explain” the social . forces
 Like China, it was the peasants’ support that made victory possible as the workers played no great part . Hence efforts have been made to show that, like China, . it was . like China’s support .
 The peasant’s classic demand is for the land he worked and that state-farms would replace estate farms more efficiently . Then realising, perhaps, that the peasants’ classic demand was for the . land he . worked, then realising that state farms would . replace
 Those working on the sugar plantations were not peasants at all but sharecroppers . Sharecroppers hired and fired by the three month season, they said .
 It is being debated whether it was a middle-class revolution betrayed because so many of its staunchest professional and managerial supporters have been alienated by now .
 SOCIALIST STANDARD, JULY, ravelled, however, however. These knotty problems can be un‘ SOCIAList STANDARD’s problems can’t be solved .
 Geografia de Cuba, a book quoted by Theodore Draper in his well documented article in Encounter last March, says the population was more urban than rural and increasingly so . According to the book, the population is increasingly urbanized and urbanized .
 Of the 40 per cent who were dependent upon agriculture for a living over a quarter were farmers and ranchers . Over a quarter of those who are dependent on agriculture were classified as farmers or ranchers.
 The urban population was mostly literate but nearly half the rural population was not . Nearly half of rural population were not literate, according to census figures .
 The mass of the people have readily given their support to a régime that promises to put an end to seasonal unemployment by diversifying agriculture . But whatcver their category is not their category, the mass of people have .
 Most unions date from the turn of the century and were built up under Stalinist influence . Except for a few, most unions date back to the mid-century .
 Within their limits, within their limits they became quite valuable workingclass instruments . Nevertheless, within these limits they were quite valuable .
 Under great pressure they carried on through the Batista dictatorship and came out more or less intact . Under very great pressure, the government carried on .
 In the early days of the guerrilla war the trade-union movement remained neutral . This was partly due to the fact that in the early years of the . early days the trade union movement . remained neutral in the war .
 Support came from professional and managerial circles who still lacked the constitutional righés promised as long ago as 1940 . Rural population saw him as the man who would enact the land reforms that had been promised in the same constitutional proposals .
 As late as April 1958 it broke, in effect, the general strike was called by Castro . The key transport workers under CP leadership did not join in . The strike broke, effect, as Castro called it .
 Most of the country’s union branches are now in the hands of Castro's 26th July Movement . Castro's victory in union elections was a few months after his triumphal march into Havana .
 National conferences of various union federations during June, July and August secured him control over most of these groups .
 It should be noted that the new government had debarred from the elections been failed by such middle-class elements as existed when the change came .
 Rarely has nature repeated the perfect juxtaposition of coal and iron that so favoured the pioneers of British capitalism . Rarely does nature repeat the perfect coal-iron juxtaposition that favoured British capitalism.
 Coming so much later onto the scene there is the problem of important sections of the working-elass being already organised to resist encroachments .
 A determined and far-sighted section of the middle-class throws off the fetters, often at the expense of some of the comforts and privileges of the class .
 At the congress of the local TUC early in 1959, there was a struggle between the proand anti-communist elements within Castro’s movement . Anti-communists had held power since his victory .
 Both Fidel and his brother Raul intervened on behalf of the pro-communist elements . As a result all but one of the leading anti-communists were purged from the Executive .
 Since then the government has taken stringent measures to regiment the organised workers . Since then, the government took stringent measures .
 All matters previously dealt with through joint negotiations were to be submitted to the Ministry of Labour for arbitration . Decrees were promulgated early in 1960 all collective bargaining was abolished and all matters were submitted for arbitration by the Ministry .
 In the Soviet hierarchy it presumably ranks higher now than mere ‘Popular Democracies” which is what most of the satellites remain .
 Freedom of dissent whilst not entirely gone has been drastically curtailed . Freedom has been severely curtailed in recent years . Freedom is no longer being allowed to be freely expressed .
 Adlai Stevenson said nearly two-thirds of Castro's first cabinet now form the leadership of Cubans in exile . Stevenson was reported by Tim as saying at the U.N. that nearly two thirds of his cabinet now formed leadership of Cuban exile .
 It can be seen that those who fought with Castro in the belief that it was a struggle between democracy and dictatorship are Silenced . Silenced, in prison or in exile .
 Political freedom is something of such over-Whelming importance to the workingclass that it loses it at its peril . Political freedom should not be over-whelming in Britain's working class, says David Cameron .
 Just as with Labour Exchanges and Old Age Pensions, so with the latest dodge, State Insurance is a soporific . State Insurance has been criticised for its lack of transparency .
 All along the line of Liberal legislation an examination shows that the benefits go to the employing class, not to the employed, not the employed . The benefits of the Liberal government go to employers, not employed, says Simon Tisdall .
 If he does not feel up to the mark he has got a guardian there specially looking after him . How well he is looked after—well fed, cared for and doctored, he said .
 To keep the worker in a fit condition ensures a greater output, and the increased efficiency resulting from such condition will enable the employer to wring more profit out of his victim . While the labourpower may cost a little more, the return is certain to be greater .
 An amendment, debated at the Conference, would have postponed any effort to re-duce armaments until such time as a law had been passed providing full maintenance for workers who Jost their jobs in the armaments industries .
 The effect that reductions of armament expenditure will have depends on all sorts of other factors 4s well . It can be answered categorically from past experience as well as from past .
 Spending on armaments and armed forces represents only a small proportion of total national income and production . In Britain it is now about 74 per cent, in U.S.A. about 11 per cent .
 There is a welling-up of the milk of human kindness im the capital breast, and we yet yet Stale Insorame and the like .
 If trade conditions were alreads depressed af that time the effects might be severe and prolonged, but they would non be different in magnitude from the cHhects produced by any other sudden cessation of demand .
 About half of the money is spent on food, uniforms, buildings and pay of military and civilian staffs . Half of the expenditure is on food and uniforms, and half is on the pay and salaries of staff members .
 In 1945 war expenditure was equal to nearly half the total national income . In 1945, the British government spent nearly half of the nation's total income .
 The size of the armed forces was slashed from $ million to $00,900 . Then in two years it was cut from £5000 million to under £850 million . The armed forces were cut from $500 million to £850million .
 The effect of this on unemployment was negligible though it involved millions of men changing their work . Millions of men changed their work and millions of others found jobs after demobilisation .
 As the armed forces dwindled, the aumbers of workers in civilian employment grew . For capita lism was in a vigorous phase of expansion. All that happened was that as the armed force dwindled .
 Britain demobilized most of its war-time armed forces, but unemployment did not fall to so low a level . America immediately after the end of World War tl hud much of the same er er er. perience as Britain .
 Soldiers and redundant munitions workers largely went to swell the very heavy unemployment that lasted for ten yeas OF more . They were not going through a phase of expansion in the easly post-war years .
 German industry has had several years of boom conditions with more vacancies than workers to fill them . Hundreds of thousands of workers being brought in from neighbouring countries .
 We can therefore say that though ari, and armies play a considerable part in the whole field of production and employment, expenditure on them is no more decisive than any other expenditure of similar size . on average about 5 per cent to J0 per cent of total national production .
 While capitalism continues no government is in fact going to abolish its armies and armaments . As in the past, there may be occasions when expenditure is reduced .
 H Capitalism’s Sensitive Spot: Capital Punishes anything which affects the sanctity of the currency . Capitalism punishes most savagely is anything that affects currency sanctity .
 In Britain the maximum penalty for counterfeiting gold and silver coins is penal servitude for life . In Britain, counterfeiting a gold or silver coin is punishable by life imprisonment .
 The extension of the death penalty in Russia includes the offences of uttering or passing forged currency or securities, and sentences up to five years and confiscation of property for speculators .
 4 big case is now before the courts of speculators who are alleged to have made 2. million roubles m a yeas (25 million at the official Russian exchange rate)
 Russiz has been spending on rockets as much as the total British cost of arms and armies . He expresses the opinion that Russiz spends more than the cost of the British arms and army .
 British capitalism could no longer keep abreast of the development of costly technique but can now no longer do so .
 The Employers’ Attitude Bec st'st. under near ~full employment” it has not been quite so easy for em ployers to discipline the workers as it was before the last war . Becoming . under near . full employment’s not as easy for
 Profits have gone up in ten years from £26,000 to £575.00 . The company's profits have now gone up by £575,000 .
 Cost of Advertising Tac advertising costs are sometimes very high for particular articles, especicll) when a new product is being launched or there is fierce competition for the market . The total cost of all advertising ts not as large as might be expected .
 According to an estimate of the evpenditure on all forms of advertising made by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter estimates the amount of advertising he spent on advertising is at least $1 billion .
 Mark Abrahams and published in the Observer the total in 196) was £455 million . T has however been rising fast and is expected 10 touch £500 million this year .
 So much political capital has been made out of the workers’ alleged “ prosperity” that if we merely succeed in getting the facts and-establishing the truth, we shall have done something really worthwhile, we say .
 Professor Morgan's book The Structure of Property Ownership in Britain is published by Professor Morgan . The structure of property ownership in Britain has been assessed by Morgan in his book .
 Professor Morgan estimates that the total nominal wealth gf this country today is ‘£40,355 millions,’ Of this, 5 per cent or 1 in every 20 own a total of £30,000 million .
 The remaining 95 per cent own a balance of £11,000 millions . That means that the remaining 5 per cent of the UK's wealthiest people own £11 million .
 In other words, 1/20 of the population owns 3/4 of the nation’s wealth . The wealth of the majority of Americans is based on wealth in the United States . The nation's wealth is worth more than $1 billion .
 The remaining 19/20 own about 4 quarter between them, but of this 95 per cent over a half own nothing .
 In 1960 10 million people paid Income Tax on £10/20 a week; nearly 6 million paid on £3 to £10 weekly . Only 16,000 paid tax on over £10,000 a year income . In 1960, 10 million paid income tax on £20/20
 The number of millionaires in Great Britain increased from 37 in 1956 to 67 in 1961 . In 1961, the number of millionaire millionaires in Britain rose to 67 .
 Mr Clore, Mr Hugh Fraser and Mr Cotton are multi-millionaires, of the order of 15 to 20 million or more . Mr Cotton is one of the richest men in the UK to date .
 As might be expected, many increased their wealth by vast “take over’s” deals .
 In the first quarter of 1960, there were mergers to the tune of £200 million . Mergers in the first half of 1960 were worth £200million .
 The first quarter of 1961 more than doubled this figure with £427 million . The largest bid of all time was £130 million for Ford's Motor Works, £39 million for Odhsms Press .
 Six per cent more retail trade passed into the hands of the great multiple combines in 1950/60 . The great combines took over six per cent of the retail trade .
 This is based on the Ministry of Labour's Price Index, which always starts an argument . This is the price index, based on Labour's price index .
 Local Government lower grade Civil Servants and teachers included in London and Cambridge Economic Service . There would hardly be any increase. Were the clerical workers. local Government .
 Behind the purely nominal increases, real wages have remained practically stationary . Real wages have been practically stationary since 2007 .
 Assessment of the situation in 1961 would be incomplete without some reference to Automation . Automation was a major factor in the development of the Air Force in 1961 .
 In practice, this means that more processes are controlled by pre-set electronic and other devices . In practice this means more processes can be controlled by electronic devices .
 The worker has less choice than ever in the character and quality of his product, and so is more completely than ever the appendage of a machine . The workers have less choice in the quality and character of their products .
 It ensures that workers work regularly at a faster pace, and is a fruitful source of more surplus value and higher profits . It is also a source of surplus value for businesses .
 The large amount of overtime worked, and long hours spent in travelling to and fro, do not improve matters . The large amounts of overtime and travelling do not help improve matters.
 1960 might be summed up by saying that it gave the very best that workers can expect under Capitalism—plenty of work . In fact, 1960 was the best year for workers under capitalism, with plenty of work, says historian .
 Workers cannot get straight improvements under capitalism under capitalism —they all have strings . Unfortunately workers can't get straight improvement under capitalism . The strings are strings, not straight improvements, say workers .
 Wages may improve, but with a big demand for labour, up go rents and the price of food and necessities . Up go rents, food and necessaries, and wages may also go up .
 The fundamental position of the worker (with his television set) remains the same. So that, overall, it might be said that in spite of the fantastic technical developments of the last decade—thz fundamental .
 This, after hundreds of Reforms. scores of leaders, the finest Health Service, the best Insurance Scheme and thz most democratic rights in the world. And this, after . hundreds of . Reforms, the NHS, and the best insurance Scheme. And the best Health Service.
 Perhaps I ought to say a word about atomic power, space-flight, space flight, the penetration of the mantle of the inner earth etc. etc. Perhaps I should mention atomic power and space flight .
 Some people think that all this supersedes or invalidates Socialism. Apparently some people think it invalidates or supersers Socialism .
 Capitalism as a passing stage in social which prepares the ground for Socialist society, they confirm it. So far from refuting the analysis of Capitalism, they . confirm it, they say .
 The bourgeoisie by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws all, even the most barbarous nations, into civilisation .
 The cheap prices of all commodities are the heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese Walls . Cheap prices are also heavy artillery for the Chinese Wall Wall .
 It keeps on doing away with the scattered state of the population centralised means of production and concentrates property in a few hands . It does away with state of state of population . It keeps away with centralised state of production .
 The capitalists have created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations together . The capitalists are creating more massive, more colossal productivity forces than any previous generation together .
 Liberalism is tragic that bewildered workers should turn back to Liberalism in their despair . But it's tragic that they should turn away from Liberalism, says Simon Tisdall .
 Socialists claimed to know the way to gt Socialism without explaining it to the workers . Even more than this, they claimed to be practical Socialists who knew the way of gt socialism .
 Socialism alone can free the workers from the necessity of selling himself for the profit of a master, says Lenin . Socialism alone will free workers from selling themselves for profit, he says .
 Socialism alone will strip him of his merchandise character, and allow him to become a full socal being, he says . Socialism alone .
 This was the start of a 57-year record of job-hunting and place seeking, culminating in the Labour Government . Labour leaders systematically opposed the very JULY reform measures they had themselves used to clamber into positions of power .
 War, Conscription in peace-time, Strike-breaking by Troops, Wage Freeze, Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs, they have supported all these and actually implemented most of them . They have supported most of these, including wage freezes, strikes-breaking and wage freezes .
 Nationalisation schemes, with their disastrous failure to understand that Society (meaning today, workers) or the ‘Community” cannot ‘control’ industry without owning (that means taking them out of capitalist hands) through political power first, are bogged down .
 "Their housing projects, as soon as they became landlords, bring them both opposition and hatred," says the mayor . "They brought them both opposing and hatred. Their housing projects ... bring them ... hatred," he says .
 The myth of the working class marching steadily forward to Socialism by increasing Labour majorities is well and truly finished . The myth is now dead, with the myth of a rising Labour majority in the Labour Party now dead .
 ADAM SMITH’s ideas on the development of economic life led him to make a clean sweep of all feudal ties and servitudes .
 The abolition of serfdom, the introduction of freedom of occupation and industry, freedom of movement, political autonomy; these were the inevitable corollaries of the new doctrine .
 The demand for free trade, formed a logical and essential part of the demand for the abolition of all restrictions upon production and distribution . A demand heavy with consequences. The demand to free trade is a logical part of a demand for an end to all restrictions on production .
 Smith's theory of free trade was as follows :— If trade be freed from all restraints, through the working of competition, it will come to pass in the long run that every country will produce those commodities which its natural facilities enable it to produce most cheaply .
 Each nation will be able to buy all it wants in the world market at the lowest possible prices . While selling to the greatest advantage those things which it is exceptionally fitted to produce .
 It is the maxim of every prudent master of a family never to make at home what it will cost him more to make than to buy . The maxim is: Never make more at home than at home, never buy more .
 In regard to the applying of these free trade principles, Smith was pr2pared to compromise . Smith was also prepared to compromise with the British government .
 He agreed to the need of Socialist Standard 1961 excise duties as a source of revenue, as also to the expediency of retaliatory duties imposed upon imports from countries whose policy was protectionist, he said .
 Smith, not being the dogmatist, as those who subsequently opposed his doctrines declared, was very cautious in practical matters . Smith was not the dogmaticist, but he was cautious about practical matters, and was cautious of practical matters.
 Much of present day opinion of Smith’s views is based upon the modifications his teachings underwent at the hands of Ricardo . and later still in the eighteen-thirties by the Manchester School of Free-traders .
 It is necessary to point out that Smith was not hostile to the landowning class . Smith was in fact not an enemy of the land owning class .
 He considered that the interest of those who lived by rent was “ strictly and inseparably connected with the general interest of Society ” for their income increased proportionately to an increase in the general welfare . On the contrary, he considered that .
 Of the capitalist class, he wrote that its interest had not the same connection with the general interest of Society as that of the landowners and wage-earners .
 The rate of profit does not like rent and wages, rise and fall with the booms and slumps that affect society, he said . For. he said, the rate of profits does not rise like rent or wages, but rise with the boom and fall .
 On the contrary, it is low in times of boom, and high in tirfes of slump . It is also high in periods of slump, according to the OECD .
 He advocated high wages and freedom of combination, but he was opposed to State interference in wage contracts .
 Smith's teaching brought about an entirely different way of looking at political economy . Smith’s teaching brought . about a new way of thinking about political economy, he says .
 It did this, first of all, by showing investigators that the source of wealth is not a simple matter . It showed investigators that it is not an easy matter to find out about wealth, it says .
 He regarded labour as the primary source of wealth, but the conditions under which labour had to operate were of vital importance . He regarded the increase of productiveness by the division of labour as important .
 Smith regarded everything from the outlook of exchange in the market, he conceived of economic phenomena as centring in exchange in processes of “trade’s ‘trade” Smith said .
 Smith’s chief contribution to economic doctrines was his neatly rounded and bold notion that economic life was a series of processes of exchange linked to each other . Smith's chief contribution was to the idea of linking economic life to the world of exchange .
 He finalised the physiocratic idea of the natural order . that is the harmonious encounter of numberless individual self-seeking econvmic activities . He said that is a harmonious, self-confident encounter .
 In his doctrine, exchange . the trading intercourse of separate economic agents, became the central manifestation of economic life . In . his doctrine of exchange. the trading . intercourse of . separate economic . agents, . became the . central manifestation . of economic . life .
 His system was not a theory of production, he considered price and value . Price and value determined production just as much as distribution, he said .
 Adam Smith said that the development of the productive powers of labour brought no benefit to the worker . Adam Smith stressed that the productivity of the worker did not benefit the worker in his work .
 Smith notes that the productive power of labour underwent no really important development until labour was transformed into wage labour, and until the means of production had taken the form of private ownership, either of land or of ‘capital’
 Labour’s productive powers did not begin to develop until the worker was no longer able to take for himself the results of development . Thus, labour's productive powers .
 The deposit for nomination of candidate was £25, though the Branch realised that they would lose their deposit . The Branch contested Duncairn Ward, as it was only in this ward that they had enough members to sign the nomination paper .
 It is a very thickly populated ward but not particularly suited to their purpose . It is the thickest populated ward in the world, but not suited to its purpose .
 Families living in dwellings that are sub-let, and adults other than the occupier and wife, are denied the right to vote . Adults other than occupiers and wife are also denied the vote .
 A property vote enables businessmen and company directors, with branches or diverse business inlerests, to vote as many as eight times . On the other hand a “ property’s vote” is a ‘property’ vote .
 The Belfast comrades had to name and address the ten thousand Election Statements, and deliver them to houses over an area of 16 to 18 square miles .
 This was a colossal task, which took well into each morning, after holding meetings in the area during the evening and night . This was the work of a group of volunteers who helped build the site .
 Their opponents contented themselves with touring the constituency with music, processions led by buntingbedecked lorries and loud-speaker exhortations .
 Homelessness and slum-dwelling have become accepted thing in our society . Yet homelessness and slums have become an accepted thing, our society. Yet homelessness is still a problem .
 House building, like every other productive activity under capitalism. is pursued. for the purpose of profit-making . Human needs are as nothing beside the great god profit, says the author .
 No party will solve the problem of bad and insufficient homes while profit remains the accepted system of social Organisation. Profit remains an accepted system, social Organisation says .
 Only in Socialism, where production of all things, including homes, is solely for the satisfaction of people’s needs, is a solution to he found. Only in socialism, production of things is for satisfaction of the needs of people .
 Not everyone has a sufficiency of the things workers produce, or can produce . It's not because everyone produces more than they do, it's because they don't have to produce more .
 Unemployment is just another permanent feature of a buyingand-selling capitalist society . Unemployment is a permanent feature in a buying and selling capitalist society, he says .
 In Socialism, human needs will be the only factor governing production, when a point is reached at which a sufficiency of all things has been produced, it will simply mean more leisure time for the producers .
 The problems of the workers North and South of the border are similar and are . Not caused hy the geographical Border, but by 4 division much more evil in its effects . The class border hetween us of the working class, who produce everything and own nothing, and the capitalists,
 Every night, in ‘spite of bad weather, a number of meetings were held . Every night in 'spite' bad weather .
 The first meetings were accompanied by three car-loads of police, motor cycle police, and several police on foot .
 Places were visited where opposition was usually violent, but only once was a voice raised in anger against us . Places visited were visited by people who were usually violent .
 Belfast members urged voters only to vote for Socialism if they understood it and wanted it . In their literature and from the platform, they urged voters to only vote for socialism .
 We congratulate our Irish comrades on the tremendous and self-sacrificing effort they put in with such good results. We congratulate their Irish comrades . We congratulate them for their efforts .
 It augurs well for the progress of the socialist movement in Ireland . It is heartening to their comrades in other lands, says the Irish socialist leader .
 Coventry Re-Blitzed in Coventry at about 11.30am . By noon we had our platform up and our literature displayed on our stand .
 The speaker opened the Meeting and comrades moved to the various points, some selling “Standards” and pamphlets . Soon we had a sizeable audience and the questions came fast and furious .
 In the afternoon an individual in the audience, using some youthful arrivals from the local beer shop, attempted to create some trouble .
 The local police arrived on the scene after the meeting was reopened . Soon after we had re-opened the meeting, the police arrived .
 They insisted that we close the meeting, but not before our speaker had put the issue to the audience and secured a majority vote of hands for us to carry on . The meeting was adjourned, but the speaker was able to secure a majority of hands to continue .
 We dismantled our platform to cries of ‘Shame’ from the audiencedirected , at the police . Nevertheless, we were obliged to give way to the forces of the State .
 The Precinct in Coventry is the city’s vpen, ultra modern, traffic-free shopping centre . It was impossible to get into or out of the stores on either side .
 The Superintendent of the police later remarked that, whoever we were, we certainly hit Coventry with a bang, and apparently this was loud enough to stop the “ commercial symphony ” being played on the cash register bells‘ However, we finally fixed things so that we could
 We carried on for about half-an-hour and then had to vacate the speaking place in favour of some hot-gospellers . The police had apparenth hooked it.
 So back we went to the scence of our former triumph. and here we carried on a successful meeting with no interruptions until 7m. So back .
 Since the above report was written we have heard of two further propaganda ventures in Coventry . Since the report was published, two more propaganda ventures have been heard of .
 On June 10th and 17th London members joined with Coventry comrades in running successful outdoor meetings .
 Thousands of people have heard their Message for the first time . A lot of confusion about the relation of Socialism to Soviet Communism was cleared up .
 We congratulate our Overseas comrades on the effort they have put in and the results thes have obtained. We congratulate them on the work they have done. We are happy to see the results achieved.
 We learn from the W.S.P. of Ireland that owing to the death of a recently elected candidate in one of the wards, they are again entering the election contest .
 The greatest single fac‘or in obtaining treir surprisingly high voie was because thes emphasised the international nature of their message . and the fact that they are part of a greater movement. They tell us that. in their opinion. In their opinion .
 Workers may not have awakened to the need for Socialism but they are beginning to demonstrate that they at least realise that so far whatever party they have voted for no change ensues for them--hence the abstentionists are the real majority . They continue to accept capitalism but are not voting
 We believe that. real.eflort on our part can carry the day, convince them that there iy something worth voting for . We believe . especially among such people, especially among . such people .
 The branch is carrying on with its programme of fortnightly discussions during the summer months . E Grant, E Hardy Branch News EALING .
 Comrade Jack Law gave a lecture on the Jehovah's Witnesses last month . He will be giving another on the “ Opening up of the American West” on July 7th . Comrade Law will give a lecture about the West .
 The weekly outdoor propaganda meetings have started at Earls Court . All members asked to make a special effort to support them .
 Group of members went down to Southsea for an outdoor meeting on Sunday, June 25th .
 Literature sales were S.S. £1 9s.d., Pamphlets £1 Os. d., Collections £2 15s. d.d. Literature sales are S.A.S., £1 O.D.
 One open-air meeting was held in Leicester and two in Nottingham . One of the meetings took place in Leicester, one in Nottingham and one in Leicester .
 A reminder of the mecting being held at Conway Hall, Red Lion Square, on Wednesday, July 19th at 7.30m .
 Lessons were learned from this meeting and as a result the Conway Hall meeting should be exceptionally well supported and organised . Members and sympathisers—rally to the meeting and keep up the good work.
 Please note your diaries and bring as many friends along as possible . The event will be held at 7.30pm on July 19 .
 There is a good gallery and plenty of Standing room, in addition to the spacious hall on the ground floor .
 Durdham Downs is the regular outdoor meeting place for Bristol Group members . Bristol Group have been holding meetings there this season . Bristol members have been meeting at the Downs this year .
 During the month of May four meetings were held, audience averaged 50 and literature sales 9s.d.d . Literature sales were also high during the month .
 The comrades are hoping that with constant Support they will be able to continue throughout the summer with increasing interest from the workers of Bristol .
 Their candidate had two half-hours on T.V. and a brief appearance after the vote was counted . The candidate had been on the campaign trail for two hours .
 Ist and 3rd Mondays (7th & 2st Aug) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street . 7th and 2nd Aug, 7th & 8th August 7th Mondays 7th .
 LEWISHAM Mondays 8pm at Co-op Hall, Davenport Road, Rushey Green, Catford, SE6 .
 NOTTINGHAM, alternate Wednesdays (2nd, 16th & 30th August) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street, London .
 2nd and 4th Mondays (14th & 28th Aug) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road, Southend, London .
 Ist and 3rd Monday (7th & 2Ist Aug) in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St. Mary's, 8 pm. Ist & 2nd Aug. in month .
 P Mellor, 13 Waterloo Place, Brynmill, Swansea, Mondays 8 pm, (no meeting Aug, 7th) Barham Old Court, Barham Park, near Sudbury Town Station, Wembley .
 2nd and 4th Thursdays (10th & 24th Aug) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12. Westham .
 2nd and 4th Fridays (lith and 25th Aug) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason's Hill, SEI8.30pm on August 1 .
 In spite of optimism a few months ago it is now clear that output is not going to get back to the previous high levels for some time to come .
 As for exports, the outlook is not bright at all, and much of the manufacturers’ former confidence about prospects has evaporated . The outlook for exports has also been bleak for many of the companies .
 The pre-war seasonal sales pattern, high in the spring and summer, and low in autumn and winter, seems now to have re-established itself . Pre-war sales patterns were high in spring, summer and winter but low in winter .
 There may be further difficulties later this year, therefore, as the graph turns downwards .
 An increase in the purchase tax on cars is hardly likely to improve their sales prospects . A further worry is, of course, the Common Market . The 1961 Finance Bill has become law .
 If Britain stays out it means the end of any hopes to step up sales in Europe . The everincreasing tariff against countries outside the Market will put British prices completely out of the running . If Britain goes in, the position may hardly be any better .
 Large-scale hire purchase defaulting has made finance companies jittery . Recent large-scale hiring purchase defaults have made the finance companies nervous . The finance companies are jittering about hiring decisions .
 The result has been that many firms have gone out of business or are on the point of doing so . The result is that many of the firms are now on the verge of going out of the market .
 American car production is still bumping along the bottom, with little sign of an upturn . U.S. car production has been hit by a recessionary slowdown .
 Borgward has run into difficulties and may be forced to go out of business altogether . In Germany, Volkswagen is still apparently doing well, but Borgward is struggling to keep afloat .
 The tempo everywhere has slackened off compared with the hectic scramble of 18 months ago . The United States market in particular was wide open to the European small car manufacturers . The tempo in the U.S. has slowed down compared with 18 months earlier .
 Every one of the other major national producers has largescale expansion programmes ahead . Like Britain, every major national producer has a big expansion programme .
 Some firms are already far advanced with their plans and almost ready to go into production . -Volkswagen in Germany, Citroen in France, Fiat in Italy . Some firms already far ahead of production .
 Others, such as Renault in France and Lancia in Italy, have also actully started work on their big new projects .
 Peugeot in France has recently bought a large piece of land near Mulhouse for a further factory . Alfa-Romeo in Italy has just begun building an important new plant near Milan . Further to these, Italian and French car makers have recently begun building new factories .
 No doubt all these firms are wondering, like their British counterparts, whether all this projected expansion is worthwhile .
 The Daily Mail recently interviewed Sir Leonard Lord, the Chairman of the British Motor Corporation . Lord was interviewed by the Daily Mail in a bid to promote his new bookings .
 He smiled broadly, raised both his hands, and showed two sets of crossed fingers . He raised both hands, raising both of his fingers, to show them to the audience .
 The result of unloading so much barley onto the British market has been to force the price down to less than £16 a ton— and it may fall further yet yet .
 One hundred million pounds down the drain! — Didn't that prove how inefficient nationalisation is?” Vhis may or may not be true .
 B.T.C.’s loss of £100 million was arrived at after £45 million had been paid in interest and other charges, This makes its true deficit more like £55 million . But there is une Way in which nationalisation jis very good business--for
 A private company which finds itself with a deficit in its accounts does not usually lumber itself with an even greater loss by paying out enormous amounts of interest . Everybody knows that a private company . does not . usually pay out enormous . amounts of . interest by paying interest .
 B.T.C.~ and all other nationalised industries—must do, because their capital is wholly guaranteed, unlike the equity shares which make un the bulk of most private companies’ capital .
 Interest payments had transformed an operating profit of £4:75 millions into an accounting deficit of 1-7 millions . British Overseas Airwavs Corporation had a kick about this last' Mav .
 A lot of people were taken for a ride when public transport in this country was nationalised, but the shareholders were not among them . Public transport in the UK is nationalised but shareholders are not among the shareholders .
 British, French and American workers were being killed in their attempts to blow Berlin to pieces . It is not so long ago that British and French workers were killed in Berlin .
 There is now a possibility that more workers will be killed in an attempt to put the German capital together again . More workers are expected to be killed as a result .
 The division of Berlin, and of Germany, has been a bone of great power contention ever since 1945 . Berlin has been divided by Germany's great powers since the fall of 1945 .
 At that time, the division was supposed to be one of the essentials of peace in Europe . The division was meant to be an essential of peace, the historian says .
 Everybody expected the usual peuce treaties to be signed within a few vears, The tacts have disappuinted these expectations . Everybody expected to see a treaty signed within few weeks .
 Whenever Mr Khruschev starts talking about a German peace (realy, there is an ominous sound of the release of safety catches) whenever he talks about the peace talks, the sounds of the safety catches are released .
 Perhaps Europe has never recovered its nerve from the 1948 Berlin blockade . Perhaps Europe's nerve has not recovered from the blockade of Berlin in 1948 .
 Another world war could start before the last one has been officially signed into history . World War II could be the first world war to begin before it was officially declared .
 E.T.U. and | the Communists NoBoDY needed a long and expensive court case to tell them that the Electrical Trades Union was dominated by energetic Communists . The Electrical Workers Union is now the largest in the world .
 No trade unionist needed the capitalist press to tell him that it was all his fault and that he must take a greater interest in his union's affairs . And no trade unionists needed to be told that they had to take a more interest in their union affairs .
 Such solicitous concern from such a quarter is, to say the least, suspicious, says a quarter of the world's most senior politicians .
 When trade unionists become sufficiently active to organise a strike for higher wages, they have hardly a friend in Fleet Street . After all. After all . when trade unionist becomes sufficiently active . active, they . have hardly . any friend in . Fleet Street.
 Nowadays, the Communists are in the vanguard of trade union actiyity . For this they earn the disapproval of the press. For this, they earned the disapproval .
 Russia has been a nuisance to British capitai ism only since Russia ceased to he Britain's ally . But let us remember that they have been an nuisance only since they ceased to be an ally .
 An upset in the international line-up could make Communist shop stewards useful to British employers, as they were during the last war . An upset could make Communists useful to employers, like they were in the 1930s .
 We should all be as active as possible in trade union work which is in working class interests . We need to be active in trade unions which are in the interests of the working class .
 We should all realise that trade unions should be the enemy of the capitalist class, instead of the docile hangdogs which the newspapers would like them to be . Trade unions are the enemies of the rich and powerful, rather than enemies of capitalist class .
 Kassem is only the latest of a long line of post-war bogey men in the Middle East . Kassem was only the first of a series of 'bogey men' in the region to emerge .
 King Saud of Saudi Arabia used to be a bogey man, a fact which was played down when he sent (roops) to support the British landings .
 Foreign Office policy of propping up feudal despot against another has been a comprehensive flop . British influence in the Arab states has been extensively undermined, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Most of the despots agree that. before most other things. they want the British to leave . Most of them agree that before most of the . other things . they want to leave the UK . Most despots . agree that . before most things .
 The oil-rich states are especially anxious 10 be "free" so that they can make the best of their natural wealth . The oil rich states are anxious to be free .
 Kuwait is the Middle East's greatest oil producer, with half of its main concession held by British Petroleum . Half of Kuwait's main concession is held by the company .
 It is improbable that they realised that it was all for the welfare of 8ritish capitalism . But it is unlikely they realised they were doing it for the good of capitalism .
 Politicians are, of course, men who have to work and, some of them, to worry . But politicians are also men, and they have to worry about their jobs, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Cut away all the hand-out material about their alleged brilliance and sincerity . We are left with people who are hard worked administrators of the detailed alfairs of capitalist society .
 Whatever department a minister may have under his control, his twenty-four hour concern must be to protect the interests of the ruling class . All his decisions must conform to society's capitalist basis, writes David Cameron .
 The unfortunate fact about this, though, is that capitalism can often be most difficult to administer . The unfortunate thing about capitalism is that it can be most hard to administer.
 When ministers think they have settled a problem, they often find that capitalism has an ungrateful way of undermining their solulion . And when they think they've settled it, they'll find it hard to find a solution .
 In foreign affairs, the pressure is particularly strong . We can all think of prominent politicians who have been sent to an early grave by the persistent worry .
 Attempts at taming the economic waywardness of property society have virtually killed some ministers and reduced others almost to invalids . Similarly. attempts to taming some ministers have virtually died some ministers . Attempts to tame property society are virtually dead .
 Yes, a polilician, apart from needing to be cynical and industrious, must also be tough . Yes, yes, a politician must also need to be tough and cynical .
 One of the acutist and most persistent of capitalism's problems is the conflict of commercial interests . The conflict between commercial interests is one of the most persistent problems of capitalism .
 We do not need to be very observant to appreciate that the goods and services which contribute to our lives are turned out only to be sold . Even those which are completely essential to us, they will be sold, says author .
 But before the car gets into any driver’s hands, the commercial requirements of capitalism must be satisfied . ‘Before any driver's hands, there are commercial requirements that must be met,’ says author .
 Sales of capitalism's commodities need not be an easy business, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Selling commodities is not easy, he says .
 There are many motor car manufacturers after the money of our incompetent driver. There are no excuses for our incompetent drivers. We need to be careful of the money we spend on our road trips .
 The super-fastest car in the world is set to go on sale this week . It will be available in the UK for the first time since 2010 .
 For that particular customer there can be only one satisfied car maker . But, for that particular car maker, there can only be one customer .
 The rest must be disappointed, and try extra hard to catch other sales . The rest of the world's best-selling retailers will be disappointed .
 The capitalist class regard the selling of commodities as vital because unless they are sold, the profit which the workers have built into them with their every working action can never be realised . The sale of commodities is vital for the capitalist class, says Marxists .
 The shareholders of the motor car industry would never invest their money in enormous factories, labour and costly machinery if it were only to make a loss . Motor car industry's shareholders never invest money into enormous factories and labour .
 Unless a profit can come from selling cars, none of them will be turned out . So, unless a profit is made, they won't sell cars, they will not sell them .
 No clothes would be tailored, no houses built, no television sets assembled, if there was no prospect of a profit being realised somewhere along the line . No clothes or houses would be built if there wasn't a profit made from the sale .
 Nobody would cut your hair, or put you up in a hotel, or entertain you . Nobody would put you in hotels, nor would entertain you, she said . She added: "Nobody would cut her hair or put her up in hotels or entertain her."
 Barley growers in this country have every prospect of harvesting a record crop this year . This year's barley crop is expected to be a record year for the UK .
 French farmers also have a lot of barley in the offing and so have the farmers in Western Germany .
 Russians have already shipped some of their surplus barley over here . They are determined to sell the stuff no matter how cheaply they have knocked the bottom out of the market .
 China has been forced to ask Canada and Australia for shipments of it on credit . China, faced with famine, is forced to rely on the aid of the US and Canada to help .
 1961 there is so much barley knocking about. 1961 there was so much beer knocking about . 1961 . 1961 there were so many barley knocking around. 1961. 1961 . There was no barley knock about .
 The National Farmers’ Union, in fact, has asked for action under the Customs (Dumping and Subsidies) Act to keep out the foreign barley .
 This does not mean that British farmers are always in favour of tariff protection for all British industries . Just like any other industry under capitalism, farmers are interested in holding onto their own markets and in getting the best price they can .
 Foreign industries must be allowed to export cut price commodities to / this country . When they buy goods, they want them as cheap as possible, even if it means that foreign industries must export cut-price commodities .
 British farmers would like to see unrestricted entry allowed for fertilisers and farm machinery, and some for feeding stuffs . For example, some fertilisers would be allowed for the first time .
 A couple of years*ago, the chairman of the Farmers and Smallholders Association spoke bitterly of what he called “.. . the fertiliser monopoly .” making ‘.. . at least an extra £10 millions by charging the British farmers more than the European price for fertil
 Aithough they would not like to see the tariff wall which shelters them knocked down . They might perhaps be in favour of cheap barley and other foodstuffs, which might mean fewer wage claims .
 You could bet on it that there would soon be another, similar problem clogging your In tray . Whatever you did, you could bet it would be another similar problem .
 Farmers and fertiliser kings are in conflict over issues like tariff protection . For not only farmers and fertilisers kings are fighting over issues such as tariffs .
 Capitalism, because it moves on its bearings of profit motive, turns up + multitude of opposing interests . [t] is the politician who must sort them out and must offer his solution to the voters as the sanest, surest method possible . Capitalism is based on the fact that it
 Chancellor of the Exchequer announced he would get power to levy a Payroll Tax to be used, when he thought fit, as a means of encouraging employers ‘to use more labour-saving machinery”
 The amount proposed is 4s. a week for each worker, the tax to be paid by the employer . The tax would be paid in part of the employer's tax bill .
 It had a very hostile reception, not only from the Opposition but from many Conservative M.P.’s and employers, it was met with a hostile reception from the opposition .
 A “ Keynesian ” scheme very similar to this was agreed by the three political parties in the war-time national government . It was to be the blue-print for maintaining full employment and for preventing prices from rising .
 It was to be operated by making workers and employers pay higher national insurance contributions when unemployment fell to a low level . Workers and employers would have to pay higher contributions if unemployment was low .
 At the previous election, he offered an opposite policy, which he said was also sane and sure . The idea was that if demand for consumer goods fell and unemployment increased, unemployment increased .
 They are the people who suffer, and are exploited as a result of the anomalies of capitalism . They are people who are exploited, and suffer, according to the author of the book .
 However hard the going a politician must endure, it cannot compare with the rough road of working class existence . However, the going is hard for a politician to endure, but it is not as hard as it is for the working class .
 'Like many other plans it has never been used, so we have no factual evidence to show what result it would have had. Like many other . plans, it is not known what effect it would've had. We have no facts to show .
 Discussion about the proposed Payroll Tax has produced some interesting information about developments in industry that have been going on and would presumably be stimulated by such a tax .
 There are thousands of one-man firms or small companies where the entire labour force consists of directors and which have no pay-roll at all .
 These firms produce drawings or tools on a free-lance or subcontract basis for the larger organisations . These firms are often found to be on a subcontract basis with larger firms .
 In the building trade there is a growing tendency for the craftsman, plumber, mason or joiner to employ himself and hire his labour out to the small builder . lipetus has been given to this by the development of small electrically driven machines which can be set up in
 A pay-roll tax Icvied on the number of workcrs dircctly em emAUGUST 1961 -ployed would be avoided by these methods, Notes on Automation .
 It is interesting to look at some of the trends to see what has happened since then and what is likely to happen . It is also interesting to see how the trends have changed since then .
 The prevailing mood of comment today is one of caution, allied with disappointment about the results of automation so far . It is not the first time automation has been automated in the UK .
 Often there is contrast with the progress made in other countries, especially America, especially U.S. Often there are contrast with other countries' progress .
 Mr F Griffiths of the British Motor Corporation writes that in the motor in‘dustry “the pattern of automation . . . still remains mainly in the machine shop .
 Mr Griffiths lists the many technical and organisational problems that need to be solved before automation can become general in motor factories .
 A scientific correspondent in the Financial Times estimated that it might be 1965 before this development was completed .
 In the field of electronic computers for commercial purposes, experience has been mixed . In the past, computers have been used as computers for personal purposes .
 Many firms that had bought computers for commercial purposes had found them a failure from the financial point of view . According to a correspondent writing in 1959 (Financial Times)
 Almost every firm in the business is losing money on its manufacture of data processing equipment . But in the engineering and scientific fields “there have been equally remarkable successes”
 The process of automation in the past six years has had little effect, either in manufacture or in offices, though clerks are increasingly worried about the future .
 The answer in most instances is that even when the labour-saving is as high as stated it is effective only in a small part of the total process of production . The answer to the question is that it is not always high enough to save labour .
 If labour is reduced by 40 per cent in processes representing a quarter of the total factory operation, the average for the whole factory operation is 10 per cent . If production and transport of materials is not affected, the overall reduction from start to finish may be less than 5 per cent. If
 This leaves out of account the often increased amount of fabour needed for production and maintenance of the automation plant . And this leaves out the sometimes. greatly increased amount . needed to produce and maintain the . automation plant. And this . leaves out . out of . account the . greatly increased
 Travellers find it easy to accept travellers’ tales about the summer weather and the “gold paved streets’ in some other part of the globe’s .
 Governments all try to counter these beliefs because they encourage discontent . Governments are trying to counter this belief because it encourages discontent. Governments all over the world have tried to counter it .
 Recent observers from both sides of the “ curtain ” have been commenting on housing conditions in Britain and Russia .
 Russian broadcaster Yur Fokin gives his eve-witness impressions of this country . Mr Fokin also gives his views of the country in Russia .
 Reita Ovsyannikov, married to a Russian, has just returned to this country after 30 years in Russia . Ovsyanikov is married to Reita, who has lived in Russia for 30 years . She has returned to the UK for the first time in 30
 Fokin did not see the contrast in her article in the Sunday Telegraph . In her article she notes the contrast that Mr Fokin didn't see .
 For the last ten years of our life in the Soviet Unioh, we had a flat of our cwn, a car, and all the money we needed . For the past 10 years of their life in Russia, we lived in a flat, car and all we needed,
 Many visitors to Russia have commented on the large number of familizs compelled to live in one room . Nobody, not even Mr Fokin, believes that Krushchev and the other V.LP.’s or the “rouble millionaires”  live in
 The implication is that Russians and Swedes and French don't mind living in overcrowded condilions . It's not the first time the world has seen overcrowded conditions .
 The double talk of politicians, newspaper editors and business men is sometimes so odd as to be hardiy comprehensible as witness an editorial in the Daily Mail .
 All employees need to have a feeling of belonging to the company, he said . each one must feel he counts as a person . He said that all employees must feel they count as people .
 Of course, legally the Ford Motor Works and all its properties belong to the company, in effect the shareholders . The £J8 million profit in 1959 belonged to the owners of the company .
 The American Ford company bought out the 45 per cent of the shares that they did not already hold, for £129 million last year . And last year they paid the money to those shareholders .
 The English company now belongs wholly to the American Company .
 The 20,000 Dagenham workers who are the Ford Company as much as Mr Ford himself, weren't even asked whether they wanted the sale to go through, much ‘less paid’ for handing over .
 They no more wanted to see Fords win than the Ford’s management wanted them to win . Ford's management wanted the Fords to win more than they wanted to win, the author says .
 The strikers and the management both see plainly that there is a conflict of interests between them . Striker and manager both see clearly that there are conflicts of interest between them.
 Medical officer worries because workers don't fezl that they belong . He worries because they don't feel like they belong to them .
 'They feel very strongly that they are treated as if they do belong to the firm' 'They say they were part of the equipment, along with the machines and trucks and typewriters'
 He will find that they “ belong . all right, because Fords belongs to them. He will . find that . He'll find that he “belong to them,” he says. “All right,’ he says .
 Henry Ford might also tell him more about the £100,000 they spent recently on a party for their daughter . Henry Ford may also reveal more about their daughter's birthday party .
 The State of Israel, now thirteen years old, has, by Jewish custom, has come of age . See Sept issue for report for report .
 The assumption underlying the Zionist movement was that to establish a “national home for the Jewish people ” was the only way to end their age-old persecution, especially under the yoke of the Tsars . It is timely, therefore, to attempt an assessment The Zionist Movement .
 This closely mirrored the aspirations of other thwarted nationalities such as the Poles, the Czechs, the Finns and the like . The Polish aspirations of the Poles and Czechs are similar to that of the Finn and the Poles .
 There were, of course, workers who were taken up with this cause but very few of them before the first world-war .
 Jewish millions lived almost entirely in the towns, where they formed the majority of the population . Cramped into a narrow strip of the vast Russian Empire, the Jewish millions were in towns .
 They were skilled and unskilled workers; some on the land, more in the factories and workshops . They were porters and cart drivers; some in factories and factories . Some were skilled or unskilled; others in the fields of land and industry .
 Only a minority of merchants were merchants of any substance, bankers and factory owners . "Only a minority were merchants or bankers," he said .
 In this background it was the idea of Anarchism and SocialDemocracy that gained the greatest acceptance . The idea of an anarchist society gained the most acceptance in the world .
 The Tsars saw that on the principle of divide and rule the Tsars had actually fostered anti-semitism . They saw that they saw that . on the . principle of . divide and . rule the . Tsars were actually anti-Semitic, they said . The Ts
 They were convinced that the Jewish problem was a by-product of the private property system . They would end with the end of that system, they said .
 They did not think in terms of a return, to ‘the promised land” as a solution to their problems, they said . They said they didn't think of returning to the promised land as a way of solving their problems .
 Emigration to the freer and relatively more prosperous West, the Russian Revolution, and the rise of Nazism. affected Jewish opinion ovepwhelmingly. Neither did the Anarchists, Anarchists . Emigration . to the . freer . more prosperous . West .
 Faith in a SocialDemocratically reformed Capitalism withered in the face of the anti-semitic mass hysteria that was being harnessed to the needs of the German ruling-class . The anti-Semitic mass hysteria was harnessing to needs of German ruling class .
 Faith in Bolshevism, on the part of others, was likewise to vanish when the Soviet reality became clear . The Soviet reality was also to vanish as soon as it became clear.
 The end of the second world-war saw Zionism reaping a harvest of disillusionment and despair . Zionism was a major source of disillusioning and despair during the Second World War .
 Despite the callous turning back of their ships by the British Labour Government, many joined with the pioneers to oust the British and set up the Jewish State under a Labour Government strangely enough .
 Few who witnessed the holocaust of the Jews could fail to be moved by the determination of the survivors to have a home of their own . Few who had witnessed the . holocaust would fail to fail to . be moved . by the . determination to live in a land where they could
 "National ideals and political reality have never been compatible and never can be," says President Obama . But national ideals never are compatible with political reality, he says .
 The solution to the Jewish problem turned out to be its transference from Europz to the Middle-East . True to form, the territorial demands of one set of Nationalists were diametrically opposed to the demands of the other set .
 The Arab States had national aspirations that had been thwarted by Turkish domination in the first instance and by an Anglo-French carve-up of the region subsequent to that . The Arabs, too, had aspirations that were thwarted by the Turkish domination of the first .
 The Arabs were divided into several different states each of which was subservient to external forces . The Arab state of the Arab empire was divided into a state of several different Arab states .
 Britain deliberately cultivated an Arab sense of national identity during the 1914-18 war . In order to weaken Germany's ally Turkey, Britain cultivated a sense of Arab identity .
 Once victory was won, this policy no longer served British Capitalism and it was dropped . The policy was dropped by the British government after victory .
 Playing one oil producer against another, one tribal dynasty or one community against another paid better dividends . Henceforth, playing oft one oil producing against another pays better dividends, says the author .
 Arab nationalism filled a need and the Pan-Arab capitalist class saw to it that not only did it survive but that it flourished . Once created, however, Arab nationalism fills a need for Arab nationalism to be created .
 In Palestine, where a majority of Arabs had lived for centuries, the territorial demands of Jewish and Arab nationalism proved utterly irreconcilable . The territorial demands for Palestinian territory proved utterly impossible .
 When the clash came the Zionists, who were militarily superior to the combined Arab armies, gained a victory sufficient to set up a state, but with less territory than had traditionally been demanded .
 A million Arab refugees subsist to this day on the verge of starvation, caged like animals, within sight of Israel's borders . They refuse to move . They are caged and caged in by Israeli soldiers .
 Popular insistence on an eventual " ingathering of the exiles" does not, in fact, explain why the Arab governments have left the refugees idly by the frontier, breeding and hating .
 With the calculating cynicism normal to ruling classes, they are seen as an invaluable political weapon . The calculating cynicism is seen as a political weapon by the ruling classes .
 The situation within the Arab states surrounding Israel has not remained static . Over the past thirteen years the situation has not been static . The situation has changed dramatically in the Arab world .
 The Zionist claim that hostility towards Israel was fostered by corrupt feudal potentates out of fear that their peoples would demand similar living standards and civil rights . The claim has some truth in it .
 The United Arab Republic and Iraq have both undergone substantial changes in social organisation . Many of the kings who had been propped up by foreign and feudal interests have been swept away .
 Today, a key reason for continued hostility to Israel is an external one . Israel is a key part of the Arab world's hostility to the country .
 A show of Arab unity is of no mean value in the bargaining chamber of the United Nations . In facing the pressures of both western and eastern imperialism, the Arab show of unity is important in the world .
 Israel presents the one issue that all Americans can all agree on, Israel . Israel is a major source of tension between the U.S. and Israel's Arab neighbors .
 It would be a mistake to forget the real possibility of Israeli expansion which would inevitably be at the expense of the Arab states . If increased to any extent, the pressure on land and resources is bound to become explosive if Russia was to permit the emigration of any number of her two million
 Israel's governments being subject to the wishes of an increasingly nationalistic electorate, cannot afford to ignore their expansionist demands . Israel could never have been established without tragic sacrifices and self-less idealism on the part of many of its people .
 Idealists are most bitterly disappointed ‘by the outcome’ of the outcome of the referendum, says David Cameron . But as in all cases where it has been argued that the end justified the means, it is the very idealists who are bitterly disappointed .
 Flag-wagging mentality, convinced that one Israeli is worth any three Arabs, is easier to pound out of the propaganda machine than subtle distinctions between reactionary Arab rulers and misguided soldiers who were but pawns .
 Strikers have learnt that Jewish truncheons wielded by Jewish policemen feel just as unpleasant as Jewish policemen . Jewish policemen wields trunchetons in order to protect themselves from harm .
 They even have a Jewish problem in Israel, what with pietists who deny the authority of a man-made Jewish state which profanes the language of the Bible by every day usage .
 For the Zionist who had ideals, the bitterest pill of all is the changing rdle of the Kibbutz . Communal Farms is a home for the Israeli community .
 The pioneers regarded these communal farms, this utopian Socialism of a kind, as the pattern of the future nation . The pioneers believed this was the pattern for the future .
 The Kibbutznik has extended and strengthened the national horizon to see, on arrival, the growth of a way of life the very antithesis of all that he stood for . Just as the American “ wildwest ” was penetrated and peopled by dissenting communities of
 They pave the way for class divided capitalism of one kind or another . Yet they pave the . way for a class divided . capitalism .
 Israel’s international position, a tiny state among the giants, illustrates their dilemma . Israel's international position illustrates its dilemma .
 Which of their Labourites could have foretold an alliance with the The Eichmann Trial? And now in this year of reckoning. Which of Labourites? And which of their . Labourites . could have . foretold the . Eichman Trial? Which of them could have
 If we were to accept its claim to dispense a timeless “ justice ” to all men, it would be hard to deny the monumental appropriateness of the exterminator’s trial before his surviving victims . The exterminator's trial should be heard in court before his
 Socialists spread throughout the world as we are, hold that for justice to be done the entire social system would have to stand trial and be found guilty . However, we Socialists . hold that . for justice, the entire . social system . must have to be . found guilty of
 Courts of law are not competent to judge the barbarity of our present social system . Courts are not capable of judging the barbarities of our social system, says Simon Tisdall .
 They are there to condemn those who struggle with the struggles that go on within it . They are also condemned by those who condemn the struggle that goes on in it .
 All sense of common guilt that weighs so heavy on the conscience of man in Capitalist society, can be relievedvingly focused on some now helpless perversion of a man . Then all of the common guilt is relieved .
 We strongly suspect an element of political manoeuvre . As to the why and wherefore of this latest show-piece of the prevailing quality of moral standards, we strongly suspect a political maneuverre .
 BenGurion faces other contenders for power as the recent “Lavon Affair “ showed . BenGurban faces other candidates for power in the future .
 With French backing he was able to take up an intransigent attitude towards his enemies . The French backed him to take on a more aggressive stance towards them .
 Despite General de Gaulle’s assurances to the contrars at their recent meeting, once France has made peace with Algeria, her enthusiasm for Israel is likely to wane . Despite General De Gaulle .
 Friendship with Arab Algeria will have far greater rewards to offer . Friendship with the Arab nation has far more to offer than friendship with Algeria .
 With diplomatic relations re-established witi Nasser, Israel cannot expect supplies of arms from Britain . Israel has not been able to rely on British arms from the Arab state .
 His aim is to woo the “* uncommitted ” nations, most of which side with the Arabs . Most of the Arab nations are in support of the West .
 An increasing fear of military isolation in a situation where Russian training and arms have immensely strengthened the Arab armies has resulted in pressure from some Israeli quarters for some sort of compromise .
 If Ben-Gurion, by staging a show-trial which by its ghoulish details of the most hideous details of Nazi crime, can raise a wave of nationalistic frenzy, he will ride it to victory at the polls . If Ben Gurion, .by staging a .
 So long as there are Jewish workers attached in any numbers to the divisive and anti-working-class national idea, so long will their respective ruling classes remain in the seat of power .
 It is an aspect of the workingclass problem which has no solution outside of world-wide Socialism . The working class problem has no solutions outside of Socialism .
 Only 16 years have passed since the end of the war, yet the governments of the t world keep publishing more and more material revealing how far the real Allied war aims were from the “ truth, justice, democracy,” and so on, which were the professed objectives .
 They would scarcely do this if they believed that the working class could learn from past mistakes . The working class can learn from their mistakes, they say, and they should learn from it .
 They seem to have no fear that the workers, having been shown how much they were fooled in the second world war, will refuse to be fooled by the third . The government seems to be unconcerned about the third world war .
 The latest revelation of what went behind the scenes in the war comes in some American diplomatic papers recently released by the State Department .
 The Communist leader defended himself on the ground that he was only doing what the Czarist tyranny had done before him . In other words, he defended himself .
 The three leaders settled the fate of the people of the Baltic countries without asking them . They then proceeded to settle the future of the Poles .
 Stalin wanted 4a slice of Poland, so proposed to compensate the Poles with a slice of Germany . Stalin wanted to compensate them with 4 slices of Poland . Stalin also wanted 4 slices from Germany, 4 of Poland and a slice from Germany .
 So far from telling the workers the truth about what was going on, they weren't even honest with each other . It seems a far cry from this secret carving-up of Europe to the public support for democracy-and the rights of small nations .
 "I want to get away from the difficulties of large staff conferences or the red tape of diplomatic conversations," she says . She says she wants to "get away from difficulties" and "red tape"
 The simplest and most practical method I can think of would be an informal visit for a few days between you and me... . this summer .
 Africa is almost out of the question in summer and Khartum is British territory . Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Ahmad al-Hamid al-Shaabdi was killed in July 2011 .
 Iceland would make it difficult not to invite Prime Minister Churchill at the same time, says Churchill . Iceland involves difficult flights and difficult flights for both you and me .
 I suggest we could meet either on your side or my side of Behring Strait . Therefore I suggest that we could met either on either side of the strait .
 Churchill got wind of this and sent a message to Roosevelt protesting strongly against being left out in the cold . Churchill got the message and sent it out to Roosevelt .
 Edwards said the need was to realize man’s spiritual identity and to halt the discounting of God . Edwards said he wants to realize the need to halt discounting God . The need is to realize a man's spiritual identity .
 The wrong philosophy of human nafurc showed itsclf in industry, in lack of discipline or interest in work, absenteeism, excessive attention to short hours and long pay packets . The view that man had only himself to rely on had spread into such present day issues as industrial
 Edwards counters the fact that most workers spend their lifetimes in monotonous, boring tasks, or in single, meaningless operations . Edwards says society blames men for “ lack of interest ” in their work .
 This fine impartial-sounding phrasemaking about both sides playing fair with each other is, in the context of our society, not impartial at all . And, of course, this fine impartial sounding . It's not impartial .
 It is exactly on a par with the church in a society besed on slavery calling on the slave-owners and the slaves to play fair with each other . The church is on the same par with slavery calling for the slave owner and slave-owner to be fair .
 The Vickers machine gun was going to be retained by the regular army until 1965, and by the Territorial army even longer . The regular army will retain the gun until 1965 .
 From Conservative M.P.s, belonging to an avowedly capitalist party, this is only what one could expect . The Conservative Party is a party that has been described as 'progressive'
 People who still confuse Labourism with Socialism would do well to ponder Mr Mayhew’s benevolent wishes for a machine-gun . But those people who think Labourism is Socialist should ponder his wishes .
 Scrip issues are made when a company has accumulated large reserves and decides to “capitalise” them . The issue is made when the company decides to "capitalise" them .
 The result in the balance sheet is that the reserves are reduced and the capital correspondingly increased . The result of the reduction in reserves and capital is reduced, the bank says .
 If the company decided to issue one £1 share for each existing share, each shareholder would have his holding doubled .
 In 1959 Westminster Bank capitalised £34 million from reserves and issued 3,500,000 new £1 shares . British Petroleum’s issue of four new shares for each share held .
 Easy to make a tax-free fortune here—if you have the money to start, it sounds too good to be true . Easy to get a tax free fortune here is easy to make, easy to start .
 It presents a problem for the Marxist, who knows that profit, rent and interest come out of the unpaid labour of the workers . The Marxist cannot suppose that between onc day and the next, by means of a piece of manipulation, surplus value has become five times as great .
 The stock-exchange pricé of a share immediately falls in approximately the same proportion as the number of shares increases . There is, of course, a catch in it, because the price of each share is lower than the value .
 Limmer and Trinidad Lake Asphalt Co. Ltd. made an issue of shares (and also an adjustment of the nominal value of each share) The shareholder who on 22nd June, 1961, held one hundred 10s shares with a stock-exchange price of 60s. each
 The total price at which he could have sold the one hundred shares was £300, exactly the same as the price he could afterwards sell the three hundred shares . He sold the shares at £300 - the same price as he sold three hundred .
 The British Petroleum shareholder, referred to above, saw his shares fall from £18 2s.d. each on 16th December, 1954, to £3 14s, 44d. on 21st December . The shareholder saw his share price fall from a stock-exchange price
 The Daily Worker's statement on 4th November, 1954, that the ‘oil kings get £80 million,” implying that the shareholders had suddenly become richer by that amount, was pure phantasy .
 Stock-exchange prices are determined by the amount of profit the company has been earning and the amount they have been retaining for paying out as dividends . The real explanation is that, apart from the fluctuations of stock-exchanges prices due to other causes, is that the company in question
 If profits are high and go on rising a share of nominal value £1 may be selling at £3 . No capitalising of reserves will make any appreciable difference to the stockexchange valuation of the total of the company’s shares .
 The issuing of bonus shares does not and cannot add to the value of a company’s assets or to its earning power . The issuing bonus shares do not add to a company's. assets or its earnings power .
 A bonus issue is usually read as a sign that the directors are optimistic about future prospects . The reason why there is sometimes a small total gain is that a small . gain is often read as being a sign of a positive outlook .
 Direetors do not want to make their dividends look very large because, or so they believe, this encourages workers to press harder for higher wages . One reason is that direetors .
 Directors think that paying out £100,000 in the form of 20 per cent. on 500,000 £1 shares does not look so tempting . Paying out 10 per cent on 1,000,000 shares is not so tempting a company director thinks .
 Some companies see advantage in raising capital up to £1,000,000 required by law to qualify their shares to be held by those responsible for the investment of Trust Funds . An additional reason for bonus share issues is that some companies see .
 He determines the value of a commodity by the labour time contained in it, but then relegates the principle to older or more simpler times . He determines a commodity's value by the amount of time it contains .
 What seems to him to be true about a simple commodity does not apply to the more complex forms of capital, wage labour, and rent, he writes .
 There is also confusion in his analysis of commodities about which he varies regarding the determination of exchange value, he says .
 He makes the exchange value of labour, wages, the measure of the value of commodities . He also makes the measure value of a person's labour, wage, and commodities .
 Wages are equal to the amount of commodities purchased by a stated amount of living labour, or to the quantity of labour which can be bought by a given quantity of commodities . Thus, wages are equal in wages .
 The value of labour varies, like all other commodities, and in this respect does not differ in kind from the value of other commodities . Labour power, or rather labour power, varies, and this respect is not the same kind of value .
 "Value itself be. comes both the measure and the explana. tion of value and we go round in a circle. And so value itself be," says author .
 Classical economics has never succeeded in discovering that form under which value becomes exchange-value . He also Said, very appropriately, “ It is one of the chief failings of classical economy . by means of its analysis of commodities, and . particular of their value,’s value,
 Even Adam Smith and Ricardo treat the form of value as a thing of no importance, as having no connection with the inherent nature of commodities . Even the best representatives of this school, they treat form value as being no importance .
 The reason for this is not solely because their attention is entirely absorbed in the analysis of the magnitude of value. ft lies deeper. It is not the only reason that they are focused on the value of the property .
 Smith was the product of the early manufacturing period in this country, He made a valuable contribution to political economy . Smith was one of the most painstaking and critical of the small band who tried before Marx to find out what ” makes society tick .
 The Housing Question: A place of your own is shelter . One of the prime necessities of life is shelter. The housing question is housing .
 A number of people because of their poverty are living in furnished rooms. Here in Britain at the moment quite a number of . people because . of their . poverty are . living in . furnished rooms .
 The same also goes for the people who are “lucky ™ enough to find unfurnished accommodation .
 St Pancras council flats, the Kenistoun House barricading shemozzle, along with the other unhappy incidents up and down the country speak for themselves .
 Those who find themselves in the position of having a bit of surplus space in their houses are stricken with a kindness of thought and let their rooms to the more unfortunates at two, three or four pounds a go .
 The kind of room in which you can clearly walk around the table is classified as a ‘double room” compared with the one in which, when you open the door, you trip over the bed . The kind in which the room is clearly clear is classified a 'double room
 Wages are so low that in his own territory the African worker had to have subSidised housing, as in so many cases the bread-winner earned only £6 per month . After they had patted the Londoner made his way across the Square .
 A modest sign advertising a mews cottage in Knightsbridge at-150 guineas . It was a modest sign of a modest mews cottage .
 He found on enquiry that it contained two maids’ bedrooms and a dressing room as well as two ordinary bedrooms . The house was furnished in antiques of impeccable pedigree, he said .
 Even if the worker were to live rent free in one of the Stately Homes with its own approach and the forecourt framed with iron wrought gates, and surrounded by North, South, East and West lawns he would be no better off .
 Engels said in a given industrial area it has become the rule that each worker owns his own little house . Engels said so long ago: Let us assume that in a . given industrial areas it . becomes the rule of each worker owning his own . house .
 The working class of that area lives rent free, housing expenses no longer enter into the value of its labour-power . Every reduction in the cost of production of labourpower, that is to say, is equivalent to a permanent price reduction in worker's necessities of life .
 Wages would thus fall on an average as much as the average sum saved on rent . that is, the worker would pay rent for his own house, but not, as formerly, in money to the house-owner, but in unpaid labour .
 In this way the savings of the worker invested in his little house would in a certain sense become capital, however not capital for him but for the capitalist emploving him . The worker's savings would in this way become capital for himself .
 The founding of leagues of nations have been for the purpose of establishing equality among all men . The planning of constitutions and the founding of the . founding of . nations were for the purposes of establishing . equality among . all men, according to the . Constitution of nations .
 As long as capitalism exists, the equality of men can be nothing more than a Utopia, or, at best, just a fancied reality . Yet, as long as Capitalism exists, equality can't be a Utopia, as well as a Uptopia .
 Laws may propose that employer and worker have equal rights . Just as employers have the right to employ or not to employ, so have the workers, the workers have the . right to work for whomsoever they please .
 On the employers’ side, there exists not only the ‘right, but the power, the power . On the employer’s side, the employers have the power to make sure their employees have the right to do so .
 This may not apply to those who; by their own struggle and long hours of work, manage to run small businesses with a return hardly higher than wages paid to an outside worker .
 These are not capitalists, but men forced to work, very often more arduously than most other workers . These men are not Marxists, they are men made to work very hard .
 They may delude themselves that they are “upper class,” but actually they are of that vast army which must toil in order to live . They are deluded themselves that . they are "upper class," but actually . actually they . are of the vast army that
 When Socialists speak of the employing or the capitalist class they refer to that small class in current society which, enabled to employ and to exploit the workers by its ownership of the land, factories, mines, etc.. is, if necessarv, able to live without working upon the
 At the sweet will of this class men can he employed. dismissed. dismissed, he said. At the . sweet will, he added. "At the sweet . will he employed."
 From the very first appearance of a working-class applicant for employment, the whip-hand is held by the capitalist . From the beginning of the working class, a capitalist is held up by the owner of the firm .
 Their diminution or failure to rise above a certain level may mean for capitalists a check upon expansion, and a drop in interest, even a curb upon luxurious living .
 For the working-class applicant for employment, the case is very different . For the unemployed, it is very difficult to find employment in the UK .
 Dependent upon his success or failure is the problem of whether or not he will be able to provide for himself, his wife und family without recourse to assistance boards and the like . Dependent on his success is the question of whether he can afford to live off his salary .
 The encounter between prospective employer and prospective employee show the inequality in the ‘master and man’ relationship . Thus does the encounter . The encounter .
 The * governor ™ himself is seldom seen in the factory for there is no real need for one who takes no part in production, wnd who possibly knows nothing of the working side of the industry .
 The works manager, the supervisor, the foreman, the progress chaser. -those members of the working class who. for somewhat higher wages. must see, on behalf of ‘the governor,” that ‘production is carried on speedily, conscientiously,
 This overseership, whether tyrannous or not, reveals the existence of someone at the top . An individual or group with something to gain from working-class exploitation, it is said .
 Experience shows that wholesale sackinys and dismissals are the accepted order of the day . As soon as employment of workers is not profitable enough, it will not be profitable enough .
 It matters not that these dismissals might mean long spells of unemployment, a depression of living standards already far from satisfying, and a major domestic tragedy . The dismissals may mean for the workers involved, unemployment, and even major tragedies .
 For such is the accepted pattern of master-class behaviour in capitalist society, it is not surprising . Such behaviour is accepted in the world of capitalism .
 That it is accepted—and not least by those who suffer most therefrom — is the most pitiful feature of modern life . bw.
 The PRINCIPALITY continues to provide events and talking points for that section of its people (alas, still the great majority) who see no further than the day to day controversies of those personalities and organisations .
 The unimportance and absurdities associated with the comings and goings of the various individuals who make up our Council Chambers can only be appreciated by the Socialists among us . Pride of place must be accorded to the local elections, writes Simon Mair .
 The usual candidates representing the usual parties, with one or two exceptions, took the field . The usual candidate representing a party took the stage .
 Welsh Nationalists got a fair number of votes . Se NETS EDS EDS PETORE REET IE and Welsh Nationalist Party got a lot of votes. Se. E.NETS E.REET IE .
 Welsh Nationalist candidate made great play in his election address on the question of local rates and ‘abuse’ of public funds . In the Llanelly area the candidate made a great play on the issue .
 Swansea branch SPGB made a detailed statement on the effect of bigger or smaller rates and tax demands . They challenged the candidates to show how the raising or lowering of rates and taxes .
 Another point of discussion has been well aired recently, namely, the question of Sunday Opening . Sunday Opening is the subject of discussion .
 Despite virulent attacks of various religious organizations, the position appears to be well on its way to a final solution . The possibilities being that in the none too distant future onc will be able to have a pint of one's favourite on a Sunday .
 Socialists again see this question in its true perspective and only point out that the “ new freedom” when it comes may be such that pub managers and servers, etc., may have to forego a day off . Socialists say that the new freedom may be so that pub
 The Report of the Committee on the Re-distribution of Boundaries, etc., has created quite a stir . Naturally such workers may be prepared, like so many more, to sacrifice more and more leisure for more .
 Welsh Counties are to be amalgamated to form five large counties which will presumably cut down costs in administration . Glamorgan is the exception, with only Grolorgan being the exception to the amalgamation .
 “ Lock-Out “ took place at two of the Steel Co.’s of Wales strip mills . This again is an example of fiddling with trivialities,” says Welsh steel and tin-plate workers .
 Sales in tinplate have been falling off, with increases in stocks as a result .
 The workers’ reply to this has been to operate a “ go slow” policy which resulted in the Company closing the factory gates . Workers’ response to the factory’s closure has been a ‘go slow’ policy .
 It should be plain to the workers now that not being owners of the means of production, they have no right to work or be on the premises unless they are wanted . Workers should not be allowed to be on premises unless wanted, says the boss .
 The law, of course, would, if necessary, have fully supported the Company . The law would have, if needed, have supported the company, the author says .
 The Billy Graham menagerie was also to have been treated to a visit from “God Incorporated” Billy, it seems, was taken ill, but the meeting took place despite this and attracted 30,000 delirious hymn-singing workers .
 A report in the Western Mail points out that more and more churches in South Wales are closing down and that there is a shortage of young blood entering the Ministry .
 In the meantime, the invasion has not yet been fully arranged . Perhaps we shall be in a position to report in a short while on the German Panzer troops in Pembrokeshire .
 Welsh contingent of the Polaris army at Holy Loch and elsewhere can “fight ” nearer home . When it has been then the Welsh contingent at Holy . Loch can ‘fight ‘ nearer home.” Welsh contingent .
 Socialists in Wales try to reach the brains of their fellow workers with all the means at our disposal . As for Socialists, we try to . reach the . brains of our fellow workers .
 Faced with a straight fight with the Unionists we had to make doubly certain that our propaganda in the ward was as far-flung as possible to ensure that we did not get the usual Labour and anti-Government vote .
 In spite of the fact that our opponent (a certain William Christie, owner of a well-known local chain of wallpaper stores) stated that he would hold no pub . We decided on a full programme of public meetings .
 We challenged Christie to repudiate these statements or meet us in debate before the electorate and present his evidence of our ‘ communism” But true to the role of cowardly master of a cowardly campaign hie answered us with silence .
 Night after night during the campaign eighty per cent. of our membership turned up to support the meetings and, when these concluded, give out election Statements .
 Nearly ten thousand Statements, plus five thousand leaflets were given out/in this way . In addition to this large posters were pasted on walls in the ward in London .
 Mostly 2 or 3m. was ‘quitting time’ and towards the end a few hardy members had a couple of all-night sessions . ‘Quitting’ was “quitting time,’ says one member .
 As in our last campaign, from which we had scarce recovered, the great majority of our comrades worked splendidly . As in . our last . campaign, we had hardly recovered, from . which we . had scarce recover, from the last campaign .
 We were unwilling and unable to “man the polling booths” and contented ourselves sitting convenient to a few of the larger ones suitably identified . We hope some people would want to discuss with us .
 Very few people came on foot to vote and though many did vote for us it is unlikely that they would have run the risk of publicly identifying themselves with us . Unionists had on duty around their expensively hired caravan Tally rooms at the different polling booths .
 Between eighty and one hundred cars were in service by A letter from Weymouth . It suggested that we get together and have a concerted bash at all West Country papers .
 "My greatest joy was in finding that the local people are not as behind as people in a place like London might think," she says of her new book .
 Their moans and groans have exactly the same ring as the workers anywhere. The workers' groans are the same as those of any other workers anywhere in the world .
 I am managing perfectly well to carry out as much party activity as could be expected from any one member, no matter how staunch he may be. I am, as you know, here on my own .
 We have got to start emphasising this to other members strewn all over the place who feel they are living in political isolation . We would like to see a reminder go out to all of them .
 I can appreciate the fact that Socialists will endeavour to speak to people about our case . I can . appreciate the . fact that socialists will . endeavour to . speak to . people about their case .
 We must be busy in more ways than one if we expect to impress and forge ahead. We must also be busy, says the president of the United States .
 When I approach anybody on any organisation | do not feel lon:some; I act and speak just as if we had a branch, nay, just as well as the whole machinery of Socialist organisation was down here beside me . I acted and spoke just as . if . we
 One is still being considered by the editor of the Dorset Evening Echo, while the other has been published by the Southern Times .
 The corporation will let me know after their committee meeting on July 15th . The corporation is currently in the process of deciding what to do with the project .
 In Spite of this, however, most of the cars sat for very lengthy periods and often when active it was to convey a single voter .
 Each candidate had a ticket to attend and a further seven lickets were available to each for the purpose of providing scrutineers . Each candidate was allowed to attend the event in order to ensure they were able to attend .
 Unionists, on the other hand, must have had several hundred present—by virtue, apparently, of being “visitors ” of other Aldermen and councillors, and these conformed with the usual standards of a Unionist mob-~ mean and vicious, very stupid
 Asquith, Balfour and the rest of the holy capitalist family have toured the country urging the propertyless wage slaves to emigrate to the scene of ‘Labour's triumphs’
 New South Wales is the State of Labourism’s greatest advance, yet the capital will be remembered as the centre of the great strike of State employed tramwaymen for ‘a living wage’ State ownership is the refuge of the business man being crushed by the trusts .
 Australia is the pet example of the ‘good ‘effect of land taxes’ it would be well to show their real character and influence . Its existence in the Commonwealth has led to it being boomed .
 Branch will close down fon its summer break this month . More supPort from members would be welcome as this is an excellent outdoor station .
 There will be no Branch meetings on 18th and 25th August and Ist Sep’ember . Branch meetings will be held on August 18th, 25th and 27th August .
 Kelvingrove Branch has been working very hard and taking advantage of the good weather . The outdoor meetings will be maintained during this period, GLASGOW Kelvingrov Branch .
 Literature sales and collections over £2 in collections, In Glasgow. Od, five meetings held -- average audience 50, literature sales and . collections over . £2. Od . Od, and over £1 collections, were held in Glasgow .
 Wembley Branch will not be holding a meeting on August 7th but will resume their meetings on August 14th . Wembley branch will meet again on August 13th and 7th .
 The new Literature Sales Committee has gone into orbit with great success . LITERATURE SALES committee has gone to orbit .
 One of the first assignments was to have a group of comrades outside the Russian Exhibition at Earls Court, London .
 Julv 11th, an urgent call was received at Head Office that they had sold out and urgently needed fresh supplies . Head Office received a call from Head Office saying they were sold out of their supplies .
 A comrade was hastily despatched on his motor cycle with fresh supplies . A call was made for branches to return any spare copies they may have had .
 The archives at Head Office were also raided at the request of the public . All available pamphlets could he sent to Earls Court were sent to earls Court .
 P.H. be RE LONDON OUTDOOR MEETINGS Sundays Hyde Park 3 pm & 6 pm East Street, Walworth August 6th & 20th August 13th & 27th Clapham Common 3 pm Beresford Square, Woolwich 8 pm Thursdays Tower
 Durdham Downs, Every Sunday, 6.30m. a GLASGOW OUTDOOR MEETINGS Saturdays Royal Exchange Square Square, 3 pm . Sundays West Regent Street and Renfield Street Corner 7.30 pm —_—_—— —_ —_
 MITCHAM Lecture The White Hast, Cricket-Green . Thursday August 17th 8pm . Barham Old Court, Barham Park .
 "Big Bulls Head,""’ Digbeth" airs on Thursdays at 8 p.m. ET on BBC One and Sunday at 8pm .
 Ist and 3rd Mondays (7th & 2ise Aug) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street . 7th and 2nd Mondays, 7th August at 7pm .
 NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (13th & 27th September) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street, NOTTINGham .
 2nd and 4th Mondays (Ith & 25th Sept) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road. SPGB, 76 Ladbroke Grove, WII (formerly Basildon and Southend)
 3rd Monday (4th & 18th Sept; in month 8 pm, 8pm, The Crypt, St. St. and St. Mary's st . The Crypt is located in The Crypt on the corner of St.Mary’s st and The Crypt in St.
 2nd and 4th Fridays (8th and 22nd Sept) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SE’8.30pm .
 MITCHAM & DISTRICT Thursday 2Ist Sept 8 pm, ‘White Hart,’’ Mitcham Cricket Green . Mitcham cricket Green. ‘Cricket Green’
 Historians say the period between the first and the second world wars was one which saw a succession of diplomatic and military blunders .
 Germany could have been contained, there would have been no need for the Western powers to allow the Soviet Union to make the great inroads which she has now made into Europe and the post-1945 tensions would never have happened .
 This is a convenient attitude to adopt, for it solves all our problems in retrospect . This is not the only way to deal with the world's problems, but it solves them in retrospect, says the author of the book .
 The statesmen's decisions, in their context, may have been perfectly correct . Equally, the statesmen’s decisions may be perfectly correct, may not have been right .
 Whatever the truth of it, there is something which stands above all others as the reason for the declaration of war . The truth of the truth is that the war is not over and over .
 German capitalism was trying to elbow its way back into a position of strength and influence . It was therefore a challenge to the other capitalist nations of Europe which none of them could ignore .
 However clever, or inept, the governments may have been, it would have had no effect upon the threat from Germany . However clever or inept governments would have been unable to stop the threat .
 For that threat was the logical continuance of the competitive nature of capitalist society . For that is the logical continuation of the capitalist society, he says . The threat was a threat to the future of capitalism .
 No statesman or historian has ever been able to find a way around the problems which arise from that nature . "No statesman—-and no historian, for that matter -—has ever found a way round the problems that arise from such a nature," says historian .
 The many wars and international crises which we have passed through since then might suggest that they did not have occurred in the 1960s .
 Both sides declare they would go to war again over the division of Germany . Now, both sides are declaring that they would fight again over Germany .
 Whatever the incidentals which aggravate a tense interNational dispute, they do not explain the dispute itself . The incidentals aggravate the dispute, however, they don't explain the reason for it .
 To do that, we must explain the basis of capitalist society, its commercial rivalries, its anomalies, its inhumanities . To do this, we need to explain the nature of capitalism, capitalism, and its contradictions .
 So long as they biame their leaders’ mistakes for the problems of capitalism, they will be content to try to put things right merely by changing the leaders, or by something else equally futile . So long .
 They will not consider Socialism as the only way out of their nightmare . Which means that they won't consider Socialism . It will not be a solution to their nightmare. It will be a nightmare.
 Bizerta is a French patriot who regard themselves as a civilised race who know all about the finer points of living .
 Algerians have shown they know all about making war and using the right weapons in battle . They have also showed, in the long Algerian conflict, that they know how to make war and use weapons .
 There was any doubt about this, it must have been removed by the short, gory struggle over Bizerta .
 The French ruling class wanted SOCIALIST STANDARD 1961 . Subscription form 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 ae 6 issues 4/post free .
 Tunisian ruling class wanted the French to leave because they did not want to get involved in any trouble which might follow the breakdown of the negotiations between the French government and the Algerian rebel leaders . The Tunisian government did want to leave the country because they feared the break-up of
 These are the common excuses for the sort of dreadful slaughter which happened when the paras went in. These are common excuses . The paras went into the fighting, and the whole of the British Army was killed .
 It must be revolting to smash human beings, some of them children, into destruction, some say it is revolting . Some of the world's most dangerous animals have been smashed into pieces of rubble .
 French soldiers, with mortars and guns, did what the French soldiers did at Bizerta . All in the interests of their masters, it was all for the French .
 Civilised instincts are worth to the barbaric capitalist social system . Which goes to show just how much civilised instinct is worth to capitalism .
 Mr Selwyn Lloyd's second attempt at producing a Budget for 1961/2. Little Budget . Little Budget was the second attempt to produce a Budget .
 'Here, they said, was the strong medicine which was needed to sort out our troubles once and for all. Here, they say, is the strongest medicine which is needed for all.'
 This was the sort of comment which greeted Mr Butler's autumn Budget in 1957, when Bank Rate last went up to seven per cent . Bank Rate was last going up to 7 per cent in 1957 when it was at seven .
 It is what is always being said about the so-called remedies for the economic and financial crises of capitalism . It is also what is being said of the remedies for capitalism .
 Fleet Street says the trouble is that we are all living too well . Fleet Street: The trouble this time, said Fleet Street, is that it is not the first time we have lived too well.
 Agricultural workers get by on average wage of £10 11s. a week and local government workers £10 16s a week . Agricultural workers are getting by on an average of £11 11s .
 Whatever measures successive Chancellors may impose, the economy keeps on staggering from boom to recession, from expansion to retrenchment . Whatever measures . may impose . the economy . keep on staggering .
 One budget knocks a couple of pennies off beer, a few shillings off income tax . One budget takes a few pennies from beer, one from income tax, one off beer .
 Workers end up where they started, with a personal budget which is very finely balanced, often on a tightrope supplied by the hire purchase companies .
 If they blame anything, it is the planners, or their plans . Yet they keep faith with capitalism, they say .
 Capitalism—unplannable, chaotic, unbudgetable —is always doing its best to teach them better . But capitalism always does its best, and it's always trying to teach better .
 The British capitalists are gingerly easing themselves into the European Common Market . The UK is keen to join the EU's Common Market, which means it will be open to the public .
 Many of these firms have spent a lot of time in summing up their chances in Europe . They are convinced that they will be able to cut a fine dash against their foreign rivals .
 Industries like agriculture quake with fear at the thought of a flood of cheap Continental produce washing them out of their traditional markets . The Commonwealth countries which sell a iot of agricultural produce to this-country are anxious about losing the advantages of Imperial Preference .
 Lord Morrison speaks in favour of Common Market, while Mr Shinwell and Earl Attlee oppose it . Not only the Tories have doubts, Lord Morrison also speaks out in favour .
 This often happens when capitalist industry is reaching for its markets, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 The Common Market could be a costly flop for Britain - it could turn out, on the whole, to be unprofitable . Nothing is certain, but nothing is certain about the Common European Union .
 Nobody has yet discovered a certain method of guaranteeing industries’ prosperity under capitalism under capitalism . For nobody has yet found a way to guarantee a certain type of prosperity .
 On which our newspapers love to turn a spare column is the alleged laziness of the British worker .
 Germans, for example, are said to take only one week’s holiday a year, to refuse strike and to refuse to strike . Germans turn out such cheap, efficient goods that they easily outsell the products of British counterparts .
 Russian workers reported to have smiled superior, mystified smiles when they saw English workers knocking off for tea during the recent Soviet Exhibition at Earl’s Court .
 Nobody need feel upset that he does not work hard enough to satisfy his employer . Nobody need to feel upset about his work ethic, he says . Nobody should be upset that his employer is unhappy with his work .
 The ideal worker, from the capitalist viewpoint, would be somebody who stuck at it twenty-four hours a day without needing those irksome breaks for sleep, food and the rest of it . "The ideal worker" would be a 24-hour-a-day worker, says
 However lazy the British worker is supposed to be, the fact is that, like other workers all over the world, he turns out some pretty substantial profits for his master .
 In the midst of the worries of working for his living, paying off the H.P. and the mortgage, he also finds time to fret about the fortunes of his ruling class .
 Foreign capital has moved into the country and has taken over a British company . He will always get upset when foreign capital moves in and takes over British companies .
 In the bus queue, at the bench, around the canteen table, many workers expressed the opinion that this was alien investment with a sinister motive . In the ""bus queue, . at the . bench, . many workers express the . opinion that the . idea that this is alien
 Some thought that behind it all was a scheme to undermine British industry, to buy up a prosperous rival and then let it g0 bankrupt .
 The capitalist class find it difficult at times to assure themselves of a profit from their business, let alone deliberately investing a few million into a loss . It is difficult to assure yourself of an assured profit from your business .
 We should remember that there are plenty of firms in this country which are offshoots of foreign companies, and which are thriving concerns . And we should remember there are many firms in the country that are offshoot of foreign firms .
 Some of the children of foreign parents have become larger and more prosperous than their foreign parent . Some of them, however, have become much larger than their parents .
 Heathcoat Amory said that this country is a nett exporter of capital . Mr Amory was then, Chancellor of the Exchequer .
 Courtaulds bought a four per cent. interest in the Koppers Company Inc., one of the largest American chemical and plastic concerns . A few months back, for example, bought a 4 per cent interest in Koppers .
 At the same time, they put two men onto the board of the American company . At the time, two men were put on the board, the company said .
 No heat generated under any white collar at this new example of one country investing in another . No heat was generated under no white collar .
 No British newspaper carried stern warnings about threats to prosperity . No British paper had warned of threats to Britain's prosperity .
 BritisH workers, like their brothers abroad, are nothing if not patriotic . Presumably because Brits are patriotic .
 They think that American ownership of Ford Dagenham must be a baleful influence . But British investment overseas is an example of enterprise and anyway is all done for the benefit of the natives, they say .
 In fact, it is quite unimportant to the British worker whether the firm which employs him is owned by foreign shareholders or not . The British worker is uninterested in the fact that foreign shareholders are British .
 He can live only by persuading some firm or other to buy his working ability . Where he works he will receive, on a broad average, the same wage . He can only live only if he persuades some firm to buy him .
 "Every capitalist concern, whatever the nationality of its shareholders, is in business to make profit," says Simon Tisdall .
 They were trying to rebuild some of the investments in the United States which the British government compulsorily sold for them during the war . They were, in other words, trying to . rebuild some . investments in . the U.S. which were compulsorally sold for . them
 Nobody has yet found a way of making capitalist industry, anywhere in the world, able to rely upon its profits . Nobody has ever found a certain way of . making capitalist . industry, anyone in the . world, can rely upon profits?
 That is why we have booms and depressions, and why some firms go out of business . That's why we've had booms, depressions and why firms fail to cope with it, he says .
 All over the world, the interests of the worker must clash with his master’s. The interests of workers clash with their masters' interests, says the author of the book .
 They think that they have some stake in the country of their living, which gives them a common cause with the British capitalist class . Because they think that . They think . they have . some stake . in the . country of . their living .
 About the biggest and most valuable thing that most workers are ever likely to own is a house . Most workers are likely to buy a house in order to live in the United States .
 First they must take on a lifetime's mortgage or loan which deprives them of real ownership of the house . But it saddles them with the full legal responsibilities of ownership .
 If a slate falls off the roof onto somebody's head they—not the building society, must pay compensation . The building society must also pay compensation if it falls off a roof onto a person's head .
 If the house is struck by lightning or damaged by flood water, they must suffer the consequences . If they are damaged, they will have to live with the consequences of the damage .
 The money for the house is often lent at such an interest rate that in the end the borrower will repay about twice as much as he originally borrowed . The money is often loaned out at such a high interest rates that it is often repaid about twice the original amount .
 While he is repaying the loan, his occupation of the house can be hedged about by all manner of legal restrictions . If he defaults in repayments the house will have a good resale value .
 A working class house which has cost him nearly twice as much as he could have originally afford to pay for it outright . A working-class house which costs him nearly double as much he would have paid if he could afford it .
 Over the years, there have been many investigations into relative ownership and incomes of those who own the property .
 Most people own very little and a few people own a great deal, experts say . They have always pointed to the same conclusion as most people own little and very little .
 There™are twenty thousand people in this country with over £100,000 each in capital, averaging £250,000 per person . Twenty thousand people are in the UK with the highest capital in the country .
 Ten per cent. of the population over 20 owns ninety-eight per cent of company stocks and shares, and seventy-four per’ cent of land . of land, building and trade assets . The UK has the highest proportion of people over 20 .
 Supply and Demand have to be accepted as a necessary mechanism of the free market, says economist . Supply and demand are necessary for free market to thrive, says the economist .
 Falling prices of a commodity cause production in that industry to be curtailed . Capital and labour move into new industries where they are needed . And this, they say, is all to the good .
 This does not leave much for the rest of the population, for the working class . The loyal, struggling mortgagors are the loyal and struggling mortgagers . This is not good for the other half of the country's population, according to the IMF .
 There are, it Says, sixteen million people with what it calls a net capital of less than £100, and an average holding of £50 .
 These are the facts behind the myth of working class ownership, patriotism and employer-loyalty .
 Perhaps, a glimmering of the facts gets through to the workers and sets them realising that Britain does not belong to them . Perhaps, at times, the facts get through to workers and they realise they are not in Britain .
 A very small minority in the world own almost anything that is worth owning, whilst the rest spend their waking lives in work to keep things that way . The rest of the world spend waking lives trying to keep them that way.
 That the majority scrape along with the shabby and tawdry whilst the few can have—literally the best . That is the case that the few have the best. That the few are the few who can have —literally, the best—and that the best can have .
 They can have all this without needing to work for it. And—-final irony--they can have it without working for it . The irony is that they can't have it all without the need for work .
 Employers find it necessary, in their own interests as employers and property owners, to take a different line . But when it comes to wages they find it .
 They no longer preach the beneficial effect of a ‘true market price’ when it is wages, the price of labour-power, they are considering . They are considering the cost of labour power .
 Politically, for vote-catching purposes, the parties which seek to win elections have to pay lip-service to “full employment ” and high wages . The parties seeking to win election must pay lip service to 'full employment ' and 'high wages'
 Full employment and high wages mean reduced profits, but full employment means reduced profits . Capitalism, whether under a Tory or Labour government, can only function when commodities can be sok at a profit . But full employment or high wages means reduced profit, and capitalism cannot function under Labour or Tory
 The government is trying to persuade workers not to take advantage of the labour-shortage by pressing for wage increases . So we have the government at the present time .
 Growing firms offer inducements to entice workers away from rival firms . One form this takes is that expanding firms, which need to recruit more workers, offer extra inducements .
 The British Employers’ Confederation recently made an analysis of the total wages of industrial and commercial Wage-earners . It was summarised in the Times and Financial Times on July 29 .
 A further £1,500 million represents excess payments above agreed rates, paid by employers to attract scarce labour . Another £600 million represents payment for overtime, and another £1.500 million for excess payments .
 Employers would prefer to get the labour they need without having to compete with each other for it . The Government shares their view .
 London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 appeal to workers in all industries and employments not to press for increases of wages or changes in conditions which would have a similar effect .
 Post Office figures given out by the Post Office to the Press about the numbers of houses with and without a teleplione .
 According to the Daily Mail there are over 13,000,000 homes without a tclephone . Over 13,00,000 people in the UK are without a phone .
 The number of people with a residential telephone is less than 34 million . Of whom one million have a shared telephone, one million share a telephone .
 High prices of land in Britain have their counterpart in Germany and Japan . The price of land is due to pressure of demand on limited available areas .
 Near Cologne, beyond the green belt, the price in 1950 was DM8 and is now some five times more . In Kiel it is as high as DM.90 for residential sites . Near Cologne the price of a residential site is now DM8 .
 Pressure of population has increased land values by 4,000 per cent in 10 years . Land continues to increase in value in most parts of Japan on average by 20 per cent annually . In good class residential areas of the city .
 At least half a million controlled houses in 195Y were being let at rents higher than the levels permitted by the Acts . The 7 ints writer estimates that there were at least 500,000 controlled houses .
 G1 industrialisation forced to forego many of the numerous religious holidays that belonged to earlier and less strenuous times . Goodbye Siesta ly .
 Spain's government is making war on the siesta and on keeping Jate hours . Now in Spain the government has made war on siesta .
 A new law requires shops, cinemas and theatres to close ‘earlier’ and it is expected thi the midday siesta will be shortened .
 Sometimes they were cheerful --gratingly, hysterically so, Sometimes apathetic . Today, they were sombre, only wanting to talk ubout their afflictions, to tell each other .
 ‘Should break this up, thought the orderly, this is the worst mood of all. Might as well be dead’ ‘‘’, said the orderly. ‘. Should break up this . should break this . up. up . up’
 Old Harris chimed in, bringing what he always imagined was sunshine and relief into the invalids’ depression . “I'm as helpless as any of you,” he said, he eyes gleaming .
 They fell into silence and sullered themsselves to the attentions of the orderlies, who came from inside the Home to wheel them off, They were a tragic Jolene Jolene .
 Here was it man who had lost his limb because of a trivial scratch at work . Here was another whose back broke when he fell from a ladder on a high job .
 Capital cunnot be blamed for every illness and accident, the fact is that it is responsible for many of them . These human wrecks were some of the unfortupale, who had felt the concentration of cay talisin’s bitterest effects .
 Some of the most common, and persistent ailments which people nowadays suffer are traceable to the stress of modern living . Modern industry and its profit incentive sets for us .
 High time for accidents iy the time when everybody is going to work — they call it the rush hour and it is in the rush that so many accidents happen . In the rush, accidents happen in rush hour .
 Capitalism’s wars maim hundreds of thousands of thousands, and undermine the health of countless others . Capitalism's wars are maiming hundreds of millions of people, and undermining many others' health .
 As long as capitalism lasts, there is little chance of society ever tackling the problem of ill-health and accidents . Cancer research comes a long way behind arnis production in the priorities of modern society .
 Let us look forward to the day when a crippled world can throw away is crutches. And let us look at the day . Let us hope for the day that the world no longer has to be crippled .
 Russia about grandiose schemes the government there has announced for a higher standard of living, shorter working hours, free bread, free housing, free transport, free gas and electricity, etc., all by 1980 or thereabouts .
 It may not have had that effect on governments and political commentators, but it certainly set them wondering what is the purpose of the manoeuvre and the pressure behind it .
 It seeks not only to demonstrate that the Soviet Union is in the lead and intends to stay there, but also to create a new ideological dynamic . China has come to the conclusion that they must look to China for agressive and bold leadership .
 A war would not prevent the triumph of Communism; but the cost would be so great in misery that it cannot even be considered . There must be no war, says the author of the book .
 This includes even trying to come to terms with the United States with the time being with the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Pekin seeks short cuts, aid Moscow, which fears them, having so much to lose . Here, the interpretation of the hidden meaning of the Manifesto itself has to be interpreted for the Russian and Chinese governments .
 The real aims of the Russia-China group of expanding capitalist Powers are proclaimed in terms of a supposed desire to help the workers; oppose colonialism and promote world Communism . Western capitalist interest in such things as oil and markets and air routes and Strategic frontiers is presented to the workers in terms
 The Manifesto can then be seen as a counter-blast to Western propa-. ganda and an endeavour to strengthen Russia against its threateningly powerful Eastern ally, We must also remember that when governments draw up programmes and make promises of blessings to come they have their anxious eyes on their
 Kruschev has one of Russia’s own " colonies" much on his mind, Eastern Germany . The Russian prime minister was speaking at the time of the assassination .
 Russian workers flock westwards in their thousands to the Russian paradise . There the workers, instead of looking East to Russia, flock to the West .
 Only a year ago Kruschev was announcing the abolition of income tax . In 1952 the Daily Worker had splash headlines like those with which it greeted the latest version .
 Workers in Britain ought to be well-versed in the methods used by a privileged class to safeguard its privilege by promises of better times for the workers . Workers in the UK should be aware of how privileged class protects its privilege .
 It should not be necessary to say that there is always a snag about these promises, it should be said . "There are always a snags about promises. It should be necessary, there are always been a snag"
 An economic blizzard blows up, or a war; or re-armament has to have priority . Or the multiplication of money wages only means were were were pounds to buy the same goods at higher prices .
 Russia is supposed to have first got rid of capitalism, then built up Socialism, and is now wavering towards Communism . Russia is said to have built up socialism, but has now turned to Communism .
 Both evolved the practice of giving the name Socialism to State Capitalism . State Capitalism evolved from socialism to state capitalism .
 The State Capitalism that Russia had was falsely labelled ‘Socialism’ Later on, Russia had been falsely labelled as “Socialism,” an afterthought with an obvious political propaganda purpose . Russia’s State Capitalism was later labelled “socialism”
 Lenin announced that, because of the shortage of specialists for industry, the government had to pay them high salaries, so the “equal wage ” principle was suspended . Within a year of promising equality Lenin announced .
 Lenin’s words: ‘Not to be a change of principle but a regretted temporary suspension. But it was, in Lenin's words, not to be changed . Lenin said: 'It was not a change to principle, but a regretful temporary suspension’
 He did not at. time time try to cover it up but candidly admitted that it was a “retrograde step,” forced upon them .
 If now Kruschev promises that some time in the future inequality is to be reduced it must be weighed against the forty-year-old pledge made and broken by Lenin . Lenin's pledge to reduce inequality was broken by the same pledge he made to the West .
 What we face then is not the image vf the future Russia presented by Kruschev but the present reality . The future Russia is now a reality, writes Alexander Nekrassovsky .
 Not a “ Socialist” economy moving towards Moneyless Communism, but the government which has just re-introduced the death penalty for currency offences . The death penalty has just been reintroduced to currency offences in Britain .
 Forecasts of free housing, free transport, etc. may look attractive, but in the real world of the struggle over wages in relation to prices they have a very different look . Free housing and free transport are attractive but in reality, they are not .
 In Russia, most workers spend on rent between 3 per cent. and 5 per cent of the family income . In Russia rents are kept at a very low level .
 Government policy is to have very high prices for clothes and socalled “luxury goods’s” goods . But along with very low rents it is government policy to have high prices .
 Daily Worker reports that by 1980 Russian workers will have “free education at all educational establishments; free medical reviews .. . including the supply of medicines ” It is only a development that capitalism can carry without difficulty and, indeed with advantage to the employers .
 The suspension in 1957 of repayment of interest and capital on the Russian Government bonds was a prelude to the Kruschev promises for 1980 .
 The period of “freezing’s” is for 25 years, which carries us up to the early 1980's . The "freezing" period is 25 years .
 David Floyd stated that the total accumulated amount of these government loans was £23,500 million, and the annual interest payment to the bondholders was £640 million .
 Russian workers were alleged to have welcomed the suspension, though it was their own savings that were involved through the year-long practice of calling on them to make a voluntary investment of one or two weeks’ pay .
 Pope and Czar, Metternich and Guizot, Fr:nch Radicals and German police-spies. Pope and . Czar . Meternich and . Guizots . Metternch and . Gizot . Radicals. Radicals . and
 It was a spectre right enough; both in being a danger for the ruling class and in being exaggerated and distorted in their eyes ‘almost out of recognition’ 'Almost out of recognisable’
 Capitalism has grown from a European to a world-wide system, capitalism has grown to a global system . Capitalism has become a global economic system, with the rise of communism .
 Russia, America, Europe and the other Powers forced into mutual protective alliance by the growth of a Socialist working class in all countries bent on ending capitalism . But we still have to wait on the future to see Russia and America .
 Not Lord Citrine, if we are to judge by his recent speech in the House of Lords . He is a former minister of state of state in the UK .
 This is lamentable, because 1 do not think that really broad-minded policy can ever come from the bottom . For a socialist analysis of war read SOCIALIST PARTY AND WAR 1/3 post paid .
 Trade union official's views are held by many others in the head offices of trade unions . It would partly account for the yawning gap which exists in many unions between officials and the rank-and-file .
 He delivered a swingeing attack on the workers for their ignorance of economics .
 The average worker has not the least realisation of the dangers of inflation . The average person has not been realised of the danger of inflation, says Mr Osborne .
 He does not understand that the economy can get out of hand and that savings can disuppear overnight . He doesn't understand that savings are worth less than a quarter of their value .
 Perhaps the workers would show more concern about the fate of savings if the system we live under allowed him to accumulate any savings worth mentioning . Perhaps the system should be more focused on the future of savings .
 Workers are paid only enough to keep them able to do the work required of them and to bring up the next generation of wage-earners . But since one of the basic laws of capitalism is that the workers are not protected from savings, the protection of savings is academic .
 Those who have savings, e., the capitalists, will do their level best to see that nothing happens to them even if sometimes, since capitalism is essentially an anarchic system, they are not altogether successful . The capitalists, e.r. e. v. capitalists, are doing their
 Lord Citrine had better be more careful about upbraiding the workers for their ignorance . The Queen should be careful not to upbraide the workers .
 If they take him at his word, and find out the real nature of the present system of society, their next step will be to end it and introduce Socialism, he says .
 Socialists have pointed out many, many limes the absurd misuse of words when a ruling class arms itself with weapons like bombs . London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 . 2007 like bombs and then claims that is simpl, taking ‘defensive’ precautions .
 The odd thing is that any ruling class, and its tame propagandists, can see this perfectly well— when the actions of any other class are being discussed . One example was seen recently in the Times .
 The Times leader-writers have very often discussed Britain's * defence preparations, the “defence” estimates, the country’s “ defence” forces, and su on .
 Indonesian ruling class forgotten of the corruption scandal . But all this was forgotten when the . executive of the Indonesian . ruling class. was forgotten .
 President Sukarno got Russia to agree to supply him with modern military aircraft . Sukarna got Russia's permission to buy him modern military planes .
 Indonesian claim that these were merely for ‘defensive’ purposes was seen as a hollow pretence . Indonesian claim was seen at once as once as an empty pretence. Indonesia's claim that this was merely for 'defensive' purposes is seen as hollow .
 What was obscure to the leader-writers when it happened under their noses in Britain became crystal clear in the distant lands of southeast Asia . It was the same thing that happened under the noses of the leaders in Britain .
 Jet bombers that are as advanced as any in the world have nothing defensive about them . West New Guinea provides the motive for the attack .
 Obviously, as the leader says, the bombers have nothing defensive about them . Obviously, they are modern yet yet have nothing to do with it .
 In a world where millions are hungry, one would have thought that the rich would try to conceal their more exlravagant excesses of over-eating .
 Attemp:s to develop his ideas led to endeavours to explain the poverty and misery of the working class . Capital, from the time of publication of Wealth of Nations, led to the development of Capital .
 One was a condemnation and a criticism of conditions—this led to ideas about Socialism . One was condemned and criticized conditions . Another was a criticism and criticism of the conditions .
 The other was a pessimistic resignation, accepting the conditions and declaring them to be the result of the working of natural laws . Both were pessimistic, accepting that the conditions were the result .
 Malthus was responsible for two important works . In 1820 his Principles of Political Economy was published preceding by some 22 years his Essay on the Principle of Population, first published in 1798 .
 Franklin says there is no bounds to the prolific nature of plants or animals, but what is mad2 by their crowding and interfering with each other's means of subsistence .
 Population has a constant tendency to incr2a52 beyond the means of subsistence . It follows from this, he says, that population has a tendency to increase .
 Malthus says population doubled every 25 years in 1A America . Population doubled in 25 years, population doubled in 50 years, he says . Population of 1A U.S. doubled in 100 years .
 The natural increase of population therefore took place like the increase in a sertes of numbers—1, 2, 4, 4. The natural rise of population was like the rise of numbers .
 Malthus says it is impossible to increase the produce of the soil in such a ratio . On the other hand, he says it would be impossible for the soil to be increased in proportion .
 Under favourable conditions we may suppose that by improving the land already under cultivation, and by utilising the comparatively poor and neglected land, it would be possible to increase yields considerably .
 Population can double in twenty-five years periods, but the increase could not be expected to be more rapid than is represented by the series of numibers-1, 2, 3 and 4 .
 Population can increase in g2ometrical progression, the means of subsistence can increase only in anihmetical progression . To sum up, whereas population can . increase in . g2metrical progression . population . increase .
 Population for Malthus, therefere is limited by the means of subsistence . Population is limited to those who have the means to survive .
 As a result of the tension inherent in the contrast between the . contrast between these two rates of increase, there is a tendency for population to increase beyond the means of subsistence . The tension is the tension between these rates of . increase and the rate of increase . increase .
 The result is that population increases in any country when the mean, cf subsistence increase, wheiher 2s 4 result of more intensive syvriculture. the import of food, or changes in the distribution of national wealth. The result of intensive farming is the result of changes in
 Prevenlive checks are those which are deliberately undertaken, such as refusal to marry, and what Malthus calls the postponement of marriage, moral restraini.i. Preven live checks are the ones deliberately undertaken by deliberately .
 In the cultivation of land, assuming that the technique remains unchanged, the technique is used to cultivate land .
 Malthus argued that each successive addition of capital and labour appiied to i beyond a ceftain amount (the opimumn . expenditure upon a particular technique) produces a smaller increment of yield .
 Beyond the optimum expenditure further increments of capital and labour no longer produce equal additions of yield but progressively diminishing ones . Beyond optimum spending, further increments are no longer producing equal additions to yield, but progressively decreasing ones .
 The conditions remain unchanged, but additions of expenditure prove less profitable, says the government .
 The expenditure of £1,000 of additional capital produces an additional product of £300 . A second £1.04"") wall will produce only £300; that of a third £1,.000 wall produce no more than £200, and so on. A third of a
 Jt assumes that the productive technique remains unchanged, an assumption which 1s contrary to all evidence . Jt. assumes that . the productive techniques remain unchanged .
 Malthus himself says that this ‘law’ is valid only so long as agricultural techniques remain unchanged . In fact, he says this “law” is valid so long if agricultural techniques are unchanged .
 It would be difficult to find a period since Malthus wrote the essay, during which advanced countries’ technique of production has not been corlinucusly changing .
 The annual conterenes of the SPA was held in Vienna from June 6 to 9, 1961 . The show was hosted by the Vienna government .
 Ownership of the means of production is no longer the only question which is decisive . Ownership no longer only question that is decisive for the working people of our times, it says .
 Pittermann seems to be oblivious of the fact that capital is not a thing, not some dead object, but a peculiar social relationship between man and man . Capital is not an object but a social relationship with man .
 Despite the S.P.A.’s boasted many decades of activity, the “ factor labour” has so far not yet found recognition . The “factor labour’ has not yet been recognised .
 It would seem that this representative of " Socialism" too had never heard of capitalist conditions and of the capitalist mode of production .
 Proksch distinguishes between the present questions of the day and the fundamental issue, i.e.. the essential aim of Socialism . Proksh distinguishes between present questions and the issue of socialism .
 Proksch sees in the new formulation of labour rights a fundamental task of Socialism . Strange it is. however, that a Sociatist, however, claims to be one-—sees in the New formulation of Labour rights .
 Pittermann, Proksch and consorts’ concept no longer exists . But apparently such is no longer the 'Pittermann' concept, if ever it has been .
 It will be understood that at a party conference questions of the day are discussed . Party conference questions will be discussed, says Labour leader .
 Socialist principle must ever be allpresent and all-transcending, says Socialist Party leader .
 Sadiy was missing in the speeches and discussions at the said party conferencz.z. This, however, was Sadiy missing from the speeches . Sadiy is a member of the Sadiy family .
 Allusion to the abolition of the exploitition of man by man through the wages and money system was designedly shunned in order not to give offence in any quarter . Rather had one the impression that any allusion to . the . real aim was to . abolish the exploitation of man
 This is nothing less than abandoning the supreme principle, which cannot but please its adversaries . This, however, means nothing less . This . means nothing more than abandoning . The supreme principle of freedom of expression cannot but pleased its adversaries, it says .
 All demands and decisions made at the S.P.A.’s conference will only serve to consolidate the present constitution of society and, if possible, perpetuate it . All demands, decisions made by the party will only . only serve . to consolidate . society's constitution and,
 Edinburgh's shortbread would not sell much shortbread by showing Edinburgh's slums, although there are enough of them . And very nice, too, too; .
 Panorama went there a few months ago, showing up the damp and rotting houses around Arthur Street . The workers pay rent to live with the rats and broken sewer pipes .
 Edinburgh also has dwellings which are not classified as slums, but which aren't much better . And like a lot of other places, it has its prefabs . Edinburgh has its own prefabs.
 Edinburgh City Council Housing Committee says prefabs will be with us for some time yet . The process of removing them is long, and alternative housing has to be promised for the tenants .
 Let nobody be deceived that as the slums come down new housing is bound to take their place . New housing will be built in slums as slums go down . Let's not be deceived, says the government .
 Sometimes the land on which they were built has what is called a high site value . The land on the site has a very high value, and sometimes it has a high value .
 In narrow Kirkgate and the surrounding streets a lot of tenements have been demolished. some of the tenements some of which have been standing for a century or more, have zen demolished .
 No new houses have gone up on the site; instead, a whiskey bond store is being built there . Woolworths are putting up another of their ted and gold shops . No new homes have been built .
 The working class, although they build the beautiful mansions and palaces, can only afford to live in the slum or the prefab, or the council house, or a little semi-detached .
 Workers have only one method of getting their living by selling their energies and skills to the capitalist class . Simply because workers have only . one way to get their living is to sell their energies to the . capitalist class, workers say .
 The great cities of Scotland are not theirs, nor are the Lochs and Highlands which they sing about . The great city of Scotland is not theirs . It is not Scotland's great cities, nor its great Lochs or Highlands .
 Sad Irish lads may dream of the Lakes of Killarnev, but they are owned by an American capitalist, just as the song said they never could be . Sad Irish boys dream about the Lakes, but American capitalists own them, says the songwriter .
 The working class of the world, in fact, own no country, no city, no land, most of them do not even own the place where they live . Most of the working class do not own any country or city, or even the place they live in .
 No use to approach that problem with just another slum clearance scheme. No use use to . approach that . No use of . just another . slum clearing scheme. The problem is not solved.
 It needs a world in which society’s first concern is for the security and happiness of the human race . It needs to be a world where society is first concerned about the security of the world .
 The prefabs were supposed to be temporary, but they have been temporary too long . They have been in place for too long, with many of the world's biggest problems .
 Professor Kaufman took the best part of thirty years to produce seven volumes . Kaufman amassed a wealth of facts regarding the origins and the nature of Israelite religion—Judaism .
 Many of these facts are incorporated in this abridgement, which makes fascinating reading . One wonders what was left out of the book, which includes many of the facts .
 This is the first time that any part of Professor Kaulman’s major work on Judaism has been published in any other language but Hebrew . The work is published in Hebrew .
 There is a good argument in this book and much to cogitate over . For those concerned with Judaism as the first monotheistic religion from which sprang Christianity and Islam, there is much to consider .
 Socialists will value this book in much the same way as Fraser's Golden Bough, and Darwin's Origin of Species, as an explanation .
 Primitive Magic was early man’s way of endeavouring to deal with the things he did not understand, and as he became more sophisticated his superstitions hardened into religion . Primitive magic was a way of dealing with things he didn't understand .
 Pantheistic and polytheistic to start with and then Monotheistic, today we have variants all along the line, enough of them to make soup firms’ varieties look sick .
 In the early days of propertied society, organised religion in the Middle East gave rise to science . Science is today busy burying religion beneath a mountain of facts .
 All of this has been brought about by man endeavouring to come to grips with the problems that confronted him . All of the world's problems have come to an end, writes Simon Cowan .
 Homo Sapiens has solved most of his problems, and we are confident that he will continue to do so . Homo Sapien has solved many of the world's problems, we say . We hope to continue to find the best way to cope with the challenges we face .
 Latin America—The Balance of Race Redressed, by Halcro Ferguson for the Institute gf Race Relations. Latin America .
 Only British newspaper that regularly covers Latin American affairs is The Observer . The Observer is a highly informed student of what is going on “south of the border”
 It is regrettable that the author makes no attempt to define his meaning of the term race . The author of this article does not attempt to .
 It is far too “loaded” a word to leave to the reader's personal interpretation of the book's contents .
 There is nothing in present day Latin America to compare with the specific discrimination on grounds of colour to be found in the Southern States of America or the Republic of South Africa . Fortunately, there is nothing that can be compared to the discrimination found in South America .
 It would be a mistake, however, to think this is due to some kind of moral superiority . It's not due to moral superiority, but it's due to the fact that it's a problem .
 From Mexico down to Paraguay the Spanish speaking descendants of the conquistadors have exerted a repressive social, religious and linguistic domination over their Indian subjects . PreColombian culture was not inferior to that of their conquerors .
 Mr Ferguson likens the break-away of the Spanish colonies under the leadership of Bolivar and San Martin to the current White-Settler .
 As Central and South America undergo their national bourgeois revolutions we are likely to witness the rise of the Indian majority as a key political factor with the subsidiary demand for literacy and equal rights of language .
 Despite the fact that numerically the peasants were preponderant in both Mexico of 1910 and Russia of 1917 it is an error to equate the respective Struggles of that period with that period . The peasants were pre-emphasised in 1910 and 1917 .
 In the words of Rudolf Sprenger, “ The Russian Revolution was a bourgeois revolution without the bourgeoisie.” The Russian revolution was the 'bourgegege without the bourgeois' The revolution in Russia was the first of its kind .
 In Mexico's case it was not a question of a fundamental change in the social basis of society, which is what is what we understand by the word revolution . In Mexico, in Mexico, the change in society was not fundamental, it was social change .
 Rather was it one of the last of the great peasant revolts doomed to failure by the inexorable laws of social development . The revolt was a peasant revolt, but it was doomed to fail by social development, the historian says .
 You seem to be running with the hares and hunting with the hounds . This would be the only logical position that your party could take, but as it is now you seem to have run with them .
 Capitalism ts 4 social system in which most people have to go to work for wages in order to live . This means that they arc forced to sell their mental and physical energies to an employer .
 Workers are forced to struggle for the best conditions for the sale of their labour power . This means that they must struggle for shorter hours. less intense working pace, higher wages and so on. Thus the workers are forced .
 Workers are the only weapon which workers can use under capitalism to defend and improve their working conditions . Workers can use the weapon of capitalism to improve working conditions under capitalism, they say . Workers need to use this weapon to protect themselves and their workers, they claim .
 It is true that trade unions do many things which are quite opposed to working class interests . Some of them help capitalism run more smoothly .
 We opposed trade union participation in the war cflort and dater their support of government productivity drives . Thus we opposed trade unions participation in war . We opposed unions' support of the war .
 When Socialism 15 established trade unions will have no morc the need for them will have disappeared . Until that day, life under capitalism i> a hatile, and workers must fight it with the hest weapon available .
 Chairman of Imperial Chemical Industries visited Russia on behalf of his Company . He reported on some very interesting observations he had made .
 Mr Chambers wanted to $22 for himself how the people lived and asked for perinission to visit their hemzs . The one exception was in the sphere of actual living conditions .
 The vast blocks of flats erected in and around Moscow represent by European standards 4 low level for new accommodation . Moscow is home to the world's largest block of flats .
 It seems to be the general rule for husband and wife to do a full day’s work and the children are left at a nursery or creche or in the care of some relation .
 Statistics would show that many more hours are worked per thousand of the total population than in the United Kingdom or in Western Germany, Mr Chambers said .
 Clothing and toilet articles are expensive, he said . Meat and pouliry was of z00d quality and not unreasonable in price, he added . Clothing, toilet articles and clothing are expensive .
 Mr Chambers has clearly shown that this country organises its industrial affairs just like any other capitalist couniry . The claim that Socialism exists in the Soviel Union is disproved by the evidence from Mr Chamber's visit .
 Its workers, just like ‘the working class elsewhere, have to sell their power to labour,’ says David Cameron . ‘The working class has to sell its power to its workers,‘ he says .
 There is commodity production, private property and the same sort of social problems as there are social problems in the U.S. economy .
 Capitalism exists in the Soviet Union-and until such time that its Working Class understand and desire Socialism, poverty and insecurity will be the lot of the workers there . Until such a time that the working class understands and desire socialism, poverty, insecurity will remain a problem .
 This regulates the behaviour between older and younger brother and other members of the family . It subjugates them all to the head of the household . This regulates behaviour between brothers and sisters .
 The system of responsibilities goes all the way through society to the head of the State . The head of state is compared to the father of a family, says the BBC .
 This lack of religious belief does not help them from pandering to even the most stupid of superstitious practices when it suits their interests . Witness the recent episode of Buddha's tooth .
 Kandaranaike, the Prime Minister, and members of her Cabinet took a prominent part in grecting the eylon .
 The relic is half the size of the Chinese relic but equally venerated in the Buddhist world . It is about half a million years old, but is equally revered in Buddhism .
 The Chinese Government can very weil understand the excitement and keenness of the Chinese Government at the possession of this,relic for it .
 The Ceylonese rulingclass will consider this acquisition very fortunate indeed .
 Buddha's tooth helps whip up religious fervour, and this is channelled into support of the Buddhist church . The Buddhist church, in Ceylon, is 4 pillar of the State, in Sri Lanka .
 A “must” for all those wishing to know just how not to solve the problems of society . A ‘must’ for all . Those wishing to learn just how to solve problems of . society .
 Acting and presentation good in some parts, but in others, oh so awkward and stultified 4S . 4S to draw embarrassed titters even from i sympathetic audience .
 The Crowning Experience is a Moral Re-Armament Production . It is a moral re-armament production . And the plot? —Well, when we tell-you that The Crowned Experience is .
 President Hoover was a special adviser to Presidents Hoover and Roosevelt . He was also an adviser to President Lincoln Lincoln and President Roosevelt .
 Broadway singer Muriel Smith portrays the leading part of the good lady, here called Emma Tremaine . The musical is set to be released on Broadway in 2015 .
 This leads to a first class row with Emma when he tries to form a ‘Cell’ in Fmma’s own college, and gets thrown off the campus for his trouble . Fmma is thrown off campus for the trouble .
 "Everything comes right in the end, of course, because they all somehow find their way to an MRA conference on Mackinac Island and become * changed .” liven the stubborn Charlic .
 In a matter of minutes he has switched his worship from the God in the Kremlin to the one at Mackinac . He has been praying for the Russian leader in a moment .
 There is a tear-jerking session with politicians and leading figures confessing their past dishonesties . They swear to uphold and apply the principles of MRA in the future .
 The political simpleton will find much in this film to encourage him in his ignorance . The film will be released in cinemas on Friday at 8.30pm .
 Apart from the scientifically untenable “God ” idea there is the fatuous and futile notion that the MRA * Absolutes ” will give us the peaceful and happy world which we all so desperately want . Apart from . the scientifically quite untenable . “ God
 Of course, it is desirable to be honest, to harbour no hatred or ill-feeling, and to be free from fear . Of course. Of course it is . To be honest and free of fear .
 No doubt we have all felt the strain imposed by having to cheat and lie at some time or other . No one but a madman really approves of it, and no one else really approves it . No doubt .
 How nice it would be if the statesmen were to be honest with each other -- a sort of “ cards en the table” policy .
 It is only in posing and answering such questions as these that we can hope to achieve a satisfactory explanation of the bloodshed, suspicion and misery in which modern society abounds .
 Liberal Government with the support of the Tories called out the troops . Police were used to break up strikers meetings . The Liberal Government called out troops .
 Industrial Unionists are among those hardest hit by the great events of August . The industrial unionists have been hit hard by the events of the past month .
 They have witnessed a strike in the industry most able to paralyse society . The strike is a strike that has paralyzed society for the first time ever .
 We have never denied that they could accomplish this. That it could paralyse society has been amply demonstrated . But then we have always denied that it could do this. We have also never denied the possibility of it .
 Industrial Unionism, with its most perfect weapon, the General Strike, can accomplish nothing more than general paralysis . However, events have gone on to prove our claim that, considered as an instrument for taking and holding’ the means of life Industrial Unionists, can only accomplish general paralysis
 The ‘riotous mob’ of August 1911 were an appalling power for destruction—everybody knew that. ‘Riots’ were ‘appalling power of destruction,’ the author says .
 When it comes to taking and holding and operating one shillingsworth of the productive wealth of the capitalist class, they are powerless . But when they are taking one shillingingsworth, they're powerless .
 They can destroy and die, but to hold and operate they must live . The difference is in the difference between these two, and in the importance of these two .
 The final lesson, and the greatest of all, is to be found in the crushed hopes of the Industrialists. the Syndicalists, the Anarchists. The Anarchists . The Anarchist. the Anarchist .
 Socialists claim that the means of production must be seized in the teeth of the armed forces . The Socialists hold that the preliminary must be to get control of the . armed forces by capturing the machinery of government .
 Comrades Grant and Hardy held an inspiring meeting . To an audience of nearly 400, they met in front of 400 people .
 The audience put some excellent questions and took part part in discussion . The audience also took part in some discussion .
 Good literature sales were made and a collection of £25 odd was taken up .
 The Propaganda Committee arranged this meeting and plans are being made for a further Demonstration for Socialism on October 18th .
 Literature Sales Committee sells literature at Earls Court during the Russian Exhibition .
 Public Meeting to discuss social consciousness in Wales . Meeting will be held at 7.30pm October 18th at Westminster Hall in West Midlands .
 Plans include a combined canvassing and propaganda trip to Southsea on August 27th and an indoor public meeting in the Autumn at Wembley . This will be the Branch’s first attempt at indoor propaganda and careful arrangements will be necessary .
 All branch members will be informed and urged to give their utmost support . Branch members will have to be informed of the decision .
 Branch has held a series of very successful meetings at Gloucester Road with attentive audiences and literature sales showing a marked improvement on_previous seasons .
 Branch members will do the best to exploit it to the full, says Branch members . We hope so and anyway, anyway, we hope so, anyway .
 Canvassing efforts continue and the practice is to send a team to selected areas month by month, with one comrade following up the contacts made . Canvass efforts continue .
 Some good contacts have been made, but the Branch is restricted by manpower shoriage . Absent Comrades please note. Some good contact has been made with some good contacts .
 Many young married workers are very worried about the future of being unemployed . They are worried about losing overtime work, which they fear will take them off .
 LONDON OUTDOOR MEETINGS Sundays Hyde Park 3 pm & 6 pm East Street, Walworth September 3rd & 17th September 10th & 24th Clapham Common 3 pm Beresford Square, Woolwich 8 pm Thursdays Tower Hill, 12.30—
 MITCHAM Lecture The White Hart, Cricket-Green Thursday September 21st 8pm . LEWISHAM LECTURE Davenport Hall, Davenports Hall, Rushey Green, SE6. MITCHam Lectures The White . Hart .
 UNe Case for Sanity Back poge poeenaT The Stagnant Society een This Yea rs 1. Looe ting . UNe case for sanity back to the U.S.
 Eccles 2nd Monday in month 7.30 pm, 5 Gaskell Road, Eccles. M Evers, 64 Pennard Road, WI2, ECCLES . Eccles is home to M. Evers and his family .
 Ist and 3rd Mondays (2nd & 16th Oct) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street . Ist, 3rd and 4th Mondays (Mornings) 7:30 pm .
 NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (iith & 25th October) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street, London .
 2nd and 4th Mondays (9th & 23rd Oct) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road, Southend .
 Ist and 3rd Monday (2nd & I6th Oct) in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St. Cottis, 19 Kingswood Chase, Leigh-on-Sea, Essex, Essex . The Crypt is located at The Crypt in St. Charles Street,
 Mondays 8pm at Barham Old Court, Barham Park, near Sudbury Town Station, Wembley, Wembley . P Mellor, 13 Waterloo Place, Brymmill, Swansea, is at the centre of the story .
 2nd and 4th Thursdays (12th & 26th Oct) in month 8 pm, Salisbury Road Schools, Manor Park, E12. Westham .
 21d and 4th Fridays (13th and 27th Oct) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason's Hill, SEI8.30pm .
 Ramsay, 9 Milne Gardens Eltham, SE9, Thursday 19th Oct 8pm, ‘White Hart’’ Mitcham Cricket Green. ‘The White Hart,’�
 To pick up awnewspaper is to find a daily catalogue of wars and thicats of wars, hatreds and atrocities, murder and violence .
 In Berlin, the two big power groups face up to each other like squabbling children, each trying to shout “ Yah” louder than its rival, each daring the other to strike the first blow .
 In the Congo, still rent with violence, the U.N. decides to intervene and chooses to do so in a sordid scramble of colonialism mixed with petty economic rivalry . The whole sorry business made worse by the usual intrigues of the big capitalist powers .
 Russia proceeds to explode nuclear devices at a frenzied rate, sending clouds of poison into the atmosphere to threaten the health of all the earth’s inhabitants, and of even the unborn . Russia, after a short period of quiet, proceeds to exploding nuclear devices .
 Both have been spending astronomical sums in perfecting the ways of delivering bombs . Between times they have both been spending .
 Huge crowds have been cheering astronauts of both sides for their heroism, apparently oblivious that behind it all lies the terrible threat that missiles can now be directed with pin-point accuracy to annihilate places .
 There is uneasy peace in Tunisia, but in Algeria the dreadful carnage go¢o on . Algeria has been hit by a wave of violence since the fall of the Arab Spring .
 Laos has dropped out of the news as quickly as it came into it, but could just as easily erupt again . Laos could erupt again if it comes back into the news .
 In South America, Brazil looked as though it might develop into another Cuba, but has not done so, at least for the moment . In East Africa, the Rhodesias and South Africa, things remain only outwardly quiet .
 The fact is that we are hardly surprised any more at anything anywhere. It's the fact that we hardly surprise any more than anything anywhere, says CNN.com .
 The indoor programmes of branches of branches are more ambitious than ever as the meetings advertised in this issue will show . Even more encouraging are the preparations for the winter .
 Most encouraging of all in these days of alleged political apathy, when even the big guns of capitalist politics find it hard to hold a good meeting, is the fat that we have run two really successful indoor rallies .
 The third of this month is being held this month and we are confident that it will prove more successful than those previously . It is a fitting conclusion to the fine summer season and an auspicious opening to an even finer winter one .
 Moscow announced the resumption of nuclear tests on Monday . Moscow announced it had resumed the tests in a bid to boost Russian confidence .
 The Russians said that it was all America’s fault - they had to let off their bombs to show that they were ready to defend themselves against Western imperialism . The Russians had to release bombs to prove that they could defend themselves .
 Washington and London professed shocked dismay. and anxiely for the future of the human race. Washington . London and Washington professed shock dismay .
 4 simple soul. Could have been excused for assuming that neither Britain nor America had ever tested 4 bomb .
 There was a lot of military pressure in both Russia and the United States, to resume the tests . Russia and U.S. were both under pressure to resume tests .
 It was certain that the first power to break the ban would come in for a propaganda lambasting . The first power in the U.S. would be certain that it was certain .
 We could, therefore, expect the Americans to derive maximum political valuc from Khruschev’s bangs, and the Russians to do their best to play the thing down . The Russians will play the event down, but the Americans will play it down .
 For that is typical of the cynicism with which capitalism’s propagandists regard such matters of life and death . For that, it's typical of that kind of cynicism .
 "At the end of it all, when the bombs have exploded and the propaganda points made, we are back where we started," says David Cameron . "We are back at the beginning of this war," he says .
 Cheddi Jagan came out on top in the elections in British Guiana, to set the old DELEGATE MEETING 52 Clapham High Street, London, SW4 October 7th & 8th Saturday 2 6pm, Sunday 1 1am Ipm,
 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. is back in power with an absolute majority, Dr. King says . He says he has been restored to respectability and is now in office with a majority of voters .
 Cuba is lined up as a potential source of investment from Britain, the U.S. and Russia . Cuba will accept this from anywhere—Britain, the United States, Russia, Russia .
 Jagan knows that some capital would be scared off if he went ahead with what he once professed as his principles of wholesale nationalisation . Jagan says that some of his principles would be scuppered off .
 Like most newly independent states, British Guiana has its eyes upon foreign interests in her mineral wealth . So he is soft-pedalling on the issue .
 A false step the cther and he will be dubbed a laekey of Western imperialism, he says . A false move will be deemed a false step and he's dubbed a 'laekey'
 When the moment of decision comes for British Guiana, there will be no lack of wordy journalists to spill their particular brand of beans .
 Guianese workers are cutting sugar and mining the bauxite and the rest and still, as ever, getting precious little out of it . But there will be a shortage of people to point out that all the time is being cut the sugar, mining and mining . The Guian
 Mr Gaitskell will climb into the ring at Blackpool to disprove the already disproven theory that they never come back . Labour Conference takes place at the end of the year .
 Mr Cousins will be left alone to uphold the cause of C.N.D. and that Mr Gaitskell will be champion once more .
 A future Labour government would be guided in its actions by the necessities of British capitalism, says London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 .
 A Labo government would keep the bomb, perhaps use it . This means that the Conference might decide against the bomb . But a Labo leader would keep it .
 This was the theme of one of Bevan’s last important specches, to the Confzrence in 1958 . Bevan' last major speech was at the Confrence of Peace .
 There has never been a government which acted otherwise, and never will be as long as the working class support capitalism . The working class supports capitalism, and the government will not act otherwise, says the Labour Party .
 Anybody who took this seriousiy must have been shocked by the recent government decisions to ignore the recommendations of the Civil Service Arbitration Tribunal, to restrict the statutory wage .
 Teachers wasting their time if they are pining for fair play, for there is no such thing in the class war . In fact, the teachers are wasting their . time . Teachers waste their time . in fact, for they are wasting .
 Ministry of Education took over Burnham Committee's functions because it was being too generous to the teachers .
 In terms of the conflict of interest between any employer and his employees, it makes very good sense indeed . But in terms of a conflict of interests between employers and their employees, this makes good sense .
 Teachers as a whole, like manv civil servants and other white collar workers, have always denied the existence of the class struggle . Teachers are not the only ones who are fighting for the better than the better .
 Selwyn Lloyd will be doing his best to teach the new generation of young people . That is one of the things he is trying to teach them .
 It stands out as yet another example of man’s technical ability and his power to acquire knowledge and apply it to solve the problems he faces . Indeed, it stands out .
 Professor Bernard Lovell of Jodrell Bank hardly turned a hair when told of the latest Russian achievement . In the space race these must be formidable, yet such has been the fantastic advance in the last few years .
 The Professor holds the view that a manned flight to the moon is only about five years off and nobody laughs at him for thinking it .
 Not so long ago that the British Interplanetary Society talked with daring optimism of nerhaps a 50 year wait . Yet it is not so long as that it was hoped for 50 years .
 We must view the Soviet feat. But it is against a background of evenis here on earth that we must view it . We must also view it as a historical feat.
 Western diplomats and politicians were doubtless reflecting gloomily on this latest indication of Russian rocket mastery . It was just one more worry to add to their already splitting headache over Berlin .
 Khrushchev exploited to the full by the Soviet ruling class, as a boost to Russian confidence . Be that as it may .
 There is lithe doubt also that American prestigz suffered a corresponding blow . i remains to be seen to what extent, particularly among the newly rising captlalist states, the Guardian of August 8th offers a crumb of comfort to the American rulers .
 Icy have some new and powerful rochess coming inly sefyne in the nest of the Socialist Standard 1961 Rockets’ Galore year or two .
 If Vostock I] was a military weapon, a twelve months start might be technically decisive . A 12-month start might have been technically decisive for the first time .
 In the history of scientific exploration twelve months is the blinking of an eye . In the world's history 12 months is a year .
 The last sentence is true enough, bui how foolish it is to ignore the war-like potentialities of scientific study in a capitalist world . It is foolish to ignore potentialities in the capitalist world.
 This neat little piece of * compartmentising ” just does not face up to the unpleasant reality that there really is no such thing as research for peaceful purposes in private property society .
 Vostock If itself was not a war weapon, it does nevertheless point to the undoubted technical lead currently heid by the Soviets . The military significance of this will not be overlooked by the United States and her N.A.T. allies .
 We can all remember the fear expressed in some sections of the British press that it would be possible to set up 4 military bases on the moon, from which a power would be able to bombard its earthly enemies in 4 future was. The fear expressed was that it was possible that a military
 The sheer power of the present rockets and their accuracy as inter-continental siissiles, give us all a glimpse of the terriiying prospect which we face if we face any time . But even ignoring this possibility, the sheer power and accuracy of the current rockets are .
 Soviet Government announced on August 30th that they would resume nuclear testing and that “ Titov-type “ rockets could be used 10 carry their new superpowerful bombs to any part of the globe .
 An acceleration of the arms race can now be confidently predicted and the space race is part of it . Space race is now part of an acceleration of an arms race that can be predicted .
 Russia will make frantic efforts to catch up and snatch the lead in rocket development, Russia says . Russia lags behind Russia in rocket technology, says Russian space agency .
 There are three very advanced American rockets available: Polaris, Skybolt, and Minuteman- . They are highly mobic, but having warheads of no more than about a megaton yizld .
 U.S. Government has the ideal political excuse to try out 4 greater range of bombs and develop the rockets to carry them .
 All their talk of banning nuclear arms has been so much hypocritical eyewash . So it is clear that the usual dirty and cynical game has been played by both sides over the past two or three years .
 We shall not here take part in the futildebate on the relative advantages of the Russian and American types of rocket . The rocket is a Russian rocket, not a Russian or American .
 Despite all these melancholy develuopments, do not let us lose sight of the tremendous possibilities of rocket propulsion . It is here to stay. and in the year . since the end of the . second World War. we have seen great strides in its develop. ment.
 One thing is certain. will unforiunately suffer perversion and defilement . Lke so many other things in 4 capitalist world. Lke . . . Many things in the world will be perverted and defiled . One thing . is certain .
 JHE WORKERS view the latest ‘crisis’ as a serious matter, but in every other respect it has the appearance .of a farce, represented almost every other year since the end of the war .
 Opposition forget crises also happened when they were the government . Selwyn Lloyd's methods of handling it are evidence of Tory ineptitude and viciousness .
 Tories embarrassed by their promises that it would not happen again when the people were ‘set free’ from Labour government planning and controls . Now find themselves committed to the idea of planning, though this time it is to be by a national economic council, representing government employers and trade unions
 There isn't a single original idea in the new Tory policy, except for variations of detail and emphasis . No indication that they are any better at smoothing out capitalism than were the Labour government .
 Most of Selwyn Lloyd’s speeches and actions might have come from Sir Stafford Cripps . Most of the late Sir Stafford's speeches may have come straight from the late Stafford . Lloyd's speeches and .actions might have . come from Cripp's speeches .
 The manufacturer, if he is to sell his goods, has to offer them at competitive prices . But not so high as to leave the market to cheaper competitors, he says . The manufacturer must offer prices as high as the market will bear, he adds .
 If wages increase too much his profit suffers so he needs something to act as a brake on wage-claims . At present the unemployment brake is missing . If wages rise too much, the profit will suffer from the increase .
 The government is bringing factories and transport to a temporary standstill, at enormous cost in the shape of lost production and profits, and with the risk that the government would lose the next election . But that means bringing factories to a standstill at a cost, and the risk of losing production
 Cripps’ appeal to the workers not to claim higher wages, and the policy of raising the price level by currency inflation . Two policies that had looked promising for a time were appealing to workers .
 Manufacturers know they can count on steadily rising prices for what they sell . They do not have to be adamant about wage increases induced by the rising cost of living .
 Cripps was eventually persuaded to devalue the pound in order to make it cheaper for the foreigner to “buy British ” But in the nature of things, this is a remedy that cannot be safely repeated every few years .
 The other part of the Cripps plan that has been copied by all his successors is to ask for more output per worker . The plan has been repeated by all successors to the government .
 The idea behind this is that provided all the additional output is sold, it would permit wages to rise without cutting into profit . The idea is that providing all the extra output would permit wage rises without cutting profits .
 There should be no increase of income from profits and rent, and rises of wages should only be asked for when productivity is increased or to attract workers .
 In 1949 he condemned wage increases aimed at keeping up with the cost of living . In particular he objected to workers in one industry demanding increases to keep up with workers in another industry .
 The present government has no hope of ‘getting T.U.C. support for a wage freeze,’s long been one of their demands . But it calculated that the T.u. would be unable to resist the bait of “ planning,” because that
 This isn’t the first time a government has exercised its power to withhold agreement and thus delay wage increases proposed by wages councils . The government has also delayed wage rises proposed by wage councils .
 It was done in 1957 in respect of National Health Service workers, and back in 1948/9 the same delaying tactics were used by the Minister of Labour .
 It took nearly a year for the retail food council and the hairdressing council to reach agreement in 1948 . But the Minister, Mr Isaacs, referred back certain of the proposals .
 The councils sent them back to him again almost unaltered . The Minister rejected them again in August, 1949 . The councils were sent back to the Minister again almost .
 The T.U.C. reported that after a meeting with the Minister the difficulties were removed, and the increases were put into operation in October, 1949, after nearly a year's hold-up .
 Shop Assistants Union had threatened to embarrass the Labour Government, by putting down an emergency resolution for the Trades Union Congress . According to Press reports at the time, the union had put down a resolution .
 The unions are quite right to continue the wage struggle but they are only deceiving themselves if they think that there would be no restriction on wage increases if Selwyn Lloyd had not put it there .
 Wages are always restricted; basically by the fact that they represent the value of the mental and physical energies the worker sells . At any given moment by the demand, and the amount of unemployment, wages are restricted .
 Employers aim to keep wages down to a level which leaves a surplus for profit . Employers have to aim at keeping wages below a level that leaves a profit for profit.
 This is capitalism, and it is idle to pretend that it can be made to operate as if its purpose was to provide constantly rising real wages without regard to profit . This is capitalist capitalism, says David Cameron .
 In practice, trade unions are forced to settle at some figure far less than they claim . Railway unions under the Labour Government claimed 12s.d. in 1948 and eventually put off with a few shillings for the lowest paid only .
 Government hopes that imposed standstill on government employees will stiffen resistance of employers in private industry . Government hopes to stiffen the resistance of private industry in private sector .
 Unions are anxiously watching what the government does, but other indicators may be more important . The Prospect for the U.S. government may be the most important indicator .
 Some economists think that if unemployment rose to about 2 per cent. —2} per cent., the unions’ ability to press for higher wages would be curbed . Some of the economists think if unemployment . rose to . 2,000 per cent .
 Unemployment has since crept up and unfilled vacancies have been declining . Unemployed vacancies have also declined in recent months .
 There will not of course be large-scale unemployment, or anything remotely resembling it, but labour should become a good deal easier to obtain in the coming months .
 If the present crisis follows the pattern of the others since the war, the pressure will last for a few months . The crisis is likely to last for several more months, says David Cameron . If the current crisis is similar, it could last for months .
 Profits which have recently been falling will start to go up again because wage increases will be harder to get . Profits will be going up again as wage increases are hard to get, says economist .
 The Chancellor will then announce that we have ‘turned the corner’ and the workers will be invited to rejoice . The Chancellor is then expected to announce that the workers are invited to rejoices .
 Socialist Standard 1961 in the coming . London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard . 1961 Socialist Standard was published in the . coming .
 Bonus shares ‘* does not add to the market value of a company’s shares . It could put increased dividends in the pockets of shareholders . To the Ea THOSE BONUS SHARES .
 Shareholders could receive £200,000 dividends in the form of 20 per cent on 1 million £1 shares . The following financial year the particular company made increased profits, the shareholders could receive 20% on 1m shares .
 The article set out to show how erroneous is the belief that doubling or trebling a company’s shares, by an issue of bonus shares, doubles or trebles the market price of each shareholder . Each shareholder's share price is doubled or tripled .
 All that each shareholder gets from the change is double or treble the number of shares . But with the market price of each share reduced to approximately a half or a third of what it was before .
 The Guardian took up the first criticism after the 1960 Congress, which it said spent its time mainly on issues “almost irrelevant to all the real problems of the Unions,” and which would not even discuss a resolution put down by a small .
 It may well be that it is largely this factor that keeps outside two large Unions, the National Union of Teachers and the Local Government Workers Union . For smaller Unions finance is probably a considerable factor .
 Transport and General Workers voted against the General Council’s recommendations on such issues as armaments . It has been heard less in recent years because the big Unions have been divided .
 If votes at Congress were cast by each Union in proportion to majority and minority opinion on Union executives and among their members, some decisions would go the other way . No doubt .
 Trade unions were regarded by employers and governments with real fear in their infancy . In their infancy they were regarded as revolutionary organizations that threatened property and the social system .
 The danger has been largely contained, partly by concessions and legislation, but also through the aims that the Unions set themselves . Now the danger has largely been contained by the unions .
 The aim of the trade union leaders in each country is to be consulted by the employers in the running of the industry, and by the government in the determination of national economic policy . Instead of thinking of themselves as part of the world working class struggling against the employers and the capitalist system,
 There is, of course, a sort of fatal logic about the direction in which the Unions are going. The Unions » are going, he says .
 If it is accepted that world-wide working class action for Socialism is impossible then it can seem to be ‘realistic’ for the Unions to try to help British capitalism against its foreign competitors, by trying to gain markets for exports .
 All through Congress debates this readiness to think in terms of British interests instead of world working class interests comes out, as ii did for example .
 In the years 1948 to 1950, in response to the appeal of the Labour government, the majority of the delegates accepted it . The majority of delegates accepted Labour's appeal in 1948-1950 .
 Even in 1950, when it was turned down on an E.T.U. resolution, the door was still lef; open . The door still remained open in 1950 .
 The E.T.U. resolution rejected wage restraint but until profits were “reasonably limited,” prices controlled and “positive planning of our British economy ” js introduced .
 Each side needs to test but reluctant to make the first move for fear of political repercussions . So it might have been a clever waiting game, with each side needing to test .
 There is no reason to blame the U.S. for losing the game, nor to suppose that the Americans held out for liumanitarian reasons . For when it came to it, they were just about as ready to let off their bombs again as were the Russians. For when
 We know that all capitalist countries like to describe their policies as being inspired by zeal for human benefits . But we know that they are not all about human benefits, they are about human rights, they say . This is not the case, but it is about the human rights of all people
 Nuclear weapons are not the only weapons of choice as far as nuclear weapons go . But that simply does not even start to Wash as far from nuclear weapons .
 There is one certain way in which Russia, America and the rest could serve human interests, and solve the problem of nuclear warfare at the same time . Russia, U.S. and other nations could solve the nuclear warfare problem together, Vladimir Putin says .
 Capitalist vations build up their armouries because ley must always strive for military supremacy, to defend the economic and commercial interests of their ruling cl:ss. Capitalists build up arsenals to defend their ruling interests, writes David Frum .
 The speakers went on to say that they ure still willing, on terms, to have a hand, with the employers and the government in working out economic plans .
 A Daily Herald editorial puts its finge on the double-edged nature of planning .
 Whether the government will make concessions in order to secure trade union collaboration remains to be seen . Liberal, Tory and financial journals attach a great deal of importance to avoiding a head-on clash with the unions .
 Government should not have behaved as if it wanted a show-down at all costs . Employers know the losses the employers can suffer in widespread strikes . They are not at all happy that the present government should have behaved .
 Trade unions will not usefully change their direction until members themselves think out their class position in capitalism and see that whai is needed is world-wide working class zaction to establish Socialism .
 The alternative, collaboration in each couniry with the government, may end by bringing unions nearer to being what the so-called trade unions are in Russia, part of the governmental machine of capitalism .
 She can keep troops and weapons there handy to move into Kuwait or any other trouble spot in the oil rich, economically vital Middle East .
 The United States wants its missile bases on the Continent, its Polaris ships in Holy Loch, because they cannot allow Russian capitalism to expand freely into Europe . The U.S. wants its missiles bases in Europe, the U.K. says .
 If Russia and America were to settle their differences tomorrow, the day after we would have some other powers at loggerheads . Now thes2 competing economic interests are an essential part of capitalism .
 Once you have armed forces you have weapons, with each force trying for the weapon which will make it the ‘most powerful of the lot’ Each force is trying to find the weapon that will make them the most powerful of all .
 The story behind the development of weapons is a horror story of the weapons development process .
 That is the story to tell the unilateral nuclear disarmers, because it is the hundred p2i cent. reason for not being one of them . That's the reason for the unilateral disarmers to not be one, he says .
 Khruschev and Kennedy have punched a big hole in the casz of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament . Kennedy has punched a hole into the campaign for nuclear disarmament, writes Peter Bergen .
 Let us pose that the C.N.D. had its way, and that the governments of the world agreed to renounce the use and manufacture of Nuclear weapons, All the diplomats would gather at Geneva to sign the instrument of renunciation .
 Germany’s signature to the 1919 treaty which disarmed her was worthless was worthless . The treaty was signed by Germany in 1919, but it was never ratified .
 The powers who signed the Locarno Treaty of friendship in 1924 were very soon at war with each other . The powers whien signed a treaty of friendship but soon became enemies .
 The post war problem of Beflin is chock full of agreements which have been broken or ignored . The post-war problem of the city is full of agreement agreements that have been ignored or ignored by the war .
 The nuclear powers have ignored their 1958 agreement to ban tests . And in the same way, now that it suits their purpos to do so, they have ignored the agreement to test .
 There is no evidence to suggest that they would behave any differently about an agreement to renounce nuclear bombs completely . There is also no evidence that the British government would behave differently .
 The diplomats in themselves might be men of sensitive iMlegrity, It is the disputing nature of capitalist society which forces them to make. and break, their pledges. It is a disputing . nature of capitalism .
 In fundamentals, the policies of capitalist governments never change, although in more superficial matters there are Opportunities to alter their iminediate policy, and they often do so . For example, there is’ lot of evidence that since Stalin's death the Russian ruling class has tended to adopt
 Stalin was one of capitalism’s strong men; his Successors have shown a more subtle touch . Stalin, whatever else can be said of him, was a strong man .
 Moscow’s tough attitude on the tests that little bit more chilling . That is what has made Moscow's tough attitude to the tests seem chilling . The tests have been banned in Russia since 2008 .
 Travellers from the U.S. and Eastern Europe tell the same story of people all in a panic about war . Travellers in the United States and from Eastern Europe say they are worried about the threat .
 We should keep the bomb tests in their perspective, and remember that weapons are not in themselves the cause of war . But we should keep it in mind, remember weapons are in themselves not in itself the cause for war .
 The next conflict will spring from the disputes of capitalism — from the Koreas, the Kuwaits, the Berlins . The next war will spring out of capitalism, says Julian Zelizer .
 In the meantime, with their bomb tests, space shots, subArctic submarines and the rest, the powers are only taking the normal capitalist precaution of arming themselves .
 For the majority of people, happy to keep capitalism going, that is the way they want it . Because for the most of people it is not a matter of concern .
 Archbishop Makarios, the leader of the fight for “liberation,’s now President of Cyprus, takes the lead . Archbishop Makario, the Archbishop of the Cypriot, is now the President of the country .
 Cypriot workers are no more ‘independent’ or “ free” now than they were under British rule, Freedom and Justice says . Another non-paradise is Ghana, Ghana .
 The Coronation oath of the British monarch, to keep the laws and customs of the country, is one which would be rigidly enforced if necessary . The oath would be a rigidly enforceable if necessary.
 Florence Dale was better known to many party members by the friendlier name of Queenie . She joined the party in 1950, becoming first a member of Ealing Branch and later helping to found the new branch at Wembley .
 Queenie was not a speaker or a writer, but she played her full part in the backroom jobs without which the more ‘glamorous” work in the party could not carry on . Queenie played her part in a backroom job without which more “g
 Much of her work was on the party’s Library Committee, looking after our collection of books, and —most essential — seeing that each month the SociaList STANDARD went out to the long list of postal subscribers .
 She also served on the Head Office Social Committee and on many working committees in her branch . She was also a member of the Head of the Social Committee .
 Queenie was an active, warm, humane person who has left many friends in the party to grieve that she will no more listen to the music, and hike over the hill . Queenie's friends say she was active and warm and humane person .
 She worked hard for Socialism and we shall carry on that work, because we know that that that is what she would have wished . We know that, that's what she'd have wished. We will carry on our work .
 To Queenie’s husband, Comrade Leslie Dale, also of Wembley Branch, we offer our sincere, comradely sympathy . Queenie's husband is also a member of the Labour Party's Wembley Branch .
 Only twenty-five years ago the ruling class sacked its then figurehead, Edward VIII, giving him less notice than a well-behaved butler could have expected . Edward VIII showed signs of wanting to ignore the code of behaviour laid down for him and marry a divorced woman .
 If a monarch was dismissed merely for wanting to breach a social code, how much more speedily the ruling class would act against one who contravened the laws made for the benefit of that class . And how much speedily would act if a monarch were dismissed for breaching social codes?
 President Nkrumah is not merely a figurehead, but the chief executive of the Ghanaian ruling class . He is sure of his position so long as he serves his masters well, he says . The Ghanaian president is sure he will be able to continue to serve his masters
 If the exigencies of policy require that opposition politicians shall be jailed without trial, then to jail they go. If that is the case, they will be jailed, he says .
 No pious oaths, however solemn, about upholding freedom and justice can be allowed to stand in the way . And no pious oath of allegiance to the nation can be left standing in the air .
 Nkrumah’s police-state methods do not stop there, he says . The police state did not stop with the anti-strike effort, he adds .
 In the twin port towns of Takoradi and Sekondi, the centres of the strike, “convicted saboteurs” can be jailed for ten years . ‘Sabotators’ can be convicted of ten years in prison .
 Police headquarters reported © that all was quiet in the two towns, and all gatherings of workers were being dispersed . Police said all gatherings were dispersed .
 The Minister for Presidential Affairs warned civil servants that if they stayed out on strike more than ten days they would be sacked and not taken on again . Civil servants include railwaymen and some of the port workers .
 Ghana Government appears to be going very near to making striking itself illegal . The Ghana Government is almost introducing a system of, forced labour .
 A third country to gain its “ freedom ” in the last decade is Nigeria . Nigeria is one of three countries to gain more freedom in the past decade .
 There, 13 citizens of the Northern Region recently had a drink . The Northern Region was recently visited by a group of 13 citizens .
 The offending Nigerians have been fined, and sentenced to eighty strokes of the cane . They were sentenced to 80 strokes .
 A further clause in the bill declares that any person who incites, encourages, or aids in any manner any employer to declare and continue a lock-out, or any employee to go or continue on strike, shall be liable to a fine of not less than £10 nor more than
 For a socialist analysis of war read SOCIALIST PARTY AND WAR . The Stagnant Society, by Michael Shanks, is published by SpGB .
 In case you should think from the title that this is a radical attack on the very basis of modern society, let us disillusion you right away .
 Britain in the 1960's is losing the productivity race with other countries and is failing to compete successfully in world markets .
 Labour relations, financial policy, government planning, export drives and export drives are all there, und many more besides . Labour relations and financial policy are all important issues in government planning .
 Perhaps you should read 7/ic Stagnant Society, {t will possibly give you an insight into current misconceptions about the Capitalist World—that's if you don‘ die of boredom halfway through it .
 We regret we cannot recommen it for an honoured place on a Socialist’s bookshelf . We regret it for a place on the Socialist' bookshelves .
 Malthus infers that Governments should retnove all obstacles to cullivation of the soil and, on the other, favour preventive ch2cks, especially the postponement of marriage .
 Malthus therefore recommends the reduction of paupers’ relief to a minimum . The pauper’s relief should be reduced to a minimal level .
 Money used to support the poor or destitute is taken from the other classes in society, he argues . Money is used from that section of the working class that is only just outside of destitution .
 It was proposed to put legal difficulties in the way of marriage . Arising from this, it was proposed that it would be legal difficulties to marry .
 The poor who had no prospects of being able to support a family were to be forbidden to marry . The poor were also forbidden to be allowed to marry in order to support their families .
 The Malthusian doctrine attracted Widespread attention, and was accepted almost without qualification by many scientists .
 It also made a strong impression on governments, and its effects were seen in the increased stringency of the marriage laws .
 Down to 1918 vestiges of this persisted in Bavaria and the Austrian Tyrol, where marriage could not be cntered into without the permission of the commune .
 The astonishing fact about the Malthu‘ian theory is its persistence in face of evidence that confutes it . The astonishing thing about the theory is that it persists in the face of the evidence that contradicts it .
 There is no evidence to warrant the assumption that there is any tendency in population growth to increase faster than subsistence, scientists say .
 The tendency to reproduce is at a rate which, if unchecked, would at some time exceed subsistence . The facts stated by Malthus to show. this tendency, simply show that where . owing to a small population in a new country, or where, owing to the unequal distribution of
 It is not correct to infer from this that the tendency to reproduce would show itself to the same extent where population was sufficiently dense, and where wealth was distributed in such a way as to lift the whole community above the necessity of a struggle for mere existence .
 Nor can it be assumed that the tendency to reproduce, by causing poverty, must prevent the existence of such a community; for this obviously would be assuming the very point at issue and be reasoning in a circle .
 It cannot be stated of existing poverty that it is due to this cause until it is shown that there are no other causes which can account for it . And even if it be admitted that the tendency to multiply must ultimately cause poverty, poverty cannot be attributed to this causes until there is no
 The Malthus theory has persisted, and will persist, because it does not in any Way Oppose or antagonise any powerful interest . The theory will persist because it will not be antagonised by powerful interests in the world .
 It is soothing and reassuring to the class who, wielding the power of wealth, largely dominate thought . The class who wield power of the wealth largely dominate the thought process .
 Socialist Standard 1961 question and examine society, i came fo the ald of the ruling class . London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 .
 The hsyvay on Population was written as an answer to William Gedwin’s Inquiry concerning Political Justice . The Socialist of today still has to con tend with Malthusian ideas, in a modern form .
 They become more prevalent in times of large-scale unemployment . They are also uscd as an excuse to justify poverty in such places as India .
 Poverty, as dealt with by Malthus, 1 not in fact the result of excessive breed ing. Poverty is not the cause of excessive breeding . Poverty is a result of overbreeding, but it is not a consequence of excessive population .
 It is the chaotic nature of the capi talist system which must be blamed . It is not the only reason to blame for the problems in the country .
 The Socialist claims that the Socialist claims is the private properly relation in the means of production . Its solution is obvious-—remove the private relation in production . The Socialist Party has a solution to this problem .
 Make this property common property, and the common access to wealth which follows such a change will provide the answer to poverty, present or future . My. my. my .
 If a company’s profits increase sufficiently it can pay out twice as much as a dividend, the dividend is more likely to be doubled . All that it tells us is that if a company's profits increase enough it can afford to make a bonus issue or not .
 The final paragraph is cqually irrelevant to the question of bonus shares . It is irrelevant to whether the bonus shares are worth more than $1billion .
 If a company makes enough profit to pay out an annual dividend equal to 10 per cent of the original capital it will take only ten years for shareholders to get back their original investment and still hold their shareholding .
 The result is achieved whether the company issues bonus shares or not, it all depends on making sufficient profit . But this is achieved if the company is making sufficient profits or not .
 "If the company does not make cnough profit an issue of bonus shares is not going to make any difference," says Ravi Agrawal .
 We repeat-———the issue of bonus shares does not add to profits or dividends, we say . The issue is not an issue that adds to profits, it adds to dividends and profits .
 Third central London meeting in DEMONSTRATION FOR SOCIALISM series . Meeting in CAXTON HALL, Westminster . Richard Headicar .
 St Pancras Town Hall in April and Conway Hall in July were stimulating and successful by all standards . The event was held at Conway Hall and St Pancra in July .
 With one speaker drawn from each, a bigger and, it is hoped, an even more fruitful meeting will be held . Now with one speaker from each will be drawn from the speakers' areas .
 The SPGB has held meetings at the Caxton Hall, a long time since the hall was used . A word or two on the situation of the hall might be timely .
 Caxton Hall lies just off Victoria Street about mid-way between Victoria Station and Parliament Square . Caxton hall is located in the middle of Victoria Street .
 Autumn Delegate Meeting will be held at Head Office, 52, Clapham High Street, S.W. on Saturday and Sunday, October 7th and 8th . Meeting will take place on October 7, 8th and 9th .
 The two Glasgow Branches, having joined up again in their work for Socialism, have reverted to their original name . Standing Orders Committee to re-arrange the seating arrangements in order that the maximum comfort will be possible .
 The Scotsmen have had a most successful outdoor season this summer, both in Glasgow and Edinburgh . They have also had a successful outdoor campaign this summer .
 December 1961—The British Political Scene, January 1962—Power Politics . December 1961: The British political scene . January 1962: Power Politics. December 1961; January 1962; January 1963: Power politics.
 The subjects for October and November are listed under Meetings . SSE's socialist Standard Standard was published in October 1961 .
 Ealing Branch is now meeting regularly again after the short holiday break in August .
 The Branch has been given a new meeting room—bigger, more comfortable and generally more pleasant than its previous onc. meeting room . The Branch was given the new room by the city's previous owner .
 This will provide more incentive for members to venture forth on miserable winter nights . This will certainly provide more motivation for members of the public .
 Branch intends to take the fullest advantage of this in arranging lectures and discussions . The new room will also be much more practicable for this purpose. Branch intends .
 Having Overseas Secretary as their own Branch Secretary is not the only reason for its increasingly international flavour . We hope to give further details of the programme next month .
 The proximity of Hyde Park and their virtually West-End location are also important factors . Hyde Park's proximity to Hyde Park is also important .
 It was the eve of his trip round Europe prior to his return to Australia . It was on his way back to Australia from a three-week trip .
 He was deluged with the addresses of people all over the Continent whom we know to be in sympathy with us . He was inundated with addresses from all over Europe, including from Europe .
 Some members met him in Italy last year but for some time he has been working in Scandinavia . He reported briefly but with humour and insight on the scene as he finds it there .
 He was able to pass over to the Branch some of her old lecture notes which are certain to be of further educational value . The Branch is now looking to use the notes to further research .
 As they meet in a room above a pub their timetable is governed by the licencing laws which means they have to adjourn before closing time at eleven . As a result of the laws, they must have to close time at 11pm .
 Those who are prepared for a “morning after the night before” usually fit in another three quarters of an hour of discussion at a coffee shop down the road . However, those who are not prepared for the ‘morning after’ night before, usually fit into another three
 Peter Byrant gives an insight into the life of an Indian sympathiser of long standing .
 Their wide perspective has not lessened their enthusiasm for propaganda outings to places nearer home . Branch propaganda trips to places closer to the UK will continue .
 Hyde Park has proved to be well worth the running on Thursday nights . This summer Paddington has made successful and highly enjoyable trips to Coventry, Nottingham and Stevenage . Hyde Park is on our doorstep, and is a great place to play .
 WEMBLEY Wembley Branch are pleased to an nounce that their first indoor public meeting will take place on October 30th . Comrade C May will be “Introducing the SPGB” to the workers of Wembley .
 Branch members are hoping for a good attendance at the event . Quite a lot of time and moncy have been spent on preparing and publicising the event.
 The second of the Branch canvassing efforts in Portsmouth was successful although hampered somewhat by a late start . The second attempt to canvass in the city was hampered by the start of the canvassing .
 On this occasion we had the welcome help of a member from Woolwich Branch . On the occasion, we had a welcome help from a member of Woolwich branch .
 During the afternoon and evening, the usual meeting was held on the seafront to an attentive audience, and lit. sales were most encouraging .
 Preparations are being made for a series of lectures by Branch members through the winter months .
 The last series dealt with various religious movements and was very successful . The series is set to return to the UK for a new series of episodes .
 Any comrade having a special knowledge of a particular subject is encouraged to hold forth . Other members find this a great help in broadening their general background . Any comrade with a special subject is invited to speak .
 The excellent summer outdoor season has, of course, helped a lot but the persistent canvassing efforts must not be forgotten either .
 Meeting will be held at Barham Old Court, Barham Park, October 30, at 8pm .
 LONDON OUTDOOR MEETINGS Sundays Hyde Park, 3 pm East Street, Walworth Clapham Common . Tower Hill, 12.30-2 pm Tower Hill and Rushcroft Road, 8 pm branch .
 A social will be held at Christmas and we hope it will be at least as successful as last year’s . Not forgetting. the lighter side, a social is planned for Christmas .
 Full details and tickets will be available later, of course, but preliminary work has already begun . Full details of the event will be revealed later .
 Regular donations are a considerable help to a working class party like ours which suffers from restrictive finances . The Labour Party needs to rely heavily on donations from its members .
 The small committee which had such great success in selling literature at the Russian Exhibition at Earls Court, have had further success . Thank you Comrade, Comrade .
 A member of the Committee, Comrade Hyams of Hackney Branch, went to the Trade Union Congress at Portsmouth and sold 60 Socialist Standards and 50 various pamphlets . During the period of the conference at Portsmouth, he sold 60 . Socialist Standards were sold during the period .
 Comrade Gilmac is working hard on his American tour and it is hoped to have details of the meetings he has addressed and his television and radio talks . The Toronto group is making encouraging progress .
 Comrades Catt, report good discussions and attendances at all of their meetings—even during the hot summer months . Catt reports good attendance at meetings even during the summer months.
 Over 20 meetings have been held so far, a grand achievement, especially when it is remembered that the group has been in exis:ence for only a few months .
 Other socialist comrades in the area are giving their support to the group . There is a possibility of forming a local of the S.P.C. in the near future .
 A heartening report indeed of courage and determination in the face of gigantic odds . "Heartening report of courage," says CNN.com correspondent .
 Film Meetings commence on 9th October with an interesting film “The German Story” which has just been made by the German Democratic Republic . Film meetings will begin on 9 October .
 This remarkable film took two years to make and tells the story of two world wars . The film was shot in France, Belgium and Germany during World War Two .
 London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard Socialist Standard . 1961 GLASGOW MEETINGS St. George's House of Representatives met in London . 1961 London meeting was attended by members of the Socialist Party .
 Edge HACKNEY LECTURE Bethnal Green Town Hall, Room 3 Wednesday, 11th October, 8m.
 Scientists have told us how bad it is for cur health to have the things tested . There has been no lack of scientists to tell us how dangerous the atom bomb is .
 The nuclear powers agreed to stop tests in 1958 only after they had completed a significant stage in their nuclear weapon build-up .
 These tests, with their predecessors, must have yielded enough knowledge for the nuclear powers to mull over while they were busy developing othci aspects of their weapons .
 We all know that they have been polishing up on rocketry, perfecting their accuracy and boosting their range . The rocketists have been working on a range of rockets to improve their accuracy .
 Now, they arc at the stage which demands further bomb tests, if the work of the last three years is not to be wasted . The work of three years has not been wasted. Now they are at the point which demands more bomb tests .
 Neither side wanted to be labelled as the one which started it all again . The big snag is that, for political reasons, neither side want to be seen as the start of it again .
 Russian foreign policy has often shown itself sensitive to such things . Over recent years, Russia has often been sensitive to foreign policy .
 Khruschev did not want Russia to be the country to break the test ban . The test ban was imposed by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Society as at present constituted is based upon the ownership of the means of living by the capitalist or master class, and the consequent enslavement of the working class . by whose labour alone wealth alone wealth is prouced .
 J Flowers, 6 Backfields, Bristol 2.05, is the manager of SPGB at the back office of Backfields .
 Ist and 3rd Mondays (6th & 20th Nov) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craven Arms, High Street . November 20th & November 21th at Cravens Arms .
 Mondays 8pm, Co-op Hall, Rushey Green, Catford, SE6. London .
 NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (8th & 22nd November) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street, London .
 2nd and 4th Mondays (13th & 27th Nov) in month 8 pm, 17 Cotswold Road, Southend, London .
 Ist and 3rd Monday (6th & 20th Nov; in month 6 pm, 6pm 6 pm) The Crypt, St. Mary's, is located in the Crypt, The Crypt . The Crypt is located at 6th and 20th Monday 6pm (6st
 2nd and 4th Fridays (10th and 24th Nov) in month 7.30 pm, Town Social Club, Mason’s Hill, SEI8.30pm .
 ORDERS for literature should be sent to the Literature Department, spcs, at the above address . CORRESPONDENCE for the Executive Committee should be submitted to the General Secretary, spcp, 52 .
 Postal orders and cheques should be crossed and made payable to the sros. L. LAKE, SPGB, at the above address, Postal orders, cheques and . orders should be made payable .
 Conservatives vote down a resolution in favour of whipping and the birch . Conservatives surprised the pundits by heavily voting down the resolution .
 All of them passionately argued their points of view, and seemed to take themselves very seriously . They, all, all of them, passionately argued with each other, and took themselves seriously .
 They searched deep into their archives, digging up a lot of contradictory pronouncements on the question . They found the answer to the question: "Yes"
 In effect a future Labour government would act as the needs of the day (i.e., British Capitalism) dictated . In effect Labour would act in the interests of British capitalism .
 If this meant breaking Conference decisions, it would be unfortunate but necessary, says Labour leader .
 The majority of us, the working class, suffer the brunt of the system’s evils, which only Socialism will remove . Only socialism will remove the evils of the capitalist system, the author says .
 Socialism in contrast will be based on common ownership and democratic control . Socialism will not be a dictatorship, it will be a democracy, it says .
 Selwyn Lloyd's small Budget threw out a sort of challenge to the trade unions . Wages battles are on the rise in the wake of the recession .
 The unions may accept the invitation to do battle with each other this winter . And one of the big things about this winter may be that this winter will be this winter's first .
 The engineers have put in their annual pay claim and the railwaymen are certain to follow suit . The engineers and railwaymen have also put in annual pay claims .
 If these unions get the same sort of treatment as the government has handed out to the teachers and the civil servants, there will surely be some big strikes .
 This is what governments have tried to avoid since the war, preferring to inflate the currency rather than meet the unions head on . Governments have been trying to avoid this since then, preferring instead of meeting head on.
 Labour government had perhaps the nearest to a strong anti-union policy . The Labour government, with its wage freeze, was perhaps the closest to a strongly anti-unions policy .
 Workers always have a struggle to get by and always have to fight to keep up their living standards . Workers always struggle to make ends meet and live in a tough time .
 Selwyn Lloyd was a time of fre2 prosperity for the working class . That will be worth remembering if the wage pause gets a grip, and the usual bunch of muddle-heads mourn the days before .
 Dr. Adenauer’s chances of keeping his grip of the West German Chancellorship were not, at one time, rated very highly . Adenauer's chances of winning the presidency were not very high at one point .
 Most observers expected a close result to the recent elections, with the Free Democrats holding the balance of power in a stalemate between Adenauer's C.D.U. and Brandt’s Social Democrats .
 Erich Mende was quite firm that if his party was invited to form a coalition government with the C.D.U., he would assent only if Adenauer gave up being Chancellor . Mende's party would only assent to a coalition deal if he was not Chancellor .
 Whether Adenauer, or Erhard, or Brandt, is Chancellor will make no difference to the German working class . But it should be instructive for them to observe the cynical manoeuvres of their politicians and to reflect that this sort of thing goes on all the time .
 NKRUMAH has made a habit of dis appointing some of the well-meanini asses who supported him because they thought that he wanted to set up a democratic state in Ghana .
 These people fall so readily and so persistently for any small-time nationalist who breezes along that it is fair to assume they are able to ignore any evidence which points out the error of their ways .
 It's just the sort of vague accusations which colonial powers us¢ to excuse the suppression of a rising nationalist movement . It is just the kind of vague accusation which colonial power us¢ used to excuse suppression of nationalist movement.
 To read it takes us back to the early nineteen-fifties, when Nkrumah was in gaol, when he was in prison . It takes us to read it .
 The asses were braying, then, for his release, because he was supposed to be leading Ghana to freedqm. He was due to lead the country to freedkm.
 Even if they drop the dictator in Accra, they will soon be taking up the cause of some other Nkrumah of the future . Even though they dropped the dictator, they would soon be looking to the future of Ghanaians .
 Many responsible newspapers have been worried for a long time at Labour's inability to dent the Tories’ confidence . Well, no—respectability, Well, well, Labour’s ability to dented the Tories' confidence .
 None of them want to see the British capilalist class having to rely upon only one parly to form their governments for them .
 Labour should have a dignified conference, Labour MPs say . So they were full of concern that Labour should be dignified . Labour should not have a 'dignified conference', they say .
 The platform at Brighton played exactly as the press had advised . Except for one or two resolutions, the conference as a whole also fell into line .
 Britain has decided to take its chance with the Common Market . Britain is on the Brink of joining the common market .
 After shivering at the water’s edge for a long, long time it has at last ventured as far as the end of the diving-board . It even shows signs this time that it is really going to take the plunge .
 Conservative leadership can contemplate the next step with easier minds . Re-inforced by the support of the Brighton Conference, even if it was apparently only given after heavy gunning from the platform .
 He has already told the Six how anxious Britain is to join them . She is keen to abide by their principles, and with what determination she is ready to carry them out .
 British Capitalism has held aloof since the Common Market came to existence . Ever since that, British capitalism has been aloof .
 For what it no doubt considered quite good economic and political reasons, it preferred the safe and easy markets of the Commonwealth to taking risks in Europe . For good economic reasons, the UK did not want to take risks in the EU .
 Even when it ecame clear that the Common Market was becoming a strong economic threat, the U.K. still attempted to thwart it by setting up a rival firm (EFTA or the Seven) as a counterweight .
 They tried all the other well-known Capitalist dodges into the bargain, such as playing off their rivals against each other, in particular by trying to drive a wedge between France und Germany .
 British Capitalism is being conditioned to the fact that there was no alternative but to jump on the Common Market band-wagon .
 Since then, they have calmly proceeded to swallow most of what they had said before (as well as a considerable amount of pride) and now calmly go forward, cap in hand, to try to get in as though this had been their intention .
 All the countries concerned with the Common Market are, of course, manceuvring for position just like Britain . Britain is in the process of leaving the European Union .
 Austria, Sweden and Switzerland had already been negotiating with the Community behind their backs . The neutrals had succeeded in obtaining some useful concessions . The ‘Neutrals’ had already secured concessions .
 At the same time, the Six themselves are jockeying for positions of self-advantage . The Six are jockeying for positions in order to get the best of themselves .
 The Netherlands are the most inclined to let Britain join, the French the most opposed . The French are most opposed to Britain joining .
 These attitudes have nothing to do with anything other than hard economic and political facts . These attitudes are nothing else but hard economic facts .
 The Dutch would be very pleased’ to see a further large market for their agricultural produce come into the Community . The French are still almost as suspicious as ever that British Capitalism’s only motive for joining is to get inside and smash .
 These are only a few examples of the conflicts of interest underlying everything connected with the Common Market . The Common Market is the largest single market in the world .
 Every one of the countries involved has its own economic and political interests to safeguard by almost any method it can .
 The Conservatives managed to bulldoze through their Conference an overwhelming vote of support for their decision . The Conservatives are expected to win an overwhelming majority of support from the public .
 If they get the Six to look favourably on their difficulties with the Commonwealth they will not have too much to fear . The Six will be hoping to look at their difficulties on their own .
 If the Six also prove co-operative over agriculture, they will be even happier . If they also prove that they are co-operative over agriculture .
 Conservatives will be in trouble if discussions on either of these topics run into trouble, too . But should the discussions on these topics go into trouble it will be trouble for the Conservatives .
 Socialist Standard 1961 . ¥ 1961 se lo argue amongst themselves without the need to come to a decision one way or the other . Out of office, they can afford to afford out of office .
 If they had been in power, it is a pretty safe bet that they would now be doing exactly the same thing as the Conservatives are doing . But if they were in power they would probably be doing the same with the same misgivings .
 It is not, after all, by accident that Tribune and the Daily Express find themselves in one camp with Mr Shinwell and Lord Hinchinbrook, and people like Mr, Heath and Woodrow Wyatt together in the other .
 In such ways do the economic forces of Capitalism speak louder than the pretences of Capitalist political parties . The world's most powerful and most powerful forces of capitalism speak out loud .
 For the essential thing to remember about all this hoo-ha over the Common Market is the harsh Capitalist reality underlying it . The essential thing is to remember is that all this is Capitalist .
 The reason why Britisa Capitalism has at last got to the point of joining the Six is because its economic interests are pressing hard upon it to do so . Britisa capitalism is pressing hard on the government to join the Six, writes Andrew Hammond .
 It's hard to be proud of how hard it is to be able to swallow pride and swallow words . The world's most successful politician has to suffer in injured pride and swallowed words .
 Britain's application to join the Common Market will be scrutinised by members of the EU . It is the same forces which helped to bring about the Common European Union itself .
 Politics also play their part, of course, and politics have their roots in the harsh economic reality of Capitalisin .
 The Common Market is to some extent the reflection of the realisation by such countries as France, Germany, and Italy, that their days as Big Powers have gone und that it is now the giants, such as Russia and the U.S.A. that dominate the world scene .
 It is the forces of Capitalism again, at work in the drive towards bigger and bigger units within individual countries, and in the urge towards bigger units like the Common Market on the world scene . The forces of capitalism are at work again, with the drive for bigger units in individual countries .
 What is not an issue in the Common Market is the interests of the workingclass, says David Cameron . The Common Market will be open to the working class, he says .
 There are plans to standardise working conditions within the Community and, in theory, the aim eventually to allow completely free movement of workers ‘nside it’ But essentially the workers’ position will remain unchanged .
 This is the sort of optimistic statement which political leaders are always putting out and which mean exactly nothing. Now what must have struck the audience was that this is the . sort of optimism statement which . political leaders always put out and . which means exactly nothing, he said .
 There is evidence that they were not particularly optimistic when they did win, and with a thumping majority . It is, in fact, that on one occasion, there was evidence that the Labour Party was not optimistic .
 Mr Shinwell once said that although he expected the landslide victory in 1945, most of the other Labour leaders took a gloomier view of their chances .
 Nobody expects Mr Gaitskell to say that he is looking forward to losing the next election . The Conservatives already have it in the bag, he says . Nobody expects him to expect him to lose in the election .
 The task of the working-class, whether Britain joins it or not, will still be to get rid of the system that generates this drive for profit . Whether Britain joins the working class, whether it does, is still the task .
 Workers of Britain and of the Common Market do have a common interest, he said . And in ‘setting about that task the workers of Britain’s workers have a ‘common interest’
 Labour are out for power over the affairs of British capitalism and to get this they do not have to educate or enlighten people . Labour are not educating or enlightening people. They do not need to educate people, they want to power . Labour should not be educated or enlightened,
 They only have to persuade enough voters that they are the cleverest, most responsible, most humane bunch of would be ministers in the land . They only need to convince enough voters they are cleveest and responsible ministers .
 Political leader must always strive to give the impression that their fortunes are set fair . Like a salesman who tells you that his product must be good because it sells so well, the political leader must strive to make the impression .
 This year’s conference rejected once again the idea that they are a party of wholesale nationalisation . The conference rejected the idea once again that they would be nationalised .
 Let us say right away that nationalisation is not, and never was, anything more than an alternative method of organising capitalism . Nationalisation is an alternative to an alternative form of capitalism, says David Cameron .
 Labour used to cling to capitalism as the cure-all for capitalism’s ailments . But the Labour pionzers used to clinging to it as an antidote to capitalism's ailments .
 We may depend on it that they would have castigated Mr, Gaitskell for his milk and water version of their favourite potion . We may have had to rely on it to be castigated .
 Nationalisation, which might have had a brief fling as a vote-getter just after the war, is now an electoral liability . Nationalisation is now a liability for the Labour Party .
 Mr Gaitskell’s great battle over Clause Four was his realisation that the surest way to lose votes was to declare for outright nationalisation . The theme of his great battle was that he realised that he would lose votes if he declared for nationalisation.
 His party’s attitude to State control has changed and so has their public image . But his party's attitude to the State has changed, so has its public image, he said .
 The nuclear disarmers are a small minority in the population, so small that there is no point in them testing their policy in a parliamentary election . They are so small they won't be tested in parliamentary elections, says David Cameron .
 Party of rigid principle, but for those who are bothered about getting power before anything else, it is a different matter . That may not worry a party of rigid principles, but it is different matter for those in power .
 Mr Gaitskell will not be shaken off by a conference resolution, says Labour leader . He says: 'This is something which cannot be shaken away by conference resolution . Then there is the little business of strikes and this, sadly, strikes, is something that cannot be dealt with by
 At one time their members were proud to be at the head of the Jarrow marchers, to wear cloth caps to the Commons, to be militant trade unionists . The Labour Party has been described as a 'militant trade unionist'
 That was all very well in the old days, when Labour were climbing, to power; it’s very different now. It was very different in the past, but it was very much different now, says Labour leader .
 If they get into power over British capitalism, strikes are going to be a nuisance which they will have to deal with, just like 1945/50 all over again . It will be a big nuisance for the Labour Party .
 Large numbers of workers regard strikes as stupid, or anti-social, or the work of layabouts, and so suspect a political party which they connect with them . Secondly, large numbers of people regard strikes to be stupid, anti-society, or stupid .
 No matter what party may write in their manifestos, the idea will stay in working class heads . Whatever evidence, however much Mr Gaitskell may soothe and reassure, no matter what his party writes in their manifestoos, it will stay .
 This is the sort of thing which is so bad for the image which Mr Gaitskell is trying to project . Labour equals strikes, this is the kind of image which is bad for him, says Labour leader .
 There is only one theory of management that is worth anything to capitalism, and that is that the system is administered in the interests of the capitalist class . The only theory is that management is in the interest of capitalism .
 For many workers, among all their other false ideas, support capital and corporal punishment . Many workers support capital . They support the idea of capital and punishment, and support some control on immigration .
 Whatever mistakes they may make, however black their record, they always seem to have enough of what it takes to ride their storms and to touch the responses of the working class . This is ironical, in a party which so Openly stands for the privileges of capitalism .
 It could be that they are very clever, or that the working class are excessively stupid and forgetful . The working class could be very clever or very stupid, it could be .
 The two great parties are not alone ‘n worrying about their public image, Every day, everywhere, we are meeting the same thing . Whatever the reason for it, the fact is that the Tory image is a successful one, The Tory Party is a success one .
 Advertisers have adopted an especially irritating image type for their ads . We see it in the advertisements which, since the days of fuller employment came to this country, have adopted this type .
 To the Eu “BRAVE NEW WORLD” I recently read one of your SociALIsT STANDARDS with interest, and can to a large extent sympathise with your criticisms and even ideals, but I cannot accept your deductions and methods . Now the earnest, well
 Socialism omits the fact that man is an individual, with a free will of his own and bad qualities as well as good ones . If man was a completely rational and perfect social animal your plans might work, and society could indeed be run in the ways Suggested . But Socialism o
 Many, indeed most, of the working classes would behave in exactly the same way as the ‘capitalist exploiters” if they had the chance to take power themselves . Many of those working class would behave exactly the way they would if they took power themselves, he says .
 Socialism, unless you can change human nature, would be abused and turned into an inverted capitalism, just as the Russians failed with Marxism . The Russians failed to change their Marxism, as well as Communism .
 This is the theme, too, of the newspapers with their unctuous human interest stories . Rock ’n’t roll stars who still love their deaf grandmothers, or rich greengrocers who would swap it all for the pitter-patter of tiny feet .
 Irritating and shameful as this may be, it should lead us to the bigger question of why it should happen . It should lead to a bigger question: why should it happen at all?
 The answer is that the image men always project an impression of general satisfaction with capitalism . The image men project is that they are satisfied with capitalism, he says .
 The people who are. depicted as . depicted as wholesome and confident are, alter all, supporters of a social system which has produced the terror and insewould stagnate .
 In conclusion, I cannot for one moment contemplate a system being accepted which is irrevocable such as yours is . I cannot imagine a system which is irreversible, such is yours is. I'm not sure how long it will last, but I'm sure it will .
 Unless the population have the right and opportunity to remove the government there is merely tyranny, it's merely tyranny . The population must have the chance to remove government from power, he says .
 Mr Vine should ask himself how it is that, if man ‘... will not be regimented, treated like a machine, or tied down by laws .” he submits so meekly to this sort of treatment under capitalism .
 It is difficult to imagine what more in the way of regi. mentation we could have suffered in the last war . Yet the working class accepted it as part of the war effort, which they supported .
 This is not because they lack individuality but because they simply cannot afford to do anything else . This is because they can't afford to . It is not a problem for them, it is a problem .
 Their wage packet forces them to live in a working class house, which is pretty much the same as the others around . They wear the same inferior clothes and eat the same substandard food as their fellow workers .
 In fact, men have always broadly conformed to the relationships of their social system . Few men are sufficiently individualistic to opt out of society. Men have always been more individualistic.
 Nobody should pretend that man is such an animal; but he is rational enough to organise and maintain London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 .
 If we accept their standards, the one thing we shall never do is to question the whys and wherefores of capitalism . And if we accept them standards, we will never question the  whys of capitalism .
 They could develop social consciousness so that the political and commercial images lose appeal . They could also develop their social consciousness, says author .
 They could do this—in fact, they must do it, if there is to be hope of solving the world’s problems . They could . do this, in fact, if they must . solve it, says the author .
 Socialist Party leader must establish Socialism and to keep it running smoothly . That is as much he can expect of himself, and it is enougH to establish Socialism .
 There may be examples of better and cheaper goods being produced as a result of economic competition . There are also examples of bad food being destroyed, of harmful and shoddy goods being made .
 International conflict may give something of a boost to, say, some branches of medical research .
 Socialism will replace the anti-social spurs of capitalism with the incentive which is based upon the simple fact that the people of the world will own the world . socialism will replace capitalism with an incentive that is based on the fact that that the world is owned by the people .
 Then man’s ingenuity and energy will have complete freedom, because they will be working for the good of society, instead of for the profit of a minority . Then man's ingenuity will be able to work for the better of society .
 The conditions were not ripe for it to take place in Russia, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin's government has been accused of corruption in Russia in the past .
 All that happened in 1917 was that a country with a backward semi-feudal system was enabled to develop itself into a fully-fledged capitalist State . The result was that the state was able to become a fully capitalist State.
 If there were to develop enough faults in it to convince Sdciety of a need to abolish it, there would be nothing to stop them doing so . But that is not to say that Socialism will be irrevocable—eternal, in fact, it will be .
 Piece-work is much less common in non-manufacturing industries . In the gas, water and electricity group, only 2% of workers are on piece-work .
 The manufacturing industries are divided into fourteen industrial groups . The manufacturing industry is divided into 14 industrial groups, including manufacturing .
 Second World War gave a big impetus to piecework among men . Bevan on piecework: 'Second World War was a big inspiration'
 Among women workers it has fallen slightly, from 46% in 1938 to 44%, but among girls under age 18 it has increased from 27% to 44% . The ratio among boys of J in 5 has remained about unchanged .
 Aneurin Bevan was Minister of Labour in 1951 . He sponsored a campaign to increase production by going over to piecework and similar schemes .
 One of the reasons given by the Ministry for needing increased production was to help the Labour government’s rearmament programme .
 Payment-by-results in recent years goes against some forecasts that it would decline because of the development of automation . Impact of Automation has been seen as a major factor in the growth of the economy . Payment by-results has increased in the last few years .
 The ex-pectation that it would decline was based on the proposition that the employer has no use for a payment system designed to speed up the worker or group of workers, if this is looked after by the technique .
 Payment by piece-rates, based on the output of individual workers, rarely suits work . On automatic processes, payments are based on automatic processes rather than individual workers' output .
 The rate of output will be decided by managements on technical grounds, and it will be controlled by technicians rather than operatives . It will be managed by managers, rather than by operatives .
 Some managements have tried to adapt old systems of payment-by-results to the new conditions, apparently not at all successfully, he said . But he went on to say that in the engineering industry some managements had tried to .
 Russian oil exports have to be multiplied many times before they reach the level of the nineteen thirties when Russian oil accounted for about oneeighth of the Western markets .
 Rumours have been floating around that the Russian government now doing a deal with the oil companies to cut out undercutting, and divide up the market .
 Russian government sometimes uses cheap oil exports to further political ends . They have been selling their oil more cheaply in Italy and West Germany than their own allies, Eastern Germany and Poland .
 The national income in money terms actually has nearly doubled in 10 years, the Express office says . But adjustment for the rise of prices reduces this, not to 50% but to about half that amount, making an average annual increase of about 24%, a year .
 While some industries have jumped ahead in size and the use of modern methods, others have lagged far behind the development in other countries . Russian industry has lagged behind other countries in size, modern methods .
 Russia has four million telephones compared with about eight million in Britain, 70 million in U.S.A. and nearly five million in Japan . Russia has about four million phones compared with eight million phones in Britain .
 The General Strike as a means of emancipation must surely fail, for the working class . The working class are propertyless, and if they cease work even the “short commons” that “ work ” means, cease too .
 All acquainted with proletarian life know the terrible privation that strikes entail . Suffering writ large on the faces of the helples babes, the toddling children and the struggling wives . The suffering writ large .
 Cambrian Strike lasted for a year in South Wales during the year-long strike . The strike was the result of a landslide in the Welsh valleys and valleys .
 Death snatches its first victims from ‘the toilers ; they are most vulnerable--they have no stores, no reserves . For we depend upon continual production, and cessa. tion means death, and . cessa .
 Mr Selwyn Lloyd could hardly have expected his audience to believe him . He said: 'I'm not going to believe you. I'm not sure what happened to me'
 Competitors are always trying to restrict wage-costs, both here and abroad . Any capitalist who did not watch this aspect very closely would soon be out of business .
 Either his shareholders would withdraw their money from his business, or he would go bankrupt . Either his business would be going bankrupt, he would have to withdraw from his company or go bankrupt.
 Mr Lloyd should take care, next time he addresses an upper class audience, not to speak too persuasively .
 The rural dean of Dulwich, however, kept up the good old tradition of those bishops and prominent churchmen who for centuries have Supported the most barbarous of punis}ments against those who broke the law .
 When one thinks of the millions of men killed in wars supported (on both sides) by Christian churches, it is not very surprising that the rural dean should seek to defend the “ ending of someone’s life’ by the state apparatus . But, of course, the
 There is, of course, no such thing as “public property ” in a private Property society . In a private society, there is no public property in private society .
 There is property which belongs to members of the ruling class individually, and property which is managed by State or “public” boards, which act on behalf of the whole owning class . Property belongs to State or public, which is usually managed by public boards .
 If this Property was really public, or in common ownership, then it would belong equally to everyone, which is another way of saying it belongs to no one . It would belong to everyone in the world, even if it were public .
 Russia holds trials for the “ theft ” of “public property,” it is really the system itself which 1s put on trial . So that when Russia holds . trials for . the theft “a theft of ‘public property” of . “
 After the vague talk about “the affluent society ” come the actual figures produced by the state machine itself . Affluence comes from the figures produced from the state itself .
 In 1960, 41 per cent of the total were receiving less than £500 per annum before payment of tax . 45 pep cent between £500 and £1,000; 12 per cent from £1 to £2,000 and 2 per cent more .
 This is counting the wife's income in with her husband’s . And this, remenber, is counting it in with their husband's. And this is not the first time it has happened .
 In the small minority of homes where there is an income coming in besides those of the father and mother, the standard will be correspondingly higher .
 Anyone who thinks they amount to “affluence “ for the ninety per cent., for the workers, should try bringing up a family at today’s inflated prices on anything under £20 per week .
 SINCE MAN’s EARLYEST Days, he has looked for an explanation of the things he cannot understand . Chasing Shadows is Chasing Shadow .
 Not knowing why the sun rises and sets, why the weather changes or why blights and sickness Occur, savage man created for himself gods to worship, placate and fear . He created gods who controlled the things he could not understand .
 With the advancement of knowledge, man’s ideas of the supernatural have changed constantly . The advancement of the knowledge has changed the way man's ideas of supernatural have evolved .
 In the present day, when so much of the mystery has been explained and the world is no longer regarded as flat with heaven above and hell below, religion in ” civilised ” countries has subtly changed its role .
 In the mid.th century it has ceased to be the explanation of the unknown and has become instead the comforter . In the . mid-century it has become the .comforter instead of the explanation .
 When the problems and insecurities of present-day life become overwhelming, it is soothing to put all one’s problems before an Almighty Being . The Almighty Being will either solve our problems and relieve us of our troubles, or decide that we should bear them to prove our faith
 'How much easier it is to do this than to battle with the situations and attempt to solve the problems. How much easier to do is to deal with the problems than to try and solve them. How easy it is not to be able to do that. How hard it's to
 The thought that death is inevitable and final is an unpalatable one, especially at times when things go badly or dangerously . The thought of death is often an unpunatable one .
 The belief that this life is only a preparation for the hereafter makes it easier to bear frustrations and less fearsome to think of death . This belief makes it less fearsome than the fear of death less fearsome .
 Every war brings with it a religious revival, says historian . To this can be attributed the fact that every war brings it with it, he says .
 Even the troubles and uncertainties of “normal ” life are easier to bear if on2 can believe that “ the meek shall inherit the earth,” and this is well known and exploited by those in authority today . Even the difficulties and uncertainties are easier if on the
 In wartime God's help and protection in ‘Our Just Cause’ is called for equally fervently by the leaders and churchmen of opposing sides .
 Christian churches have learnt to adapt themselves to modern life . Christian churches are adapting themselves to life in modern times, says Christian minister .
 Billy Graham type crusades make Sunday afternoon band performances by the Salvation Army look like very poor relations . The Salvation Army is a very poor relation to Billy Graham's crusades .
 There are believers in Texas who are not worried by this f they have a little money to spare . There are even believers in the state .
 For the price of one dollar, they will mechanically pray 10,000 prayers for any individual contributor . The price of a dollar is $1 .
 Socialists do not believe in life after death; our thoughts are firmly fixed on worthwhile future in this life . Socialists believe in a worthwhile future after death .
 We therefore expend our energies in working to abolish Capitalism and establish Socialism which, although no ~ heaven on earth, will solve most of the problems besetting mankind today,” says the party .
 To achieve Socialism, the majority of men and women must underStand it, want it and work for it . The majority of people must understand it and want it, says Socialist leader .
 "We cannot offer to understand or work for it for them. Unfortunately, unlike the PRAYER Organisation, we cannot offer ... to help them understand"
 The only assistance we can offer is what we are doing, explaining the system under which we live and showing how it is the cause of wars, periodic unemployment and the other insecurities we suffer today . We can only offer what we can do, explain how the system is causing wars
 It is futile to use up energies to build up rewards in heaven while relying on an Almighty Being to solve their problems on earth . We try to make them see that it is futile .
 There is NOTHING more that devoted, well-meaning people could have done. There is nothing more than that could have been done .
 Over the years they have altered, added and improvised to try to meet the requirements of changing knowlzdge and needs . Over the past few years, they have changed and improvised .
 The structure of this early Victorian hospital has outlived itself and what the place reall, needs is to be pulled down and rebuilt . But as it stands now, the structure of the hospital has . outlived . itself and needs is pulled down .
 The skeleton of a flyover flyover is being built in a London hospital ward . It will be the first flyover to be built in London since 1964 . The project will be completed in 2015 .
 The drilling, buildozing and blasting of the great new road developmeni scheme must have a devastating effect on the poor patients . Don't leave the window open too long, though, though—don't leave it open .
 They did think about spending some more money on the scheme, to make it quieter and so easier on the patients’ nerves . They did spend more money to make the scheme quieter .
 Roads come first and sick human beings somewhere after that . But in the end they decided that roads come first, and sick people somewhere after .
 They grumble enough about the need for new roads . And the amount of tax which goes into licences, petrol and so on . Certainly, they grumble .
 Flyovers, underpasses, motorways and the rest are built for their especial benefit and enjoyment . Yet they would be wrong to think that they are built specifically for their own benefit or enjoyment .
 "Our society is based upon private property, which means that a few people own the means of life," says President Obama . "We are based on private property," says Obama .
 This leaves a lot of people who are virtually propertyless, and therefore have to work for the few owners . This leaves many people who must work for a few owners. This leaves them with no property, and they have to do what they need .
 In this work they create a surplus which must be sold so that the capitalists can realise their profits . The work they do creates a surplus, which must then be sold to the capitalists .
 Thesz profits are used by and at the discretion of the international, wealthy ruling class . The profits will be used by the rich and powerful in the future .
 Traffic jams prevent profitable goods being moved efficiently . They even stop workers getting to work on time, which means that they might not turn out surplus as much surplus as they should . Traffic jams stop profitable goods from being able to be delivered efficiently .
 If motor cars are to be stuck jorever in jams and queues, a lot of potential buyers may decide to use some other form of transport .
 The motor car market is already none too healthy; if there was a developing hardness against the industry's sales jargon there wouid soon be panic stations in the plushy showrooms .
 Al fresco salons on old bomb sites would be possible in the future . So would there be in the al fresco . salons in old bomb . sites, where workers obtain their latest model .
 The noxious, smelly fluid can overnight turn 4 flyblown, sandy waste into a world danger spot .
 It has lined the pockets of shareholders all over the world . and enabled a handful of Eastern potentates to count their wealth in Cadillacs instead of the traditional camels .
 London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 Socialist Standard . 1961 cient road system, with lots of cars using it, is very important . No need io point out that the oil boys think an effi effi .
 These are the reasons why the excavators scrunch outside the hospital walls, and why ordinary, decent people think it right to put motor cars higher up the scale of values .
 Sick workers contribute little, or nothing, to the profitability of capitalism . For sick workers, they contribute little or nothing to the profits of capitalism, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Capitalism can be attacked coldly, with fact and arguments on economics, history and the rest . Capitalism can't be attacked with facts and arguments, but with facts on economics and history, it can be argued .
 This does not mean that we do not see through the cloying mess of moral standards and human values which capitalism foists on us . But it does mean we don't see through this cloyed mess of morals and values that capitalism foils us .
 Capitalism's unhappy knack of encroaching upon the reform clashed with some sectional economic interest . It is useless merely to try to be humane; for many an uphill struggle to implement a reform has been followed .
 The following letter has been received from a sympathiser and we think it will be of interest to our readers .
 On September 4 dockworkers and railwaymen at Takoradi and Kumasi in Ghana went on strike against a deliberate attempt by the government to decrease the workers’ share of what they produce .
 austerity budget introduced in July provided for measures which would lead to an all-round rise in prices . The austerity budget was introduced by the government in July .
 In addition a compulsory savings scheme was introduced and a wage freeze announced . The government has introduced a new national savings scheme .
 The strikers were told that they didn’t really want to strike but that they were being forced to . If anyone wished to return to work the government would gladly provide protection, the government said . The government said they would provide protection to anyone who wanted to return .
 President “Nkrumah from a holiday resort on the Black Sza coast of Russia ordered his Ministers at home to get tough with strikers . Very few cworkers took up this offer .
 The strike was, of course, unofficialnce the leadership of the trade unions Supports Nkrumah . The strike is unofficial .
 The general secretary of the T.U.C. hurried back from the neutral’s conference in Belgrade, quickly got to know the facts and did not hesjlate to call the strike a “counterrevolution” and denounce it 4s illegal .
 In Sep‘ember the legal daily minimum wage for unskilled workers was raised from 5s.d. to 6s. d.d . The pposition newspaper Ashanti Pioneer supported these demands . In Sep'ember the  minimum wage was raised .
 The austerity budget will make’ the workers worse off than they wer tefore September last . Workers will be worse off if the budget is passed, says Labour MP .
 T.U.C. workers blamed the workers’ dissatisfaction on the remnants of a capitalist, imperialist, colonialist system which still darkened the econcmic and social horizon .
 Minority felt that workers were dissatisfied because they saw top trade union officials and Government Ministers becoming wealthier while the workers suffered . Ashanti Pioneer felt that they were dissatisfied .
 For daring to make such observations on the development of capitalism in Ghana, the Ashanti Pisneer found that ir future it would be subject lo censorship . For daring the . observations on . the . development of . capitalism in . Ghana and for supporting the demands for wage increases the .
 The Ghana T.U.C. says the cause of the trouble is capitalism . The Ghana government is right in attributing the problem to capitalism .
 But it is not the remnants but the beginning of Capitalism that is responsible . Capitalism is responsible for the collapse of the Soviet Union, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Ghana's first gambling casino will open shortly—but only for foreigners and cerlain classes of wealthy Ghanians . The casino is expected to open in the country's capital, Ghanian capital, Accra .
 Ghanians will not be admitted to membership unless they have a yearly income of more than £1,500 . Members of the armed forces, judiciary, police force or public service departments not allowed to join casino .
 As it is, with the legal minimum wage at 6s.d. a day these Ghanian capitalists get about ten times as much a year as an ordinary worker . As well as the minimum wage, they get ten times more than ordinary workers .
 The strike at the Williamson diamond mine brought this division into the public eye . Mr Nyere firmly ended after 12 days after the strike . The strike was the first of its kind in Zimbabwe .
 Tanganyika obtained a majority in the legislative council in September . Trade unionists expected quick action to improve wage levels .
 Working closely with Sir Arthur Vasey, his Finance Minister, he is endeavouring to maintain the climate of quiet confidence for foreign investment .
 Banda, after his sweeping victory in the Nyasaland elections, seems to be planning similar actions to those of Nkrumah . Banda was elected to power in the country .
 Suzgo Msiska, leader of one of the two rival trade union congresses in Nyasaland, has lost a great deal of prestige in the eyes of Banda and his colleagues .
 At first Lumumba called out troops against then but eventually gave in and granted wage increases . Not before he had devalued the Congolese franc, he devalued it .
 Even the elementary democratic rights of ‘one man, one vote’ and freedom of political activity that independence-may bring are not secure as in events in Ghana in particular show .
 Socialists say the struggle for independence was not worth it . Ghanian and other workers ask if the struggle was worth it, Socialists reply .
 We do not, of course, expect colonial workers to suffer colonisation for ever . But we do not expect that colonial workers will suffer for ever.
 We are just pointing out that independence is not the solution to their problems . We are not saying independence will solve their problems, we are just saying that independence will not be the solution .
 Socialism is the only solution to the problems of the workers throughout the world, says President Obama . Socialism is only solution for the workers, says Obama .
 Colonialism The Twilight of European Colonialism by Stewart C Easton . Stewart C. Easton is a historian and author of the book .
 It was to all intents of purposes inevitable that the colonies should have developed their nationalist organisations, to demand that a native ruling class should have the right to exploit their country’s mineral wealth and human labour .
 In the Congo, this desire has bred nationalism within nationalism, with the Katangese wanting to be left alone with the immense riches that are under their feet .
 The road to independence is usually fairly smooth in most colonies . Unless colonies have a settler population, independence is likely to be smooth . There are military complications, but independence is generally smooth .
 Ghana is the classic example of this; and it has had its effect all over Africa . It has had an effect on all over the continent, says Ghana's president . Ghana is a classic example, says President Obama .
 When independence has been agreed to, there is a lot of political work -to be done - to be done . There is still a lot to do when independence is agreed .
 A constitution must be drafted, political parties must work out their programmes for the new state . Elections must be arranged for the state, and a constitution must also be drafted . Political parties must organise elections and work out political programmes for a new state.
 A series of artidles appeared in the Western Socialist dealing with the theoretical basis of Socialism . This, and the political events which have preceded independence, make the subject matter of Mr Socialist Standard .
 These were dearly written, and readers found them interesting and informative . Readers of this article have expressed their appreciation for their work .
 It is intended to publish extracts from time to time, as space permits, for the benefit of readers who missed them when they first appeared .
 The author knows what suppression of the African native has meant, and what it must lead to . He knows what it means to suppress African native .
 Such is the tradition of bitterness that it is too late to make amends . And now, such a tradition of bitter bitterness, it's too late for amends to be made .
 Political developments have their place in history, and we should all be familiar with them, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 For this Mr Easton, in his agreeably smooth and economical style, he has produced a very adequate book .
 ALL MARINE ENGINES, from Fulton's Clermont to the giant turbines of the Normandie, are based on a few mechanical principles of thermodynamics, energy coefficients, reciprocal motion, and the like . Socialist Standard 1961 .
 These principles ai least must be understood by anyone who intends to run a steam ship. These principles must also be understood .
 The vast inteliectual machinery of modern socialism is too based on a few relatively simple principles . And the vast intelligenceiectal machinery is based on just a few simple principles, he says .
 In order to become a Socialist these principles must be grasped, understood and appiicd . And in order to be a Socialist they must be understood and understood . The Socialist Party is not a Socialist Party .
 Our philosophy is more than expository and imterpretative—it +5 dynamic, it deals with a seal world, and is itself a potent force for change . We are proud of our philosophy, which is dynamic and dynamic, and deals with the seal world .
 Have you ever listened to an argum-n' between a Socialist and a non-Socialist? If so, the most remarkable thing you wiii have noticed is the degree of disagr-2ment in the meanings they attach to the terms employed.”
 The Socialist might assert, for example, that we are Materia!ists, not Idealists. The Socialist may assert, that . we are not Idealist. We are a socialist, not an Idealist . The Socialist Party is a Socialist Party, not a Socialist
 Nine times out of ten because the non-Socialist ""has an entirely erroneous conception »f the meanings of these terms .
 The socialist regards capital as a condition of a thing, rather than a thing . Because he looks upon capital as an object, the socialist regards it as a matter of matter, he says .
 This reply only confirms the questioner im his suspicion that all Socialists are hopeless mental cases . This is only confirms his suspicion of a hopeless mental case .
 When he asks this he has in mind of a conception of wages as the unconditioned reward for labour . When he asked this he was in a reference to wages as a reward .
 The Socialist regards the wage system as an historically determined relationship between labour and capital, a transitory phase in social development .
 Arguments may go on interminably with relatively little change of view for either party . Arguments such as these may go to interminable with little change for either side of the fence .
 Both sides are in a way right, but the substantive difference between their mental states is seldom 4; wide as it appears . The difference between the two is not always 4; it's often 4; 4; as it is as wide as the appears .
 The clashes are essentially verbal and the viewpoints are irreconcilable so iong as each puts a distinctly different interpretation on the terms used . The clash is essentially verbal .
 Socialist contender must realize that there is scarcely an important word used by him that is not tinctured in meaning by our economic theories or by its scientific or philosophical significance . Socialist candidate must first realize that .
 The nea-Socialist almost invariably reacts to the same set of terms by their colloquial or every-day sense . The neastastastist reacts to these terms by using them colloquially or in their everyday sense .
 Confronted with this barrier of language there can never be a meeting of the minds . Confronting this barrier, there can't be an easy meeting of minds .
 The first step necessary towards 2n understanding of Marxian Socialism is 4 clear comprehension of the terms involved .
 Socialists proceed on the incontestestably established fact that society has for many thousands of vears been divided into economically distinct classes . Socialists say society has been divided between economic classes for centuries .
 By the nature of the game it calls into existence two mutually opposing classes . But by the very nature, the game calls for two classes of people to be divided .
 Both, *while Capitalism lasts, necessary to each other, yet diametrically Opposed in interests . Both are necessary to keep capitalism alive, but not opposing each other's interests .
 'Gravitated at one pole are those who, by the rules of the game, sanctioned by the Law, Church, Tradition and Custom, have acquired possession of the machinery of wealth production'
 These persons, although at war among themselves, are Knit into a cohesive unit in a common resolve that the rules governing the priVate nature of property shall not be changed . The people at war with each other, Knit together in a united resolve .
 By their similarity of economic interests they form a category which we variously call the Capitalist, master, ruling or dominant class . The Capitalist is a master, master and dominant class, the dominant class in the world .
 The opposing economic pole is composed of those who, by the very nature of the game, are excluded from participation in participation in the ownership of the means of wealth production .
 The proletariat (from the Latin, meaning children of the soil), wage-slaves or working class, are the overwhelming majority in modern society . They are doomed by an ineluctable law of Capitalistic development to be swamped in the mire of poverty .
 This brief synopsis should give you a fair understanding of economic class distinction . This brief overview of the history of class distinction will help you understand the difference in class .
 Do not confuse it with social, cultural, political or educational differences . Don't confuse differences with social or political differences, it's important to understand .
 The effects are effects only, reflections of the actual parts men and classes play in the scheme of the economic system . These latter may be, and often are, explicable on the basis of different economic levels .
 The wealth of society is represented as a vast accumulation of commodities, and an incessant struggle obtains between the two class divisions over the share each shall possess . The wealth is represented by a vast collection of commodities .
 We live in a political society in which diverse economic groups strive to achieve their ambitions through the control of the state power . But we live in an economic society where diverse economic . groups strive for their ambitions .
 This contest for policical supremacy is the ground on which is fought the battle for economic mastery . This is where the battle is fought for economic dominance, writes David Cameron .
 Whichever group succeeds in capturing the state imposes its economic will on the rest of society, it will impose its will on society .
 They dictate the policies of state and directly control the functions of the state, ie., the police, judiciary, armed forces, primary education, etc. and indirectly, by reason of wealth and influence, the prevailing ideology (this word means, roughly, reflected ideas from a system or social
 Writers, preachers, scientists, educators, philosophers, philosophers dance to the tune called by the Casars of commerce and industry . The Casars are known for their work in science and medicine .
 The ruling class permits the dissemination only of ideas which tend to perpetuate the existing order, writes David Cameron .
 This viewpoini is class biased and serves to vitiate the teachings of history, science and pnilosophy and bend them to the support of entrenched privilege . It is a class-biased view of history and science, science .
 This interest, as we have shown, is contrary to the true interests of the working class . And this interest, it's not only, but it's the true interest of working class, says Labour leader .
 Socialist must correct distortion in world of ideas and supplant error and prejudice with true proletarian knowledge . Socialist must, to achieve its economic and political emancipation, correct the distortion in the world of idea .
 HEGEL was in ADVANCE of his times by reason of the enormous historical sense that underlay his system . He was in the midst of the Second World War and was in advance of his own times .
 "The current of his thought always proceeded in line with world development," he said . The current of this current of thinking always proceeded to the world development .
 The process of world development was regarded as a test of the unfolding of the concept, that is, the Concept was the ultimate Reality . The uncoiling of physical events over time over time was evidence of the logicalness of his postulated concept .
 Hegel regarded phenomenal change, i.e. manifestations of social and natural law, as the selfdevelopment of the Absolute Concept . Phenomenal change is a form of change that is self-developing of the Concept .
 Not his concept or that of any man, but a universal concept that existed independently of time and space, he said . "Not his concept ... an all-embracing world-soul," he said of the concept .
 The dialectic development in nature and history struggled along after the self-developing concept, which moved itself, how or why, nobody knew . How or why? Nobody knew .
 If the universal concept be selfmoving, governed by laws inscrutable, or no laws at all, natural change be but a reflection of the evolution of the cosmic concept . What purports to be an explanation, being itself explained, is no explanation .
 The only wisdom such a philosophy can impart is that whatever is in the world is in it . It changes because it does change, and that it does .
 Four thousand years ago the chroniclers of Hebrew myths had explained as much—or as little—and ‘in language simple and direct’ ‘In language simple, direct,’ they wrote .
 The cosmology of Genesis, the gropings of primitive speculation, had said as much and left the rationale of the universe as enigmatic as before . The ponderous intellectual machinery of Hegel, milling the same metaphysical grist, could grind out no more logic than what was already in the
 Hegel's great value in Hegel's system was his sense of historical continuity . But the great value of his system was that he had historical continuity, he says .
 The principle of evolutionary progression pervaded his entire work, his work was historical . There was a real relationship between the thought process and the world, he said .
 The true relationship between the concept and the universe was inverted . But the true relationship was inverted, he says .
 If it coutd be turned upright on its feet, the real content which . everywhere entered the philosophy would be in alignment with the true sequence of causality . If . it were turned upright, the true content which everywhere entered would be . in alignment .
 Marx had to make his ideological reversal before he could apply the dialectic . Marx's ideological reversal was necessary for Marx to achieve his goal of socialism .
 Marx applied the dialectic primarily to history and human society . Marx showed that all problems, all knowledge and the purposes of all knowledge are always set in a concrete historical context . Marx applied Marx's dialectic to human society and history .
 There is a guiding thread running through the mazes of the social process . Here is a guide thread that runs through the maze of social processes .
 Nowhere in Marx is the dialectic expounded as a formal philosophical system . By its guidance not only were the apparent anomalies and inconsistencies of the past reconciled and explained, but a course of action was suggested that would rid society of its major ills .
 Marx’s method is bone and ‘sinew of his entire work,’ he said . But the method was to be found in all of Marx's economic theories, he added .
 It is practically applied in the materialistic conception of history and is woven warp and woof in the socialist theory of the state and the class struggle . It is woven in the Marxist conception of the revolution .
 Socialists do not claim that Society is SOCIALIST STANDARD, NOVEMBER 1961, an organic mechanism which can be entirely explained by one invariable rule . Socialists don't claim that society is Socialists .
 They admit the existence of relatively independent factors which effect the course of history in varying degrees . The influence of the exceptional intellect on the state of general culture, the inimical or benign influences of religious movements, the accidents of technological and scientific discovery, or the caprices of fashion —
 The multivariety of causes, the incalculable complexity of social reactions do not admit of strict scientific prediction . The multibariety . of causes does not admit strict scientific predictions, the author says .
 The point to remember is—all the causes and all the effects operative within the body of society are to be explained in terms of nature and society itself .
 Nature and society generate the forces under which new forms and expressions arise . Or in other words nature and society create the forces to create new forms of expression .
 This explanation of social motivation completely eliminates the idealist’s soul-concept . The idealist's soul concept is that social motivation is social motivation .
 A philosophy of social change must admit of empirical verifications of its theories, that is it should be submissible to proof . Conditions under which change is possible must be indicated as at any given time, he says .
 Dialectics provides a nexus between ene culture and another . It must recognize the consciousness of human beings; that they actively participate in shaping the course of their own histories . Dialecticists must recognize that human beings actively participate .
 As the conditions become unstable the form uf the institution either effects a change in the conditions or perpetuates itself as a new thing . The form of the institution is the product of the altered conditions and its antecedent form, the author says .
 The new combination in turn gives rise to a continuous modification of conditions, reacting reciprocally on them and itself . The new combinations react reciprocally to each other and themselves .
 He showed that social change resulted from the interactions of nature, society and human intelligence . On the contrary, he showed that .
 The conventionally accepted ‘effect,” consciousness, was itself as much a cause as the laws of nature and society, and that vice versa, the assigned causes were in turn effects . The author says that consciousness, consciousness and society are as much of a cause .
 Marx applied dialectics of social change to all stages of development . Marx applied the dialectics to all forms of development, including the development of the world .
 For the first time in the history of human thought a law was discovered with which to explain local and universal social evolution . The law was used to explain the evolution of social evolution in the world .
 The process of change from situation to situation and social system to social system exhibits certain inevitable features . There is unity between both phases in that certain features of the old afe preserved and carried over into the new; ¢. The technically developed processes of production and highly specialized division of labour
 Certain features of the old do not appear in the new; e.g., the slave status of labour and private ownership of the means of social existence along with the coercive state will fall into desuetud> under Socialism .
 New forms, activities and purposes arise out of the new combination; and these further change the meaning of whatever is retained of the old . New forms and activities arise from a new combination, says the author .
 "The process of social change, interchange and development goes on forever," says the author . The process of change and interchange "go on forever"
 "The only law that never varies is the eternal, immutable law of change itself," says President Obama . "The eternal law of changing itself is the law itself," he says .
 Anti-Marxists misrepresent Socialists as ignoring the factor of consciousness and human nature . Marx never wearied reiterating that the characteristic mark of social development, as opposed to biological or natural development, was the increasingly greater part played by human consciousness .
 The Delegate Meeting held at Head Office on Saturday and Sunday, October 7th and . 8th. was well attended and proved to be one of the most interesting for some time . Michael WEMBLEY LECTURE Barham Old Court, Barham Park Harrow Road,
 Many interesting ideas exchanged and there is no doubt that comrades Icft the meeting with renewed enthusiasm to make even greater efforts to spread the word of Socialism .
 Our energetic and resourceful new Literature Sales Committee hired a caravan and sped up to Blackpool, where they bombarded the delegation there with literature of the Socialist case .
 The Committee made these arrangements quickly and efficiently and obtained the E.C.’s blessing while the work was actually in progress . The committee says the committee made the arrangements quickly, efficiently .
 This Committee is doing excellent work, attending rallies and meetings of other political organisations, apart from seeing that our own meetings are well supplied with literature .
 Details of sales will be given in the next issue of our next issue, together with the Blackpool report, which will be published in Blackpool .
 Glaswegians should hasten to get in at the start and so benefit from the continuity of the series dealing with the Sixties . These meetings will carry on thraughout the winter .
 Head Office films are being well attended and debates have been arranged . Head Office is organising films and debates to be held in the future .
 The meetings list in every issue should be one of the first items for perusal, so that members can tell friends and sympathisers in plenty of time . Members of the Labour Party should be informed of the events in advance .
 Ealing Branch’s programme of winter activities really gets under way this month . Two lectures, one general and the other theoretical, as well as a film showing, will take place .
 The new meeting room is much more comfortable than the old and is a first-rate place for these activities . The meeting room has a new, more comfortable, first-class room .
 Members asked to make a special effort to be prompt and to note especially the time of the film show made necessary because the film lasts almost an hour-and-ahalf . Members are asked to be extra prompt during the show .
 Two new members have been made in recent months as well as several other contacts . The group has also made contact with two new members .
 Branch members are looking forward to a really successful winter stason . Branch members hope for a successful winter Stason . The local branch has been in the news for over a year .
 1961 NOVEMBER 1961 GLASGOW MEETINGS St. London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard . 1961 Socialist Standard was published by the Socialist Party .
 "The German Story" is a full length film showing at 7.45pm . Discussion will be held on November 17th and 24th November 24th at 7pm .
 Ona chequer board of political tactics the Old Bolshevik moved, mated and slayed, until the assumption of power rested in one man— Stalin . Stalin .
 Stalin completed the work begun by Lenin, turning Marxism into an authoritarian ideology of state capitalism on a par and competing with other state ideologies, i.e. The Communist Party is an authoritarian state capitalism .
 Ist and 3rd Mond-ys (3rd & 17th Dec) 7.30 pm, The Coffee Room, Craen Arms, High Screet . Ist & 3rd Dec. December 3rd & Dec. 17th will be at 7pm .
 NOTTINGHAM Alternate Wednesdays (6th & 20th December) 7.30 pm, Peoples Hall, Heathcoat Street, London .
 Ist and 3rd Monday (4th & 18th Dec) in month 8 pm, The Crypt, St. Michaels, 8 pm. Ist & Dec. Dec.
 Mitcham Cricket Green. Thursday 2nd Dec 8pm, ‘White Hart,”’ Mitcham cricket Green.
 LETTERS containing postal orders, etc., should be sent to E LAKE, SPGR, at the above address .
 Postal orders and cheques should be crossed and made payable to the spos . Postal orders, cheques and checks should also be crossed .
 Clapham High Street is the headquarters of the Socialist Party of Great Britain's National Socialist Party .
 Macaulay 3811 Stalin-the God who fell For Stalin, the final disgrace, was Stalin's final disgrace . For Stalin- the God who . fell, the God . who fell for Stalin, Stalin, was the . final disgrace. For Stalin it was Stalin . for Stalin
 His simple grave now mocks the memory of the days when he was the great dictator, who could make Krushchev caper like court jester . The simple grave of the former dictator mocks his simple grave .
 It mocks, too, the memory of the fulsome praise that was heaped upon him when his pitiless rule was at its height . It also mocks the praise he received for his brutal rule .
 Long live the towe:ing genius of all humanity, the teacher and the guide who is leading us victoriously to Communism, our beloved comrade Stalin, Stalin . Stalin .
 Now that the truth about the “ beloved comrade” is officially acknowledged in Moscow, we can expect some more rewriting of history . Now that Stalin wanted to eliminate the memory of his enemies, it's likely to be more rewriting history, writes Alexander Nekrassov .
 Always taking their line from Moscow, they were emong Stalin’s worshippers, and disregarded the facts about the Russian dictator which Socialists, and others, put before them .
 Molotov and Voroshilov will go as others have gone before them, perhaps . Perhaps Molotsov will follow in the footsteps of others who have done so .
 Historians see similarities between twentieth century Russia and seventeenth century England by treating Stalin’s corpse as Cromwell's was after the Restoration . Perhaps the Soviet government will gratify the historians who see similarities .
 Russian workers will probably accept this, in the manner of workers all over the world . The Russian workers are probably accepting this, as well as the Russians .
 How much more hopeful if they turned the belated denunciation of Stalin to good account .
 The argument for having leaders must be in the assumption that they are beneficial to society . Yet the whole argument for leaders is that they should be beneficial to the community .
 If they can turn out as Stalin did, the urgument for them is destroyed . The urguments for them are destroyed. If they don't, they will be destroyed .
 There is a lesson here for Russian workers and for those in other countries, says CNN.com's John Sutter . There is also a lesson for other workers in Russia, he says .
 It is useless t¢ change one set of leaders for another, The real necd is for the working class to gain enough knowledge te bring about Socialism . The working class should gain enough . knowledge te bringing about Socialism, he says .
 This wrecked the pre-war mirage of a glorious prosperity based on high wages . The UK has been hit hard by high wages since the Second World War . It is now the only place in the world to live and work in Britain .
 For this reason, among others, the Tories came back in triumph to Westminster . The Tories came to Westminster for this reason . The Conservatives came back to Westminster in 2010 .
 A lot has happened since then and a lot has been forgotten, especially promises about reducing prices . A lot of things have been forgotten since then, especially when it comes to reducing prices. A lot is still being forgotten, and it's important to keep up with the promise .
 Taking the purchasing power of the £1 as twenty shillings when the Tories got back in October, 1951, that same £1 note was now worth only I4s.d . So the Financial Secretary to the Treasury had no need to tremble .
 The government have any number of excuses for their failure to keep their election promises . Naturally, the government have many of them excuses .
 Most of them amount to the argument that they have been helpless in economic condilions outside their control . Most of the arguments amount to an argument that the economy is outside of the control of the government .
 The workers have forgotten the rosy promises of 1951 and are now bemused by the prospect of the £1,000 a year dustman .
 Capitalism will really start shaking when the workers despise all promises as worthless . Capitalism will begin shaking when all promises are worthless, says John Defterios .
 Striker turned up at the labour exchange in his Jaguar and parked it-in amongst the smart cars of his fellow-strikers . Strike at Margam Steel Works is the latest in a long line of strikes at the company .
 The pictures and the stories in the press were presumably intended to undermine the strikers’ case . The pictures suggest that men who can afford to run a car have no need to strike, they say .
 The bricklayers at Margam were engaged in unpleasant and dangerous work which put their health in great hazard . Their health was at great risk .
 The Steel Company of Wales had agreed to the bricklayers doing this work under the “job and finish” rule . This rule was allowed to spread to men on a few other types of work .
 W.W. decided that they were losing out on the deal and tried to change the rules . W. W. decided to make the deal with the U.S.
 Workers must always fight for their interests under Capitalism, even under Affluent Capitalism . Workers must fight for workers' interests under capitalism, even if it's called Affluent capitalism .
 Nothing makes any difference to this —not even tiie ownership of a car . Nothing makes a difference to a person's life, even if they own a car, it's not a matter of ownership .
 It is an absorbing, if chilling, occupation to speculate upon the reasons for the explosions . It is not the only way to speculate .
 The bombs could have beer let off as a move in any, or all, of these conflicts . Beer bombs could be let off in any of the conflicts .
 The conflicts are typical of Capitalism in the ‘Sixties—and so are the bombs . The conflict is typical of capitalism in the 'Sixties, and so are bombs .
 This could mean more bombs, more radioactivity, perhaps even bombs dropped in anger . And this could mean even more bombs dropped by angry bombs, perhaps more bombs .
 Capitalism has always had its workers willing to support the system, although they may bemoan the horrors which it continually produces . It is no getaway for them now to say that the bomb tests are a great, inhuman mistake, or the work of a callous government .
 And this will go on until the people realise it and do something about it . And this is not the first time it has happened, it will continue .
 The bright lights of Earls Court are dimmed and the hectic publicity is over . Now come the harsh realities of trying to sell all the cars that were so enthusiastically praised, says BBC's Mark Whitaker .
 As at all Motor Shows, there was the usual optimistic talk of large orders and encouraging sales .
 The big car-hire firms carefully saved their orders to coincide with the Show, as they do every year . All manufacturers expressed satisfaction with the event at the Show .
 Of the Big Five, BMC and Ford are probably the least affected, but they also have troubles . BMC is the least likely to be affected by the crash, but Ford also has troubles .
 BMC’s best seller is the Mini-minor, but they themselves admit that the ratio of profit on these is small . BMC's best-selling car is Mini-mini, but it has admitted that the profit on this is small.
 They have to sell a Lot to make the balance-sheet look reasonable . let alone brilliant . They have a lot of to sell to make their balance sheet look reasonable and brilliant .
 Miniminors are too dear to compete effectively with the home products of similar size . Yet in overseas marOkets, there is no favourable tariff to helo. them .
 All the other big national producers have also held their Shows and are faced with the same problems . The other national producers are also facing the same issues .
 France had no less than three completely new small cars at the Paris Show . Three completely new cars at Paris Show can only mean tremendous competition within France .
 Volkswagen still turning out 4,200 new models a day . New larger car on show at Frankfurt, but old model still being sold .
 In yearly terms this is something like 800900 thousand, about the same as the whole of British production will be this year . The whole of the British production is this year.
 Italian car production is also rising rapidly, whilst at the same time they are thinking oi steps to keep out steadily mounting imports . The Italian government is also thinking of keeping out steadily rising imports .
 To the Ea (ND and SPGB) I note the news item on page 96 of the June issue . I am glad, but not surprised, that CND members figured prominently at the St. Louis rally . All these countries have plans similar to those of the British .
 Mr Gaitskell and Mr George Brown have yet to apply for membership . However, they have not applied for membership of the council .
 CND members are always trying to persuade people that a nuclear war would be the final chapter in the world’s history . CND: A nuclear war is the last chapter of the history .
 We are trying to restore sanity to a divided world in which even the USSR finds it necessary to stockpile nuclear weapons . The U.S. has a stockpile of nuclear weapons, according to experts .
 Before long, many smaller nations, regardless of their political systems, will possess the secret of thermo-nuclear mass destruction, says CNN's John Sutter .
 All sensible people realise that an international Socialist society, democratically elected in the true sense, is the main political hope for the future . But in order to allow and encourage the forces of the Left, we must ensure that there is a world left in manufacturers to expand output .
 One thing they must all be wondering is how they are going to dispose of this output . One thing must be wondering: how they will dispose of it .
 It will be interesting to see how things develop during the next few months . It will also be an interesting time to see what happens in the future .
 Only 15 years ago European Capilalism had almost been written off by the United States . Even the vast quantities of dollar aid that were poured into Europe were given more as an emergency stopv which to preach our propaganda, create Socialist society .
 No organisation which concerns itself with putting right the problems now confronting us, could be justified in maintaining this sort of opposition . No organisation concerned with putting problems right now could justify such opposition .
 J must assume, therefore, that the author of a “Lesson In Futility ” is not representative of his fellow members . J. J. must assume that he is not representing the author .
 Soclalist wants a new social system based upon the common ownership of the means of wealth production and distribution . A Soclist wants to replace capitalism with common ownership .
 He is not in favour of capitalism of any sort because he knows London School of Economics & Political Science 2007 Socialist Standard 1961 gap between Russia and Russia .
 One hundred and fifty years’s experience of exploiting the working class was still there to form the basis for revival . The Labour Party has been in touch with the British working class for over 100 years .
 The countries of the Common Market are a threat to American Capitalism, writes David Frum . If Britain joins, the threat will really be formidable, he says .
 The United States is in fact in a similar position to that of the U.S. The U.N. is in a-very similar position, says President Obama .
 Mr Radford confirms that a member of CND may hold any sort of political views provided he is agreed that wars should not be fought with nuclear weapons . He says he suspects the organisation contains some Liberals .
 CND can only be another organisation which stands for a reformed capitalism . No Socialist could belong to such an organisation such as the CND .
 There may be many CND members who sincerely think that they are Socialists, but they are not the first to get themselves involved in that particular bit of muddle-headedness .
 It is rather late in the day for CND, with its Labour and Liberal members, to tell us that time is getting short . CND's Labour and Lib Dems say it is time for time to be getting short.
 Whilst we have been explaining and opposing capitalism’s wars our opponents have been busily fighting them and working to make them more destructive . We have been working to explain and oppose capitalism's wars, our opponents are busily trying to make it more destructive.
 But our correspondent has to offer only the old plea that we should drop our work for Socialism until we have sorted out one more of capitalism's problems .
 One of the comfortable assumplions which this Industry uses to oil jts wheels is that the present time (whenever that may be) is one of enlightened civilisation . The present time is a time for enlightened civilisation, says the Industry .
 The advertisement may not be intended for a wide readership, but the point it tries to make is pretty general . The ad is not meant for a broad audience, but it's intended to be a general statement .
 The past is rather doubtful —mistakes were made, foolish things were done, or foolishly left undone . The past has been rather doubtful, says author .
 The ""Twenties were certainly a classical period of cynicism and disillusionment," says the author of the book .
 Fleet Street and Tin Pan Alley have always found it difficult to revive any popular nostalgia for the period .
 Both Labour and Communist governments have built up massive armed forces for their capitalist class . The capitalist class have made sure that those forces were equipped with enormous stocks of powerful weapons .
 They have also played their part in keeping the divisions of the capitalist world which Mr Radford mentions, by their export drives, patriotic propaganda and so on . They also have also helped to keep the divisions in the world by keeping the divide between capitalism and socialism .
 Here is evidence enough to support the Socialist claim that reformist policies are futile . Here is. evidence enough for . support of the Socialist . claim .
 Russia is as much a capitalist nation as any other and cannot be expected to seact any differently in face of international competition . Russia is not expected to act differently in the face of competition, says Putin .
 It is the reformist organisations which, in their support of capitalism, uphold what what they called the “new morality ” - although goodness knows there was nothing new about it . The reformists were the reactions of a generation bewildered by one of the most dreadful wars .
 The tiniest village in England can show its memorial to a shockingly long list of young men who died in that war . The tiny village in the country's smallest village has a memorial to those who died there .
 They drowned in the mud at Paschendaele, they were slaughtered by the Turkish infantry at Gallipoli . The Turkish infantry also killed them in the battle for their country .
 British workers swarmed cheering into the streets on August 4th, 1914 . It was so different {ram what everybody had been expecting .
 During the war there was no lack of well-kept ministers to assure the people who were actually doing the dying that they did not suffer for nothing .
 Some of the emptiest promises and the silliest of the blather have gone down in history and are still remembered with sardonic smiles . The emptyest promises and silliest blather will go down, but some of the best of the promises have been left behind .
 There are still plenty of men who can recall coming home from the trenches to join the long queues at the labour exchanges . For many, it is not the first time they have come home from war .
 For any social system is inseparable from its values; to support one is to uphold the other . To support a social system, support it is essential to upholding the other, says David Cameron .
 The SPGB has always stood for the social revolution which will sweep away capitalism and all its false social values, says the SPGB .
 This will be the complete, only and oncefor-all cure for the problems of capitalism . To stand for anything less could mean that we would end up supporting the very thing we originally professed to oppose .
 A one-time pacifist could serve as a Minister of War . That is why old opponents of the peerage system somelimes end their days in the House of Lords .
 People who are now members of CND will, if capitalism requires them to, fight in 4 nuclear war just as pacifists of the nineteen thirties took part in the last war . It is why people who are . now . part of the . CND . will fight in
 The “Seek Work” clause was meant to deprive the unemployed of even the pitifully small dole . The clause was designed to keep the unemployed out of poverty .
 As the years turned into the ‘Thirties, there opened the long list of international conflicts . The invasion of China, the attack on Abyssinia, the German ex pansion in Europe—which led up to the Second World War .
 It is difficult to explain why Fascism was so popular in Germany and not in other countries in which conditions were broadly the same . Fascism is a form of fascism in Germany, but it is not widely understood elsewhere .
 Whatever the explanation for this, there is one thing which can be said, is that this is not a bad thing . Whatever the reason for this is, it is a good thing to say, it's a good news for the world .
 Fascism, with its reliance upon the strong man leader theory and its extreme racialism, is the desperate product of despair . Fascism is the result of despair, writes David Frum, the author of the book Fascism .
 An unemployed man, or a man who cannot find a home for this family, is easy prey for the first rabble rouser . Or perhaps the Jew comes under the lash because, says the racialist, he owns the country and so controls what goes on in it . Or
 This is so obviously a doctrine of ignorance and despair that simply to state it is to expose its weaknesses . This is simply to expose the weaknesses of the doctrine, which is so obvious it's so obviously ignorant that it's dangerous .
 When ignorant workers are having Capitalism’s problems thrown in their faces, it is just the sort of theory that can find favour with them . But when they are shocked and bewildered and desperate, it's just the kind of theory .
 Fascism is part of the explanation for the rise of Fascism in Europe and of the astounding, dreadful things that it did there. That is part, at any rate, of the reason for Fascism, he says .
 Some people recall the years between the wars with a shudder, as rather like a bad illness which came to its crisis in 1939 . It is not wonderful, then, that some people remember the years before the wars .
 Baldwin was unflappable Prime Minister of Canada . Baldwin was a long time before the word '10 Supermac' was pinned on 10 Supermac .
 He was an astute politician who played the game as dirtily as he had to . He was a shrewd politician, who played as dirty as he could .
 "To blame him for a whole period of brutality is to side step the facts," says CNN.com's John Sutter . But to blame him, he says, is to 'side step down'
 Tizard and Lindemann were involved in a wartime bombing controversy . Tizard was the prime minister of Germany during the Second World War . Lindmann was the architect of the World War II .
 These men were highly trained scientists who hardly seemed able -to avoid arguing . These men seemed to hardly seem able to avoid arguing. They hardly seemed to be able .
 One of their bitterest clashes was over the question of whether the Royal Air Force should have bombed German civilians . The pair clashed over the issue of bombing German civilians in the war .
 Neither of them argued that it would be callous, even by their lights, to deliberately attack a civilian population .
 They fought over -whether the air force was capable of doing the job and whether, if it was done, it wouid have any considerable effect on the German war effort .
 There is no need to suppose that either man had an emotional case; both of them went into it armed with cold calculations in terror and destruction . Both men went into the war with the U.S. in terror, destruction .
 While this was going on, the politicians were soothing us with their promises, some of yah are supposed to have been fulfilled in the so-called Affluent Society . While this is going on we were supposed to be fulfilled by the politicians .
 They can take on the lifetime burden of a mortgage on a house, they say . They have given up hope of getting one by any other method . They say they are willing to live with a mortgage .
 Do not let us forget the shadow under which the Affluent Society has . grown up . And do not let them forget that . The Affluent society has grown up. Do not forget that it is a shadow under .
 World split into two great armed camps in dispute over the exploitation of markets and the possession of raw materials . Almost since the end of the last war, the world has been split between two great camps .
 The Russans have let off the'r massive bombs and promised us that we have only seen a half of it . The Russ.ans have promised to let us only see half of the massive bombs . The Russians have promised us we will only see a 'half of it'
 The American Secretary of Defence has replied that his country’s military power is virtually irresistible .
 Affluent Society eats ifs food and breathes its air only after they have been soiled by the fallout . The Affluent society eats food only after it has been eaten by ifs .
 For £150 million every family in the country could be decently housed within twenty years, says World Parliament Association's szcretary general .
 For £200 million the roads could be improved, possibly to save 20,000 lives a year . The roads could also be improved in order to save lives of 20,500 people .
 Nothing would please us more if we could pack up making all those beastly guns and bombs and build houses instead of building houses instead . We would like to see how easy it is to build a house .
 The trouble is we have got to live with the Russians (or the Americans, depending upon who is answering the question) and they've got a big army . The trouble will be living with Russia or the U.S. and the Russians, writes Andrew Hammond .
 If we don’t watch out, they’ll start moving into parts of the world where we are boss at the moment, says David Cameron . The UK is boss at this moment, he says .
 Capitalism is bound to throw up its disputes because it splits the world into competing economic groups, says David Frum . Capitalism will throw up disputes, he says, because it divides the world's economic groups . Capitalism has a tendency to divide the world, he writes .
 The armies, the guns, the aircraft and the bombs are there to influence the dispute and if need be to fight it out . If need be, the bombs will be used in the fight .
 The nations of Capitalism must arm themselves. must coldly work out the damage and death potential of their weapons, must perpetrate some of the most barbaric acts the human race has ever experienced . Sometimes human credulity breaks under the strain of it all and we are swept into the crazy
 Or bewilderment fertilises ignorance and breeds the maniacal savagery of racialism . Or bewildered ignorance fertilises the maniacs of racialists, or bewildersers .
 "The desperate, bloody story goes on, period after period, changing perhaps its form, but never its miserable content," says the author . "It's a desperate story, but it's never the same thing," he says of the story .
 The ""Twenties and ‘Thirties may have been bad times, but nothing that has happened since has made them look worse by comparison. The '50s and '60s were bad times. But nothing that hasn't made it look worse has made it worse by
 Many worthy people have fondly cherished the notion that Roosevelt and his fellow Republicans meant * doing for” the trusts . Roosevelt and fellow Republicans were meant to do for’s trusts, but now they are busting them up .
 Liberal advertisement sheets have praised him for his ‘great fight’ and accepted him as the enemy of monopoly . Liberal adverts praise him for fighting monopoly monopoly .
 But true to capitalist methods, when something more than mere words and rhetoric is required, he turns round and defends the trusts and ridicules the idea of destroying them .
 Roosevelt: ‘The big business has come to stay and it is futile to expect to return to the old days of Jaissezfaire'
 In the course of his article he denounces the government for interfering with the Steel Trust and calls President Taft's policy a “ chaotic” one, So much for capitalist politicians .
 When they seek office they tell their poor followers that trusts can be smashed by anti-trust laws . When seeking office, they tell them poor followers they can smash trusts, they must not be trusted .
 Socialists often say concentration of capital is inevitable result of economic laws . But in the calm of other days the truth emerges, the truth so often driven home by Socialists emerges . The truth is that combination of capital and concentration is inevitable .
 Always the same pattern of one interest trying to form a monopoly and other interests trying to break it . Both sides say that their only motive is to help the poor . Both parties say that they only want to help poor .
 In another column a paragraph is reproduced from our issue of December, 1911, about the foolishness of expecting the politicians to carry out their promise to bust the trusts and destroy monopoly .
 Many laws have been passed since then to cut the giants down in size and enforce competition, but all that has happened is that the giants have grown fatter and stronger . Still, still the rerormists are promising to do something to stop them .
 Labour M.Ps. complain that it is not enough, but none of them seem to know quite what to do . Now it is the turn of the Labour MPs. to complain .
 The first Fabian Essays dublished 80 years ago were already discussing what to do about monopolies .
 The Restrictive Practices Court should have power to threaten offending companies, Hutber says . Hutber's proposal is that the court should be able to threaten an offending company .
 Far from being new, it was an idea well known to the early Fabians and was ancient cven then .
 Gladstone, then a Tory, was responsible for the first Act of Parliament giving the Government power to take over the railways in 1844 .
 Manufacturers and traders who were being bled by the monopolistic railways had got Gladstone to pass the Act . Gladstone wanted to use it as a threat against the Companies unless they reduced their charges .
 The test of the effect of the Act is to see to what extent it has succeeded in bringing prices down . Since the purpose of the restrictive practices by manufacturers and traders is to force up prices to get more profit, the simple test will be to see how much the Act has succeeded .
 Mr Heath concluded that the effect of the Act on the general level of prices has so far been very small . To date, the visible effect on retail prices has been almost nil .
 As soon as the law makes some practice illegal the lawyers get to work to discover ways of getting round it . What happens is that as soon . as soon as . law makes it illegal, lawyers are working on ways to get round it, says Simon Tisdall .
 Manufacturers agree not to fix prices, but to make 'open price' agreements . They set up a control agency to exchange information about prices each manufacturer is charging .
 Monopolies Act has been to stimulate mergers by rival firms . If it is illegal for rivals to agree on price maintenance, it is quite legal for them to merge .
 Some critics of the Monopolies Acts in Britain say things are different in America; and indeed the battle there has been going on longer . It is claimed by some critics of some critics that things are . different in Britain .
 In April of this year the American electrical manufacturing industry was convicted for breaches of the anti-trust laws . Electrical manufacturing industry has been convicted of breaches of anti-piracy laws .
 Seven directors were sent to prison and fines of two million dollars were imposed . Seven directors of the company were jailed and fined .
 Those who started waging war against Standard Oil Trust in the eighteen eighties were not promising that after eighty years the battle would be going on .
 In USA, as in Britain in Gladstone's day, the fight is in internal capitalist one, between the trust formers and their trade victims . In U.S. as in U.K. in Britain, the trade victims are victims of the trust-formers .
 Government agencies, private utilities and Municipal authorities have been. among the industry’s biggest customers . The price-fixing conspiracies kept prices too high, they say .
 If all the claims were upheld by the courts, the manufacturers might have to pay out as much as a hundred million dollars in damages .
 Marxists have always held that the progress of Capitalism has involved the inevitable trend towards concentration into bigger and more costly enterprises . In the meantime, as Marxists always held, the trend of capitalism has involved a trend towards concentrated firms .
 There is a natural tendency to extol the virtues of the small man, but many seem to deplore the growth of big business . We live in a world where all units are increasing in size and importance .
 Labour M.P. ‘would be almost unthinkable’ for a trade union to make such a declaration today,’s Labour leader said .
 The possibility of a Socialist world in which you do not have to curb market seeking, profit making industries because you have production solely for use, is still beyond their grasp, H Ghana Visit says .
 Duncan Sandys, the British diplomats in Ghana, the Prime Minister himself and the other members of the Cabinet have had a hand in the final decision .
 The only person who doesn't scem to have been consulted is the person whose safety, after all, is at stake-—the Queen herself . The Queen herself.
 There could hardly have been a more striking illustration of the position the monarchy now holds as against the ruling class . The monarch's position is a striking contrast to that of a ruling class in Britain .
 The Capitalists have taken over the state and the machinery of government, they have converted the governmental instruments of the old landowner-ruled society to their own uses, or have allowed them to survive merely as powerless ceremonial appendages .
 The Queen and Nkrumah rode together through the towns of Ghana . The Queen had no choice in the matter as the Queen was forced to do so .
 The Government, the Capitalists’ executive committee, had decided that she was to go . The Capitalists' executive committee had decided she should go .
 The monarch in Capitalist society is no more than a pupp2t, she was constitutionally bound to “take her minister's advice’—i.e., do as she was told . And since the monarch is no less than a puppet, she is constitutionally obligated to take
 Recently Nkrumah, as the chosen righi hand of the Ghana ruling class, has been revealing more and more clearly what kind of society the Ghana rulers have decided on . Recently he has been revealed more clearly .
 It is now an offence punishable with jail to defame the President . It seems in practice to cover any kind' of criticism of him .
 Only a decade ago, when there was just as much of a dictatorship in Ghana as there is now, the Daily Express had no objection to the dictatorship at all . The only difference is that the dictatorship was then run by the British ruling class instead of the Ghanaian ruling class .
 The record of the Daily Express on the matter deprives it of the right to criticise . It is not the first time the Express has criticised the Government .
 Only those who criticised the British dictatorship of the past can now criticise the Nkrumah dictatorship . Only those . criticised the . British dictatorship . of the . past can logically now . criticise . the . present regime of the present .
 The people who will suffer most from the fall-out from this bomb are the Russian working class, says CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 The Russian rulers, for all their pretence that their State Capitalism is a form of “ Socialism,” in fact show as much contempt for their own workers as any Western ruling class could . Which is another demonstration .
 It is horrible to think that an appreciable number of human beings will be crippled either mentally or physically in order that Mr Krushchev should attempt to terrorise the world in this way .
 For a socialist analysis of war read SOCIALIST PARTY AND WAR . Jane Thomas, Eyre & Spottiswood. 42s.
 He has made a very good job of collecting and presenting information on the complex and fast-moving events of the Civil War .
 Spanish Republican Exiles had still learned so little that they hoped that the new organisation would dispose of Franco . Yet when that war ended, the United Nations inherited the shabby mantle of the League .
 It might have been expected that the world war and all that has happened since would have destroyed interest in the Spanish Civil War . But the steady stream of books proves otherwise, proving otherwise .
 It is not the size and destructiveness of the war, but the passions aroused in participants and onlookers alike that make it still memorable . The war is still remembered for its passions and its destructiveness, the author says .
 There is also speculation about what would have happened if only some politician or party had turned in a different direction at the crucial moment .
 From the start, the wilder volunteers had got into trouble with the authorities, if only for drunkenness . The wilder participants had got in trouble with authorities .
 Those who wished to return home were not permitted to do so when they wished . Some complained that they had volunteered on the assumption that they could go home in three months’ time .
 Mr Thomas dismisses as unreal the charge that the Russians “ cheated” the Republicans of the money, but concedes “ that Russia drove a hard bargain for her goods .
 No arms or food were sent to Spain before the end of October . Three months after Franco had rebelled, no arms or supplies were sent .
 Immediate payment in gold was insisted upon by Stalin for such arms as were sent . Stalin insisted on payment of gold in gold in order to get arms .
 German Capitalism might bait the hook with long-term credits, but not out of charity; only because of a really big fish was to be caught, Spanish mineral wealth . He was quite wrong; German Capitalism .
 It was German aid that was finally decisive in the autumn of 1938 . The price — exacted for the arms “ was German participation in all the important iron ore projects in Spain .
 There is no evidence to show that Germany considered supplying the planes . No evidence that the planes would be supplied by Germany .
 Both parties felt so strongly about their own policies that defeat itself seemed preferable to surrender of the purity of their individual views . One excuse might be that all. the parties felt . strongly about themselves .
 Failing to get aid from the West th Spanish Government had to rely more and more on Russia and the Communists -~- which only increased the division in its own ranks . Failing the West, the Spanish Government relied on Russia for its survival .
 In April, 1939, the National Committee representing the Spanish Confederation of Labour . published a statement, Three Years of Socialist Standard 1961 Struggle in Spain, giving their version of events and the reason for failure .
 The virulence of their charges against Russia and the Russian-directed Spanish Communists shows that Mr Thomas has understated the impossibility of Republican Unity . The virulent charges against Russian and the Spanish Communists show that .
 Thzy accused the Communists of almost every crime that they had charged against Franco, plus cowardice . Thzy said the Communists were guilty of almost all of the crimes they had been charged against .
 For the Communists, they would have won against Franco and his allies . They still half-beligved that, but for the Communists they would've won . The Communist Party still believes that, despite their efforts, they still believe that they still won .
 Mr Thomas sums up his own by saying that most of the governments were using the Spanish conflict to test out weapons and study tactics for future us2 in larger wars .
 Observers appear to have drawn the wrong lessons or failed to profit by the right ones . Of course, Germany, Russia and Italy were exploiting the same opportunity, though it is one of the ironies of the situation .
 Each government seems hesitant about pushing intervention so far as to provoke a war immediately . Each government, however, seems to have been reluctant to push intervention .
 Germans and Russians who had desertion and been warring in Spain for three years, hobnobbing together to celebrate Stalin-Hitler pact of friendship . If any Republicans still held this illusion in the Spring 1939 when the Republican armies collapsed they had only to wait six months to see Germans
 Franco reversed the roles and was willing to give aid to Germany, at a price . Franco was not drawn into the war as a combatant Power, but he was not .
 The Spanish Blue Division fought alongside the German armies in Russia . This did not stop them from sharing the horrors of the war in Russia with the Germans .
 In the Epilogue in which Mr Thomas briefly notes the fate of those who came to prominence in Spain, he tells of the Republican general El Campesino who as an exile was welcomed to Russia, but fell foul of the authorities .
 He escaped and in appalling difficulties made his way to Persia; only to be handed back by the British . He escaped but was handed back to the British by the end of the war .
 Mr Thomas’s material shows how heavily the scales were weighted against the Republicans in the international field . The material shows that Mr Thomas's material shows .
 The Texas Oil Co. was at once willing to supply oil on longterm credit, without guarantee . Franco's oil company was willing to provide long-term credit to Franco .
 Those who, for whatever reasons, hold the view that . the workers should support war can say that in 1936 that risk was worth taking . Those who hold the . view that the workers . should support . support war .
 It is not merely being wise after the event to say that the GOP’s position was impossible and that civil war could not solve their problems. It is simply being wise . It's not just saying that the Republicans’ position is impossible .
 Popular Front won the 1936 election by a bare majority of votes . Popular Front was composed of such divergent elements that the aim of a LabourLiberal Parliamentary democracy was at that time as much out of the question .
 AnarchoSyndicalists repudiated politics and parliamentary methods, which they called “empty phrasemongering” and who beved in direct action, violence, and armed revolt, as much against a Republican Government as any other .
 Popular Front and Popular Front Government was a denial of all their principles, regretted almost as soon as it was given . Their support for the Popular Front was a 'denial of all its principles', regretted almost soon after it given .
 The word LEVELLER was first heard in 1606 when a band of men roamed the Warwickshire countryside uprooting or levelling fences and hedges . These detested barriers had been going up all over England for eighty years .
 Property waste-land brought misery to the poor and greater wealth to the rich . Enclosing the ‘waste-land’ that from time immemorial had been common property brought increasing misery to poor .
 Large areas were turned into sheep walks to satisfy the growing demand abroad for superior English wool . Large areas of English wool were turned out to satisfy demand abroad .
 Fresh ideas on farming and improved methods of stockbreeding made squires land-greedy . The squires were led by squires in the 17th century .
 Enclosing was the polite name for stealing; people were driven from their homes to give pasture to sheep . People were driven out of their homes for pasture to give .
 Their only hope of survival lay in the towns; where they were fleeced even more closely than their woolly competitors . The only hope was to survive in towns, where they had to rely on the towns .
 Inventions and the necessity for larger ships meant bigger outlay and brought a demand for more money in the form of capital . Inventors and larger ships were needed to build larger ships .
 The land lost much of its aristocratic value; the traditional obligations to tenant and labourer tended to disappear . The land was given to the poor in the early 1900s, but the land was not aristocratic .
 The old tyrant with titles was often supz2rseded by a new tyrant with money . Farmworkers were tricked out of Tights of tenure . The old tyrannies were often superseded by new tyrannies .
 Though freed from the old bondage they were enslaved in a new and often terrifying system . They were freed from old bondage . Though freed, they were slaves in a terrifying new system .
 Throughout these tremendous changes Charles I remained obstinately feudal in outlook . Charles I was obstinately opposed to feudalism .
 By 1628 the House of Commons was three times richer than the Lords . The House of Lords is three times wealthier than the Commons . The Lords were three times more richer in 1628 .
 This gave its members confidence to resist the king’s demands for money . This gave them confidence to resistance to the king's demands .
 In 1629 he closed Parliament for eleven years, hoping to show his recalcitrant M.Ps, that he alone held power . But in 1639 a rebellion broke out in Scotland, and by 1640 he had been forced to recall Parliament to vote the necessary money to quell
 They knew that archaic notions of kingship must give way to a governmental system favourable to the merchants . The merchants knew that they had to change the way they wanted to govern .
 As a warm-up for their startling policy they executed the king’s chief minister, the Earl of Strafford, who had been raising an army in Ireland to crush Parliament . The Earl was also executed for his role in crushing Parliament in Ireland .
 John Lilburne, leader of a ‘left-wing’ group, the Levellers, was released from prison, where he had resided two years for issuing anti-State Church pamphlets . Now free, he got an Army command .
 With widespread opposition came a taste for democratic expression . With this widespread opposition, there was also a taste of democratic expression, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The popularity of Cromwell's rising faction gave the Levellers a chance to speak out . Cromwell was the leader of the rising faction in the early 17th century .
 On the right were the Anglican Royalists, conservative and pro-Charlcs . On the left were theIndependents, radical but not united . The left were radical and radical, but united .
 They were divided into a right-wing called Gentlemen Independents headed by Cromwell, Ireton, and Fairfax . A left-wing known as the Levellers were led by the left . Cromwell was the leader of the Liberal Party headed by Ireton .
 The latter reflected the aspirations-of small farmers, humbler-tradesmen, and soldiers, says CNN.com.com .
 They advocated greater political equality than the Independents and had a widespread popular support . The party was founded in 1903 . It was the first party to form a political party .
 The civilian arm of the movement (the Diggers) urged greater cconomic equality . In recognising that all political organisations and freedoms spring from or are crushed by the particular mode of land ownership .
 All through the struggle the Levellers did best in the army, perhaps because there they were better organised than the Diggers . Perhaps because of the organisation it was better organised, they were able to get out of the war .
 Levellers maintained that economic freedom followed from political freedom . Diggers saw it rather the other way . Both issued a considerable mass of literature .
 Stripped of Biblical overtones it stated a view that is still a staggering novelty to millions today . Stripped out of its Biblical . overtones, it stated that the view that was still a . staggering novelty .
 The paper was suppressed after September, 1649, by ‘democratic” Cromwell . Cromwell suppressed the paper in 1649 .
 The Levellers just as clearly saw that religion with its mirage of a happy future life was the carrot that encouraged the poor donkey of a labourer to stagger on . It was the same thing that religion was to encourage the poor .
 The New Model Army was Parliament’s striking force, its job to overthrow the king . Richard Overton, too, wrote in Man's Mortality that the idea of the soul was ridiculous . The New model army was Parliament's striking force .
 The Levellers saw in it a means of getting better conditions for the poor . But because its ranks were filled with many pro-Leveller men, the Leveller saw it as a way to get better conditions .
 On May 20th, 1647, ‘a great petition’ was sent to the Commons demanding political reforms and the re-organisation of the Constitution . The petition was sent by the Commons to demand political reforms in order to change the constitution .
 When the re-imprisoned Lilburne heard that the common hangman had been instructed to burn it, he looked to the army for support . He was in and out of gaol between 1646-1648 for various attacks on authority .
 He declared the power of the land vested in the army, and Cromwell agreed . Cromwell later declared that the power was in the hands of the army . He declared that he had the right to take over the land .
 Fearing the support gained by the Levellers, the Presbyterians compromised with Charles . Next, a manifesto, The Case of the Army Truly Stated, was presented to General Fairfax on October 15th, 1647 .
 The Independents with the Levellers marched to London, entered the House and passed a measure to thwart any attempt to corrupt the army . The Presbyterians were crushed . Enraged, the Independent with the . Leveller marched to . London, entering the House,
 Cromwell had been aided by ‘the Levellers,’ he refused to free Lilburne . Cromwell was aided by the 'Levellers' but refused to help free LilBurne .
 Law reform to enable laymen to three was found guilty and one of these was shot . Law reform was found to be in violation of the law . One of these laymen was shot in the head .
 The Levellers tried resistence again, but were imprisoned and imprisoned . Lilburne remained in the Tower . It was a serious defeat .
 All the contesting elements of Parliament sank their differences again in preparation for the fray . Parliament is preparing for the next round of elections .
 The artful Presbyterians released Lilburne, hoping he would stir the army to mutiny . The army was released by the Presbyterians, hoping to stir up a mutiny.
 He supported Cromwell, presumably regarding him as the lesser of two evils . But he supported him as a lesser-than-two evils .
 Fairfax, Cromwell and the others Grandees (as they were somewhat derisively called) allowed their discussion in a series of debates held in Putney . Pensions for disabled widows and children soldiers, soldiers, and disabled women's pensions, were among the topics discussed .
 Cromwell reasoned that if these fiery demands could be proved too extreme or impractical, Leveller influence would diminish and the threat to his supremacy would disappear . Cromwell: If these demands were proved too severe or impractical it would diminish .
 The main point was that the vote was the birthright of all men, and to this Ireton replied, “. . . . voting was a property right. Voting was a . property right,” Ireton said .
 Only those who owned a house worth 40s a year in rent or who had a frechold interest in land should vote . Only those with a property worth $40,000 a year should vote, say MPs .
 The protection of private property was of the utmost importance, now that freedom had been won, says the British Prime Minister .
 Rainborough for the Levellers retorted that what was required in voting was reason not property . Rainborough said voting was not a matter of property .
 Next, he set Out to quell his army and persuade the least influenced to sign a pledge of loyalty at Corkbush Field, Ware, in Hertfordshire .
 The Agreement of the People was presented to Fairfax, Fairfax, but he accepted it, but told the men to go on signing and they did . Fairfax accepted the agreement but told them to sign it .
 Cromwell drew his sword and rode angrily among them, tearing away their colours . But then up rode two dissenting regiments singing and wearing the Leveller colours . Cromwell was angry and tore the colours of the dissenting regiment .
 1961 inent, but lay in abeyance while the king's fate was decided . 1961 Socialist Standard 1961 was inentent, and lay . inabeyance .
 On January 30th, 1649, Charles, king by the grace of God, died by the . grace of the merchants . Charles was the king of England . He died January 30,1649 .
 Both were quite good one lasted nearly a quarter of an hour and J have brought the tape of it back with me . Both were very good, with J bringing the tape back with him .
 There was an excellent discussion relating to war and the H-Bomb, in which there were contrasting views expressed . Arising out of something 1 had said (nothing to do with the tour)
 There is a great deal | have missed out of this report on account of the limitations of space, and many members and sympathisers who gave me a warm greeting .
 "I would like them all to know how much I appreciate what they did for me," she said . She said she would like to thank them for their support .
 During the last two weeks in America I stayed with the Rabs, and I have to thank them for the warmth of their hospitality and the way they put themselves out to see that | had rest and recreation, including some lovely trips to see the magnificent autumn plumage .
 The delegation present was of necessity not large. Owing to the vast distances between branches and groups over there . The delegation was not large .
 At the outset taped and written grectings from all over the world were heard and read . Then various reports of the year's work were given .
 The sending out of letters to Libraries and Colleges during the year had brought excellent results . The sending . out letters to libraries and Colleges had brought . excellent results.
 A proposal to produce two new Pamphlets, one on the Materialist Conception of History and the other on The WSP What it Stands For, has been referred to the Editorial Committee for attention .
 Conference Social was held at a member’s house on the evening of the first day of conference . Conference Social held at member's house .
 It was a very pleasant, comradely and lively affair, attended by about fifty members of the party .
 "On September Sth I left for Detroit, accompanied by comrades Rab and Orner, and we held three meetings there. On September S. S.S. I went to Detroit accompanied by Rab, Orner and Rab . On September . S.E. I was accompanied by
 A proposal to form a discussion group was agreed to by a small group of people . They were small but interesting with plenty of questions, they said . The group was formed in response to a meeting at the fourth evening .
 The discussion group has made a very good start, at a place that has been rented, and a large number of interested people arc attending it . I have since learnt that the discussion group is made a good start . It is a very small group of people who are interested in attending it
 The members concerned have put in a lot of time and energy lo ensure its success . It appears to be that it is a method that could be widely copied . The members of the committee have put a lot in a great effort to ensure their success .
 Rab and Orner left for Vancouver and Victoria on September 9th . They left for Chicago on September 8th .
 On the morning of the Ith | was given a long newspaper interview in Victoria and a brief TV interview . The interview was cut short because of mechanical difficulties during the recording .
 The next day there was a good meeting in Victoria with plenty of questions and some opposition . There were also plenty of opposition to the government .
 There was -a short disturbance at this meeting on account of the interruptions of a local celebrity .
 After the Victoria meeting, I went up the coast of Vancouver Island to Nanaimo, about 80 or so miles. I had an interview with the editor of the local paper and spoke at a mecting in the evening—-not very well as I was feeling very tired. However
 There were interesting questions, particularly from Some young people, and discussion . However, there were some interesting questions from some young people .
 Comrade Stafford, 84 years old, proposes to run classes there . He writes regularly to local papers .
 After the meeting we had a hectic drive back to Victoria, arriving at 2.30pm . After a meeting, we had to return to Victoria for the second time .
 The next meeting I spoke at was in Port Alberni, about 40 miles beyond Nanaimo .
 "I must express my appreciation of the excellent work being done there by Comrades Luff, Jenkins, Tickner and Poirier," says author .
 The last three just swept me off my feet with their cnergy—they travelled to Nanaimo and Port Alberni to post bills and distribute leaflets advertising the meetings, as well as arranging for newspaper interviews and attending the meetings . They also received considerable help from sympathisers .
 Comrades J and M Ahrens, Watkins and Cannon had been busy with Radio, TV, and the newspapers . Comrade J andM Ahren's, Watkins, Cannon were busy with radio, TV and newspapers .
 I appeared with three others—budding MP's —and we each had to supply a copy of the script which we read at the meeting . I appeared in a meeting with three other budding MP's and we had to read the script .
 We were given a short time to answer each other. Mine lasted about nine minutes . Then we were given time to respond to each other’s questions .
 After a short break in the radio whilst questions were collected from the audience, we cach answered questions put to us by the audience . We then were given a short time to sum up.
 Comrades J, and M Ahrens took me for a long week-end to a bungalow they had built in the mountains where I was re-vitalised for the rest of the tour .
 Members are making strenuous efforts to get an open air meeting place in Stanley Park . On September 26th I left for Winnipeg .
 There were two meetings there but attendance was not good—possibly because the weather was perishing cold, about 20 degrees . Attendance was poor, possibly because of the weather .
 Old members have died or moved west and south-west, leaving the others to carry on under great difficulties . Winnipeg has changed over the years .
 "They are very\much isolated there, but are doing a very good job stirring things up. They are very ...isolated there," he said .
 An open discussion group has been formed not connected with any political party . Every week one of the members of the group reads a paper, which is then discussed .
 After | had opened up, questions »were addressed to me for about 1} hours, and then there was discussion . After | opened up,. questions had been addressed to . me for . about 1. hours, she said . 'Then there were discussion. about 1] hours,
 Comrades George and Karla Ellenbogen have recently gone to live there and started stirring things up . They have recently moved in and have been stirring up the fire .
 The meeting in Montreal wis excellent with plenty of questions and discussion . The meeting was excellent with lots of questions .
 There again 1] was glad to renew acquaintance with old members I had met on previous visits . "Comrade Orner, who is endowed with superlative energy," he said .
 A number of sympathisers, including a seaman who had met our comrades in London at the Russian Exhibition, wanted to join the WSP which shows how sceds can flower in distant places .
 The detailed story of our comrades activities makes interesting reading, but unfortunately space limits us to this very brief report . We are happy to provide a brief version of the story .
 The trip was most successful, and the propaganda value was probably much greater than can be assessed at the moment . What must be said is that the trip was . most successful . The propaganda value of the trip is probably greater than could be assessed .
 Next year it is intended to repeat ventures like this, and their growing success will be in no small measure due to the hard (though pleasurable) work done by our comrades .
 Mr Headicar, the CND representative, “sat down” the previous Saturday and got himself two months imprisonment . Mr Headicsar, a CND rep, ‘sat down and got two months’ imprisonment .
 The SPGB were out of contact with the real world, and death would overtake us all, notwithstanding the propagation of Socialist ideas, unless nuclear weapons were abandoned, says the writer .
 Melvin Harris for the SPGB showed that CND was similar to many other bodies, which had sprung up in the past, attempting to tackle one or other evil Of the capitalist system . CND is similar to other bodies which have tried to tackle the evils of capitalism .
 These organisalions had failed, and CND would fail for the same reason. These organisations had failed. CND will fail again, he said .
 The films are followed by brief comments by a party speaker, and then the meeting is open for questions and discussion . Light refreshments will be available in the Social Room afterwards .
 Bethnal Green Town Hall, E2, is a great place to take part in the lectures . Visitors particularly welcome .
 The Socialist Standard is a way of increasing sales of the Socialist Standard . Branch News is published in a bid to increase sales .
 For eight shillings a year a copy of this book will be sent to any address in the British Isles . For eight-shillings-a-year subscription to the book is free .
 The greater its circulation the greater will be the impact of Socialist propaganda, and incidentally, the more economic . The more economic will be . the “ Standards” cost of production . The greater circulation of the propaganda the greater .
 In 1962, Socialist Standard sales of the Socialist Standard increased dramatically . Resolve in 1962 to increase your sales and spread the case for Socialism .
 The Branch’s winter lectures are in full swing with a wide range of subjects, every other week . The Branch's winter lectures will be held every week on a variety of subjects .
 All those who attend will find the meetings stimulating und worthwhile . All those attending will find it worthwhile, says author .
 Wembley is holding their Xmas Social on December 16th at the Ealing Park Tavern . Wembley will be hosting a Xmas social at the Tavern on December 17th .
 J Ealing Branch is continuing its winter activities with a showing of Eisenstein’s film ‘Strike’ on December 8th . The film will be shown at the branch in Ealing, London .
 Owing to the length of the film, please note that the showing will begin at 7.45m prompt .
 Further Jectures and film shows are being planned for January, February and March 1962. s Blackpool Lights .
 Every Sunday at 7.30 pm prompt throughout the winter until April 29th . Room 2, Door G, Room G, is open at 7:30pm every Sunday night .
 January 28th, STRUGGLE FOR THE CARIBBEAN ee EALING FILM * Memorial Hall, Windsor Road, Ealing Broadway. What's at stake in Germany?
 Socialiet varty vf Great Brstutn, 52 Clapham High Stvect, London, S.W. 4.W 4.N.