 Ex-Officials Meet in Moscow To Match Notes on Cuba Crisis . Many of the top-level participants in the Cuban missile crisis confronted each other eyeball to eyeball .
 Gorbachev: Missile crisis contained important and enduring lessons . Bush: U.S.-Soviet-Cuban talks contain important lessons about missile crisis . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton: "It's a good time for the United States"
 Soviet and Cuban officials have agreed to discuss their roles in the crisis with U.S. officials . Today marked the first time that ranking Soviet and Cuba officials have discussed their roles with United States officials .
 Soviet participants include longtime foreign minister Andrei Gromyko and former ambassador to Washington Anatoliy Dobrynin . Khrushchev's father, Nikita, ordered the stationing of nuclear missiles on Cuba and later agreed to withdraw them .
 Edward M Kennedy and John F Kennedy Jr. both backed out at a late date . Edward M. Kennedy was the son of Edward Kennedy .
 American participants include former defense secretary Robert S McNamara, former national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and former White House special counsel Theodore C Sorensen .
 American participants in today's opening session said they got a much stronger sense than ever before of Cuban and Soviet fears of an imminent U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 In his memoirs, Khrushchev insisted that his primary motivation for deploying missiles in Cuba was to deter a U.S. invasion . In the memoirs he said he wanted to deter an invasion of the United States .
 Col. McNamara acknowledged that if he had been in the shoes of the Soviet and Cuban officials across the room, he would have been in his shoes . McNamara was reported by other participants to have acknowledged .
 He continued to insist, however, that the Kennedy administration had no intention of invading Cuba prior to the missile crisis .
 Documents make clear that while encouraging a revolt by disaffected Cubans was the preferred means of deposing Castro . Some administration officials favored direct military intervention, documents show .
 Soviet officials did reveal that Washington's nuclear superiority in 1962 was even greater than the 15:1 ratio previously thought . Soviet officials revealed that Washington had a nuclear superiority ratio of 15 to 15 .
 At the time of the crisis, two-thirds of the Soviets' entire missile stock of about 60 launchers was deployed in Cuba . The crisis occurred in Cuba during the early 1980s .
 Gorbachev said the sharpest conflict could be extinguished thanks to "responsible approach and good sense" exhibited by Khrushchev, Kennedy and Castro . In his message to the conference to conference he said that the lesson of the crisis was that “the sharpest . conflict could .