 Cuba is located in the northern Caribbean at the confluence of the Caribbean Sea, the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean . Cuba is the most populous country in the world, with the largest island in Cuba .
 Cuba is south of the eastern United States and the Bahamas . It is west of the Turks and Caicos Islands and Haiti and east of Mexico . Cuba is also located in the Bahamas, Haiti and Cuba .
 Its people, culture and customs draw from several sources including the aboriginal Taíno and Ciboney peoples . The period of Spanish colonialism, the introduction of African slaves, and its proximity to the United States .
 The island has a tropical climate that is moderated by the surrounding waters . However, the warm temperatures of the Caribbean Sea and the fact that Cuba itself almost completely blocks access to the Gulf of Mexico make Cuba prone to hurricanes .
 Cuba is perhaps the most well-known Caribbean nation due to its pivotal role in world politics in the twentieth century . Religion and religious freedom are key issues in Cuba's political history .
 At the beginning of the twenty-first century, the nation is attempting to dig out from decades under a communist and socialist system . The nation is re-establishing relationships with free and advanced nations .
 Cuba is an archipelago of islands located in the Caribbean Sea . Cuba is the most populated island in the world, with many of its islands .
 Cuba is the nation's principal island, which is surrounded by four main groups of islands . Cuba is Cuba's main island, surrounded by a group of islands known as Cuba, Cuba's other islands .
 These are the Colorados, the Camagüey, the Jardines de la Reina and the Canarreos . The Canarries are the largest islands in Spain and the largest in the country .
 The main island of Cuba constitutes most of the nation's land area . Cuba is the 17th-largest island in the world by land area and is 17th in size . Cuba's main island is the main island, Cuba's largest island and is the most populated island nation .
 Cuba has a total land area of 42,803 square miles . Cuba is slightly smaller than the United States state of Pennsylvania . Cuba has the largest land area in the world .
 It has 3,735 km of coastline and 29 km of land borders with the leased U.S. territory at Guantánamo Bay . The United States Navy's Guantanamo Bay Naval Base is located .
 The local climate is tropical, though moderated by trade winds . Cuba has a tropical climate, moderating trade winds, though .
 In general, there is a drier season from November to April, and a rainier season from May to October .
 Cuba lies in the path of hurricanes, and these destructive storms are most common in September and October . Cuba is most vulnerable to hurricanes, especially in the months leading up to hurricanes .
 Havana is the largest city and capital; other major cities include Santiago de Cuba and Camagüey . Havana is Cuba's largest city, capital .
 Better known smaller towns include Baracoa which was the first Spanish settlement on Cuba, Trinidad, a UNESCO world heritage site, and Bayamo .
 Natural resources include cobalt, nickel, iron ore, copper, manganese, salt, timber, silica, and petroleum . Natural resources also include nickel, copper and nickel .
 There are still many cedar, rosewood, mahogany, and other valuable trees . There is still many valuable trees in the U.S.
 Large areas were cleared in order to grow sugar cane, resulting in the need to import timber . Large areas of timber needed to be imported to grow the sugar cane .
 Christopher Columbus sighted the island on October 28, 1492, when he first voyage of discovery and claimed it for Spain . History of Cuba began in 1492 .
 The island had been inhabited by Amerindian peoples known as the Guanahatabey and Ciboney in the western section, with the Taíno peoples in the remaining area . The island is now uninhabited by indigenous people .
 The Taino, a sophisticated agricultural society, were related to the Arawakan peoples of South America who had migrated to the Greater Antilles . They had a sophisticated agriculture society .
 Coast of Cuba was fully mapped by Sebastián de Ocampo in 1511 . First Spanish settlement was founded by Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar at Baracoa .
 Cuba soon became a point of departure for exploration on the North American mainland . Cuba was the first country to explore the island nation of Cuba .
 Native population decimated mainly by European-introduced disease and maltreatment . By 1550 the native population had been decimated by Europeans .
 Aspects of the region's aboriginal heritage has survived, however, in part due to the rise of a significant Mestizo population .
 By 1570, most residents were of mixed ancestry, a mixture of Spanish, African, and Indian heritages . Most of the town's mixed ancestry was Spanish and African .
 Intermarriage was common due to the absence of women emigrants as well as the military nature of the conquest . Intermarriage is common in the early years of the conquests .
 Cuba soon began to depend on the sugarcane industry as its main source of economy . Cuba soon relied heavily on the industry as a source of wealth . Cuba's sugar industry is now a major source of income .
 More than 600,000 slaves were imported from Africa in the nineteenth century . The slaves were brought from Africa .
 Many of these arrived after 1820, the year that Spain and Great Britain had agreed would be the end of slave trading in the Spanish colonies . Spain and Britain agreed to end the trade in 1820 .
 By 1830 the Cuban sugar industry had become the most mechanized in the world . Cuba's sugar industry was the world's first to be mechanized and mechanized .
 Small farmers were expelled from their land while the forests were depleted . Small farmers had to leave their land in order to save the forests .
 Wealthy plantation owners gained prominence in the political and social fields of plantation owners . Wealthy plantation owners gained prominence in the political, social and economic fields .
 Contract workers, Mexican-Indian and Chinese, joined the labor force . They took on tasks as degrading and dangerous as slaves faced . Contract workers took on the same tasks as slaves .
 At the same time, the British navy attacked slave ships, and the Americans abolished slavery . At the time, slavery was abolished in the United States .
 The African slave trade ended in 1865, though it took another 21 years before slavery in Cuba was abolished in Cuba . Slavery in Cuba ended 21 years later, but slavery was abolished 21 years after .
 The Spanish population was boosted by settlers leaving Haiti when that territory was ceded to France in 1697 . The population of Spanish settlers left Haiti when it was given to France .
 An English fleet under command of Lord Albermarle took control of the island in 1762 . The Battle of Havana was part of the Seven Years' War . Spanish rule was restored to Spain the following year .
 Cuba remained loyal to Spain in the 1820s, when other parts of Spain’s empire in Latin America rebelled and formed independent states . There was some agitation for independence in Cuba, although there were some agitation .
 Cubans feared the rising power of the United States . This was partly because of the prosperity of the Cuban settlers depended on their export trade to Europe .
 Spanish migration contributed to the slow development of a Cuban national identity . An additional factor was the continuous migration of Spaniards to Cuba from all social strata . The demographic trend had ceased in other Spanish possessions decades before .
 Cuba's proximity to the United States has been a powerful influence on its history . Cuba’s proximity to U.S. has been powerful influence over its history. Cuba has a history of its own history .
 Throughout the nineteenth century, Southern politicians in the U.S. plotted the island’s annexation . Southern politicians plotted the annexation .
 Polk authorized ambassador to Spain, Romulus Mitchell Saunders, to negotiate the purchase of Cuba . Polk offered up to $100 million, an astonishing sum of money at the time for one territory .
 Spain refused to consider ceding one of its last possessions in the Americas . Spain, however, refused to give up its last possession of the continent .
 Carlos Manuel de Céspedes, now known as the ""father of the revolution," led a rebellion in 1868 led by a wealthy planter from Oriente province who freed his slaves, proclaimed a war and was named President of the Cuban Republic-in-arms .
 This resulted in a prolonged conflict known as the Ten Years' War between pro-independence forces and the Spanish Army, allied with local supporters . The Spanish Army was allied with the local supporters of independence in the 1960s .
 Spain promised to reform the island's political and economic system in 1878 . At the Convention of Zanjon in Zanjon, Spain promised a reform of the political system . The island is now a tourist destination in Spain .
 Pro-independence agitation temporarily died down, but the nationalist leader Antonio Maceo and several others refused to accept the Spanish conditions .
 Calixto Garcia began another uprising in 1879, but received little support . In 1879 he began a revolt against the government, but it was unsuccessful .
 During this period, rural poverty in Spain provoked by the Spanish Revolution of 1868 and its aftermath led to greater emigration to Cuba . The rural poverty of rural Spain led to an even greater emigrations to Cuba.
 During the 1890s, pro-independence agitation revived, fueled by resentment of the restrictions imposed on Cuban trade by Spain . Spain’s increasingly oppressive and incompetent administration of Cuba, Cuba .
 Few of the promises for economic reform made by the Spanish government in the Pact of Zanjon were kept . Few promises were kept by the government in Zanjon .
 Annual trade between Cuba and the U.S. had reached about $100 million . In 1894 Spain canceled a CubanUnited States trade pact .
 The writer and poet José Martí organized the war over a ten-year period while in exile in the U.S. and proclaimed Cuba an independent republic . Máximo Gómez landed with an invasion force in Cuba .
 His death immortalized him, making him Cuba’s undisputed national hero . His death made him the Cuban dictator of Cuba .
 The eastern region of the island was quickly conquered and the conflict spread westward . The eastern part of the country was quickly taken over by the British Empire .
 In 1896 Spain placed 200,000 troops on the island who ushered rural residents into urban camps . In 1896 100,000 people were forced to live in urban camps in order to survive .
 In 1897 Spain promised home rule with an elected legislature . Spain moved to a more conciliatory policy, promising home rule .
 By this time however, most of the population had begun to sympathize with the rebels and the war for independence continued . By the time of this time, the majority of the country had begun sympathizing with rebels .
 Commercial activity had essentially ceased and news of Spanish atrocities on the island reached the U.S. Anti-Spanish resentment began to heat up . Commercial activity in the island was essentially ceased .
 Forces in the U.S. favoring intervention in Cuba seized on this incident to accuse Spain of blowing up the ship . There was no evidence of who had done the deed, although there was no proof .
 President McKinley was quick to comply with a resolution passed by Congress calling for intervention . McKinley complied with the resolution and ordered the intervention .
 United States forces landed in Cuba in June 1898 and quickly overcame exhausted Spanish resistance . The result was the Spanish-American War, which ended in 1898 . The U.S. and Spain fought in Cuba .
 In August a peace treaty was signed under which Spain agreed to withdraw from Cuba . In August, Spain withdrew from Cuba under the peace treaty .
 Some advocates in the U.S. supported Cuban independence, while others argued for outright annexation .
 As a compromise, the McKinley administration placed Cuba under a 20-year U.S. treaty . The treaty was a compromise . Cuba was placed under the treaty by McKinley .
 Unlike the Philippines, where events had followed a similar course, there was no outbreak of armed resistance . The Cuban independence movement bitterly opposed this arrangement, but unlike the Philippines .
 Theodore Roosevelt, who had fought in the Spanish-American War and had sympathies with the independence movement, abandoned the treaty proposal in 1901 .
 The Republic of Cuba gained formal independence on May 20, 1902, with the independence leader Tomás Estrada Palma becoming the country’s first president .
 The U.S. retained the right to intervene in Cuban affairs and supervise its finances and foreign relations . Under the new Cuban constitution, however, the United States retains the right .
 Under the Platt Amendment, Cuba agreed to lease to the United States the naval base at Guantánamo Bay . Cuba also agreed to the U.S. to lease the base to Cuba .
 Cuba today does not celebrate May 20 as their date of independence, but instead October 10, as the first declaration of independence . October 10 is the date of Cuba's independence . Cuba today celebrates May 20 .
 Independent Cuba soon ran into difficulties as a result of factional disputes and corruption among the small educated elite . The failure of the government to deal with the deep social problems left behind by the Spanish .
 In 1906, following disputed elections to choose Estrada Palma’s successor, an armed revolt broke out . The United States exercised its right of intervention in the wake of the revolt .
 The country was placed under United States occupation and the United States governor, Charles Edward Magoon, took charge of it for three years .
 Magoon's governorship in Cuba was viewed in a negative light by many Cuban historians for years thereafter . Many Cuban historians believe that much political corruption was introduced during Magoon’s years there .
 In 1908 self-government was restored when José Miguel Gómez was elected President . Self-government in Cuba was restored in 1908 .
 The Gomez administration, which lasted until 1913, set a pattern of graft, corruption, maladministration, fiscal irresponsibility, and social insensitivity . Gomez administration was known for its corruption, corruption and insensitivity toward Afro-Cubans .
 African-Cuban community organized to secure better jobs and more political patronage . Led by Evaristo Estenoz and Pedro Ivonet, the community was organized in order to secure more jobs .
 Machado's administration was fraught with troop intimidation and assassination . Machado was assassinated by the Colombian government in 2009 . He was forced to step down from his post .
 He was overthrown by leftist groups, with U.S. help, in the Revolution of 1933, which brought Batista to power . Batista overthrown in 1933 .
 During his rule, Cubans gained greater control over their own economy . Major national development projects were undertaken during his rule .
 His hold on power was weakened by the Great Depression, which drove down the price of Cuba’s agricultural exports and caused widespread poverty . Cuba's economy was hit hard by the Depression, and poverty was widespread .
 In August 1933, elements of the Cuban army staged a coup which deposed Machado and installed Carlos Manuel de Céspedes, son of Cuba's founding father, as President . The coup took place in August 1933 .
 In September, however, a second coup led by Sergeant Fulgencio Batista overthrew Céspedes leading to the formation of the first Ramón Grau San Martín government . The first government was formed by the first government of the second government .
 In 1934, Batista and the army replaced Grau with Carlos Mendieta y Montefur . The army was the real center of power in Cuba, replacing Grau .
 With the support of the communist-controlled labor unions, Batista was elected President . Batista's administration carried out major social reforms and introduced a new constitution .
 Batista's administration formally took Cuba into World War II as a United States ally . Cuba, however, did not significantly participate militarily in the hostilities . Cuba declared war on Japan on December 9, 1941, then Germany and Italy on December 11, 1941 .
 At the end of his term in 1944, Batista stepped down and Ramón Grau was elected to succeed him . Grau became the first president of Cuba in 1944 .
 Grau initiated increased government spending on health, education and housing . Grau led the government to increased spending on education and health .
 Grau's liberals were bitter enemies of the Communists . Batista opposed most of Grau’s program . Grau was a bitter enemy of the Communist Party .
 In 1948, Grau was succeeded by Carlos Prío Socarrás, who had been Grau's minister of labor and was particularly disliked by Communists .
 Prío was a less principled liberal than Grau and, under his administration, corruption increased notably .
 Havana became a safe haven for mafia operations in the 1950s . This was partly a result of the postwar revival of U.S. wealth and the consequent influx of gambling money into Havana . Havana is now a thriving tourist destination .
 Prío carried out major reforms such as founding a National Bank and stabilizing the Cuban currency . He was the first president of Cuba to take office .
 The influx of North American money fueled an economic boom which did much to raise living standards and create a prosperous middle class in most urban areas . But the gap between rich and poor became wider and more obvious .
 The Directorio Revolucionario and Organizacion Autentica attacked the Presidential Palace in Havana in 1957 . Bullet-ridden truck used in the attack was used in attack .
 By the late 1950s, Cuba had developed one of the leading economies in Latin America . Presidential Palace in Havana is now the Museum of the Revolution .
 It had among the highest annual per capita incomes in the region, $353.5 million .
 The majority of rural workers earned only about one-fourth this amount and lived in poverty . However, most rural workers earn only one-third this amount . Most rural workers live in poverty, according to the report .
 Much of the country suffered a lack of public services, as well as unemployment and underemployment . The country has been hit hard by the rise of populism .
 A number of foreign investors controlled the economy, owning a great percentage of the arable land, essential services and still–profitable sugar production .
 Throughout this decade, Batista exercised absolute control over the political system . Batista was in control of the country's political system throughout the decade .
 When it became apparent that Batista had little chance of winning the 1952 election, he staged a coup . Batista held power with the backing of a nationalist section of the army as a “provisional president” for the next two years .
 The internal decay of Batista's government and resultant suffering of the population and their frustrations gave power to the opposition that brought about to his downfall, led by Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro led the opposition to the overthrow of his government .
 Castro had been a legislative candidate for elections in 1952 that were aborted by Batista . Batista had been trying to oust Castro in 1952 . Castro was a candidate for a legislative seat in 1952, but was never elected .
 Castro formed an underground organization of supporters, including his brother, Raúl, and Mario Chanes de Armas . As the nation grew increasingly discontent, Castro formed a network of underground supporters .
 Together they plotted to overthrow Batista, collecting guns and ammunition . Finalizing their plans for an armed attack on Moncada Barracks, Batista's largest garrison outside Santiago .
 Castro and other surviving members of his group managed to escape to an area of the rugged Sierra Maestra mountains east of Santiago where they were eventually discovered and captured . Castro and others escaped to a remote area of rugged mountains and were eventually captured .
 Castro was tried in the fall of 1953 and sentenced to up to 15 years in prison . Castro was found guilty of attempted murder in October of that year .
 After having served less than two years, he was released in May 1955 due to a general amnesty from Batista who was under political pressure .
 He and a group of friends went to Mexico to prepare for the overthrow of the Cuban government . The Cuban government was overthrown by the government of Cuba .
 In Mexico, Castro met Argentine–born Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, a proponent of guerrilla warfare . Castro met Ernesto "Che" in Mexico, where he met Che, a Marxist guerrilla leader .
 Guevara joined the group of rebels and became an important force in shaping Castro's political beliefs . He was a key figure in shaping the evolving political beliefs of Castro's regime .
 Guevara's observations of the misery of the poor in Latin America had already convinced him that the only solution lay in violent revolution . The only solution to the problem lay in violence, he said .
 On November 26, 1956, Castro and his band of 81 rebels, mostly Cuban exiles, set out from Tuxpan, Mexico aboard the yacht Granma for Cuba . Castro and the rebels set out aboard the boat Granma from Mexico aboard on November 26 .
 Landing at Playa Las Coloradas near the eastern city of Manzanillo on December 2, they were routed and nearly annihilated by security forces . Landing was a disaster for the group, which was routed and almost annihilated .
 A dozen survivors, including Castro, his brother Raul and Guevara, retreated to the Sierra Maestra and began a guerrilla campaign . Castro and his brother, Raul, were among the survivors . Castro's brother, Fidel Castro, was killed in September 1968 .
 From their encampment in the Sierra Maestra mountains, the 26th of July Movement waged a guerrilla war against the Batista government . The 26th July Movement was formed from a guerrilla camp in the mountains .
 In the cities and major towns also, resistance groups were organizing until underground groups were everywhere . Underground groups were organized in cities, towns and cities across the world .
 Through 1957 and 1958, opposition to Batista grew, especially among the upper and middle classes and students . The Catholic Church and many rural areas also opposed Batista .
 The United States imposed an arms embargo on the Cuban government on March 14, 1958 . The embargo was imposed in response to Batista's plea to purchase better arms from the U.S.
 By late 1958, the rebels had succeeded in breaking out of the Sierra Maestra and launched a general insurrection . Hundreds of students and others fled Batista’s crackdown on dissent in the cities .
 He reported that the romantic revolutionary was no Communist; in fact, the local Communists opposed him . He said that he was a romantic revolutionary, but he was not Communist .
 Castro's image was changed from that of that of a hothead into that of the youthful face of Cuba's future . Castro was changed into a young face of the Cuban youth in the 1960s .
 Castro's rudimentary command of the English language and charismatic presence enabled him to appeal directly to a U.S. audience . Through television, Castro's basic English command and charisma helped him gain a foothold in the United States .
 Batista's government was isolated in 1958 when the United States imposed an arms embargo . The embargo was imposed by the U.S. in 1958 .
 At the same time several Cuban military commanders sympathized with the rebellion or joined it . At the time, Cuban military leaders were sympathetic to the rebellion .
 When the rebels captured Santa Clara, east of Havana, Batista decided the struggle was futile . Batista fled the country to exile in Portugal and later Spain . He was forced to live in exile after the capture .
 Fidel Castro became Prime Minister of Cuba in February 1959 . He held effective power in the country until formally handing it over to his brother, Raul Castro, in 2008 .
 Castro’s government carried out measures such as the confiscation of private real estate, the nationalization of public utilities, and began a campaign to institute tighter controls on the private sector such as closing down of gambling industry .
 Castro evicted many Americans, including mobsters, from the island . Castro also evicted American mobsters from island .
 These measures were undertaken by his government in the name of the program that he had outlined in the ''Manifiesto de Montecristi'' while in the Sierra Maestra .
 He failed to enact the most important elements of his reform program, however, which was to call elections under the Electoral Code of 1943 within the first 18 months of his time in power . He also failed to restore all of the provisions of the Constitution of 1940 that had been suspended under Bat
 Castro flew to Washington, DC, in April 1959, but was not received by President Eisenhower . Eisenhower decided to attend a golf tournament rather than meet with Castro .
 Attitudes towards the Cuban revolution both in Cuba and the U.S. were changing rapidly . The Cuban revolution was a major event in Cuba's history . The revolution in Cuba was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 The nationalization of U.S.-owned companies aroused immediate hostility within the Eisenhower administration . Eisenhower administration was opposed to the move .
 Cubans began to leave their country in great numbers and formed a burgeoning expatriate community in Miami . Cubans are now living in Miami, Florida, where they have a thriving community .
 Many were angry at Castro's revolutionary government due to its seizure of private property in Cuba and the increasing number of "paredones" of those who opposed him .
 Cuban-Americans soon formed a powerful political lobbying group in the U.S. The group is now a powerful lobbying group . The Cuban-American community has a history of political activism .
 The United States government became increasingly hostile towards Cuba throughout 1959 . The U.S. government was increasingly hostile to Cuba throughout the years .
 This, in turn, may have influenced Castro's movement away from the liberal elements of his revolutionary movement and increased the power of hardline Marxist figures in the government, notably Che Guevara . This theory is open to debate .
 In October 1959, Castro openly declared himself to be friendly towards Communism, though he did not yet claim to be a Communist himself . The liberal and other anti-Communist elements were purged .
 Within six months of coming to power, he had sent agents to initiate revolutions in several Latin American countries . He established diplomatic and economic ties with leading socialist powers .
 Cuban citizens who had initially supported the revolution fled the country to join the growing exile community in Miami . Many Cuban citizens now live in the U.S. and live in exile .
 In March 1960, the first aid agreements were signed with the Soviet Union . The first aid agreement was signed with Russia in March 1960 .
 In late 1960, a trade embargo was imposed, which strengthened Castro's ties with the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union stepped in to buy tons of Cuban sugar . Castro's relationship with the U.S. strengthened in late 1960 .
 At the same time, the Kennedy administration authorized plans for an invasion of Cuba by Florida-based Cuban exiles, taking advantage of anti-Castro uprisings which were repressed . The Kennedy administration approved plans to invade Cuba .
 The failed invasion in April 1961 came to be known as the Bay of Pigs Invasion . It was the first attempt to invade the U.S. mainland .
 These were mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles that had the capability of reaching the eastern U.S. within a few minutes following launch from Cuba . The missiles were launched from Cuba in 1961 .
 U.S. spy planes detected the presence of new military construction on the island . By the end of the following month, United States spy planes had detected new military activity .
 The United States responded by placing a naval blockade on Cuba in order to prevent the receipt of further Soviet missile shipments . The U.S. placed the blockade in place to prevent further missile shipments to Cuba .
 President Kennedy warned that U.S. forces would seize all weapons and materials the Soviets attempted to deliver . President Kennedy said the United States would seize the materials and weapons .
 For the next several days Soviet ships which had already been en route to Cuba altered course away from the blockade zone . The blockade zone was closed for several days until the end of the blockade .
 On October 28, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev informed Kennedy that work on the missile sites would cease and missiles already in Cuba would be returned to the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy committed that the United States would not invade Cuba, a fear founded on the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion . Kennedy, in turn, said that the U.S. would never invade Cuba .
 Kennedy quietly promised withdrawal of nuclear-armed missiles from Turkey which the United States had deployed in previous years . It was also learned that Kennedy also promised the withdrawal of the missiles .
 Castro was infuriated by the Soviets' withdrawal in the face of the U.S. ultimatum . Cuba alone did not have the power to act against either superpower .
 Nikita Khrushchev fell from power in October 1964 . Nine months after the assassination of John F Kennedy, Nikita was overthrown from power . Nikita became the leader of the Soviet Union .
 A so-called 'Yank tank', one of the many remaining U.S. cars in Cuba, imported prior to the United States embargo against Cuba . Marxist-Leninist Cuba .
 During 1963, relations deteriorated again as Castro moved Cuba towards a fully-fledged Communist system modeled on the Soviet Union . Relations deteriorated again in 1963, when Castro began to push Cuba's Communist system .
 The United States imposed a complete diplomatic and commercial embargo on Cuba . The embargo was imposed by the U.S. in 1961 .
 Cuba was forced to direct virtually all its trade to the Soviet Union and its allies . At this time the U.S. influence in Latin America was strong enough to make the embargo very effective .
 The nation was plagued by shortages of food, fuel, and other necessities . The nation's economy was hit hard by the recession in 2008 .
 Raúl Castro’s position was strengthened by the departure of Che Guevara to launch unsuccessful attempts at insurrectionist movements in Congo, and then Bolivia, where he was killed in 1967 . Che died in Bolivian in 1968 .
 Osvaldo Dorticós Torrado was President of Cuba from 1959 to 1976 . He was a figurehead of little importance in Cuba .
 Castro introduced a new constitution in 1976 under which he became President himself, while remaining chairman of the Council of Ministers . Castro introduced the new constitution under the name of the new president .
 Castro moved onto the world stage as a leading spokesperson for Third World ""anti-imperialist" governments . During the 1970s, Castro became a leading spokesman for Third . World governments .
 On a more concrete level, he provided invaluable military assistance to pro-Soviet forces in Angola, Ethiopia, Yemen and other African trouble spots .
 Cuban forces were decisive in helping the MPLA forces win the Angolan Civil War in 1975 . Cuban forces helped win the war in Angola . The MPLA won the war with the Cuban government .
 The bills for these expeditionary forces were paid by the Soviets, but they placed a considerable strain on Cuba’s economy and manpower resources . Cuba was forced to rely heavily on the Soviet-funded expeditionary force in Cuba .
 The Soviets were forced to provide further economic assistance by buying the entire Cuban sugar crop . Even though they grew enough sugar beet to meet their own needs, the Soviets bought the entire crop .
 In exchange, the Soviets supplied Cuba with all its fuel, since it could not import oil from any other source . Cuba was forced to rely on the Soviet Union for fuel supplies .
 Cuba's economic dependence on the Soviet Union deepened by Castro’s determination to build his vision of a socialist society in Cuba . Castro was determined not to rely on Soviet Union for economic reasons .
 This entailed the provision of free health care and education for the entire population . The government was able to provide free health and education to the entire country .
 Through the 1970s and 1980s, the Soviets were prepared to subsidize all this in exchange for the strategic asset of an ally under the nose of the United States and the undoubted propaganda value of Castro’s considerable prestige .
 By the 1970s, the ability of the U.S. to keep Cuba isolated was declining . Cuba's ability to be isolated from the United States is declining .
 Cuba had been expelled from the Organization of American States in 1962 . The OAS had cooperated with the United States trade boycott for the next decade . In 1975, the OAS lifted all sanctions against the island-nation and both Mexico and Canada defied the U.S.
 Both countries had hoped to foster liberalization in Cuba by allowing trade, cultural and diplomatic contacts to resume . But they were disappointed by no appreciable easing of repression against domestic opposition . Both countries were disappointed with the lack of progress in Cuba .
 Castro did stop openly supporting insurrectionist movements against Latin American governments . Pro-Castro groups continued to fight military dictatorships which then controlled most Latin American countries .
 The Cuban community in the United States grew in size, wealth and power . Politically opposed liberalization of U.S. policy towards Cuba .
 The efforts of the exiles to foment an anti-Castro movement inside Cuba, let alone a revolution there, met limited success . However, the efforts were unsuccessful, with some saying they were necessary .
 The storming of the Peruvian embassy in Havana in April 1980 led to the ""Mariel boatlift"" to the United States later that month . 7000 Cuban citizens seeking political asylum in Cuba were granted permission to leave the nation .
 In all, over 125,000 Cubans emigrated to the United States before the flow of vessels ended on June 15 . Some of them were criminals released from prisons .
 The two countries signed an agreement in 1987 allowing 20,000 Cubans to emigrate annually to the U.S. The agreement was made in 1987 . The two nations signed a deal allowing 20000 Cuban to emigrate annually .
 Tens of thousands have arrived illegally to the U.S. and elsewhere since the days of the revolution . An uncounted number of those who died at sea have died in the past .
 The demise of the Soviet Union in 1991 dealt Cuba a giant economic blow . Post-Cold War Cuba has been hit hard by the economic collapse of the USSR .
 U.S.-Cuban accords eventually slowed to a trickle of a few thousand a year by the accords . It led to another unregulated exodus of asylum seekers to the United States in 1994 .
 Castro’s popularity was severely tested by the aftermath of the Soviet collapse . The collapse led to a cut off in aid, the loss of a guaranteed export market for Cuban sugar . Castro's popularity was also severely tested .
 It caused a crisis in confidence for those who believed that the Soviet Union was successfully ""building socialism"" and providing a model that other countries should follow . It also caused, as in all Communist countries, a crisis of confidence .
 In Cuba, however, these events were not sufficient to persuade Cuban Communists that they should voluntarily give up power . The Cuban Communists were not satisfied with the events in Cuba .
 To survive they did recognize that to survive they needed to open up to capitalism . However, they also recognized that they did not want to live under capitalism . They did want to be open-minded about capitalism .
 In 1993 Cuba began to legalize small family-owned businesses, such as restaurants . Cuba also encouraged private employment and encouraged small businesses .
 Foreign capitalists invited to the island, including Canadian and Spanish hoteliers . Foreign capitalists were invited to island .
 Cuba shot down two small aircraft piloted by a Florida-based anti-Castro group in 1996 . In 1996, the Cuban government shot down planes piloted in Cuba by a group .
 The Helms-Burton law threatened U.S. sanctions against foreign-owned companies investing in Cuba . This led to the passing of the law, which threatened United States sanctions . The law was passed by Congress in 1994 .
 In 1997, Christmas was restored as a national holiday, as the nation anticipated a visit by Pope John Paul II the following year .
 Many Cubans began to question the future of socialism . During this time many Cubans questioned the country's socialist government .
 By the late 1990s Cuba had more or less normal economic relations with most Latin American countries . Cuba had improved relations with the European Union, which began providing aid and loans .
 China emerged as a new source of aid and support, even though Cuba had sided with the Soviets during the Sino-Soviet split of the 1960s . China also emerged as an important source of support and support for Cuba .
 President Hugo Chávez of Venezuela and President Evo Morales of Bolivia are major oil exporters . Cuba also found new allies in Venezuela and Bolivia, major oil and gas exporters.
 Castro again drew international criticism when, in 1999, prominent dissidents were jailed and repressive laws were enacted . Castro's repressive laws included repressive laws enacted in the late 1980s .
 Castro maintained a firm grip on power, however, speculation grew on the state of his health, and rumors abounded . Castro maintained his grip on the presidency, but speculation grew .
 Castro was too ill to attend a commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Granma boat landing on December 2, 2006, which fueled speculation that he had stomach cancer . Castro was hospitalized with stomach cancer in 2006 . Castro died in 2009 .
 Fidel Castro announced he was resigning as President of Cuba on February 19, 2008 . Castro announced that he was stepping down as President in 2008 .
 In his acceptance speech, Raúl Castro promised that some of the restrictions that limit Cubans' daily lives would be removed . Castro also promised to remove some restrictions from Cuba .
 Miguel Díaz-Canel was elected president on April 18, 2018 after the resignation of Raúl Castro . Miguel was elected President of Cuba in April 2018 . He was sworn in as president of the country .
 José Martí Monument designed by Enrique Luis Varela, sculpture by Juan José Sicre and finished in 1958 . Monument was completed in 1958 and was designed by Enrique Luiz Luis Varelas .
 The Republic of Cuba was defined as a socialist state in 1976 . The Socialist Constitution of 1976 was adopted without following the procedures laid out in the Constitution of 1940 . Cuba is now a socialist country .
 Socialist Constitution of 1992 claimed to be guided by the ideas of José Martí, and the political ideas of Karl Marx, Engels and Lenin . This constitution was replaced by the Socialist Constitution of 1992 .
 Members of both councils are elected by the National Assembly of People’s Power . Both councils are members of the People's Council of Power .
 The President of Cuba, who is also elected by the Assembly, serves for a five year term . Since the ratification of the 2019 Constitution, there is a limit of two consecutive five-year terms . Cuba's President is elected by an Assembly of the Assembly .
 The Supreme Court of Cuba serves as the nation's highest judicial branch of government . Cuba's Supreme Court is Cuba's highest court . Cuba is home to the highest court in the world .
 It is the court of last resort for all appeals from convictions in provincial courts . It is also the court-of-last resort for appeals from provincial courts in England .
 Between sessions legislative power is held by the 31 member Council of Ministers . The assembly meets twice a year, between sessions and meetings of the Council of ministers .
 Cuban citizens over 16 years of age who have not been found guilty of a criminal offense can vote can vote . All Cuban citizens aged 16-years-old over 16 can vote if they are not found guilty .
 Individual vote totals, which are invariably high, are not verified by non-partisan, independent, or non-state organs and observers . Individuals' vote totals are always high .
 Nominees are chosen at local gatherings from multiple candidates before gaining approval from election committees . Nomineers are chosen by local gatherings and then approved by election committees.
 There is just one candidate for each seat, who must gain a majority to be elected . In the subsequent election, only one candidate can win a majority in each seat .
 In 1997, the party claimed 780,000 members . Representatives generally constitute at least half of the Councils of state and the National Assembly .
 The remaining positions will be filled by candidates nominally without party affiliation . The remaining candidates will be chosen by candidates without party affiliations .
 Other political parties campaign and raise finances internationally, while activity within Cuba by opposition groups is minimal and illegal . Opposition groups are limited to minimal activity within the country .
 Cuban constitution has language pertaining to freedom of speech, but rights are limited by Article 62 . Article 62 states that none of the freedoms which are recognized for citizens can be exercised contrary to the existence and objectives of the socialist state .
 Almost all adult Cubans participate in the community-based Committees for the Defense of the Revolution . The Committees play a central role in daily life .
 These groups are designed to coordinate public projects, protect and ensure socialist ideology among the citizenry . These groups act as a neighborhood watchdog against ""counter-revolutionary"" activity .
 The most significant measures are the United States embargo against Cuba and the Helms-Burton Act of 1996 . The most important of these measures is the U.S. embargo on Cuba .
 The Cuban government, its supporters and other observers within and outside Cuba argue that Cuba has a form of democracy . They say the extensive participation in the nomination process at the national and municipal level is part of the democratic process .
 Cuban government accused of torture, arbitrary imprisonment, unfair trials, extra-judicial executions . Cuban government has been accused of numerous human rights abuses, including torture .
 Cuba placed a moratorium on capital punishment in 2001 . It made an exception for perpetrators of an armed hijacking two years later . The Cuban government made a similar exception in 2009 .
 Groups such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have issued reports on Cuban prisoners of conscience .
 Opponents claim the Cuban government represses free expression by limiting access to the Internet . Opponents say the government restricts Internet access to Cuba .
 The Cuban government denies the International Committee of the Red Cross access to its prisons . Many human rights groups including Amnesty International are denied entry to Cuba . The government denies access to the prisons .
 There are trade unions in Cuba, with a membership totaling 98 percent of the island's workforce . Cuba is home to a large majority of its workforce .
 Unions do not register with any state agency, and self-financed from monthly membership dues . Unions are self-funded by membership dues, not registering with state agencies .
 Their supporters claim that union officers are elected on an open basis . They say differing political views are found within each of the unions .
 Supporters claim that the CTC allows workers to have their voice heard in government . Opponents say the government uses it to control trade unions and appoint leaders .
 The freedom of workers to express independent opinions is also a subject of debate . Workers are also allowed to express their views on the internet .
 Fourteen provinces and one special municipality now comprise Cuba . Provinces and municipalities now comprise the country .
 The present subdivisions closely resemble those of Spanish military provinces during the Cuban Wars of Independence, when the most troublesome areas were subdivided . The present subdivisions resemble the provinces of military provinces in Spain .
 From 1975 until the late 1980s, massive Soviet military assistance enabled Cuba to upgrade its military capabilities . The Cuban government was aided by the Soviet Union in the 1980s and 1980s .
 Since the loss of Soviet subsidies, Cuba has dramatically scaled down the numbers of military personnel . About 60,000 military personnel were in Cuba in 2003, down from 235,000 in 1994 .
 The government now spends roughly 1.0 percent of GDP on military expenditures . The government spends roughly . 1.5 percent of its GDP on . military expenditures.
 The Cuban Government adheres to socialist principles in organizing its largely state-controlled planned economy . The Cuban economy is largely controlled by state-run government .
 Most of the means of production are owned and run by the government and most of the labor force is employed by the state . The state owns and runs most of production and employs most of its labor force .
 Capital investment is restricted and requires approval by the government . Capital investment must be approved by the Government .
 In 1996, the State started to impose income taxes on Cubans earning hard currency, primarily the self-employed . The end of Communist rule in Eastern Europe meant the end of Soviet subsidies for Cuba .
 Cuba depended on Moscow for sheltered markets for its exports and substantial aid . Before the collapse of the Soviet Union, Cuba relied heavily on Russia for protection .
 The Soviets had been paying above-market prices for Cuban sugar, while providing Cuba with petroleum at below market prices . The Soviets were paying above market prices for sugar, but under-market for petroleum .
 The removal of these subsidies sent the Cuban economy into a rapid depression known in Cuba as the Special Period . The removal was known as the 'Special Period' in Cuba .
 In 1992, the United States tightened the trade embargo contributing to a drop in Cuban living standards which approached crisis point within a year . The U.S. tightened the embargo in 1992, contributing to drop in Cuba living standards .
 Cuba took limited free market-oriented measures to alleviate shortages of food, consumer goods, and services to make up for the ending of Soviet subsidies . Like some other Communist and post-Communist states following the collapse of the Soviet Union, Cuba took some measures to help alleviate shortages .
 Some steps included allowing some self-employment in certain retail and light manufacturing sectors . The legalization of the use of the U.S. dollar in business, and the encouragement of tourism .
 The rapid growth of tourism during the Special Period had widespread social and economic repercussions in Cuba . Cuba's rapid growth in tourism had widespread economic and social repercussions .
 At one time, Cuba was the world's most important sugar producer and exporter . Cuba was one of the world’s biggest sugar producers and exporters .
 Production has fallen due to a series of hurricanes and droughts, which have devastated its crop area . Production has also been hit hard by a number of natural disasters, including hurricanes and drought .
 A lack of investment in infrastructure has forced the closing of many mills . In addition to the closure, many mills have been closed due to lack of infrastructure .
 In 2001, studies showed that the average Cuban's standard of living was lower than before the downturn of the post-Soviet period . The average Cuban national standard was lower in 2001 .
 Paramount issues have been state salaries failing to meet personal needs under the state rationing system . State salaries are chronically plagued with shortages . State rationing is chronically plagued by shortages .
 Cubans increasingly turned to the black market to obtain basic food, clothing, household, and health amenities . Cubans are increasingly turning to black market for basic necessities . The number of rationed goods available in Cuba has declined .
 Cuba's major export partners are the Netherlands, Canada, and China; major import partners are Venezuela, Spain, and the United States . In addition, petty corruption in state industries such as the pilferage of state assets is still common .
 Cuba's major exports are sugar, nickel, tobacco, fish, medical products, citrus, coffee and skilled labor . Cuba exports include tobacco, tobacco and medical products .
 Large reserves of oil were found in the North Cuba Basin sparking interest from other nations as well as calls from politicians in the United States to relax the Cuba trade embargo . Large amounts of oil have been found in North Cuba .
 The Cuban population is 64 percent White, 9 percent African, and 26 percent mixed race . The Chinese-Cuban population is between 11 and 12 million .
 DNA studies have suggested that the contribution of indigenous neo-Taíno Nations to the local populations may be more significant than formerly believed . DNA studies throughout the Antilles region suggest that the contributions of neo- Taíno nations to the region may be greater than previously believed .
 Asians make up about 1 percent of the population, and are largely of Chinese ancestry descended from laborers who arrived in the nineteenth century to build railroads and work in mines . Asians are descended from Chinese immigrants who arrived from China in the late 1800s . Asians also descend from Chinese laborers who
 After the Industrial Revolution, many of these laborers stayed in Cuba because they could not afford return passage to China . Many of the laborers stayed there because they couldn't afford to return passage back .
 Havana is overstretched in terms of land use, water, electricity, transportation, and other elements of the urban infrastructure . The Cuban government controls the movement of people into Havana on the grounds that the area is over-stretched .
 There is a population of several thousand North African teen and pre-teen refugees . The refugees are mainly from North African refugees .
 Cuba's demographic profile more resembles those of former Communist Eastern European countries such as Poland or Ukraine . With its high abortion rate, low birth rate, and aging population, Cuba's demographics more resemble those of its Latin American and Caribbean neighbors .
 Immigration and emigration have had noticeable effects on the demographic profile of Cuba during the twentieth century . Cuba's demographic profile has been affected by emigration and immigration .
 Between 1900 and 1930, close to a million Spaniards arrived from Spain . Between 1900-1930, close-to-a-million Spaniards came to Spain .
 Since 1959, over a million Cubans have left the island, primarily to Miami, Florida, where a vocal, well-educated and economically successful exile community exists .
 The emigration that occurred immediately following the Cuban Revolution was primarily of the upper and middle classes that were predominantly white . This contributed to a demographic shift along with changes in birth rates and racial identifications among the various ethnic groups .
 Cuba and the U.S. agreed to limit emigration to the United States in 1994 to normalize migration between the two countries . The Mariel boatlift led to chaos that accompanied the Mariel Boatlift in 1994 . Cuba agreed to cap emigration from Cuba in 1994, but
 U.S. grants a specific number of visas to those wishing to emigrate while those picked up at sea are returned to Cuba . Under this, the United States grants the visas only to those seeking a visa . Cubans picked up in Cuba are sent back to Cuba without a visa
 The Attorney General has discretion to grant permanent residence to Cuban natives or citizens seeking adjustment of status if they have been present in the United States for at least one year after admission or parole and are admissible as immigrants .
 Cuban culture is much influenced by the fact that it is a melting pot of cultures, primarily from Spain and Africa . Havana is one of the most famous free museums in Cuba .
 It has produced more than its fair share of literature, including the output of non-Cubans Stephen Crane, and Ernest Hemingway .
 Many Cubans participate in sports which share popularity in North America, rather than sports traditionally promoted in other Latin American nations . Due to historical associations with the United States, many Cubans play sports which are more popular in the U.S. than in Latin America .
 Baseball in Cuba is by far the most popular sports in Cuba . Other sports include basketball, volleyball and track . Baseball is a popular pastime .
 Cuban music is very rich and is the most commonly known expression of culture . Cuban music has a rich and rich history .
 The ""central form"" of this music is Son, which has been the basis of many other musical styles like salsa, rumba and mambo . Son is a slower derivation of mambo, the cha-cha-cha .
 Traditional Cuban instruments are of African and/or Taíno origin such as the maracas, güiro, marímba and mayohuacan . The Tres was also invented in Cuba .
 Popular Cuban music of all styles has been enjoyed and praised widely across the world . Cuban music is enjoyed widely in Cuba and around the world.
 Cuban classical music includes music with strong African and European influences . Composers like Ernesto Lecuona have received international acclaim for their work .
 Cuban literature began to find its voice in the early nineteenth century . Cuban literature has been written in Cuba since 1900s .
 Dominant themes of independence and freedom were exemplified by José Martí, who led the Modernist movement in Cuban literature . The themes of freedom and independence are exemplified in Cuba's literature .
 Nicolás Guillén and Jose Z Tallet focused on literature as social protest . Writers such as Nicolás Guillén and Jose Tallet focused on literature .
 Reinaldo Arenas, Guillermo Cabrera Infante, Leonardo Padura Fuentes, and Ronaldo Menedez have earned international recognition in the post-revolutionary era . Many writers have felt compelled to continue their work in exile due to perceived censorship by Cuban authorities .
 Cuban recipes share spices and techniques with Spanish cooking, with some Caribbean influence in spice and flavor .
 A traditional Cuban meal would not be served in courses; rather all food items would be served at the same time . The meal would be a traditional meal served in a traditional Cuban restaurant .
 The typical meal could consist of plantain, black beans and rice, ropa vieja , Cuban bread, pork with onions, and tropical fruits .
 Black beans and rice, referred to as moros y cristianos, and plantains, are staples of the Cuban diet .
 Historically, Cuba has had some of the highest rates of education in Latin America, both before and after the revolution .
 All education is free of charge to Cuban citizens including university education . All Cuban citizens are allowed to study in Cuba .
 School attendance is compulsory from ages six to the end of Basic secondary education . All students, regardless of age or gender, wear school uniforms with the color denoting grade level .
 Primary education lasts for six years, secondary education is divided into basic and pre-university education . Primary education ends at six years and secondary education lasts at least six years . Basic education ends after six years.
 Higher education is provided by universities, higher institutes, higher pedagogical institutes and higher polytechnic institutes . Higher education can be provided by higher education institutes such as universities and polytechnics .
 The Cuban Ministry of Higher Education also operates a scheme of Distance Education . Distance Education provides regular afternoon and evening courses in rural areas .
 Education has a strong political and ideological emphasis in Cuba . Students progressing to higher education are expected to have a commitment to the goals of the government .
 Cuban government assumes full fiscal and administrative responsibility for the health care of its citizens . Cuban government operates a national health system and assumes full responsibility .
 Historically, Cuba has long ranked high in numbers of medical personnel . Cuba has made significant contributions to world health since the nineteenth century .
 Cuba has a multitude of faiths reflecting the island’s diverse cultural elements . Catedral de San Cristóbal de la Habana is located in the central city of Havana .
 Catholicism, brought to the island by Spanish colonialists at the beginning of the sixteenth century, is the most prevalent professed faith . Catholicism is also prevalent in Cuba .
 After the revolution, Cuba became an officially atheistic state and severely restricted religious practice . Cuba was an atheist state until the end of the revolution .
 The Roman Catholic Church is made up of the Cuban Catholic Bishops' Conference . It is led by the Cardinal Archbishop of Havana . The Cuban Catholic Church was founded in 1961 .
 Pope John Paul II paid a historic visit to the island in January 1998, invited by the Cuban government and Catholic Church . The trip was part of a historic trip by the Pope to Cuba .
 The religious landscape of Cuba is also strongly marked by syncretisms of various kinds . Cuba's religious landscape is strongly marked with syncretism .
 This diversity derives from West and Central Africans who came to Cuba, and reinvented their African religions . The diversity of Cuba's religions derives from the West, Central Africans, who came in .
 They combined elements of the Catholic belief system with elements of Brazilian Umbanda . They did so by combining elements of their belief system, with a result very similar to the original Umbanda.
 Catholicism is often practiced in tandem with Santería, a mixture of Catholicism and other, mainly African, faiths that include a number of cult religions . Catholicism and Santeria are often practiced alongside other religions, such as cult religions.
 Cuba’s patron saint, La Virgen de la Caridad del Cobre, is a syncretism with the Santería goddess Ochún . Cuba's patron saint is the patron saint of the island .
 The important religious festival ""La Virgen de la Caridad del Cobre"" is celebrated by Cubans annually on September 8 .
 Other religions practiced are Palo Monte, and Abakuá, which have large parts of their liturgy in African languages . Palo Monte is a form of African religion .
 0,000 Cubans belong to the island’s 54 Protestant denominations . Protestantism was introduced from the United States in the eighteenth century .
 Pentecostalism has grown rapidly in recent years, and the Assemblies of God alone claims a membership of over 100,000 people . Pentecossalism is a Christian denomination that has a large following in the world . The Penticostalist movement has been
 Cuba has small communities of Jews, Muslims and members of the Bahá'í faith . Cuba has Jewish, Muslim and Muslim communities in small communities .
 Most Jewish Cubans are descendants of Polish and Russian Jews who fled pogroms at the beginning of the twentieth century . Most of the population of Cuban Jews is descendants of Poles and Russians who fled the pograms .
 Most of the Sephardic Jews live in the provinces, although they do maintain a synagogue in Havana . Most of these Sephardics live in Havana, although there is a synagogue there .
 Cuba's future is best assured by protecting freedoms of religion, expression, association and other human rights, says President Obama . Cuba is best to protect, in law and practice, the Cuban government says .
 The Commission calls on the U.S. government and its allies to send this message clearly to Cuba's new leadership . The Commission urges the United States government to send a message clearly .
 The Cuban government abandoned its policy of atheism in the early 1990s . Castro welcomed a visit from Pope John Paul II in 1998, and two years later, religious holidays were reinstated .
 A wave of arrests of democracy and free-speech advocates began in 2003, and the old tactics of restrictions and surveillance returned . The old tactics have returned .
 The world saw once again a series of acts that demonstrated the authorities' attempts to impose inappropriate control over religious communities . The world was witness to the 'inappropriate control' of religious communities.
 A 2005 law on religion meant to ""legalize"" house churches has reinforced the government's efforts to increase control over some religious practice . The 2005 law was meant to "legalize" house churches .
 Political prisoners are increasingly subject to limitations on their right to practice their religion . Political prisoners and human rights and pro-democracy activists are increasingly limited to their rights .
 Fidel Castro's nearly 50-year-long rule was marked by a stormy, and sometimes brutal, relationship with Cuba's religious communities . Cuba's relationship with religious communities was marked with arrests, deportations, and severe restrictions on religious activities .
 "Religious life has been unjustly repressed and controlled by his government," Cromartie says . "Generations of Cuban religious adherents have suffered," he says .
 The first secretary controls the Politburo and the Secretariat, Cuba's top decision-making bodies . The officeholder as de facto leader of Cuba .
 Central Intelligence Agency, Cuba Economy The World Factbook, Retrieved August 25, 2021 . The World Economic Factbook is published by the CIA and CIA .
 USCIRF Urges Full Protection of Freedom of Religion, Other Human Rights . United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, February 26, 2008 . USCIRf Urges full Protection of Rights of Religion .
 British Anguilla · British Virgin Islands · Cayman Islands · Montserrat · Turks and Caicos Islands Dutch Aruba · Netherlands Antilles French Guadeloupe · Martinique · Saint-Barthélemy · St. Vincent and the Grenadines . Domin
 Antigua and Barbuda · Bahamas, Bahamas, Barbados · Belize · Canada · Costa Rica · Cuba · Dominica · Dominican Republic . Dominican Republic · El Salvador · Grenada · Guatemala . Guatemala · Haiti · Honduras · Jamaica · Mexico · Nicaragua · Mexico . Nicaragua ·
 The history of this article since it was imported to New World Encyclopedia: History of ""Cuba"" Some restrictions may apply to use of individual images which are separately licensed .