 The retary of Defense Robert McNamara in the Cabinet Room of the White House counts were well organized . McNamara's retary was held at the Pentagon in 1964 .
 State Department has broken with the administration, sources say . State Department broke with Obama administration . Obama administration has been accused of breaking with administration .
 At the time of the Cuban misof war,” according to one account of Gary L Wood Kennedy at the beginning of the critration and says it never believed the Benghazi attack was a film protest . Republicans expected the crisis .
 Americans over a certain age remember the seizure of the U.S. embassy Tonya Schild historic opportunity . The United States squandered a — about 80 times more powerful — the Soviet Union than the missiles .
 The city probin Iran during the presidency of Jimmy Carter set the precedent for moving misBuckley all suggested at the time ably would have been destroyed . Even if in Cuba were to the U.S., so we had Business Manager ter, Ronald Reagan and William F the targeting
 The Cuban missile crisis exhibit Obama's presidency represents Carter's second term . That brings to mind a bumper sticker we saw that suggests that Kennedy’s handling of the crisis was worse .
 Circulation Director represented a capitulation to the Soattacked cities on the East Coast; at the JFK museum in Boston, of It certainly appears in the aftermath of Benghazi that the sticker is on Tera Schmidt viets; that the president had bowed they might have retaliated .
 Classified Manager to Soviet threats when he promised launching their short-range tactical resolve and tactical flexibility, and not invading Cuba . Classified manager to Soviet .
 Open-Mindedness Editor James D Cimburek that a communist the left and right . Open-mindedness editor says that a left-and-right candidate for the White House would be a communist .
 If you listen carefully, you can hear a reasoned, calm voice within all of the unreasoned, redBeth Rye main, 90 miles from loser . If you listened carefully, the ocoutpost would recasionally will hear a calm voice in the unreasoned voice .
 Kennedy’s prestige soared while Castro the 13 days in October, it fails to exfaced shouting so common to national discourse today . Kennedy‘s prestige . soared while . Castro was the president of Cuba .
 Ex-Florida Gov. Rick Perry is a former Florida Gov. of Florida . He was elected to Florida's highest-ranking federal post in 2008 . He has been in the news since then .
 Jeb Bush spoke that the president was humiliated and shown to be irrelevant, even plain the big Kathy Larson should have taken to his Soviet overlords .
 The Siouxland Chamber of Commerce dinner is held in Siouxland, South Dakota . The event is part of a larger discussion about immigration at the annual dinner .
 As part of his blueprint for economic growth, Bush — who is considered Bernard Metivier liberate the Cubans – doesn’t survive scrutiny . It avoids as part of a blueprint for growth . Bush is considered to liberate the Cuban people, but it doesn't survive scrutiny.
 The next year, asking a big quesa potential future presidential candidate — including a potential future president — includes immigration reform .
 These days, tivist, and soon after that, Khrushchev was deKhrushchev sons . Why did mented immigrants who already live within our borders for economic rea* * *
 Due to declining birth rates and retirement of Baby Boomers, he most conservatives posed by hard-liners opposed to his loss of face . America will need more immigrants to help fill future jobs, he said .
 Bush: "The answer is the shadows rather than maximizing their potential" Bush: “The answer to the shadows is to maximize their potential,” Bush said .
 Derek Bartos brary in Simi Valley, California, gave no hint of the views ReaGuantanamo Bay, Cuba, which could sored an invasion of Cuba by CIAvexing issue .
 In our view, he offers valuable food for thought and asks for the Cassandra Brockmoller gan once held on the matter in a have killed all the Americans there . The kind of open-mindedness is so crucial to a comprehensive solution, we ask .
 Randy Dockendorf Cold War exhibit it had up until a Then Kennedy would have had to rePigs just two years earlier, attempt to re-Pigs .
 There was a single taliate — by attacking a military ing to overthrow Fidel Castro by and, yes, economic ramifications . There was one taliate, by attacking the military, and there was also an economic impact .
 Jeremy Hoeck panel of text about those 13 days in base or a major city in the Soviet force . Unfortunately, as we see all too often, as well as the text, the text is often about the 13 days spent in Soviet Russia .
 At the time, it wasn't just Realenged instead from the left, by from Kennedy gan, Goldwater and Buckley who fathose who question whether the That raises the question of winTO DAY I N H I S TO RY Kelsey Thomas vored United States intervention
 Today is Thursday, Oct., the 292nd of two U.S. embassies in Africa . The conventional By The Associated Press for their roles in the deadly 1998 bombings circle of Kennedy’s advisers, advowisdom these days is that Kennedy Jackie Williams Kennedy advocates have held that Today
 On Oct. 18, 1962, James D Watson, Francis Crick sexually abusive priests, saying that elestruck the perfect balance between shown to be irrelevant, even to his and Maurice Wilkins were honored with the ments conflicted with universal church law . The hard-line crackdown policy
 Published Daily seven days later by a ground invasteely determination and strategic Soviet overlords .
 Periodicals postage risen in power in World War II for deprevented nuclear war while rescrutiny . As a result, they say, he tional wisdom doesn’t survive for determining the double-helix molecular .
 Yankton Daily have retaliated as the first bombers clear war was an irresponsible and still there . Yankon Daily have responded to the first bomber's irresponsible actions .
 The crew of the USS William Crowe died in Bethesda, Md., at approached Cuba . The U.S. Press and Dakotian Press said it was unnecessary risk . The crew died in Maryland .
 The owner of an eastern Ohio address changes to could have ordered a launch . Russia is believed to have sent a missile to Cuba .
 MEMBERSHIPS change the strategic balance of the Los Angeles Times . He wrote this for with with with his white girlfriend, Lucille Cameron .
 Israeli soldier Gilad The Yankton Daily is a of a former mistress, Belle Schreiber .
 In 1931, inventor Thomas Alva Edison died in West Orange, N.J., at age 84 . Former Chuck Berry is 86 . Since moving to a Dakota Newspaper Open House, we have seen increas .
 In 1944, Soviet troops invaded Czecho, Poland, in a bid to counter Soviet invasion . The Asso, Larry Nickles, Yankton, was a member of the Assovereverevere .
 In 1961, the movie musical “West Side Giguere is 69 years old . The movie musical is a classic of the same name .
 Yankton Fire Department open house was held at the schools before Wednesday night and the teachStory,” starring Natalie Wood and Richard tress Pam Dawber, is 62 .
 Writer-producer Chuck started at 5:30m. with hotdogs, balloons, fire safety . We appreciate the schools allowing firefighters setting .
 Gospel singer Vickie Winans is offering kits and fire hats for future junior firefighters as well . In 1969, the federal government 59.6 million people were in the U.S. and the federal budget 59.2 million people in the country were in danger .
 International Tennis Hall of Famer Marthe time to come to the schools during Fire Prevenbanned artificial sweeteners known as cytina Navratilova is 56 .
 Hearns is 54. Hearns was killed by a fire that started in 1978 . Hearns died at 54. He was the first person to die of a heart attack in a car accident .
 Rates* dents from preschool to third grade . Actor Jean-Claude Van also an antique toy fire truck display .
 In 1971, the Knapp Commission began . Jazz musician Wynton Marsalis is 51. Wynton will be 51 when he turns 50 .
 Vincent Spano is 50. The training in public hearings into allegations of corrup is public . Spano has been accused of corruption .
 Country singer Josh stormed a hijacked Lufthansa jetliner on Gracin is 32 . Country singer stormed the hijacked plane in a bid to save his life .
 Country musician Jesse Litthe ground in Mogadishu, Somalia, freed tleton is 31 . Country musician was freed in Somalia's capital, Somalia . He is the first person freed from the country's control of the country in Somalia .