 Intelligence Community convinced that Russia was placing missiles and atomic weapons in Cuba . U-2 had just finished a photographic mission . Intelligence Community had become convinced of Russia placing missiles in Cuba.
 The Cuban missile crisis was the beginning of a confrontation between the two giant atomic nations, the United States and the U.S.R.R., which brought the world to the abyss of nuclear destruction .
 "From that moment in president Kennedy's office until Sunday morning, that was my life," says Kennedy . "For Americans and Russians, for the whole world, it was their life as well," says JFK's widow .
 The general feeling in the beginning was that some form of action was required. The general feel in the first part of the story is that some sort of action is required. 'The general feeling was that something was needed. Some of the people in the country were very concerned about the situation
 There were those, although they were a small minority, who felt the missiles did not alter the balance of power and therefore necessitated no action .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff were unanimous in railing for immediate military action . Joint chiefs of Staff called for immediate action against North Korea .
 They forcefully presented their view that the blockade would not be effective . "They forcefully presented [the blockade] as a reason for it to be effective," they said .
 General Curtis LeMay, Air Force Chief of Staff, argued strongly with the President that a military attack was essential . Air Force Secretary of State George W. Bush, Secretary of Defense George H. Bush and Secretary of Staff John Kerry argued strongly for a military strike .
 When the President questioned what the response of the Russians might be, General LeMay assured him there would be no reaction . LeMay said the Russians would not be surprised by the response .
 The President recognized the validity of the arguments made by the Joint Chiefs, the danger that more and more missiles would be placed in Cuba, and the likelihood, if we did nothing, that the Russians would move on Berlin and in other areas of the world, feeling the U.S.
 Then it would be too late to do anything in Cuba, for by that time all their missiles would be operational . By that time they would have been operational, the U.S. would not be able to launch any missiles .
 Secretary McNamara told the President he disagreed with the Joint Chiefs and favored a blockade rather than an attack . McNamara said the necessary planes, men, and ammunition were being deployed and that we could be ready to move .
 The plans called for an initial attack, consisting of five hundred sorties, striking all military targets, including missile sites, airfields, ports, and gun emplacements . The plans call for the attack to begin with a series of sorties .
 This was not from a deep conviction that it would be a successful course of action, but from a feeling that it had more flexibility and fewer liabilities than a military attack . This is not from deep conviction, but a feeling of more flexibility .
 With some trepidation, I argued that, whatever validity the military and political arguments were for an attack in preference to a blockade, America's traditions and history would not permit such a course of action . The U.S. would not be willing to attack, he said .
 He was advocating a surprise attack by a very large nation against a very small one . Whatever military reasons, he and others could marshall, they were nevertheless, in the last analysis, it was a surprise .
 We spent more time on this moral question during the first five days than any other single matter, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 At various times, it was proposed that we send a letter to Khrushchev twenty-four hours before the bombardment was to begin, that we sent a . letter to Castro, that leaflets and pamphlets listing the targets be dropped over Cuba before the attack - all these ideas and more
 We struggled and fought with one another and with our consciences, for it was a question that deeply troubled us all . We struggled, fought with each other and our conscienceences,’s for it .
 CNN's John Sutter visited the State Department early Saturday morning . He was back in Washington on Saturday morning and again on Saturday night . Sutter was back at State Department again Saturday morning.
 He was hoping to be able to meet with us early enough to decide on a course of action and then broadcast it to the nation Sunday night . He hopes to meet early enough for a decision to be made early enough .
 "Saturday morning at 10:00 o'clock I called the President at the Blackstone Hotel in Chicago and told him we were ready to meet with him," says President Obama . President Obama met with President Obama on Saturday morning .
 As he was returning to Washington, our armed forces across the world were put on alert . As he returned to Washington he was put on the alert . The world was on alert as he returned from Washington .
 Secretary McNamara ordered four tactical air squadrons placed at readiness for an air strike, in case the President decided to accept that recommendation . Air strike would have been the first strike since the fall of the war .
 The President arrived back at the White House at 1:40 P.M. and went for a swim . The President returned to the Oval Office at 1.40 p.m. ET .
 A larger group of people met, some of whom had not participated in the deliberations up to that time . Convened as a formal meeting of the National Security Council, it was a larger group .
 Bob McNamara presented the argument for the blockade of Cuba . Others presented the arguments for the military attack . The blockade was the first time the U.S. military attacked Cuba .
 The discussion, for the most part, was able and organized, but some statements were made as accepted truisms, which I, at least, thought were of questionable validity . The discussion was able to be organized and organized .
 One member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff argued that we could use nuclear weapons, on the basis that our adversaries would use theirs against us in an attack . Another member argued that nuclear weapons could be used against our adversaries .
 I thought, as I listened, of the many times that I had heard the military take positions which, if wrong, had the advantage that no one would be around at the end to know . I thought of the military taking positions that, if they were wrong, they would have the
 The President made his decision that afternoon that afternoon in favor of the blockade . The blockade has been in place for more than a week .
 General Sweeney, Jr., Commander in Chief of the Tactical Air Command, told the President that even a surprise air attack could not be certain of destroying all the missile sites and nuclear weapons in Cuba . Sweeney: Even a major surprise air strike could not destroy all the nuclear weapons .
 "That ended the small, lingering doubt that might still have remained in his mind. That ended a small . lingering doubt," he said . "I'm not going to let it go," he added .
 It had worried him that a blockade would not remove the missiles - now it's clear that an attack could not accomplish that task completely, either . It had been worried that a . blockade would . not remove missiles -now it is clear that . an attack . could not . accomplish that
 The strongest argument against an all-out military attack was that a surprise attack would erode the moral position of the U.S. throughout the world . A surprise attack on the United States could erode if not destroy the moral standing of the nation .
 The next morning, Wednesday morning, the quarantine went into effect . Reports during the early hours told of the Russian ships coming steadily on toward Cuba .
 "I talked with the President for a few moments before we went in to our regular meeting," says President Obama .
 Secretary McNamara announced that two Russian ships, the Gagarin and the Komiles, were within a few miles of our quarantine barrier . The Komiles were within the quarantine barrier at the time of the incident .
 The interception of both ships would probably be before noon Washington time . Both ships would be intercepted by the U.S. time .
 The expectation was that at least one of the vessels would be stopped and bearded between 10:30 and 11:00 o'clock . The event was expected to take place at around 11:30am .
 Navy reports Russian submarine moved into position between two ships . Russian submarine is believed to have moved in position between the two vessels .
 It had originally been planned to have a cruiser make the first interception, but, because of the increased danger, it decided in the past few hours to send in an aircraft carrier supported by helicopters, carrying antisubmarine equipment, hovering overhead .
 The carrier Essex was to signal the submarine by sonar to surface and identify itself . The submarine was to be identified by the carrier Essex . The carrier was to use sonar technology to detect the submarine .
 If it refused, depth charges with a small explosive would be used until the submarine surfaced . If the submarine refused, a depth charge would be fired at the submarine .
 I think these few minutes were the time of gravest concern for the President. President. "These few minutes" were the President's time of 'credibility for the president, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 For a few fleeting seconds, it was almost as though no one else was there and he was no longer the President . For a brief moment, it seemed as though he was not the President.
 Six ships previously on their way to Cuba at the edge of the quarantine line have stopped or have turned back toward the Soviet Union . The ships were previously heading toward Cuba .
 Twenty Russian ships closest to the barrier had stopped and were dead in the water or had turned around . A short time later, the report came that the twenty Russian ships had stopped or turned around or stopped .
 President Kennedy ordered the State Department to proceed with preparations for a crash program on civil government in Cuba . The crash program would be established after the invasion and occupation of that country .
 Secretary McNamara reported the conclusion of the military that we should expect very heavy casualties in an invasion . McNamara: We should expect a lot of heavy casualties .
 John McCone said everyone should understand that an invasion was going to be a much more serious undertaking than most people had previously realized . McCone: "An invasion of the U.S. will be a very serious undertaking"
 Despite the heavy pressure on the big decisions, President Kennedy followed every detail . Kennedy followed his lead in the wake of the Vietnam War .
 He requested, for instance, the names of all the Cuban doctors in the Miami area, should their services be required .
 The Liberty, a U.S. military ship with extremely sensitive equipment, was struck by Israel during the Israeli-Arab war . It was ordered to be moved farther out to sea, where it would be less vulnerable to attack .
 He supervised everything, from the contents of leaflets to the assembling of ships for the invasion . He oversaw everything, including dropping leaflets over Cuba and assembling ships .
 A great deal has been written about this message, including the allegation that at the time Khrushchev wrote it he must have been so unstable or emotional that he had become incoherent . The message was written by the then-Krushchev in the 1960s and '60s .
 "There was no question that the letter had been written by him personally. There was no doubt that he had written it personally," he said .
 It was not incoherent and the emotion was directed at the death, destruction, and anarchy that nuclear war would bring to his people and all mankind, he said .
 That, he said again and again, again and in many different ways, must be avoided . That is what he said repeatedly and again: "That, again, must not be avoided"
 No more weapons to Cuba and those within Cuba withdrawn or destroyed, and you reciprocate by withdrawing your blockade and also agree not to invade Cuba . Cuba must withdraw its blockade and withdraw its weapons from the U.S. from Cuba .
 Hoover: "I received a memorandum from J Edgar Hoover, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, that gave me a feeling of considerable disquiet" Hoover says Hoover's memo gave him a 'sense of disquiet' Hoover says .
 It was therefore with some sense of foreboding that I went to the meeting of our Ex-Committe . I went there to meet with the ex-committe president and his wife . She said: 'It was with a sense of . forebode that I had to
 A new, this time very formal, letter had arrived from Khrushchev to President Kennedy . The letter was signed by the then-Krushchev-era President of the Soviet Union .
 It was obviously no longer Mr Khrushchev personally who was writing, but the Foreign Office of the Kremlin . The Foreign Office was obviously writing, and it was clearly no longer writing .
 The letter is quite different from the letter received twelve hours before . The letter was quite different than the one received 12 hours earlier .
 Secretary McNamara reported increasing evidence that the Russians in Cuba were now working day and night, intensifying their efforts on all the missile sites and on the IL-28s . McNamara: "To add to the feeling of foreboding and gloom, [Russian] forces are now
 The change in the language and tenor of the letters from Khrushchev indicated confusion within the Soviet Union . But there was confusion among us as well as ourselves as well, he says .
 Some suggested writing to Khrushchev and asking him to clarify his two letters . Some suggested asking him for clarification of his letters .
 "The door was clearly open for the Soviet Union to take reciprocal action against Turkey," he says . "We realized that, as we sat there, the work was proceeding on the missile sites in Cuba, and we now had the additional consideration that if we destroyed these sites and began an
 NATO countries were supporting our position and recommending that the U.S. be firm . President Kennedy said, "They did not realize the full implications for them" The NATO countries supported our position, but, Kennedy said .
 If we carried out an air strike against Cuba and the Soviet Union answered by attacking Turkey, all NATO was going to be involved, says President George W. Bush .
 President would have to decide if he would use nuclear weapons against the Soviet Union . All mankind would be threatened, he says, if he used nukes against the USSR .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff joined the meeting and recommended their solution . Joint chiefs of Staff met in Washington to discuss the solution .
 It had the attraction of being a very simple next step - an air strike on Monday, followed shortly afterward by an invasion . It had been a simple step -an air strike followed shortly afterwards by a invasion .
 They pointed out to the President that they had always felt the blockade to be far too weak a course . Military steps were the only ones the Soviet Union would understand, they said .
 They were not surprised that nothing had been achieved by limited force, for this is exactly what they had predicted, they said . They said: "They were not at all surprised that . nothing was achieved by . limited force"
 In the midst of these deliberations, another message came, to change the whole course of events and alter history . "The message came to alter history," the author says . "It changed the course of history," he says .
 Major Rudolf Anderson Jr. was one of the two pilots who carried out the original U-2 reconnaissance that uncovered the presence of missiles in Cuba . Anderson had since flown several other photo-reconnaissance missions and was flying one that Saturday morning, October 27 .
 His plane was hit by a SAM missile, that it had crashed in Cuba, and that he had been killed, he says . "His plane had been hit by SAM missile," he adds .
 There was the knowledge that we had to take military action to protect our pilots. There was knowledge that . There was also the knowledge . We had to be able to protect pilots from harm, he said .
 There was the feeling that the noose was tightening on all of us, on Americans, on mankind, and that the bridges to escape were crumbling . And there was a feeling that there were feeling that all the bridges were crumbling, and there were no escape options .
 The President ordered the Ex Comm to meet again at 9:00 P.M. in the White House. President Obama ordered the meeting to take place in the morning .
 The letter was being typed and prepared for transmission, he and I sat in his office . While the letter was typed he and his wife sat in the office to discuss it .
 He talked about Major Anderson and how it is always the brave and the best who die . He also talked about how it was the brave who died .
 Politicians and officials sit home pontificating about great principles and issues, make the decisions, and dine with their wives and families, while the brave and the young die . The brave and young die, while politicians and officials are sitting home pontifying about great issues .
 If events continue as they have in the last several days, that struggle -which no one wishes, which will accomplish nothing -will engulf and destroy all mankind . And yet if events continue, the struggle will engulf all mankind, he says .
 "He wanted to make sure that he had done everything in his power, everything conceivable, to prevent such a catastrophe," says President Obama .
 Every opportunity was given to the Russians to find a peaceful settlement which would not diminish their national security or be a public humiliation . Every opportunity is given to Russia to find peaceful settlement, the PM said .
 "It was not only for Americans that he was concerned, or primarily the older generation of any land," he said . "I was concerned for Americans. It was also for the older generations," he added .
 The thought that disturbed him the most, and that made the prospect of war much more fearful than it would otherwise have been, was the specter of :he death of the children of this country and all the world .
 They would never have a chance to make a decision, to vote in an election, to run for office, to lead a revolution . They would not be able to decide their own destinies, they would not have been able to make decisions .
 We erred not only for ourselves, our futures, our hopes, and our country, but for those who had never been given a chance to play a role, to vote aye or nay, to make themselves felt . The great tragedy was that, if we erred,
 I telephoned Ambassador Dobrynin about 7:15 P.M. and asked him to come to the Department of Justice. He was in the U.S. Embassy in Washington, D.C. He said: "I called the ambassador to Washington about 7.15
 The President was not optimistic, nor was I . He ordered twenty-four troop-carrier squadrons of the Air Force Reserve to active duty . The President also ordered .
 He had not abandoned hope, but what hope there was now rested with Khrushchev's revising his course within the next few hours . The hope rested with what hope it now rests with the revising of his course in the coming hours .
 I had promised my daughters for a long time that I would take them to the Horse Show, and early Sunday morning I went to the Washington Armory to watch the horses jump . The horses jump.
 He said he had just received word from the Russians that they had agreed to withdraw missiles from Cuba . He said the Russians had agreed that they would withdraw the missiles .
 Ambassador Dobrynin called Obama to meet with him at the White House . Obama: "I received a call from Ambassador Dobynin saying he would like to visit with me"
 He told me that Khrushchev had agreed to dismantle and withdraw the missiles under adequate supervision and inspection . He said that everything was going to work out satisfactorily; and that Mr Khrushche wanted to send his best wishes to President and me .
 I went back to the White House and talked to the President for it long time. "I talked to him for a long time," she says of Obama .
 He placed telephone calls to former Presidents Truman and Eisenhower . While I was there, he placed phone calls to ex-Presidents Eisenhower and Truman . He placed calls from Truman to Eisenhower .
 "As I closed the door, he was seated at the desk writing a letter to Mrs. Mrs. Barbara," she says . "He was seated writing a note to her," she adds .