 Cuba is ninety miles away from the United States of America . It all started when a communist revolution took place in Cuba .
 Many American businesses were dependent on Cuba . This was a great blow to the U.S. as many American businesses depend on Cuba. This is a blow to America's economy .
 In April 1961, the C.I.A organised an attack on Cuba led by Cuban exiles in an attempt to restore American control . The attack was organised by the Cuban ex-Cuba rebels in a bid to regain control of the country .
 They landed in a place called the Bay of Pigs and set up a base for guerrilla war against the Cuban government . They set up the base in Cuba to fight against the government .
 They expected other Cubans to rise up and join the rebellion, but they misunderstood the popularity of the communist dictator, Fidel Castro . They expected others to join them, but instead they misunderstood his popularity .
 The struggle for control of Cuba was part of a worldwide Cold War . Cuba was the center of the Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States .
 On October 14, a U-2 spy plane flew over Cuba and took photographs of the missile site . The U.S. missile site is located in Cuba, Cuba, near the Cuban capital .
 President Kennedy was shown photographs proving that Soviet missile were on Cuba . President Kennedy of the United States was shown the photographs . The photographs were taken in Cuba in 1961 .
 At this stage, the Americans spent six days secretly discussing and planning how to respond to the attack . The Americans spent the rest of the time secretly planning how they would respond .
 They did not even consult their closest ally, the government of Britain until the 21st of October . The UK government did not consult the UK until October 21, 2015 .
 This was shortly before Kennedy made an announcement to the American people about the crisis and the likelihood of a war . Kennedy made the announcement shortly before making an announcement .
 On 22nd October, he issued a quarantine of all ships headed to Cuba . The quarantine was imposed on all ships heading to the island nation .
 Kennedy did not want to lose his pride and be seen backing down in the face of the Soviets . They had already considered taking their missiles out of Turkey but Kennedy didn't .
 American military leaders recommended an immediate air attack on Cuba that would consequently mean an outbreak of war . U.S. military leaders said an immediate attack would result in a war with Cuba .
 A letter was about to be sent to the Soviets refusing to do a deal over the missiles in Turkey but Kennedy changed his mind . The letter was sent to Soviet leaders but Kennedy decided to make the deal .
 He decided to first letter and sent another letter to Khrushchev accepting the Soviet proposal that the missiles should be withdrawn in return for an American commitment not to invade Cuba .
 There was an immense possibility of a nuclear war over the Cuban missile crisis which had accumulated over the space of two and a half years . Thankfully to both Kennedy's than finally Khrushchev's careful judgement the war was avoided .
 Source A5 shows a meeting between Castro and Khrushchev, it may be noted they look very comfortable together as they discuss the state of Cuba .
 These women then became instructors to nearly 29,000 peasant women . These women expanded the traditional role of the Cuban women, greatly expanding their role .
 First aid training was given to 11,000 women and the FMC managed over one hundred day care centers . The FMC also managed over 100 day centers .
 This suggests that perestroika was initiated under Andropov's premiership, not Gorbachev's . This suggests it was started under the premiership of Andropova, rather than the Soviet Union .
 One of the main arguments against the deployment of NMD is that the main threat faced by the USA and other 'western' nations is the threat of terrorism .
 Khrushchev realised that if one country left the Warsaw Pact others would soon follow as part of the domino effect which would lead to the collapse in soviet control over the satellite states . However, at the mention of leaving the . Warsaw Pact Khrushchell realised that at the
 200,000 troops and 6000 tanks sent into Hungary on November 4th 1956 . Decided to withdraw from the Warsaw Pact Kruschev saw this as a sign of embarrassment for Russia .