 President John F Kennedy’s blockade of Cuba, Nikita Khrushchev's missile bases there, and the impotence of the UN the minute the two nuclear titans decide to unleash a war holocaust . “In opposing war, we make it clear that we are
 A good deal of illumination on both these factors can be gained if we take it out of the present moment of crisis and see that which was inherent in it the day before . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in Syria since 2003 .
 In opposing any invasion or war against the Cuban people, we cannot, however, let Khrushchev get away with playing ‘the champion of peace’ just because he defends Castro, who has taken away the rights and freedoms of the . Cuban people . The Russian people and Kennedy
 Russia is the greatest exporter of counter-revolution, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "What was wrong with people who pretend that Russia is not in Cuba"
 It is easy to see counter-revolution when it is as direct as it is in the outright squashing of a revolution, as the Russian destruction of the Hungarian Revolution . Counter-revolution is a form of radicalism that is often seen in Russia as a result of the overthrow of the
 It is not easy to see counter-revolution when it is a question of planned exploitation of the proletarian in his daily life, says Lenin . Lenin: 'It's not easy, when it's about planned exploitation in daily life'
 Those who can't get away from the spurious ground for argument established by Communists for the special benefit of the liberals . They fail to see that the Russian arms imported into Cuba are not one-tenth of the threat to the U.S. that they are to the Cuban people .
 Small Cuba, even when armed by Russia, is no match for U.S. might, but it is a power against the unarmed revolutionary underground . Small Cuba is no longer a match for United States might . Cuba's armed forces are no match against the United States' might .
 Kennedy made the shocking, unilateral, warlike pronouncement of blockade of Cuba . Kennedy's actions were the result of a blockade of the island nation .
 Outside of Khrushchev’s break-up of the summit as a result of the U-2 plane spy incident, when the two nuclear giants were pitted against each other with no intermediaries, the people of the world were never closer to a nuclear holocaust .
 The present confrontation is not limited to verbal threats and busted summits . It's not just verbal threats, but it's not only that verbal threats .
 It is now clear beyond peradventure of doubt that both Kennedy and Khrushchev are mad enough to plunge the world into thermonuclear war . It is clear beyond any doubt that the two men are mad .
 If a summit meeting should result and stave off the day, it clearly will be only a delaying action . The summit meeting is likely to be only delaying action, even if a meeting is held .
 It's clear that Cuba has become the possible locale of the outburst, as Berlin has been and remains to this day another focal point . What is involved is the United States-Russian competition for domination of the world, writes CNN.
 It is at this point that the movements opposing war show their own negative character . It is not the only movement opposing war shows its negative character. It's at this time that the opposition to war shows itself negative character."
 The falling into a trap is inevitable when one does not view positively what they are fighting for, instead of only what they're fighting against, is inevitable . The falling of a trap can be inevitable if one doesn't view positive what they fight for .
 Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament are supposed to be for banning the bomb . But they had not a word to say against its spread to yet another country, in this case Cuba .
 Even without a bomb, he has moved so far away from the revolution he led, writes David Frum . Cuba is now an outpost of single-party state-capitalism, he writes .
 Fidel Castro expounded his conception of why an “integrated revolutionary organization” that is to say, a single party in which the Communists and what was left of the July 26th Movement merged .
 Anyone can–though it must be admitted that Fidel doesn’t do it very well–repeat generalizations of Marxism on the role of the working class . Anyone can repeat generalizations, but Fidel doesn't do it well .
 The proof, the only proof, that it is a way of life, not a mere weapon of propaganda, is its realization in life . The proof is that it's not propaganda, but it's the realization of life .
 No such thing is true in Fidel’s Cuba, where not a single organ–from the trades unions to the peasant unions, from the state to the party–is any longer controlled by the working people . The state, the unions, the state and the party are no longer
 "At this life-and-death moment, we can under no circumstances allow ourselves to be swallowed up by this curious movement," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Marxist-Humanist ideas remain the beacon for future generations as they are for ours . If nothing else can be left unsullied, let’s at least make sure that our Marxist-humanist ideas stay the beacon .
 We must unfurl our banner, and proceed with our opposition to both poles of world capital . We must put in their rightly subordinate place those who “follow the leader,” be that Khrushchev or Kennedy. Therefore we must . unfurl .
 Kennedy has finally exposed himself as no different from the Republicans who had urged blockade before and now urge invasion . Things will be in any way easier for the building of a Marxist-Humanist movement, he writes .
 The hysteria created by the administration is much more ominous than that created by Sen. Ted Cruz . Sen. Cruz says the administration has created a "hysteria" of hysteria .
 There were those among the Marxists who tried to misuse a Marxist statement about the whip of the counter-revolution helping the revolutionary development . Whenever a political position was proven wrong, there were those trying to misuse it .
 The whip of the counter-revolution refers to it urging the revolution on when it is already in process but has not yet reached full fruition, as, say, between February and before October 1917, when the Kornilov episode exposed Kerensky .
 In a non-revolutionary period, the problems confronting Marxist-Humanism are made harder, not lessened, by the blockade . The man who has the means to start a nuclear holocaust does not forget for a moment his power to press down upon the opposition .
 Kennedy’s timing his announcement of nuclear bases in Cuba to when it would be most useful to the Democrats running for election. Take even the minor question of Kennedy's timing . Kennedy's announcement of Cuba's nuclear bases was most likely to be timed to help Democrats .
 Two percent one way or the other may win him the election of a Governor or a Congressman . Two percent could win him a Congressman or Governor .
 Over 60% of the American people are opposed to invasion of Cuba . Once won–or lost–however, however, he has to be concerned not with a 2% margin but with the fact that over 60% .
 As the capitalist ruler he is, he then turns the power against his own people. As a capitalist ruler, he is . As he is. He then turned the power . against his . own people, he said .
 "Of course, we know the universal opposition to war and can build on that," he says . Of course, he says. "We know we know we can't go to war, and we need to stop it."
 Of course, we build our organization along with developing our ideas comprehensively, but we can do so only by being fully conscious of all the obstacles in the way . We can't build our organizations around the world without being fully aware of the obstacles .
 It would be folly to act as if by opposition we mean the kind of arms that only the bourgeoisie has . Therefore, it would be foolish to act . Therefore it would not be folly, we say .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev have arms and ships and missiles and prisons . They also have prisons and prisons and jet bombers . Kennedy and Krushchev–have arms, ships and ships .
 They can afford to play games as to who is the ‘aggressor’ and ‘deceiver’ while they jockey for best position to attack . ‘Deception’ is a form of deception for the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 We must learn to express our ideas clearly “in 25 words or less,” that is to say, with full consciousness that our time is not unlimited . Johnny put it succinctly enough when he said that we must . .
 We are under no illusion that times of such heightened crises are propitious for building a mass organization . We are sure that the new sense of urgency is just the impulse needed to intensify our activity in a way that the meeting of the movement from theory with that from practice will not be left
 Dunayevskaya refused to call the state-capitalist Russian empire ‘USSR’ because it was neither socialist nor run by actual soviets, and was dominated by Russia . She refused to use the term 'USSR' because it wasn't socialist or run by
 On May 1, 1960, a U.S. U-2 spy plane piloted by Francis Gary Powers was shot down over Russian air space . The incident caused the breakup of a U-U.S.-Russia summit on disarmament .
 The July 26th Movement was a revolutionary group organized to overthrow Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista . It was formed to overthrow Batista's regime .
 Manolo Fernández was a Cuban labor union leader . He was ousted by the government shortly after Castro took power . He is one of Cuba's most prominent labor union leaders .
 The extremist right-wing John Birch Society claimed that labor unions and the civil rights movement were Communist conspiracies . The John Birch society is still active today .
 Alexander Kerensky headed the Provisional government set up following the February 1917 Russian Revolution . Alexander was a socialist opportunist who headed the provisional government .
 General Lavr Kornilov led a failed counter-revolution against Kerensky in August . Lavr led the failed anti-Kerenski counterrevolution in August 2013 . He was killed in August 2014 .
 Lenin's Bolsheviks helped defeat Kornilov, opening the way for the October Revolution . Lenin’s Bolsheviks fought Kornillov in the Russian Revolution . The revolution was the birth of the Russian revolution .
 Marx’s Critique of the Gotha Program . Marxism and the U.S. Civil War .