 Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev sent missiles to Cuba in response to the installation of missiles by the United States in Turkey . U.S. missiles were installed in Turkey, which was also installed by Russia .
 Once the U.S. was aware of this there were a few courses of action that could be taken . The United States is aware of the situation and could take action .
 The chosen action was to blockade any further weapons coming into Cuba . The action was chosen to block any further arms coming into the country .
 This started negotiations that would eventually end with the removal of missiles from Cuba and Turkey and a promise from the U.S. that they would not invade Cuba . This led to an agreement to remove missiles from Turkey and Cuba and a deal was reached .
 These negotiations were very tense, and the threat of war was felt by all involved parties . These negotiations are very tense and felt by many of the world's leaders .
 Although the negotiations only last a short time in October of 1962, the impact of this crisis is important today . The impact of the crisis in 1962 is still important today.
 An important skill in history and social studies is to be able to draw conclusions from multiple sources, says author . "An important skill is being able to take a look at multiple sources"
 The United States and U.S.R. were on the brink of war, but the efforts of John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev brought a more peaceful end to the conflict .
 Looking into the negotiations will allow students to decide which side showed more willingness to put an end to the issue .
 Analyze primary and secondary sources related to a historical question to evaluate their relevance, make comparisons, integrate new information with prior knowledge, and come to a reasoned conclusion . Analyze secondary and primary sources to evaluate relevance and make comparisons with them .
 Recall, select, and explain the significance of important people, their work, and their ideas in the areas of political and intellectual leadership, inventions, discoveries, and the arts, in each era .
 Governments of various countries have sometimes sought peaceful resolutions to conflicts and sometimes gone to war . Compare examples and analyze why governments sometimes seek peaceful resolutions .
 Identify a historical or contemporary event in which a person was forced to take an ethical position, such as a decision to go to war, the impeachment of a president, or a presidential pardon, and explain the issues involved .
 Communicate ideas and opinions with others . Develop tentative hypotheses based on the historical evidence .
 Be able to compose a well‐organized essay considering all of the information that will be presented . Be be able to write a well-organized essay with all the information presented .
 This lesson is aimed at student in a 12th grade United States History class .
 Due to the difficulty in the language of some of the primary documents used, younger students may have a harder time understanding them . Younger students may be harder to understand them .
 In order to make this lesson more accessible one could summarize documents using age appropriate vocabulary . The lesson is based on a series of documents written by children .
 Students could work in groups or as a class to evaluate the first sources and gradually work more independently . In addition, students could work as a group to evaluate first sources .
 This lesson should take about three and a half hours or roughly three or four class periods . This lesson will take roughly three to four hours . The lesson is a lesson that should take around three and half hours .
 This is all dependent on the level of participation and understanding displayed by the students during the lesson .
 It could be adapted to be used in a Political Science course when dealing with foreign policy or diplomacy .
 Students will learn about the history of the Cold War and how it ended . The students will also learn about how it was brought to an end .
 This is important to students because this crisis had a big impact on how the U.S. handled other crisis during the Cold War . It had a part in shaping future diplomacy tactics . Students will be able to learn about the impact of this crisis in the United States .
 Enough copies of the hypothesis/evidence sheet 3.6 copies of data sets 4. 6 copies of each data set . Enough copies needed for the hypothesis and evidence sheet . Enough data sets for hypothesis, evidence sheet and data sets .
 The inquiry lesson will be done through a description of the events leading up to the crisis . Engagement in the inquiry lesson is done through an inquiry into the events before .
 Students will be told about the situation in Berlin and how hostilities with the Soviet Union have been going on for some time . Students will also be told how the situation has changed in the past few years .
 Students will be informed about the arms race and the fear of nuclear that accompanied it . Students will also be told about the fear and fear of the nuclear arms race .
 This should engage the students because it does not give clues to the end of the crisis . This is not the only way to end the crisis, it is the way to engage students, says the author .
 Elicit Hypotheses worksheet will be distributed throughout the class .
 The question will remain up on the board or the projector screen while students consider the possibilities . Students will also consider the question .
 Students will be broken into groups of about five or six to come up with one or two hypotheses . After the students have had a chance to think, they will be split up into groups .
 They will compare their hypotheses, and then be instructed to come up with a few more as a group . They will then be told to come with a new hypothesis .
 The teacher will ask students to come back together to come up with one more hypothesis per group . After all of the hypotheses are up on the board the teacher asks students to think about one more .
 This hypothesis does not have to be completely rational, but should remain somewhat relevant . This hypothesis should remain relevant, but not completely rational .
 It will help to establish the process of creating and evaluating hypotheses . It will also help establish how to evaluate hypotheses .
 The students will then be given the first data set, and a volunteer will read it out loud . Volunteers will then read the data set out loud. The students are then asked to read it from the first set .
 The researchers will go back to their groups to discuss the data set and how it either supports the hypotheses or undermines them . They will then go back and discuss how it supports their hypotheses .
 Students will record their evidence on a worksheet handed out earlier in class . The students will record evidence on the worksheet .
 As a class we will discuss the data set and how it tries to answer the question . We will also discuss how the data sets are designed to answer that question .
 Interpreting meaning from primary sources can sometimes be a struggle for students early in the lesson . It is very important that the teacher closely monitors students as they interpret data sets .
 Looking at the first data set as a class might work great for younger grades . The data set is based on the data set from the first class of students .
 The teacher will then ask if there are any new hypotheses that have come about due to the evidence in the first data set . Then the teacher will ask if the teacher has come up with a new hypothesis .
 The pattern will be repeated until the data sets are finished . Once this is complete, the second data set will be handed out, and the pattern will continue .
 The students should be able to use the later data sets more efficiently on their own, so less instruction and facilitation is needed from the teacher . The data sets should be more efficiently used by students themselves, says the author .
 Data set three is a video and could be used to re‐engage students on the second day of the lesson . Data set set three could be re-engaged students with video .
 Set seven is another political cartoon that is to be used at the beginning of the period to re‐engage the students . Set seven will be used to re-engage students with political cartoons .
 The cartoon is merely presenting a perception of the President from the Cuban perspective . The teacher should emphasize that this cartoon is not intended to depict the Cuban President .
 Students will pick one or two hypotheses that they feel are most valid . Students will then pick one of the ones they feel most likely .
 Students will then write a persuasive paper as to why they feel this hypothesis is right . The students will then decide whether they believe it is true . Students will also write a paper explaining why they think it is right to believe .
 They should include the data sets as evidence to support their hypothesis . The data sets should be included as evidence of their hypothesis, the author says .
 Students will be required to state their thesis or hypothesis in the first paragraph . They will then restated it in the conclusion . Students must state their hypothesis or hypothesis first .
 Students must use a certain number of sources, and cite correctly . Students must also cite correctly and use a number of different sources .
 To ensure that this happens, the teacher must show the students what is expected . The teacher must also show them what to expect .
 For this exercise, I exercise a parenthetical reference to which data set is sufficient .
 The students will be given class time to work on their draft of this essay .
 At the end of the hour, they will get in groups and critique each other’s arguments and writing according to the evidence and the rubric . The students will then write according to evidence and writing to each other .
 The students will then take these drafts and revise them to hand in the next day . The students then take them back to hand-in-the-next day .
 This data provides information that is not in the other data sets . It may change the perception of some of the students, some of whom may not see the data .
 This document states that Kennedy possibly did not care too much about the missiles in Turkey because they were obsolete anyway . The document says Kennedy possibly didn't care about the missile missiles because they are obsolete anyway anyway .
 Students will have the opportunity to take this new data into consideration and change their essay if need be .
 They will find out that theories can change even though they may seem very well supported . Theories can change, even though it may seem well supported, they can change .
 The informal portion of the assessment will be with regards to participation both in the large group and in small groups . The informal version of this article will be published in the U.S. State Department of Education .
 Students will not be penalized for participation that adds ideas that are not correct . Students will be not penalized if they add ideas that aren't correct .
 The goal for participation is that students are able to use higher order thinking skills . The goal is to use these skills to help students learn more about thinking . Students are encouraged to participate in the program .
 This could be seen when students put ethics or values in their answers . This is when they answer questions about ethics and values in the answers . Students can also put ethics into their answers to the questions .
 Adding dispositions to an argument will enhance a student’s experience within the lesson . Additions to arguments will enhance an argument's experience within a lesson .
 This is an opportunity for students that may not have participated fully to get their ideas across . This is a chance for the students that might not have been fully participated fully, say students .
 Both portions of the assessment will be taken into consideration while assessing this lesson . The assessment will also be taken to consider the other parts of the lesson .
 Students will receive the rubric back for their written work . Students will get their participation grade and a total grade .
 This lesson is geared for a 12th grade classroom . Reflection and Self Assessment is a reflection and self-assessment .
 If some of the text seems difficult, it will be easy for the teacher to create summaries for the data sets that can be read to supplement the data set .
 Students are required to take the data sets and construct a hypothesis from them . Students must construct a hypotheses from the data .
 The meaning that they take away from the sources will not always be a literal one . The meaning of the sources is not always being literal one, it's not always literal .
 The data sets take up most of the lesson and students will have to manipulate them in order to show support for or contradict hypotheses . This lesson receives a 4 for this standard .
 Students must be aware of the events that are surrounding the Missile Crisis in order to create a reasoned hypothesis . Students must also consider the events surrounding the missile crisis .
 Students must combine knowledge with data sets to show support for their argument . They must also take knowledge given at the beginning of the lesson and combine it with the data sets .
 Students are asked to work in groups to discuss the data sets and possible hypotheses . Students are also asked to talk about the data .
 This sustained conversation and construction of a reasoned conclusion gives this lesson a score of 4 for this standard . The lesson is given a 4 for the standard .
 When students break into groups, they are asked to discuss the data in terms of the focus question . Students discuss data in the groups of students .
 The data is to either show support for or contradict the hypotheses that they came up with . They are to use the data to either support or contradict their hypotheses .
 The score for this standard would be either a 4 or a 5 depending of the work of the individual groups . When coming back to the larger group the discussion may be more teacher led, but there is still the opportunity for students to comment .
 Students will be given information that will consider different points of view . Connections to the World Beyond the Classroom will be shown to students .
 Students will learn tools that will help them read sources and decipher meaning from them . Students will use these tools to help them learn how to read sources .
 This is a skill that will transcend the classroom if students find value in it . This is the skill that can be taught to be a valuable teacher .
 This lesson should receive either a 3 or a 4 depending on the connections that students are able to make between this lesson and the necessity of using these skills when considering a newspaper article . This lesson is based on the fact that this article is an example of a newspaper story .
 There is an underlying ethical value at the heart of this lesson and it is in regards to the avoidance of war . There is also an ethical value in this lesson .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev try different tactics in order to resolve the conflict without the use of weapons . The two leaders were able to use different tactics .
 This issue is something that leaders are faced with when something as severe as this conflict was. This is something they faced with . This issue was something leaders must face when something like this conflict is severe .
 Student will look at the ways in which war was avoided through diplomacy . Student will also look at how diplomacy avoided war by avoiding it .
 It was used effectively in this instance to ensure the security of the countries involved as well as the rest of the world, says CNN.com . The world's most powerful weapon system was used to protect the country from harm .
 These considerations would allow for students to interject values and beliefs as well as critique the values of others during this lesson . Students would be able to use these considerations to help students understand values .
 Because certain issues in this lesson are debatable, this lesson receives a 4 on this standard . The lesson is given a 4-on-4 rating .
 Interdisciplinary integration comes in because this is primarily a history lesson, but political science is also a focus due to diplomacy . The history lesson is primarily history, but also political science .
 Students are also required to know some geography in order to realize the threat that the missiles in Cuba and Turkey presented .
 The knowledge and skills that are integrated into this lesson will allow students to read a passage from either a newspaper or another source and evaluate its meaning . Students will be able to read and evaluate the meaning of a newspaper article .
 This is something that will help them become better citizens when considering such things like a voting . This will also help them be better citizens, says CNN.com .
 Students will relying on one source for information will not allow them to get the full story . Students will rely heavily on the information they need to know about the events surrounding them .
 This lesson receives a 4 for this standard because the interdisciplinary integration focuses more on a social understanding . The knowledge and skills learned will make them better citizens, students say .
 This lesson is constructed in such a way that students will be able to look at primary and secondary documents to make conclusions . The lesson is designed to teach students how to make their own conclusions . This lesson was designed to help students understand the content of this lesson .
 If more sources could be found from the Cuban or Soviet point of view, it would strengthen the pool of data, says CNN.com .
 One of the data sets is especially long, but the information within the document all seemed important, so it was not cut down . The data sets are especially important, but not cut .
 This is by far the longest, so students should not be too overwhelmed by the data . Students will be able to use the data to learn more about the world's largest dataset .
 The beginning of each new class period will include either a video segment or a political cartoon . This will hopefully be successful in engaging the interest and attention of students .
 The documents used in this data set are somewhat difficult, so the use of them for younger students may not be appropriate . Use of the data set is somewhat difficult .
 If this were to be used in middle school, it would be necessary to supplement them with a summary or discussion before students were broken into smaller groups .
 This lesson is tailored in a way that it should effectively reach its intended audience . Overall this lesson should be tailored to effectively reach your intended audience.
 This lesson displays this very well because it asks students to look at primary and secondary documents in order to determine a cause . This lesson shows students how important documents are to determine .
 It is set up in a way that students may interpret the data in different ways . It is also set up to allow students to interpret it differently .
 Two people do not have to come away with the same meaning from a document . Two people don't have to have the same meanings from the same document, the author says .
 Creating this lesson was a challenge, but when working as a teacher it will only be more difficult . Creating this week's lesson was the challenge .
 The amount of possible data sets that could be used in this lesson is uncountable . The amount could be unlimited .
 Picking the right sources for this lesson was probably the hardest part of picking the right ones .
 "Once the data sets were in place, the rest of the lesson just fell into place," the author says .
 The skills and knowledge involved will be used in many other areas . All that said, this lesson is worthwhile for both the teacher and the student .
 The ability to look at a document and come to a conclusion is a very important skill to have in order to be a well informed citizen . It is an important skill for a well-informed citizen, says CNN.com .
 Letter from President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev was sent October 22, 1962 . Letter was signed by the President of the Soviet Union in Moscow, Russia .
 I hope that your Government will refrain from any action which would widen or deepen this already grave crisis . I hope we can agree to resume the path of peaceful negotiations .
 I should say frankly that measures outlined in your statement represent a serious threat to peace and security of peoples . I should . say frankly, measures outlined . pose a serious . threat to . peace and . security of people .
 I hope that Government of United States will show prudence and renounce actions pursued by you, which could lead to catastrophic consequences for peace throughout world . I hope government of U.S. will show . prudence .
 Students should see throughout the data sets that Castro is sort of left out of the discussions . Castro should be seen as an important figure in the history of the Castro era .
 Cuba's location plays an important role in the issue, but Cuban leaders have little if any say in the matter . Cuba’s location of the issue is an important part of the debate .
 This clip voices Castro’s concerns about invasion during the conflict . This clip offers another point of view .
 The President instructed McNamara to review all details of instructions to the Fleet Commanders regarding procedures to be followed in the blockade . McNamara was tasked with reviewing the instructions .
 There was an extended discussion of actions to be taken under assumed Soviet resistance activities such as failing to stop, refusing right to board, ships turning around, heading in another direction, etc. etc. There was also a discussion of how to take actions to stop and board ships .
 Discussion of the effect on United States industry by chartering and preempting the use of 20 or 30 American ships . Discussion of effect on U.S. industry by Chartering and . preempting use of . 20 or . 30 ships .
 Gilpatric reported that this would have little or no effect on the U.S. economy . He said it would be little or little effect on American economy . GilPatric said this would not affect the economy .
 Gilpatric said that McCone's concerns were unfounded . McCone questioned these findings . Gilpatrics said that this had been thoroughly studied and McCone had concerns .
 The Attorney General stated that it was within the law to use foreign bottoms . Decision was made to preempt United States bottoms and not worry about the consequences because they would not be serious .
 President urged that Norstad be retained at SHAPE during the period of crisis, perhaps until 1 February 63 . Norstad is currently in charge of SHAPE .
 Bundy stated that this is complicated as the two posts are so co-mingled that they really must be held by one man . Bundy said that this was complicated because the posts must be shared by a single person . Bundy also said that the posts should be held together .
 Taylor raised question that if this was done it would hurt Lemnitzer's prestige . Taylor said if this were done, it would have hurt the prestige of the institution .
 The President said that he felt that Norstad was so experienced and so capable that he would take the risk of NATO country criticisms, he did not think that Lemnitzer would be hurt, and he wished Norstad to remain . Norstad's judgment was so sound, the President said
 President seemed particularly concerned over the situation if we should launch attacks which might result in four or five missiles being delivered on the U.S. He said he was concerned about the situation .
 DOD spokesmen stated that the area covered by the 1100-mile missiles involved 92 million people . The area was covered by an area of 1100- miles .
 They felt that fall-out space was available though not equipped for about 40 million . They said it was not equipped with enough space to accommodate 40 million people .
 Many arrangements could be made without too much publicity, such as repositioning food, actually obtaining space, putting up shelter signs, etc. Replied .
 "I got the conclusion that not very much could or would be done," he says . "Whatever was done would involve a great deal of publicity and public alarm," he adds .
 McCone stated to the President that he felt certain intelligence should be reported to the meeting prior to the departure of Secretary McNamara as some items observed by the Intelligence Community might prove of great significance .
 John A McCone/2/ Director /2/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature . John A. McCone .
 You should deliver the letter addressed by the President to Chairman Khrushchev immediately . You should also deliver the President's letter to the Chairman of the Council .
 "We firmly adhere to the principles of international law and observe strictly the norms which regulate navigation on the high seas, in international waters," says the ship .
 I think it would be possible to end the controversy quickly and normalize the situation, he says . "Statesmen charged with responsibility are of sober mind and have an awareness of their responsibility," he writes .
 Cuba and Turkey must have permission to enter Cuba, Turkey, says President Vladimir Putin . Russia and Cuba have not been allowed to enter each other's countries, says Putin .
 The clip signifies the end of the crisis and gives an interesting view of its conclusion . The clip is a conclusion to a series of events that have taken place in the past few weeks .
 Hypotheses Supporting Evidence Contradicting Evidence . Things to keep in mind when looking at the data sets .
 Support Includes 5 or Includes 4 pieces Includes 3 pieces of Includes 2 or for more pieces of of evidence that evidence that support fewer pieces of Evidence that support the hypothesis that supports the hypothesis. Support includes 5 or includes 4 pieces .
 The writer's position is There is no paragraph strong and leaves recognizable . Closing The conclusion is The conclusion of this article will be The conclusion .
 The restated within the conclusion ‚ the the writer's position closing paragraph, but paper just ends. understanding is restated . The writer's the first two position. sentences of the Effective closing restatement .