 It is the first time the setting up of U.N. inspection machinery has been invoked in a crisis directly confronting the United States and Soviet Union .
 The United States and the Soviet Union, together with the other countries, will renew their efforts to achieve a disarmament agreement in a spirit of greater mutual comprehension, especially in light of the messag . exchanged between Mr Khrushchev and Mr Kennedy .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy joined by Macmillan on urgent call for cessation of tests . Kennedy and Kennedy join in call to end tests .
 The situation after Mr. Castro's speech of 1 November as it affects problems of inspection will be considered in a separate paper . Sr. The Prime Minister wrote to Mr Khrushchev on 28 October 1/ The situation .
 Reportedly, the Soviet Union is locking for a technical solution and may, in the near future, make new proposals on control which envisage the use of automatic sealed seismic stations .
 The 28 October messages by Khrushchev and Kenned:/ did not raise explicitly the general question of military bases, 1 ,t in the wake of the Cuban events thi3 question is likely to come up time and again .
 Some observers felt that attempts on the part of the Soviet Union to increase and diversify her own deterrent capacity were to be expected . Already before the recent Cuban events some observers felt .
 Although she possessed a huge capacity to threaten Europe with a large army and seme 7C0 medium-range balli stic missiles of ranges up to 2, COO miles . In the -3field of ICBM's she was believed to be outclassed .
 It is not easy for governments to decide military developments coincide with the long-term interests of political stability, says CNN.com .
 World security would gain if the great Powers were to undertake not to establish any new bases outside their territories . World Security would gain, nevertheless, if they were to stop establishing new bases abroad .
 The stability of the military balance has had the effect of reducing the apprehension over bases . During the past few years, the stability has been the main concern for the security of bases .
 As Mr Aiker fvxii last week in t e Security Council, "for several years no new foreign military bases have been established throughout the world"
 Zorin raised the question of U.S. overseas bases in the Security Council debate . It was logical to raise the question, he said .
 Mr Stevenson described the U.S. position as that there are missiles, comparable to those being placed in Cv a, v/ith the forces of only three of our Allies . In his reply, Mr, Stevenson said the missiles were comparable to that of only 3 of the Allies
 The U.S. has nearly 70 bases in West Europe and North Africa but only three are for intermediate range ballistic missiles . Only three of the bases in the region are for missiles . The United States has a total of 70 bases around the world .
 The remainder of the depots are conventional depots for naval, army and air forces .
 It is reported that there are 8 nuclear submarines, each equipped with 16 Polaris missiles, deployed in "".lest European waters . That number will have grown to about 40 by the end of 1963 .
 Khrushchev suggested to Kennedy that Soviet nuclear missiles could be removed from Cuba in return for similar action by the United States in Turkey . The White House replied that the U.S. and Allies have long taken the lead in seeking properly inspected ares limitation on both sides .
 This has been interpreted to mean that the United States and its allies would be prepared to consider this question if it were brought up in a different context at a later date . One can say whether in the future the Soviet Union will raise the question of nuclear missile bases in Turkey .
 The case of Cuba tends to give force to a demand for the elimination of nuclear missile bases overseas . Certainly, the case of the Cuba case gives force to an anti-nuclear base demand .
 The Soviet military base in Cuba is defenceless and the base in Turkey is all but obsolete . It is the only defenceless Soviet base in the world .
 The removal of any bases from Russian perimeter would strengthen America's stand on behalf of peace and would bring •comparable Soviet response . n 7.7. 7.5.5: Removal of any . bases from Russia perimeter would immensely strengthen America’s stand on . behalf of
 The elimination of Soviet bases in Ciba and the United States in Turkey would be a step towards reducing tensions and might help the course of general disarmament . The Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church in the U.S. said that the elimination of the bases would help reduce tensions .