 To commemorate the 50th anniversary new books, articles and reminiscences will no doubt be forthcoming . New books and articles are no doubt forthcoming .
 A full accounting of the numbers and types of U.S. and Soviet nuclear weapons that were operational during the period from mid-October through November 1962, a nuclear order of battle . One contribution to the vast literature would be a full accounting .
 Most accounts of the crisis mention certain weapon types but leave others out . The tally is incomplete and the tally is not complete . Most accounts mention certain weapons types .
 The crisis began in mid-October 1962 when the U.S. discovered that the Soviet Union was secretly deploying medium-range ballistic missiles into Cuba . The crisis was triggered by the discovery of Soviet Union's secret weapons in Cuba .
 The United States had been aware that the Soviet Union was providing increased military assistance to Cuba since late July . But ballistic missiles crossed the line, the U.S. says .
 Strategic Air Command U-2 aircraft overflying western Cuba took photos that revealed that bases were being readied and missiles were being prepared .
 President Kennedy was shown the “hard photographic evidence” at 8:45 am on Tuesday October 16 . These conclusive facts were provided to the president’s advisers and he was shown .
 Committees were formed, plans proposed, and U.S. military forces were put on higher levels of alert .
 President Kennedy described his course of action in an address to the nation on October 22, 1963 .
 A “strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment’s under shipment to Cuba, to go into effect on October 24 . This included a “Strict quarantine” on all military equipment under shipment .
 At the same time diplomatic communications and an exchange of letters between Premier Khrushchev and President Kennedy ensued eventually leading to a resolution of the crisis . Diplomatic communications and a letter exchange ensued .
 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union subject to U.N. verification . On Sunday October 28, October 28 .
 The United States agreed not to invade Cuba and in a secret agreement said it would remove its Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The U.S. agreed to remove them from Turkey in secret agreement .
 The crisis did not end suddenly after the thirteen-day period from October 16th to 28th when Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles . The crisis was not over and ended suddenly after a 13 day period .
 A new phase of the crisis ensued, virtually out of sight, with a great deal unknown to the Americans . The crisis was virtually out-of-sight, with the Americans unaware .
 U.S. forces were only gradually wound down in November . Issue of removing IL-28 bombers among the most serious concerns .
 Strategic Air Command remained at DEFCON II until November 21 and only returned to its normal readiness condition, on November 27 .
 On October 22 Pacific Command Quick Reaction Alert aircraft were loaded with nuclear weapons and readied for immediate launch . Pacific Command aircraft loaded with nukes were readied to launch .
 On November 21, the USSR announced seven measures to reduce military readiness, effective immediately . The measures were announced on November 21 the USSR .
 Kennedy: Impending mid-term elections were days away and were definitely on Kennedy’s mind . Kennedy: "Impending midterms are days away"
 How to respond to the presses’ voracious appetite and control the narrative was a constant problem . How to deal with the press’s voracity?
 The role of the tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba was a key topic in a tense four hour exchange on November 22d . Fidel Castro, his associates and Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan were at the center of the exchange . Castro and the Soviet deputy prime minister discussed the
 The original plan was to leave the tactical nuclear weapon in Cuba as part of a Soviet presence . It was originally intended to be part of the Soviet presence in Cuba .
 The Soviets would transfer the FKRs and Lunas to Cuba, thus making it the first nuclear power in Latin America . There was also a second part of the plan that the Soviets transferred the F.KRs to Cuba .
 Khrushchev feared Castro might not be as responsible a custodian of Soviet nuclear weapons as one would have liked . The original plan would have to be reversed after it became clear that Castro was not responsible for the weapons .
 At the same time the issue of removal of the 42 Il-28s had to be faced . At the time, the issue was also being faced .
 Khrushchev sent Anastas Mikoyan who arrived in Havana on November 2, 1962 . The Soviet Union removed ballistic missiles, tactical nuclear weapons and other weapons .
 The Soviet Deputy Prime Minister accomplished his difficult tasks while maintaining friendship with its socialist ally in the Western Hemisphere . He accomplished his task while maintaining his friendship with Russia .
 For this, as Svetlana Savranskaya argues, Mikoyan should be given credit for helping to end the Cuban crisis . For this he should be credited for ending the crisis .
 Sergo Mikoyan and Svetlana Sarranskaya are the authors of the book . The book is based on the November 4 missile attack in November .
 This is clearly the most important new information to come out about the Cuban crisis . It demonstrates that there is still much to be known about it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 On November 30 the tactical nuclear weapons were loaded aboard the Arkangel’sk . The ship sailed for home on December 1st, 7 arriving in the USSR on December 20th .
 Earlier on November 5, the Aleksandrovsk departed Cuba with the 24 warheads for the SS-5 IRBMs and the 36 SS-4 warheads . The Russian-built Russian-made missiles are capable of carrying warheads .
 There was continuing concern by the Defense Intelligence Agency about the quantitative and qualitative increase of Soviet conventional weapons to Cuba that left Castro with a formidable military capability . The CIA was concerned that the increase in Cuban conventional weapons would leave Castro with an enormous military force .
 The nuclear order of battle includes available/operational weapons, some on high levels of alert, which were ready to be used if authoritative orders had been given . The nuclear weapons list includes available and operational weapons .
 The nuclear weapons were of many different types depending on their range, yield, location and delivery mode . Nuclear weapons were often different types of weapons depending on the range and yield .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev had no intention of starting a nuclear war, and did everything they could to prevent one . Events occurred that they and their advisers did not know about or control .
 As the crisis unfolded there was the possibility of weapons being launched by mistake, miscalculation or misjudgment . The possibility of a launch of weapons by mistake is a concern .
 Once one nuclear weapon had been used it is difficult to say where it might have ended . It is impossible to say exactly where the nuclear weapon might have been used .
 On both sides there was incomplete intelligence leading to mistaken analysis and/or false conclusions . The U.S. intelligence on both sides of the border was incomplete, according to CNN.com .
 There have been a series of conferences attended by US, Russian, and Cuban participants .
 These exchanges, coupled with additional disclosures of authoritative documents, revealed unsettling dimensions of the crisis . These exchanges were revealed in an interview with CNN's Richard Quest .
 American officials, including Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, did not believe that nuclear warheads for the Soviet weapons had arrived .
 By the time of the quarantine most had arrived and were already in Cuba . In fact, by the time the quarantine was underway most had already arrived .
 Indigirka arrived on October 4th at Mariel and unloaded 90 warheads for four weapon systems . After a 19-day trip from Severomorsk the cargo ship took 19 days to unload the warheads .
 Thirty-six of the warheads were for the SS-4 MRBMs . The warheads were kept in vans parked near the missile sites . They were used to launch missiles from the Soviet Union .
 Had there been verification of the presence of dozens of warheads for the tactical systems, it may have complicated the outcome of the crisis . The situation may have been complicated by the lack of verification .
 One of the more likely scenarios involves Soviet use of one or several nuclear weapons to attack U.S. forces invading Cuba .
 In a 1992 conference, and later in a 1994 book, it was revealed that there were tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba . The weapons were revealed in the book .
 The Americans did not know about them and if pressured desperate Soviet soldiers might have fired them had an invasion ensued . Khrushchev may have delegated authority to the local General .
 The Soviets divulged that the Soviet general in Cuba had been delegated authority by Moscow to use tactical nuclear weapons if the U.S. were to conduct an amphibious invasion of the island . Contact was lost with Moscow and contact was lost .
 American officials up until then knew nothing about the presence of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba, much less about any pre-delegation orders to use them . U.S. officials knew nothing until then that .
 Khrushchev rescinded the pre-delegation order after President Kennedy went on TV on October 22 to announce the presence of offensive missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy made the announcement on TV .
 On the U.S. side prior to public disclosure of the missiles in Cuba, there were invasion plans being prepared and promoted by various generals . On the US side before the public disclosure, the invasion plans were also being prepared .
 More concrete invasion plans were prepared to be undertaken on October 28 if Khrushchev did not reply positively by then . Later plans were made to be carried out on October 31 .
 If those plans had gone forward there would have been a very different outcome to the crisis, possibly the use of nuclear weapons in and around Cuba, which could have rapidly escalated to further exchanges, perhaps even to global nuclear war using strategic weapons .
 The crisis occurred at an early stage of the arms race when each side’s forces were still relatively immature . Each side's forces were relatively immature at the time of the crisis .
 The forces on the U.S. side were configured for deterrence or war fighting with safety a secondary objective . The forces were designed for deterrence and war fighting .
 There was not yet the inherent coupling that would occur when the U.S. and Soviet forces attained rough levels of parity .
 At this later, more dangerous stage, when forces were tightly coupled, something may have triggered higher stages of alert and a cascading effect may have overwhelmed the system . The system may have been overwhelmed by a cascade of cascading effects .
 Logical, prudent and conservative measures taken by officials in response to the actions of each other may have resulted in the outbreak of war . Officials should have taken conservative measures to prevent the outbreak .
 Marshall Grechko ordered representatives of the Warsaw Pact to “carry out several measures in increasing the military preparedness” of Pact forces . On the same day he ordered Warsaw Pact representatives to increase the military readiness of forces .
 On October 25, Red Star carried portions of a speech by Marshall Rodion Malinovsky emphasizing the power of Soviet missiles . The speech was carried by Red Star .
 U.S. weapons in Europe could hit targets in the Soviet Union . Soviet weapons in the western USSR aimed at European targets that would have been involved in a regional nuclear war .
 Soviet and U.S. nuclear weapons in and around Cuba would have been involved in a local nuclear war . Soviet and United States nuclear weapons were involved in the Cuban nuclear war.
 What follows is an Order of Battle of nuclear forces that were available to military and civilian officials from mid-October through November 1962 . Some scenarios of how nuclear forces might have been used and with what consequences .
 If nuclear weapons had been used in or around Cuba or launched from Cuba the possibility of escalation was high with regional use likely and the use of strategic weapons a serious possibility . The possibility of using nuclear weapons in Cuba was high .
 President Kennedy said as much in his October 22 address to the nation . President Kennedy: "I'm sorry for what I've done, I'm sure you're going to do it."
 Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson advised that we should knock out the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Former President George W. Bush said the missiles should be removed from Cuba .
 "I know what they are required to do in the light of their history and their posture around the world," says President Obama . "It's a very difficult time for the U.S. to do so," says Obama .
 Khrushchev’s letter to President Kennedy of October 26 revealed his fears about the “calamitous nature of modern warfare.” The letter was written by the then-Krushchev .
 He warned the American president that ‘should war indeed break out, it would not be in our power to contain or stop it, for such is the logic of war,’ he said .
 A large scale attack by the United States against the Soviet Union in October 1962 would have been with over 3500 nuclear weapons, with a combined yield of approximately 6300 megatons . As detailed below, a large scale U.S. attack would be with a total of over 35
 This was about half of the number of warheads with U.S. strategic forces . Most of the warheads were bomber weapons for long-range bombers . The warheads were used to launch long-distance bombers .
 The total number of nuclear weapons in the U.S. Stockpile in October 1962 was approximately 26,400 and the Soviet Union approximately 3300 . The Soviet Union had 3300 nuclear weapons . The total nuclear weapon stock in the United States Stock Pile was approximately 26,
 If we extrapolate, to estimate what the forces might be in SIOP-63, it is reasonable to conclude that 3500 fully generated weapons have a combined yield of some 6300 megatons .
 Nuclear weapon systems on both sides were available in and around Europe and could have been employed if escalation had occurred . A Regional Nuclear War in the European Theater was possible in the region .
 It is instructive to estimate Europe’s possible role in the crisis and the destruction that might have ensued . Nevertheless, it is important to consider Europe's possible role as a role in Europe's crisis and its destruction .
 Medium-range and intermediate-range missiles and fighter bombers were made up US/NATO and Soviet regional forces in the European theater . The Soviet-U.S. regional forces were based in Europe and Russia .
 In 1962, the United States had approximately 4375 nuclear weapons deployed in Europe . In 1962 the U.S. had about 4375 nukes deployed to Europe . The United States also had 4375 nuclear weapons deployed in Europe .
 The U.S. and NATO fighter bombers had a supply of nuclear bombs deployed at bases in Germany, Italy, Greece, Turkey, the Netherlands and aboard for aircraft carriers .
 Air Force and Navy planes would have had to contend with a formidable Soviet air defense system on their way to targets in the Soviet Union . The Air Force would have faced a formidable air defense .
 Many were likely aimed at European targets with a portion targeted on United States bases and United States allies in the Pacific region . A portion of the attacks were aimed at U.S. bases and allies in Asia, the Pentagon says .
 Soviet fighter bombers based near the western border of the Soviet Union may have had missions to hit targets in Western Europe .
 Initial use of a nuclear weapon might have begun in and around Cuba . A Local Nuclear War might have been started in Cuba . Initial use may have been in Cuba.
 The most likely scenario would have been use of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons to attack and repel American forces during an invasion of Cuba .
 If American soldiers were killed, as they surely would have been, the U.S. would have had to retaliate . More likely the Soviets would have responded to the deaths of American soldiers, as well .
 A most dire situation for the United States would have been the launching of SS-4 MRBMs to American cities within its range of 1300 statute miles . The U.S. would have had to rely on the launch of the missiles to launch .
 There were only six to eight missiles operational on October 28, when the order from Moscow arrived . According to Major General Igor Stastenko, commander of the Soviet missile troops on Cuba, there were only 6 to 8 missiles on Cuba .
 "We do not know precisely how ready they were or whether they were specifically targeted at American cities," the author says . "We are not sure how ready or if they were," he says .
 Cities along the eastern seaboard as far north as Washington, DC were within range . New Orleans, Houston, and Dallas to the west and Cincinnati to the northwest were within the range .
 Even with poor accuracy a one megaton detonation in or around those American cities would have caused hundreds of thousands of deaths . Even with its poor accuracy, the detonation was likely to have caused thousands of people .
 We do not know what role nuclear weapons played in various OPLANS that were outlines to be used to invade Cuba .
 The majority view within the U.S. military was that conventional forces were probably adequate to attack and destroy Soviet forces on Cuba without the use of nuclear weapons . The majority of the American military was thought to be capable of attacking and destroying Soviet forces .
 Included are the nine ICBMs at Vandenberg AFB, deployed in test/training facilities, which attained an emergency launch capability and were added to the SIOP force, targeted at the “Sino-Soviet Bloc”
 Six Atlas Fs at Walker AFB, NM and ten at Plattsburgh AFB, NY were at the time under Air Force Systems Command control . At the time, they were under the AFSC/SAC Agreement to be transferred to SAC and ready for EWO firing .
 SAC declared the 556th SMS at Plattsburgh operational operational competing deployment of the Atlas ICBM force . The number of ICBMs being placed on alert increased daily and by 20 December 1962 SAC had placed 556 on alert .
 On October 24, SAC invoked the Air Force Systems Command AFSC/SAC Agreement for Emergency Combat Capability of Ballistic Missile Launch Complexes . The agreement was invoked by SAC on October 24 . SAC: The agreement is for emergency combat capability .
 This meant placing the test missiles at Vandenberg in a war ready posture and turning them over to SAC control . SAC turned the missiles over to Vandenberg .
 Of the twenty ICBM launchers at Vandenberg, AFB eleven were for Atlas missiles, three were for Titan missiles and six were for Minuteman missiles . AFB 11 of the twenty IBM launchers are for Atlas and Titan missiles . Vandenberg AFB is located in California, California, and
 54 Titan 1 ICBMs were placed on alert in six squadrons at five Air Force Bases in 1962 . 54 were deployed at five bases in six months .
 At the peak of the crisis on October 27, 1962 the first two Minuteman 1A ICBMs were placed on alert at Malmstrom AFB, Montana . Range: 7,250 miles Warhead: W59Y1 .
 By the next day four were on alert at Malmstrom and two days later there were nine . The next day there were four more on alert, two more two days after .
 By December 11, twenty were on alert at Malmstrom . They continued to be fielded .
 On October 23 SAC combat crews replaced AFSC and civilian contractor personnel, targets were programmed into the systems . Nuclear warheads replaced test reentry vehicles and nuclear warheads were replaced .
 Minuteman in LF-2 was taken off strategic alert on November 1 and the Minutemen in . LF-3 on November 2 because of maintenance required on the guidance and control section .
 On October 24 the AFSC/SAC Agreement for Emergency Combat Capability of Ballistic Missile Launch Complexes was executed for the first time . The agreement was executed on October 24 .
 Over the next month Thirty-six AFSC missiles were turned over to SAC and placed on alert . i. ii. The missiles had been turned over by the U.S. Air Force Command Command .
 Less is known about the availability of the United States SSBNs during the months of October and November 1962 .
 The eighth, the USS Thomas A Edison, departed Charleston, SC on November 7, 1962 to go on operational patrol with 16 Polaris A2 missiles . The ship was the first ship to carry the missile missiles .
 The U.S. established a submarine base in Holy Loch, Scotland for a squadron of ballistic missile submarines . The base was within range of the Soviet Union .
 The likely patrol areas were the Norwegian Sea and the eastern Mediterranean . The likely patrols were likely to be in Norwegian Sea or eastern Mediterranean waters .
 The first five George Washington class submarines arrived at Holy Loch between March and October 1961 . They began their patrols of approximately 65 days .
 Both are undergoing repairs to pumps, motors, electronics and weapons, as well as loading supplies . Both were undergoing repairs .
 USS Abraham Lincoln was hit by a load of torpedoes . USS Lincoln was attacked by several torpedoes in the early 1950s .
 Of the seven SSBNs five carried Polaris A-1 SLBMs and two carried Polaris SLBmets . Two of the seven were used to carry Polaris A.1SLBMs .
 The United States conducted a flurry of tests from April to June in the Pacific . Clearly the Soviets took notice of this event and the tests conducted by the United States .
 The Ethan Allen returned to Charleston via the Panama Canal, and departed on patrol on June 26, 1962 . 16 Polaris A-2 missiles arrived at Holy Loch at the end of August 1962 .
 The Soviets kept a trawler equipped for electronics and communications surveillance, stationed close enough to the Holy Loch to keep track of traffic in and out of the port . Once again Commander Griffiths, “The Soviets kept an . .
 The Soviet High Command knew there were five SSBNs within range of targets in the Soviet Union with 80 nuclear weapons on board . Most certainly the Soviet high command knew there .
 The submarines needed to surface to launch their missiles and thus were far more vulnerable than the ballistic missile submarines that soon replaced them . Submarine submarines need to surface and thus more vulnerable to launch missiles .
 Normally one or two submarines were continuously on patrol in the North Pacific within range of targets in the Soviet Far East . The U.S. Navy was known to have submarines on patrol at the time .
 Installations on the Kamchatka Peninsula, notably the Soviet Pacific Fleet, were priority targets . The Soviet Pacific fleet was also targeted .
 Depending upon which submarines were on station between two and nine missiles were available to be fired at any given time . Depending on which submarine was on station at the time of the attack, two to nine missiles could be fired .
 The order to “Surface” to launch her missiles never came and she returned from patrol on 29 October 1962 . The order never came to launch missiles .
 The three submarines on station had a total of eight Regulus missiles within striking distance of the Soviet Union . The three Submarine submarines were on station at the time of the attack .
 When ordered to DEFCON 2 they prepared the nuclear warheads for arming and, if necessary, for launching missiles . The U.S. nuclear weapons program is based in Alaska and Alaska .
 It was briefed to the President on September 14, 1962, one month before the start of the Cuban missile crisis .
 SIOP-62 had come into effect April 15, 1961 and had been briefed to the President on September 13, 1961 . SIOP 62 had been issued by the President in September 1961 .
 SIOP-62 was the first nuclear war plan under the new arrangement of coordinating all commands through the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff to have a Single Integrated Operational Plan and coordinate the nuclear targeting plans of all commands .
 Much about the SIOP remains classified, but significant information about SIOP-62 is available . Much of the information remains classified . The SIOP will be used by the U.S. military in the future .
 SIOP-62 has been declassified and provides details of what forces would have been employed at the time, the kinds of targets they would have destroyed, and what knowledge President Kennedy had of the war plan as a result .
 SIOP-62 was criticized for overkill and overkill . The successor plan included five targets instead of just one basic option . There were attempts to distinguish between civilian and military targets .
 If the President faced “the moment of thermonuclear truth,” to use McGeorge Bundy’s phase, his only options were, in effect, massive nuclear strikes . Nevertheless, if the President . faced ‘the moment’ of ‘thermonuclear
 SIOP-63 allowed for several “withhold’s” options and made some attempt to distinguish between civilian and military targets . SIOP 63 allowed for a number of ‘withholds’ options, including targeting targets .
 SIOP-63 was quite similar to SIOP -62 - unleashing massive strikes with even more weapons available . But in general it was similar to the previous one strike in which more weapons were available .
 U.S. strategic nuclear forces on July 15, 1961, numbered 3,267 weapons, 54 vastly more than the fledgling Soviet strategic forces . The United States had 54 more nuclear weapons than the Soviet Union .
 A memo drafted for General Maxwell Taylor some seven weeks later describes SIOP-62 . The memo was drafted for general Maxwell Taylor seven weeks after the war .
 The plan had 14 to 16 attack options, all based on the amount of alert time available . The plan was designed to protect the U.S. from a terrorist attack .
 The combined yield was 12,825 megatons down from the 1960 peak of over 20,000 megatonons . i.ii. i.i.ii: The combined yields were 12,888 megatonions, down from a peak of 20,600 megatones
 On October 22, United States military forces worldwide went on DEFCON 3 at 7:00 pm the precise time that President Kennedy went on television and delivered a 17-minute speech . President Kennedy announced “unmistakable evidence” of the presence of missiles and bombers in Cuba
 CINCSAC General Thomas Power ordered his forces to DEFCON 2 at 10:00 am Washington time on 24 October 1962 as the Naval quarantine was coming into effect . The quarantine was due to take place on October 24, 1962 .
 An hour later General Power used the Primary Alerting System to address his forces on the seriousness of the situation . General Power said the situation was serious and that the situation had been serious .
 He felt it was important for the Soviets to know of SAC’s readiness and they surely heard the message . ‘They surely heard it,’ he said .
 In the late 1950s Strategic Air Command implemented airborne alert missions with the codename, Chrome Dome . Airborne alert missions were codenamed 'Chrome Dome'
 The Thule Ballistic Missile Early Warning System, located in Greenland, began operations in 1960 to warn of Soviet missile launches . The system is located near Greenland .
 If the Thule radar went dead the B-52 could communicate with SAC that the BMEWS had been struck and the Soviet attack had begun . If the radar died, the B.52 was able to communicate with the SAC to say it had been hit .
 On October 22 at 1700 EDT (two hours prior to President Kennedy’s address to the nation) SAC went to a one-eighth airborne alert force . The alert force was two hours before President Kennedy's address .
 The airborne alert operation increased to sixty-six daily launches (28 southern, 36 northern and 2 Thule monitor) by November 5th, with more B-52Hs available, to seventyfive daily launches .
 Each airborne alert bomber carried bombs with a combined yield of between 4.5 and 4.4 bombs . The bombs were carried by each of the bombers .
 At the direction of the JCS General Power terminated the 1/8 airborne alert posture effective 0600Z November 21 . The alert posture has returned to its normal level .
 During the one-month operation 2,088 B-52 aircraft were launched; airborne alert flying hours totaled 47,168 . During the month of operations 2,000 B-Qs were launched . During that period, BQs had more than 47,000 flying hours .
 While SAC was at DEFCON 2, 92. percent of its weapon systems were ready to launch within one hour . The U.S. Air Force says 92.9 percent of the weapons systems are ready to go on launch .
 Between 23 October and 26 November, SAC bombers made 2,511 flights (with a total of 8,101 weapons aboard without an accident) Between October and November, the bombers flew with 8,100 weapons aboard .
 The targets ranged from missile complexes and military bases to ‘command and control centers’ like the Kremlin, in the heart of Moscow, and ‘urban industrial targets’ such as steel mills, electrical grids, and petroleum facilities .
 They were deployed to Germany with the 1st Pilotless Bomber Squadron at the end of 1955 . They were withdrawn in June 1969 .
 Over the course of the crisis there were various estimates by U.S. intelligence about the number and types of Soviet forces in Cuba, facing Europe and the Soviet Union .
 The most authoritative figures on ICBM availability come from Strategic Rocket Forces historian Lt. Lt. Gen. John S. Kagan . Lt. S.Kagan: "The most authoritative figure is that of Soviet ICBMs74"
 Four of the SS-6s were on open launch pads at Plesetsk and two were reserve missiles at Baikonur that were not on permanent duty as they were intended for space exploration . Two of the missiles were reserve weapons intended to be used for exploration .
 Two Baikonur SS-6s were made ready by being fueled and attaching a warhead . During the crisis the two Baik on-board were fueled and attached warhead to each other .
 A topic for further research is to understand the alert procedures of the Strategic Rocket Forces in particular the Soviet military in general . A topic of further research should be discussed .
 They were too large to fit in silos and were fired from reinforced concrete launch pads . The launch pads were too small to fit into silos or silos .
 It took twenty hours to prepare for launch and could not be kept on alert for more than a day . The launch took place at a time of twenty hours .
 The liquid fuel for the missiles was corrosive and toxic, could leak, and was potentially dangerous . Liquid fuel for missiles is corrosive, toxic, and could leak . It was used to fuel missiles .
 The majority of the Soviet ICBM force during the crisis was the 36 SS-7s (R16), 26 in silos and 10 on open launch pads . Most of the force was the Soviet Union's 36 SS7s .
 The SS-7 Saddler was a two-stage storable, liquid-propellant ICBM capable of delivering 3500 lb reentry vehicle to a range of 12,000 kilometers with a CEP of 1.25 nm .
 Reaction time under normal conditions was three hours for soft sites and five to fifteen minutes for hard sites . Reaction time would be three hours under soft sites, five to 15 minutes under hard sites, three hours per hour for soft soft sites .
 Later assessments reduced the number to 44 operational with six training launchers with some operational capability, close to Karlov’s figure . i. ii. Karlov said: ‘There are 44 operational weapons with some capability'
 The original Soviet plan was to deploy seven Golf I diesel submarines to Cuba . Each submarine carried three SS-N-4 Sark ballistic missiles with a single 1.45 Mt warhead and nuclear torpedoes .
 There were no missile facilities in Cuba able to service the liquid fueled missiles . Liquid fueled missiles were used to launch missiles .
 Fuel could only be left in the missiles for thirty days after which it became a safety concern . Fuel can only be stored in missiles for up to 30 days . Fuel was only left in missiles after 30 days after becoming a safety issue .
 A diesel submarine on patrol had to change its batteries every one or two days and had to surface making it vulnerable to anti-submarine warfare systems . A diesel sub on patrol would have to change batteries every day and surface .
 The cruise missile submarines probably had an anti-carrier mission rather than a land-attack mission . They were dropped from U.S. intelligence estimates after 1962 .
 Although the Soviets had many ballistic missile submarines none played a role in the Cuban crisis . i.ii. i. The Soviet Union did not have many of its submarines . ii. Although the Soviet Union had many submarines, none of them played a part in the crisis .
 If war had broken out and Soviet Bear and Bison bombers attempted to fly over the North Pole to attack North American targets they would have been met by formidable United States and Canadian air defenses .
 Air defense interceptor aircraft armed with nuclear missiles would likely have prevented any Soviet bomber from reaching its target . Many interceptors would have been equipped with nuclear weapons .
 The United States had over 3,500 fully generated weapons at the ready to use against the Soviet Union . The U.S. had more than 3,000 weapons ready for use in the fight .
 Given the difficulty of Soviet bombers to carry out their missions, the actual ratio is probably higher . While that is a ratio of about dozen-to-one, it's probably higher than that .
 The question of whether nuclear superiority played a role in resolving the crisis has been studied at length . It is not the purpose of this paper but it is worth reviewing the issues .
 The formal agreement to deploy Thors in Great Britain was signed on February 22, 1958 . Thors were deployed to the United Kingdom in 1958 .
 The Thor had a range of 1,740 miles and carried one W49Y2 warhead with a yield of 1.2 . The Thor was launched in 1944 and carried a W49 Y2 nuclear warhead .
 On June 22, 1959 SAC transferred the first Thor squadron to the 77th RAF Strategic Missile Squadron . The squadron was the first to fly Thor missiles from SAC's first squadron .
 From June 1960 until late November 1962 there were 60 Thors deployed in Great Britain . 60th Thors were deployed to Great Britain from June 1960 to November 1962 .
 On November 29, 1962 the first Thor IRBM was removed from alert under the phase out program . On August 15, 1963 the last missile came off alert . The last missile was taken off alert in August 1963 under phase out of program .
 President Kennedy inherited the Jupiter agreements from the previous administration . He would deploy the missiles to Turkey and later agree to remove them as part of the settlement of the crisis .
 The first Jupiter agreement was signed between the U.S. and Italy on March 26, 1959 to deploy two squadrons of Jupiter IRBMs on Italian soil . The agreement was made in 1959 .
 The Jupiter was a single-stage, liquid fueled rocket with all inertial guidance . It was the first time the rocket was launched by NASA .
 It had a range of 1,750 miles and carried a W49Y2 warhead with a yield of 1.2 . It was launched in 1961 and carried 1.5 million rounds of ammunition .
 The Italian base was located at Gioia del Colle in the Puglia . Each squadron was organized into five flights of three missiles each . The base was . located in the area .
 The missiles are highly vulnerable, standing vertically in the open countryside on launch pads . A sniper’s bullet could piece their thin skin of the missile rendering them inoperable . The missiles were highly vulnerable .
 The two Jupiter missiles in Italy became operational between February and July 1961 . The two squadrons of Jupiter missiles became operational in Italy . Jupiter missiles were launched in 1961 .
 By April 23, all of the missiles and equipment from Italy were disassembled . The missiles were removed from the U.S. arsenal .
 By the time Kennedy became president, missiles had not yet been delivered . The missiles were not delivered for six months after Kennedy took office .
 The first launch positions became operational as scheduled on November 6, 1961 . An Air Force historian says the launch positions were operational .
 The squadron’s warheads remained in SAC custody and possession until such time they might be released for launch by an American warhead release order . The squadron's warheads, however, remained in the custody of SAC until such a release order was issued .
 The Soviet Army responded to the American deployments in Turkey by deploying their own MRBM sites at Krasnovodsk and Kirovabad . Zaloga adds that, the Soviet Army had responded .
 President Kennedy had asked the Pentagon to look into having the obsolete missiles removed, most recently in August, only to have the bureaucracy fail to implement his decision . President Kennedy asked for the missiles removed in August .
 One scholar concludes, “He certainly would have liked to remove them, for he believed that keeping them deployed entailed serious risks – but risks less serious than those he associated with removal.”
 On 17 January 1963, the U.S. announced the phase out of the one Jupiter squadron in Turkey . Six days later, on 23 January, the Turkish government announced that the squadron had been phased out as well .
 The missiles were removed from alert in April 1963 and the last IRBM was shipped in July . The missiles have never been deployed in North Korea .
 Quick Reaction Alert was a higher state of readiness whereby planes were on the runway, fueled and armed with weapons, with their pilot or pilot or pilots nearby able to be airborne in 15 minutes or less . The state-ready state was created by the Air Force for the first time .
 They were responsible for attacking thirtyseven “high priority’s targets, mainly airfields in East Germany . They attacked thirtyseven "high priority" targets .
 Earlier that year, in April, President Kennedy had ordered that loading bombs onto the F-100s be prohibited . The weapons did not have electronic locking systems .
 On October 27, the Generals were successful getting Kennedy to reverse his decision . Kennedy reversed his decision on October 27 . The Generals won't be able to sue Kennedy again .
 The issue of custody and control was raised during a December 1960 visit to NATO bases by members of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy accompanied by Harold Agnew, Director of Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory .
 The pilots were nearby ready to take off, day or night, in fifteen minutes, in 15 minutes . The pilots had to be ready for take off in the morning .
 At a base in Germany the delegation noticed the plane was lightly guarded and there was little to stop a pilot from taking off on a bombing mission of his own . The delegation noticed that the plane had been lightly guarded .
 In addition safety concerns were raised about certain bombs, specifically the Mk 7 and Mk 12 . Safety concerns have also been raised about the bombs .
 This led to recommendations to use coded arming control control devices that could be incorporated as part of the weapon . The weapon could be integrated into a range of weapons .
 Upon proper authorization from the President the U.S. custodian would enter a code to arm the weapon . The code would be used to arm a weapon .
 Mace missiles served alongside the Matador before the latter was phased out in 1962 . These included F-84, F-100 F101 F101, F105 and B-57 aircraft .
 First deployed to Hahn AB, Germany with the 1st Pilotless Bomber Squadron in 1954 . First deployed in 1956 with the newly activated 701st Tactical Missile Wing . In 1956, the 701st tactical Missile Wing was activated .
 The MGM-13A variant used a mobile launcher and was phased out of USAFE by 1 September 1966 . The MGM 13A variant was the first to be phased out by USAFE in 1966 .
 One squadron of the CGM-13B variant used a zerolength launcher at a hardened site until it was inactivated in April 1969 . One squadron was inactivated in April 1968 .
 The SS-4 constituted the bulk of the Soviet offensive missile threat to Europe . The SS4 was the main Soviet offensive weapon threat to the continent .
 Initial operational capability of the SS-5 at soft sites occurred in late 1961 . Initial operational capability of the SS5 was achieved in late 1960s . The SS5 is a prototype for the first time .
 There is no public information about whether the Soviets may have had Tu16 Badger or Tu-22 Blinder bombers, or strike fighters such as the MiG-21 Fishbed, on alert, at bases in the western USSR .
 The rest of the missiles, six (6 SS-4s and 32 SS-5s) and launchers never arrived . These would be at the center of the crisis as the other missiles were not arrived .
 These included 36 SS-4 warheads, 36 FKR-1 warheads, 12 FROG warheads, and 6 bombs for the Il-28 bombers . The bombs were also included for Il-27 bombers .
 The SS-4 warheads were stored at Bejucal and the FROG warheads went to Managua . The FROGs were stored in Bejuca and the SS-3 warheads were kept at BeJucal .
 On October 23, sixty-eight warheads arrived at La Isabela aboard the Alexandrovsk . The Alexandrovsky was the first vessel to arrive in the country .
 As there were no SS-5 missiles in Cuba the warheads were never unloaded . There were no weapons in Cuba, the warheads never were unloaded .
 The original plan called for four nuclear naval mines to arrive with Soviet naval forces in October . These never arrived, and the original plan was never realized .
 Soviet troop strength on Cuba on October 24 was 41,902 (of a planned 45,000), four times what the U.S. intelligence had estimated . The United States intelligence estimate was four times that the United States had thought . The Soviet invasion of Cuba in Cuba in October
 Thirty-six SS-4 Sandal MRBMs plus six training missies (a total of 42 missiles) arrived in Cuba aboard the Omsk on September 7th or 8th .
 The original table of organization/order of battle called for 48 MRBMs, two missiles for each launcher . The original order of battle calls for 48 missiles, two launchers each .
 There is some uncertainty about whether the original number was reduced or whether six additional SS-4 missiles and twelve additional warheads were ever shipped but never arrived . The quarantine began on Wednesday, October 24 .
 We now know that Dean Rusk’s often quoted quote that, “We’re eyeball to eyeball, and the other fellow just blinked” is a myth . We now have to know that the incident that supposedly occurred on October 24, is actually a
 This dramatic moment has been included in many books about the missile crisis . But careful research by Michael Dobbs proves that this showdown never happened . Dobbs' research shows that this confrontation never happened.
 On October 22, the date of President Kennedy’s speech to the nation, no missile had yet been fueled, targeted or mated with a warhead . The date of the speech was October 22 . No missile had been fueled or targeted that day, and no missile was yet
 The original plan was to deploy two regiments with 32 R-14 IRBM missiles with 16 launchers . SS-5 Skean was originally planned to deploy 32 missiles with 32 launchers with 16 missiles .
 The two missile regiments on two ships with 16 SS-5 launchers and 32 missiles were ordered to turn back . The two missiles regiments had 16 launchers, 32 missiles and 16 missiles in total .
 The Alexandrovsk carried 24 SS-5 one-megaton warheads and dropped anchor at La Isabela on October 23 hours before quarantine went into effect in the early hours of October 24 .
 There is some uncertainty about whether the original number was reduced or whether eight addition warheads for the SS-5s were ever shipped and never arrived due to the quarantine . The quarantine began on Wednesday, October 24 .
 There is no record of a third ship carrying nuclear warheads to Cuba besides the Indigirka and the Alexandrovsk . No record of third ship with nuclear warheads .
 Each regiment had eight launchers and five rockets per launcher for a total of 80 missiles equipped with 80 fourteen-kiloton warheads . Each regiment was equipped with eight launchers, five rockets and 80 missiles .
 Thirty-six warheads arrived in Cuba on October 4th and forty-four on October 23th . Thirty-four warheads were sent to Cuba in October 23 .
 The Luna battalion had three batteries attached to three regiments deployed near Artemisa, Havana and Santa Clara .
 There were 36 FROG missiles in Cuba, 12 nuclear and 24 conventional missiles . Overall there were 36 of the missiles were in Cuba . 12 nuclear missiles were launched in Cuba in the 1960s .
 The Il-28s became an issue and their removal was essential to a final resolution of the crisis, says President Obama . "The Il-27s were essential to the removal of them," says Obama. "They were essential in the resolution of this crisis."
 Some were stationed at San Julian under control of the Soviet Navy and equipped with torpedoes and mines . Some were intended for attacks on U.S. naval invasion forces . Others were equipped with mines and torpedoes .
 The nuclear capable Il-28s were at an airfield outside the city of Holguin but remained in crates . The nuclear-capable aircraft were in crates at the airfield but remained inside .
 There were no known plans to disclose the presence of these units . Their existence was not revealed until the early 1990s, after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Shipping by air was ruled out and an armada of naval vessels would have drawn too much attention . Thus merchant ships were chosen to be built on merchant ships .
 The Maria Ulyanova was the first ship to arrive in Cuba on July 26, 1962 . The first ship arrived in Cuba in 1962 .
 The last ship to remove the strategic missile warheads left on November 7 . The last vessel left the country on the November 7.
 The last tactical nuclear weapons were shipped from Cuba until December 1st . They were shipped to Cuba from Cuba in December .
 Little is known about the U.S. nuclear weapons deployed on Cuba during the missile crisis . Guantanamo remains a key location in Cuba .
 From December 1961 until July-September 1963 there were a number of “non-nuclear depth bombs” deployed at Guantanamo Naval Base in Cuba .
 The fission cores for the Guantanamo weapons were stored elsewhere, either aboard ships or at naval bases, most likely in Florida . Fission cores were stored aboard ships and aboard bases .
 The cores could have been rushed to Cuba, inserted into the bomb casings and put aboard antisubmarine aircraft .
 The weapon type was probably the Betty nuclear depth bomb using a B7/Mk7 warhead, deployed from 1955-1963 . The Betty bomb was later replaced by the B57 depth bomb, deployed in 1963 .
 Both depth bombs could be carried by all contemporary Navy ASW aircraft . The bombs were designed to carry depth bombs .
 These included the P2V-3C Neptune, the S2F/S-2 Tracker aircraft, and the SH-34G/J Seabat carrier-based helicopter .
 None of the accounts of the crisis have mentioned these weapons and whether there were any contingency plans to use them . None of these accounts have mentioned the weapons, including those of the U.S.
 Over 2800 dependents of Navy and Marine Corps families were evacuated from Guantanamo on October 22d. Families of over 2800 were evacuated by the Navy and Marines .
 It is unclear how many Navy and Marine Corps personnel may have remained and what their role was in the crisis . It is not clear how many of the personnel remain in the area .
 While dependents were leaving the garrison was reinforced with three Marine Battalion Landing teams numbering 5000 Marines and two naval construction battalions . The garrison was bolstered by 5000 Marines .
 FKR cruise missiles were targeted at the U.S. base at Guantanamo Bay . We now know that they were targeted by the FKR .
 One regiment, near Mariel, was intended to defeat an amphibious landing . One regiment was designed to defeat the landing .
 A second regiment, located in the Sierra de Micaro hills, overlooked Guantanamo Bay . The second regiment was located in a second hillside overlooking the bay .
 Its purpose was to defeat any amphibious landing and destroy any U.S. forces operating from Guantanamo Bay . It was designed to destroy any United States forces from Guantanamo .
 Around October 24 the Russians moved a convoy of FKR cruise missiles to a pre-launch position at Vilorio and two days later moved to the village of Filipinas, 15 miles from Guantanamo . According to Michael Dobbs, the convoy was moved to Vilorio .
 U.S. air defense forces mobilized after Soviet missile sites were discovered . Air defense forces were mobilized after the discovery .
 All dispersed ADC aircraft were armed with nuclear weapons for the first time . All dispersed aircraft were equipped with nuclear arms . The first time the ADC aircraft had nuclear weapons .
 Four USAF interceptors operated from Homestead AFB, two from Tyndall AFB, FL and eight Navy planes from Key West Naval Air Station . Eight Navy planes operated from Key W. Naval Air Stations .
 On October 19 Air Defense Command increased the number of interceptors standing alert . By October 22 the Air Force had 12 RC-121s and some 82 interceptors, for which nuclear weapons were available, on guard in Florida .
 On November 18 CONAD returned its dispersed aircraft to their home bases and re-established the normal one-third alert . CONAD's dispersed aircraft were returned to their bases .
 During the period October 22 to November 26, ADC flew a total of 13,047 sorties . 2,800 of those sorties were from Florida bases .
 The planes were F-102A Delta Daggers armed with the nuclear AIM-26A Falcon air-to-air missile and F-106A/B Delta Darts armed with one nuclear AIR-2A Genie missile . The planes are armed with two nuclear missiles and one
 If war had broken out and Soviet Beagle bombers had attempted to attack the United States they would have been met by formidable U.S. air defenses .
 Tactical Air Forces began a major deployment into the Florida area on October 19 . The Florida area is home to the Tactical Air Force .
 Many of these planes were equipped with nuclear bombs and were in invasion plans . JCS rescinded the decision to use tactical nuclear weapons on October 31 .
 One hundred and eighty-three ships took an active part in Cuban operations during the quarantine . United States Naval Forces took part in the operation .
 Each carrier had some forty nuclear bombs available for its aircraft . Each carrier was equipped with some forty bombs available .
 On the 26th TAC began low-level reconnaissance over Cuba which disclosed additional targets . Air offensive planning for three massive airstrikes a day until Cuban air capability was destroyed . The Cuban air force was planning to destroy Cuban air capabilities .
 On October 28 all alert crews were on standby status in the operations ready rooms, and external power plants were connected to the aircraft .
 From October 29 through the end of November, Air Force contingency actions were devoted primarily to maintaining the alert force, and preserving simultaneously the overall capability of USAF's combat commands .
 U.S. invasion plans were revised to include use of tactical nuclear weapons such as Honest John missiles . JCS decision on October 31 against the earlier planned use of nuclear weapons in invasion operations .
 The U.S. atmospheric test program continued unabated, with business as usual, despite the crisis .
 Three tests conducted near Johnston Island in the Pacific during the days of the crisis . Three tests were conducted near the island during the crisis.
 One Atlas ICBM was ready for a test launch that had been previously scheduled for later that week . “When DEFCON 3 was declared at the beginning of the crisis, the launch was scheduled for that week.”
 The test reentry vehicle was maintained on this single missile . Nuclear warheads were being placed on ICBMs in surrounding launch facilities .
 Despite the severity of the crisis and the emergency alert operations taking place, this Atlas ICBM was actually launched, without further orders from Washington political authorities, on October 26th .
 The four submarines had left their base on the Kola Peninsula on October 1 . The four submersibles had left the base in Russia in October .
 Their diesel engines were easy to detect and their daily communication with Moscow was intercepted . Their daily communications with Moscow were intercepted by the Kremlin .
 It was the first time Soviet submarines had sailed so close to the East Coast of the U.S. It alarmed Admiral Robert L Dennison .
 The squadron would be comprised of seven Golf 1 dieselelectric submarines, each carrying three R-13 ballistic missiles, and four Foxtrot submarines with a compliment of torpedoes .
 Plans to send cruisers, destroyers and Golf 1s were cancelled . But the B-4, B-36 and B-59 Foxtrot submarines left Northern Fleet base on October 1st .
 The United States Navy tracked the submarines but were ordered not to attack them . The U.S. Navy tracked them but was ordered to avoid attacking them .
 The Navy was instructed to signal submarines to surface first by dropping grenades and then practice depth charges . The Navy also instructed to use grenades to get them to surface .
 Submarine Surfacing and Identification Procedures was sent by the Pentagon to Moscow so that they could inform the submarines that they were not under attack . The communication was sent to Moscow to inform them of the danger .
 The messages to the submarines never got through and the captains and crew believed that perhaps war had broken out . The captain and crew were under great physical discomfort from weeks under sea .
 On October 27, probably the most dangerous day of the crisis, the firing of a nuclear torpedo almost occurred . The firing of the torpedo almost happened on that day .
 The incident is one more example of a nuclear weapon almost being used that would likely have led to a far different outcome . The incident was one of a number of nuclear weapons almost used .
 A U-2 on an air sampling mission to the North Pole inadvertently crossed the Soviet border . The pilot lost track of his location as the pilot lost control of the U.S. mission .
 At least six Soviet interceptors took off with orders to shoot down the intruder . The intruder was shot down by Soviet forces in the early hours of the day .
 Pilot finally overcame his disorientation to turn U-2 to the east . Pilot turned the plane around and turned it to the west .
 SAC asked Alaskan Air Command to scramble a pair of F-102 interceptors to provide protection for the U-2 . The interceptors were scrambled to protect the U.2 from U.S. aircraft .
 The U-2 was escorted back to an Alaskan airstrip . Fortunately they never encountered the MiGs and never encountered MiGs .
 Had the F-102s come within range and fired their Falcons to protect the U-2 the nuclear threshold was crossed and a different scenario would have unfolded . Had the U.2 had been hit by the F.102s fired, the situation would have been different . The U
 I would like to thank Timothy McDonnell, William Burr and Michael Dobbs for reading earlier drafts of this report . Endnotes: We are happy to provide a summary of our findings .
 The report should be considered a work in progress and I welcome corrections . The report has been published in the past two years .
 July November 1962 (Washington DC: National Indications Center, June 18, 1963), 113), 113. July November November 1962 .
 The Soviets believed they could secretly introduce their missiles and when their presence was disclosed the United States would not respond . The U.S. did not respond when it was revealed to the Soviets . The Soviets thought they could sneakily introduce their missile missiles .
 Some advisers urged JFK to destroy the missiles by an air attack and follow up with an invasion thought the Soviets would not respond with military action . Some advisers who urged him to destroy missiles by air attack or follow-up with invasion thought Soviet response would be limited .
 At the time, the U.S. thought there were 10,000 Soviet troops in Cuba . The United States thought there would be 10,500 Soviet troops at the time .
 Proceedings from the first two conferences were published in Blight and Welch, On the Brink . Proceedings were published by the first and second conferences .
 January 3-7, 1991 – on Antigua, attended by American, Soviet, and Cuban officials . January 3 to 7, 1991 . Antigu was attended by U.S. and Soviet officials .
 Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Nuclear Weapons (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., Inc., 1997), 303. Eisenhower, JFK and the Kennedys were both assassinated in 1968 .
 The Nuclear War Plan Briefing to President Kennedy,” International Security . International Security , 25. 25. The nuclear war plan was briefed by President Kennedy .
 The Rise and Fall of Russia’s Strategic Nuclear Forces, 1945-2000 , 243. The Rise . Fall of the Russian nuclear forces is due to be followed by the collapse of the Soviet Union's nuclear arsenal .
 Assessment of increased Conventional Military Capabilities of Cuban and Soviet Units in Cuba, 14 November 1962, 1.1. 1.2.3.4.5.5 . The Cuban government was in Cuba in 1962 .
 See also Bernard C Nalty, USAF Ballistic Missile Programs, 1962-1964 , 2.2.3.4.5.5 .
 The status of the 12 Atlas Fs at Walker AFB, NM, during the October period is unclear . The status is unclear as to whether the aircraft were still operational .
 On 20 December SAC declared the 556th SMS at Plattsburgh operational competing deployment of the Atlas ICBM force . The 556 SMS was declared operational .
 SIOP war plan targets were assigned and programmed into the systems, and munitions maintenance personnel replaced the test reentry vehicles with nuclear warheads .
 The first missile, an Atlas F ICBM, was placed on full alert on October 23 . The AFSC and civilian contractor personnel working in the launch control facility were replaced by a SAC combat crew .
 The three squadrons achieved operational status between June and December 1963 in six squadrons at three Air Force bases . The squadrons were based at three air bases .
 The USS Sam Houston visited Izmir, Turkey on 14 April 1963 . The first Polaris submarine assigned to Mediterranean patrol, was on patrol in the Mediterranean .
 This was the first foreign port, other than Holy Loch, visited by an SSBN . It was surely sent to fill the void of the withdrawn Jupiters .
 Over the next seven weeks they continued to be emplaced and made operational . Over seven weeks, they were made operational. They were then emplaced .
 On December 11, 1962 SAC headquarters declared two flights to be operational . SAC Headquarters declared two of the flights operational .
 A Discussion of Readiness Measures (Washington, DC: National Indications Center, July 15, 1963), 21. In 1963, the U.S. government issued a statement of support for the Vietnam War, Vietnam, Vietnam and Afghanistan. The U.N. Vietnam War was declared
 The first test of the R-13 missile with a nuclear warhead was conducted on 20 October 1961 at the Novaya Zemlya test range with an estimated yield of 1.45 Mt. The first nuclear test was conducted in 1961 .
 The Nuclear War Plan Briefing to President Kennedy,” International Security . International Security , fn 16, 27, 27 .
 Jacob Neufeld, The Development of Ballistic Missiles in the U.S. Air Force, 1945-1960 , 1945- 1960 .
 Charles DeGaulle assumed power in June 1958 . He refused to accept the Jupiters . Charles De Gaulle was a French President .
 The Eisenhower administration and the Air Force considered sites in Greece, Spain, West Germany, Okinawa and Alaska . The number of squadrons would fluctuate depending on the location .
 See also Jacob Neufeld, The Development of Ballistic Missiles in the United States Air Force, 1945-1960 , 186 .
 U.S. Air Forces in Europe, 1945-1973 (Office of History, USAFE, 10 May 1974), 55. United States Air Force in Europe was 1945- 1973 .
 Soviet Ballistic Missile Forces During the Cuban Crisis,” Journal of Soviet Military Studies, June 1990, 321, citing Penkovskiyy .
 Starbird, January 5, 1961, with Attachment I, The NATO Custody Control Problem . Starbird was born in New York City .
 On October 28 orders were given to increase the number from nine to twenty-one . The order was given on October 28 to expand the number of people in the U.S.
 Soviet Ballistic Missile Forces During the Cuban Crisis,” Journal of Soviet Military Studies, June 1990, 317. “The Cuban Crisis” was the Cuban Missile Crisis of the 1960s .
 Also aboard were thirty-six warheads for re FKR-1 cruise missiles, twelve warheads for the FROG tactical ballistic missiles and six gravity bombs for the Il-28 Beagle bombers . Also aboard the ship was 36 warheads for FKR cruise missiles and 36 gravity bombs .
 William Kaufmann calculated that thirty-four out of seventy-six SAC bomber bases were within range of the SS-4s . Most of the other bases were in range of SS-5s . Kaufman calculated that most of the bases would be within range .
 After the discovery of Ilyushin bombers and FROG missiles on October 25 United States invasion plans were revised to include use of tactical nuclear weapons such as Honest John missiles .