 Half a century ago it was the epicenter of the 1962 Missile Crisis . The city was center of the crisis in 1962 .
 During that time it served as a Soviet base for middlerange nuclear missiles . U.S. air reconnaissance photos of it were spread through media all around the world .
 The crisis was solved through negotiations without Cuban involvement . As a result of this neglect, the Missile Crisis has been under-communicated in Cuba . The crisis has been neglected by Cuban officials and the public .
 A Swedish–Cuban research project has now investigated what kinds of memories remain today at the former missile base . The project is part of a joint effort between Sweden and Cuba .
 1962 Missile Crisis is a well-known episode of the Cold War and twentieth-century history .
 It is well documented in a rich variety of sources, and has been the subject of extensive historical research . It has been subject to extensive research, including extensive historical analysis .
 The story of the Missile Crisis has actually been told so many times that it almost writes itself . The story has been told of the crisis in the U.S.
 In an attempt to find and give voice to stories other than those dominating ‘big history’ we have studied the crisis from an archaeological perspective . We have looked at the crisis in an archaeological context .
 Archaeology can be used to begin a remembering process and attract interest to a past that otherwise would not be discussed . We want to find out what material remains the Missile Crisis has generated .
 Our point of departure is one of the former Soviet nuclear missile bases in Cuba . The former Soviet missile bases are located in Cuba, Cuba .
 Archaeologists say archaeology is as important, if not more important, than what actually emerges from the ground . Archaeologists have found that archaeology can be more important than archaeology itself .
 The project is a cooperation between a group of Swedish archaeologists and Cuban anthropologists, archaeologists, and historians . The project was a collaboration between a Swedish archaeologist and Cuban historians .
 Let us briefly recount the main themes in the ‘big history’ of the Missile Crisis . The main themes of the crisis are the 'big history of the missile crisis .
 Bay of Pigs invasion in south-west Cuba in April 1961 was an important part of the prelude to the crisis in Cuba .
 A group of approximately 1400 US-supported exile Cubans attempted to land there and start a counterrevolution in order to overthrow the revolutionary government . The group of about 1400 Americans tried to land on the island .
 The invaders were quickly defeated and the operation was a military and political fiasco . The invasion was an invasion of the country's capital .
 The need to defend the Cuban revolution against new U.S. attacks and to maintain Soviet prestige in Latin America were the reasons given by the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev for suggesting the installation of missiles with nuclear warheads .
 If Cuba fell, other Latin American countries would reject us, he says, claiming that for all our might the Soviet Union hadn't been able to do anything for Cuba except to make empty protests to the U.N. He says .
 The Soviet proposal to install missiles with nuclear warheads in Cuba was presented to the Cuban leadership in May 1962 . The Cuban leadership agreed to accept the offer without hesitation .
 The top-secret move of missiles and Soviet forces to Cuba – Operation Anadyr – was initiated and the first units arrived in early August . The top secret move to Cuba was initiated by the Soviet Union .
 On 14 October 1962, United States air reconnaissance discovered what the following day was interpreted as Soviet launching sites for nuclear missiles . The following day, the U.S. Air Force discovered what appeared to be Soviet missile launch sites .
 Kennedy excluded this solution and a week later he gave his famous speech to the nation where he announced the establishment of a naval blockade against Cuba . A week later, Kennedy announced that he had established the blockade .
 Each missile contained a nuclear warhead 70 times more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb . Each missile was carried out by a nuclear missile that was 70 times the size of a nuclear bomb .
 At the same time intensive negotiations were taking place between Washington and Moscow . At the time, Russia and the U.S. were taking part in negotiations to reach a deal .
 All over the world people anxiously awaited news about the development of the crisis . The crisis is the first of its kind in the world .
 After 13 days ‘when the world stood still’ the crisis finally came to an end . ‘After 13 days, the crisis was finally over,’ says one of the world’s most famous people .
 The solution of the crisis created great political tension in the relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union . But the solution of this crisis created political tension .
 All important negotiations during the crisis had taken place directly between Washington and Moscow, without involving Havana . The reason was that all the important negotiations in the crisis took place without involvement from Havana .
 Although they were the epicenter of the conflict, they had no say in the matter . The U.S. military says it has no say on whether or not to withdraw from Syria .
 Not only was this decision taken without consulting us, several steps were taken without informing us . Not only this decision was taken without consultation, but also several steps taken without telling us .
 The Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, on the other hand, chose to see the crisis as a victory . The crisis was a major embarrassment for the Soviet Union, which saw it as a defeat .
 The objective to defend the Cuban revolution by preventing a U.S. invasion had been achieved . The objective was to prevent a United States invasion of Cuba .
 The Caribbean crisis was a triumph of Soviet foreign policy and a personal triumph in my own career as a statesman and as a member of the collective leadership . It was a 'personal triumph' in my career as statesman, he said .
 Missile Crisis is an under-communicated part of Cuban history . The national humiliation felt by the Cuban leadership has led to the Missile Crisis being under-Communicated .
 Cuba is one of the most well-known episodes in modern Cuban history to most people outside Cuba . So, while it is given paradoxically little attention in Cuba, it is not given little attention .
 The exhibition at the Museum of the Revolution in Havana is a good example of this . The exhibition is at the museum of the revolution in Havana .
 The museum contains a seemingly endless number of exhibition cases . Only one that briefly touches on the Missile Crisis .
 Most archaeological research on the materiality of the Cold War highlights questions concerning technical and military aspects of the remains, their heritage value, and how they can be preserved .
 Local people have much to add to our archaeological understanding of the sites, and their participation is also important for democratic reasons . We believe this is a mistake, and local people have important to contribute to the study .
 They have a right to make their voices heard about a past that affected them, and in which they also played a part, they say . They are right to speak out about the past, and that they also play a part in it .
 In this project we combine the study of material remains with studies of memories and stories told by local people in order to gain new knowledge about the Missile Crisis and its human dimensions . The project is based on material remains and stories from local people .
 Remains of the recent past have a remarkable potential to affect people . They make history a concern and awaken memories . Remains make history an issue of concern .
 People remember differently, and the multi-vocality of the recent past brings the democratic dimensions in writing history to the fore . History is constructed for different reasons in different contexts, says historian David Cameron .
 An important aspect of the project is to interact with the local community and talk about how the Missile Crisis history is constructed .
 Cuban government would expect difficulties in getting permission to visit former Soviet missile bases and conduct archaeological research there .
 We were granted the necessary permission without considerable trouble . But even though our interest probably seemed strange to many, we were granted permission to use the site .
 Permitting us to conduct archaeology at the former missile sites may actually be a way to disarm a politically loaded history . Archaeology could disarm a political loaded history, author says .
 Archaeology can be used to transform a recent and problematic history into a seemingly distant past . Archaeology is generally associated with deep time, and archaeology is associated with the past .
 This transformation makes it possible to look at the crisis with new eyes, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "This is the first time we have seen the crisis in a new light," he says .
 This is the first example of recognizing some historical interest in these sites . This is a first time the city has recognized some of its historical sites .
 The missile sites have until now not been the objects of more thorough study . The missile site has been the object of more than a dozen years of research .
 These were situated in El Purio and Sitiecito, both close to the town of Santa Clara in central Cuba .
 In an otherwise very stretched Cuban economy this quarry does quite well . The quarry does well, says Cuban official . In the rest of the Cuban economy, the quarry does very well .
 Material remains from the Soviet base are in danger of being destroyed . Unfortunately this means that the material remains from this Soviet base will be destroyed . The material remains are still at risk of destruction .
 It was on this pad that the missiles were to be erected into firing position . The missile launch pad was used to erect missiles into firing positions .
 There is no obvious functional reason for this destruction, and it contradicts statements made by local officials acknowledging the historical value of the site . Local officials have acknowledged the site's historical value, but the destruction contradicts that .
 The destruction could be due to a worry that if the site were protected as a cultural heritage site it would threaten economic interests . Nevertheless, it is difficult to disregard that the destruction is due to an economic concern .
 The air is filled with vultures looking for creatures that have fallen victim to the heat . Vultures are looking for animals that have been killed by the heat in recent days .
 People in the area used to move away from the hot sun into the coolness of a small cave in order to take a break . The cave is located in a small part of the area .
 The names of Soviet soldiers belonging to the missile forces in Cuba have been immortalized in this way . This graffiti is the only known example where the names of individual Soviet soldiers were immortalized . The names are only known examples of this graffiti .
 This unique example is now very much in danger of being destroyed by the quarrying . The unique example of the quarry is now being used as a model for a museum .
 The possibility of cutting out the part of the cave wall with Soviet graffiti in order to save it for the future has been suggested . The cave wall is covered in Soviet graffiti .
 Hangars served as a kind of assembly hall where missile bodies and nuclear warheads were put together . The hangars were used to store nuclear weapons and missiles .
 The concrete components for the hangar were transported by ship all the way from the Soviet Union . The hangar was built in the 1980s and is the first of its kind in the world .
 High-level photo of the site taken on 17 October shows erectors, a missile hangar and buildings under construction, missile trailers, and a tent area .
 Almost half a century has passed since these photos were taken, the overall use of the landscape and the spread of vegetation at the site are quite similar today . Despite the fact that almost half acentury has passed, the landscapes and vegetation are still similar today.
 Local people who lived in the area in 1962 had never seen the aerial photos taken during the crisis . The aerial photos were taken during a crisis in 1962 .
 Image 93 from Secretary McNamara's Special Cuba Briefing, U.S. Dept. of Defense .
 Photograph in the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston objects seen in the present landscape engaged people and formed a good starting point for conversations about their memories of the crisis . Photographs were taken in the JFK Presidential Library .
 Today there are few visible signs that there once was a missile base in Santa Cruz de los Pinos . The base was once a military base in the area .
 They lie helter-skelter and look like the bleached ribs of some long-extinct giant animal . The ribs look like they were the ribs of an extinct giant animal, they say .
 Parts of the road network in and around the village are constructed or modified in connection with the construction of the Soviet base .
 The mound was obviously manmade and probably consisted of material that was bulldozed away from what was to become the hangar floor . It is thought to be material from the ground that was to be used in the hangar .
 The only finds were some rubber straps, probably made from inner tubes of car tires . They were probably made of inner tubes made of tires .
 In a scrap heap belonging to the farmer living closest to the hangar we found another artifact . In the scrap heap, the farmer lived near the hangar, he found the artifact .
 It was a grenade tube that he or his father had originally found somewhere in the close surroundings; he did not remember where or when, but it clearly derives from the Soviets . He said he was not sure if he had found the tube but it had been found in the area .
 We also did some metal detecting at the site of a former farmhouse . Local people said it had been used by Soviet officers during the time of the base .
 The idea was to try to locate rubbish pits and lost objects connected with the house . The idea is to find rubbish pits, lost objects and lost items .
 A number of minor test pits were made where the metal detector gave response, but with the exception of some pieces of barbed wire of Soviet type it is not clear whether the objects (batteries, bottles, aluminum fragments) can be linked to the missile base .
 This was close to the ‘tent area’, and we assumed that a lot of activity would have taken place there. This was near to the tent area, which we assumed would have been there. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case.
 We surveyed other parts of the ‘open storage area’ and its surroundings with a metal detector . We also surveyed other areas of the open storage area with metal detectors .
 One of the few finds that match stories told by local people about the Soviet soldiers are splinters from a bottle with measure marks .
 This type of bottle was used for a special kind of extra strong rum called Alcoholitis . Alcoholitis was sold only at pharmacies . The rum is a rum that is sold only in pharmacies .
 According to our informants, the Cubans considered it too strong to drink but the Russians appreciated it . According to informants, it was too strong for Cubans to drink .
 These were embarrassingly difficult to locate, partly because of fields with tall sugar cane . These were difficult to find because of the height of the cane .
 The barracks reveal themselves as a shift in color in a roadway . Eventually we discovered, however, that the barracks revealed themselves as the color in the roadway .
 With the help of a bulldozer we uncovered two of the barracks down to the floor level and beyond . With the assistance of the . assistance of a . bulldozer, we uncovered . two barracks . down to floor level . and beyond.
 We also dug a trench in front of the entrances of four of the former eight barracks . The former barracks were built in the 1950s and 1960s .
 This area, as well as the whole barracks area, was surveyed with a metal detector . This area of the barracks area was surveyed using metal detectors . The area was also surveyed with metal detectors by soldiers and police .
 "We found very few artifacts and none that could be linked to the time of the Missile Crisis with certainty with certainty," says Pentagon .
 There was actually no clear evidence that people had ever moved into and lived in the barracks, which would make sense since they were still under construction in the aerial photograph from 27 October .
 We also wanted to create an arena where we could meet with local people and talk about their experiences of the former Soviet base in particular and their memories of the Missile Crisis .
 Whether they are historically correct is not of vital importance to us in this specific context . What we are interested in is how the Missile Crisis is remembered, he says . "We're interested in how the missile crisis is remembered"
 The Soviet base area was forbidden territory for all Cubans, civilians as well as military personnel, unless they had special permission to visit it . Cubans were allowed to visit the area, but were not allowed to .
 Most of the stories told by the local people deal with occurrences outside of the base . This means that most of the . stories . told by locals deal with . occurrences outside the base. This . means that .
 In general, it seems that people living in the village did not know what was going on . Only a few refer to fear in connection with the Soviet military activities .
 Several said they did not learn about the true character of the base until after the Missile Crisis . Several said that they learned about the base's true character after the Crisis .
 Lowaltitude U.S. flights gave people the impression that war could break out at any time . Some people refer to the lowaltitude United States flights as 'dangerous'
 The base has been under construction for more than a decade . The base will be open to the public for the first time ever .
 A number of farmers were forced to leave their homes with short notice and move away to make room for the missile base . The missile base is expected to be used to build a missile range .
 They did not always get the time to collect all their livestock and other belongings before being relocated to new houses . The animals were moved to new homes and moved into new homes .
 Many Cubans were eager to express their loyalty to the Cuban revolution, CNN's John Sutter reports .
 There were also those who had never forgotten or forgiven what they experienced as an injustice . But there were also some who had forgiven what had happened to them .
 Another story concerns a street corner in the center of the small town of Santa Cruz de los Pinos . The town is small enough to have a population of 1,500 people .
 There used to be a house which stood on the right side of the street corner, which today is partly empty . We heard several different versions of this story, but the common theme is that there used to have been a house .
 When the missile trailers reached this corner they discovered that the curve was too narrow . The curve is too narrow for missile trailers to reach this corner .
 All missile transports took place in the dark in an attempt to make them more difficult to discover from the air . The missile transports were carried out in a dark environment to avoid detection .
 The family that lived in the house at the right side of the street corner had to be wakened in the middle of the night by a high-ranking officer . The family was woken by a police officer at the corner .
 He told them that they immediately had to evacuate their house since it was going to be pulled down to enable missile transports to make the turn . The house was pulled down and the family was evacuated immediately .
 In another version of the story it was a shoe shop that was pulled down, not a family home . The family home is pulled down in a bid to save it from being pulled down .
 To us it is not vitally important which version – if any – is the historically correct one . We are happy to clarify which version - if any - is the historical one .
 The lack of material culture draws people’s attention and demands an explanation . What is interesting is that the . physical environment, in this case actually the lack of . material culture, is actually the . emptiness where you would normally expect a . house .
 The explanations given recall and recast the memories of the Missile Crisis . The explanations of the events in the missile crisis have been explained by experts .
 Many local residents still have personal memories of the Russians, and there seem to have been good relations between the groups . Many locals still remember their memories of Russians .
 Only a few of the locals understood Spanish, and as none of the local people we met understood Russian they had difficulties communicating with each other .
 There were meetings and places where the young soldiers met with young people, mostly girls, from the village . Despite this, there are memories of meetings and meetings with young soldiers .
 In some cases this led to an exchange of letters that continued for many years after the crisis . Some of the letters continued to be exchanged for years .
 The villagers who befriended the Soviet soldiers seemed sorry that the Russians had disappeared so quickly and that there had not been time for a proper goodbye . The villagers said they were sorry that they had not had a proper farewell .
 No one had any preserved evidence to show us . Although there are a lot of stories about watches received through exchange or as gifts, no one had preserved evidence .
 The Missile Crisis is remembered through instruments for showing time but the instruments themselves are gone . It is almost as if they have become a metaphor for the passing and changing of time . The instruments are now a symbol of the changing and passing of time in the world .
 The Swedish part of the team has experienced how the project generates a remembering process even back in Sweden . The project has been a success in Sweden and Sweden .
 Many people in Cuba remember how they themselves or people they know lived through the Missile Crisis . The U.S. Embassy in Havana, Cuba, is now in Cuba, Cuba .
 Many Swedes were convinced that there would be a nuclear world war and acted accordingly . Swedes acted accordingly to prevent a nuclear war and act accordingly .
 One of the stories we were told was about a man (Oloph Odenius, 1923–87) whose doctoral thesis was thwarted as a consequence of the Missile Crisis . The story was told of a man whose thesis had been thwarted by the crisis .
 By 1962 he had spent 10 years collecting material for his thesis at the National Library of Sweden . He was a specialist in medieval art .
 All the original sources were kept in a special room at the library that only he had access to . Since it was not easy back then to make copies of old documents and books, all the originals were kept .
 He had put slips of paper at those passages he was going to refer to in his thesis . He had been going to use them as a reference to his thesis, he said .
 All slips had been thrown in a wastepaper basket and all documents and books had been returned to their storage . All his slips were thrown in wastepapers .
 The chief librarian had listened to the news and heard about the Soviet missiles in Cuba and the U.S. ultimatum .
 He was convinced that a new world war could break out at any time and had accordingly sounded the emergency alarm . He was like many others .
 All valuable documents were immediately brought to safety . This meant that all valuable documents had to be brought to a safe place .
 It is an example of how the Missile Crisis affected people on a personal level all over the world . As an academic, it is easy to understand the despair he must have felt .
 Odenius eventually was awarded an honorary doctorate . We are happy to note that he was eventually awarded an Honorary Doctorate .
 Petter Ljunggren was a 12-year-old boy living with his family in the city of Halmstad in south-west Sweden . Another story about the Missile Crisis is told by Petter .
 The threat that the Cold War could change into a real one was very obvious even before the crisis . The threat was obvious, even before it was even obvious, according to experts .
 Every household in Sweden had received a leaflet with information on what to do if there was war . In all the gateways in Halmstad, there were maps of how to evacuate the city .
 Petter used to fantasize about how he saved the prettiest girl in his class from the biggest threat of all – the nuclear bomb . Petter saved the prettyest girl in class from a nuclear bomb, Petter says .
 The Missile Crisis made the fear of evacuation and war feel closer to ever before . The missile crisis was the height of the Cold War .
 After barely two weeks the crisis was over and all the equipment ended up in the attic . The crisis ended up being over within two weeks and the equipment was put back in storage .
 The children had received more new things than they had wished for at Christmastime . But the children had now received more than they'd wished for .
 These stories about the Missile Crisis as experienced from a Swedish perspective can, of course, be viewed as anecdotes, just like the stories told by local people in Santa Cruz de los Pinos .
 An anecdotal mapping of the past is an alternative to the ‘big history’ that has occupied historians for such a long time, says Joel Fineman . The American literature scholar has suggested that anecdotal mapping is a good alternative to big history .
 "It is a way to connect the big and the small history, and to give the recent past a human face," says the author of the book .
 The lack of artifacts surprised us and admittedly was somewhat of a disappointment . We were disappointed with the lack of artifact artifacts .
 When the Soviet military left the base in early November 1962, the farmers and the people from the village went to the site to look for things that remained . When the excavations were finished, local people told us that .
 Local farmers cleared the area in the 1960s and 1970s so that cattle would not be injured when trampling on cans, bottles and scrap iron . Local farmers also told us that they had cleared the site in the 1970s and 1960s .
 Material remains from the missile site are present almost everywhere in the nearby surroundings . We soon discovered, however, that there are material remains from missile site present everywhere .
 People in the Cuban countryside live in very modest circumstances, and they have made use of the material left by the Russians in many different ways .
 A kind of perforated iron mat was laid on the ground to improve passability . The mat is a kind of iron mat that was laid over the ground in missile base .
 The mats have been reused in many different ways; for example, as a footbridge to a dwelling house, a barn wall, a bottle holder, and components in a pigsty .
 This means that the physical space for this shop and its components are both a direct consequence of the crisis that threatened world peace half a century ago . This means . This is both a result of the . crisis that threatens world peace . 50 years ago. This .
 The reinforcement bars extracted from the concrete arches have been reused as building material . They have been used as reinforcing bars for the construction of new buildings .
 The remains of the arch, from which the iron had been taken, consist of small pieces of concrete left lying on the ground . The remains were taken from the arch .
 Many of them have imprints from the reinforcement bars and they resemble fossils from creatures living millions of years ago in some distant geological epoch . Many of the imprints on the bars are imprinted by the bars and resemble fossils .
 Mats Burström says the world came to its senses when faced with the threat of Armageddon . He says the Swedish leader is proud of his work in Sweden .
 It is tempting to think that the battering of the concrete arch to pieces and the many reuses of material from the Soviet missile base are symbolically motivated . The arch is being bashed to pieces, but it is not the first time it has been damaged .
 Pieces of concrete from a missile hangar arch with imprints from reinforcement bars . The concrete is part of the concrete structure of the missile hangar .
 The Swedish Museum of National Antiquities in Stockholm was opened in 1962 . It was the first Swedish museum to open a new museum in Sweden .
 On a local level some people had to leave and abandon their homes, and on a national level Cuba was neglected in the negotiations between the superpowers . Cuba is neglected in negotiations between Russia and the West .
 The main reason for the reuse of material from the missile base is, to all appearances, instead a shortage of goods in the Cuban countryside . It is not a shortage in the countryside, but a shortage .
 Archaeologists say the symbolic dimension of the reuse seems obvious . Still, to us as archaeologists, it seems obvious to us that the reuse is obvious .
 Our view has probably influenced locals and they may now actually look at the old Soviet material in a different way than before . We hope locals will be able to use the material again and again .
 In the history of the recent past, well-documented large-scale happenings and meta-narratives dominate over small-scale and more specific histories .
 This means that something is lost, since the latter histories are usually more tangible and give a human dimension to the past . This is the case that something has been lost, as it is lost to the people .
 We have explored how archaeology can initiate a remembering process . We have also explored the importance of archaeology in archaeology .
 Material remains from the missile site are being reused in different ways at farmsteads and other places . It is obvious that material from the site brings forth memories .
 To dig in the ground is also to dig in memories of the recent past, says the author . To dig into the ground also is to dig into memories of those past, he says .
 Working together with local inhabitants creates new thoughts, focusing on the specific historical happening and its aftermath as well as general questions concerning the writing of history .
 Archaeology is as much an arena for dialogue and reflection as it is a search for material remains, archaeologist says . Archaeologists are as much as they are looking for dialogue as they search for remains, he says .
 This also means that the rather low number of artifacts found at the site that can be directly associated with the Missile Crisis is not a problem . This also mean that there are not a lot of artifacts that could be directly linked to the missile crisis .
 It is the low-voiced, from-below histories that are called forth, and the human dimension these give to the history of the Missile Crisis, that are most important . It's the history that is most important, says the historian .
 When we started our fieldwork in Santa Cruz de los Pinos there was no local interest in the missile site as an historical place . The site is located in the town of Santa Cruz, Puerto Rico .
 Missile Crisis was a kind of under-communicated part of Cuban history . This was well in line with the Missile Crisis being under-Communicated . The crisis was well-publicized in Cuba .
 Former Soviet base is now recognized as a resource of historical interest as well as a place of economic potential .
 The local museum has been renovated and was re-opened in May 2008 with the history of the missile site as an important part of the exhibition . The museum has a history of missile site .
 A collection of material about the site has begun . One example is photographs showing Cubans on a picnic at the deserted base .
 Cubans were not allowed to visit the base when it was in use . They were curious to see what the site had looked like when the Russians had left .
 Later, the site was gradually forgotten as people were busy coping with everyday life . The site was later forgotten and was forgotten .
 The local government has discovered the economic potential of the missile site . Local government has now discovered the potential for the site .
 It lies within range for a one-day visit from Havana and could therefore be of interest to tourists . It is within range of Havana and is a popular tourist destination .
 People all over the world have memories of the Missile Crisis . People may want to see one of the sites of focus back then .
 Authorities have started to educate some of the small farmers living closest to the site in how to guide visitors and keep watch over the area .
 Archaeological interest in the former Soviet nuclear missile site initially aroused some surprise and skepticism among academic colleagues and local people in Santa Cruz de los Pinos .
 At the local level this was probably strengthened by the fact that some of us are foreigners and we were all accompanied by officials . At the . local level, this was . strengthened by fact that . some of the . foreigners are foreigners, and we are all accompanied with officials .
 'To excavate in the intense heat is hard work. However, it actually helped us convince people of the sincerity of our interest in how the Missile Crisis was experienced from a local perspective,' says the film .
 Officials convinced people that they were allowed to talk about the Missile Crisis . The presence of officials convinced them that they could talk about it .
 As a result of our digging in the ground, stories of a silenced past have begun to surface . We are digging into the ground to uncover stories of the silenced past .
 These stories are, of course, influenced by the present context, and we may very well have created an interest that was not there before . These stories may be influenced by a new interest that may not have been there before, says Simon Tisdall .
 Undoubtedly, more material remains need to be uncovered and more voices must be heard in order to get a more fully down-to-earth perspective on the Missile Crisis . More material remains must be uncovered, but there is still much more to learn .
 These histories from below give a new and human dimension to the history of the crisis . The history of this crisis has a human dimension, with the help of historians .
 It has generated important discussions about the writing of history in general . It has also generated important discussion about the history of writing .
 Thanks to local residents and officials who made it possible for us to visit missile sites in El Purio, Sitiecito, and Santa Cruz de los Pinos .
 We also thank National Swedish Television and the Museum of National Antiquities in Stockholm for their cooperation and financial support .
 Diez Acosta, T Informe sobre las regions de emplazamiento de las unidades coheteriles estrategicas Sovieticas desplegadas in el territorio de la República de Cuba en the periodo de Octub
 His major focus of research is the archaeology of the contemporary past and the relation between material culture and memory . The archaeologist is also concerned with the relation of material culture to memory .
 TOMÁS DIEz ACOSTA has a PhD in history and is professor and senior researcher at the Cuban Institute of History in Havana .
 He is a distinguished expert on the history of the Cuban revolution as well as the Missile Crisis . He is an expert on Cuban history .
 A. Lic. in anthropology is a researcher at the Cuban Centre of Anthropology in Havana . She is studying anthropology in Cuba .
 Her major focus of research is traditional popular culture, anthropology of food, and ethnic relations . Her research includes anthropology, anthropology, food and ethnicity .
 His major focus of research is archaeological historiography and knowledge production . He is also interested in the ideology and theory of archaeological heritage management .
 A. Lic. in geography is a specialist at the Institute of Scientific and Technological Information in Havana, Cuba . She is also a specialist in geography at the IISI .
 His major focus of research is computer science and the application of GIS within geoscience and archaeology .
 His major focus of research is the epistemology and ontology of archaeology and heritage management . His major research focus is the political dimensions of archaeological and heritage .
 JESÚS M PAJÓN has a PhD in paleoclimate and geochemistry . He is researcher at the Cuban Centre of Anthropology in Havana .
 His major focus of research is paleoclimatic and paleoenvironmental reconstruction . He has published numerous works on the Earth's climate reconstruction .
 JESÚS RAFAEL ROBAINA JARAMILLO has an MA in anthropology and is director of the Cuban Centre of Anthropology in Havana . He has a PhD in anthropology .
 His major focus of research is the religion of ancestry of African in Cuba . His major research is religion of African ancestry of Cuba .
 BENGT WESTERGAARD has a BA in archaeology and is a field archaeologist . He is a specialist in digital field documentation systems including GIS and database management .