 AFRICA AMERICAS VOLUMES — INS ON O10) SV NNION 0) 0) 25) AY. (/eyu) /eyu Ce bent-bu.
 They had adopted a cattle-oriented way of life, probably as a result of contacts with Berber-speaking nomads who had reached the area of the Senegal River valley sometime prior to ap 1000 .
 Geographically this includes the region between 22° to 35°s, and 15° to 33°z. Geographical region is 22°-35°s . Geography includes region between 15°-33°z and 22° - 35° .
 Clan names refer to particular plants or animals that have supernatural abilities . People who belong to a particular clan cannot eat that particular plant or animal .
 Singing and dancing are major forms of entertainment among the Azande, especially at feasts and other celebrations . Singing is a form of form of entertainment that is important to Azande .
 The Azande, along with hundreds of thousands of the people living in the southern Sudan, had fled the Sudan to live in neighboring countries . The peace pact between the SPLA and the Khartoum government to end the civil war ended in 2005 .
 These Baganda people maintain close ties with their agrarian roots in villages . They also practice ‘urban agriculture’ in town homesteads by growing crops in small available areas .
 The solidarity of the Bakongo people has a long history based on the splendor of the ancient Kongo kingdom and the cultural unity of the Kikongo language . Bakongo is the people of Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Republic of Congolese .
 The Bamana live in the Republic of Mali . Eerdmans, 1975. The Bamanans are an indigenous people .
 The Banyankole, who numbered about 400,000 people at the turn of the century in 2000, are located in southwestern Uganda . They are the indigenous Kinyankole religion .
 Zambia has been relatively stable during the post-independence era . Inter-ethnic fighting has not been a major problem in the country .
 MAURITANIA MALI Tombouctou waet a Bamako 7 Ouagddoug Monrovia . LIBERIA ing down missions and chasing out the priests .
 The staple food is /a pate, made by adding boiling water to corn, millet, cassava, or sorghum flour . Pate is made from boiling water and added to corn and millet .
 Benin’s major social problems revolve around lack of economic opportunity, poor law enforcement, and the need for public services . Benin is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Berber, especially those living in Morocco, wrote their language using the Arabic alphabet . Later, between about AD 1000 and 1500, Berbers used the same alphabet . Berber used the alphabet between AD 1000 to 1500 .
 Burkina Faso is one of the economically poorest countries in Africa . The country is the least known to Americans . It is also one of Africa's poorest countries .
 The 48% figure for the Mossi has been suspected of being a deliberate under-representation in order to deny a demographic majority .
 Ethnic groups transfer some rights and goods through the male line of kinship, and others through the female . In the southwestern part of the country where Burkina, Ghana, and Cote d’Ivoire come together, some rights are transferred through kinship .
 Turkana @/ Z GANDA Mogadishu fnpala g\ KENYA RW arm Kig ; Lake ~ Bujumbur. Turkana . Turkana at the center of the Lake Lake .
 Burundi is a relatively modest country in contrast to Western countries . Burundian culture is more modest than in the West . The country is known for its modest lifestyle .
 Cameroon’s first president, Ahmadou Ahidjo, declared a one-party state in 1966 . Cameroon is now a one party-free state .
 Cameroonian makossa music defines much of the popular culture . Socializing at baptisms, weddings, and parties is entertainment .
 These forms range from the European-origin mazurkas and valzas, to the polyrhythmic batuko, and modern popular music of funana and finagon .
 In Central African society it is looked down upon to refuse a meal when offered . Even if one is not hungry, in Central Africa it is considered a taboo to refuse food .
 The more Westernized southerners, leading to ethnic conflict and rebellions in eastern and northern Chad, have led to ethnic conflicts .
 The sun, heat, and blowing sand in the north require clothing that covers the entire body except for the face .
 CHAGGA PRONUNCIATION: CHAH-guh ALTERNATE NAMES: Chaga, Waschagga, Jagga, or Dschagga . Kilimanjaro region in northern Tanzania has 1,500,000 inhabitants . On the southern slopes
 Another splinter group moved into the Lower Shire valley of southern Malawi and became known as the Mang/anja . The Mang/Anja is a Malawi-based group of people who have lived in Malawi .
 A sizable population of Chewa or Nyanja speakers in the surrounding countries can be explained by these migrations . Chewa is spoken in Zimbabwe, and a sizable population in surrounding countries .
 The inauguration ceremony for such chiefs has been resurrected in some quarters . The ndu inauguration ceremony has been revived in some parts .
 Saves e | Malawi i ~"" Mayotte Antsiranana Nampula e Juande Nova / *Mahajanga / Mahajanga . Mozambique a Harare, Mozambiquique a . Harare . Bulawayo Antananarivo .
 In 1997, the Republic of the Congo swore in a new president after waging a four-month civil war that killed thousands . Brazzaville was once one of the most peaceful and smoothly run capitals in Central Africa, in ruins .
 Malabog°°° a EQUATORIAL GUINEA © Bata Libreville GABON Sao Tomé Kisangani SAO TOME & PRINCIPE .
 The Nganga-Nzambe, the “doctor of God, is called upon in times of need to intercede with sacrifices and prayers . It is the ‘Doctor of God’ who intercedes with sacrifices .
 Lugman the Wise says: “God has humbled the people of the world with two traits: death and poverty.” Lugman also says that God humbled his people with death, poverty .
 The Creoles are a culturally distinct people of Sierra Leone . Christianity with remnants of traditional African religion is Christianity . The Creole language is Krio and the language of Krio .
 The Dinka are one of the largest ethnic groups in the republic of Sudan . Numbering between 500,000 and 1 million people, the Dinka population is one of Sudan's largest . Dinka people are Monotheistic-worship of the Nhialic .
 Among nomadic herders of Djibouti, their livestock (goats, sheep, camels, and cattle) provides the main dietary staples— milk and meat . Djiboutsi's livestock provide the main sources of food .
 "TANZANIA ® Kinshasa Angola ‘ Kananga é L0capa Luanda SULabtumbashi J ANGOLA * Benguela Kitwe » ZAMBIA Lusaka’s Mavinga e g
 The Arab Republic of Egypt is more commonly known as Egypt . Egypt is known as the Arab Republic . The country is known for its brutality .
 A key event in the ancient history of Egypt was the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt, by the legendary King Menes, in the third millennium Bc. Egypt .
 Most of the population consumes bread, rice, beans, fruits, and vegetables on a daily basis . Food is a staple of daily life .
 Equatorial Guineans enjoy socializing with family and friends . They do not need invitations to visit each other . Like Africans on the continent, they enjoy socialising with family .
 Today, the BBC and Radio France International are available on FM broadcasts from Malabo and are popular in Malabo .
 By 1989, the Ethiopian government’s largely conscripted military forces lost battles across Eritrea and Tegre provinces, died by the thousands, and surrendered in droves .
 Zanzibar I childhood, Saba, also known as Meqdes, teaches him about his father, King Solomon, and he draws a picture of his father to keep near as a remembrance .
 CENTRAL “AFRICAN REPUBLIC Monrouiee LIBERIA CAMEROON \ ome 1 Douala Malabo . Equatorial GuineA Sao Tomé SAO TOME & PRINCIPE . Abidjan  Bata  Libreville
 Annobén varies by membership in those who are more actively engaged in pastoralism and less inclined to be devout and are more syncretic . Those settled Fulani are more devout and more inclined to engage in religious activism .
 Polygyny is legal in Gabon, but it is required for couples entering state-sanctioned marriage contracts to register as "polygamous" or "monogamous" Couples entering contracts register as either ‘polygamy’ or monogamous . Polygy
 In 1994 a military coup was led by four army lieutenants headed by Lt. Lt. C. Cesar Herrera . Herrera led the coup in 1994 .
 Minimum working age is 15, but custom and economic necessities often force children to work at a younger age . The minimum working age for children in the UK is 15 .
 Only 30% of the population over 15 years old is literate in French . Literacy rates are improving, but only 30% are literate French .
 Zanzibar I are not included in national examinations . KENYA y 2 (iogadishu WB Nairobi   Bujumbura  Pemba  Pemba y 2 .
 Igboland is located in southeastern Nigeria between 5° and 6° N latitude and between 6° and 8° £ longitude . It is also located in Nigeria's southern border .
 The Jjo are the fourth largest ethnic group in Nigeria . They live in the coastal region of southern Nigeria, principally in the states of Bayelsa and Rivers .
 The Ijo now see themselves as a distinct people with reference to their mainland neighbors (the Igbo, Yoruba, Isoko, Beni, and others) Even though cultural differences within the Ijo-speaking population are sometimes greater than those between Ijo and non-Ijo
 The Jjo political identity took shape during the colonial period, as early as the 1940s as part of nationalist movements throughout the continent . It was part of the nationalistic movements throughout Africa .
 Bata Libreville GABON vinced them to stop female circumcision in their ibe after seven young women died . Malabo is the Equatorial Guinea capital of Guinea .
 Spirits of the bush and water are believed to be the most common and conspicuous supernatural agents influencing the course of daily life . Spirits of water and bush are the most prominent and conspicuous agents influencing daily life in Australia .
 Although the Tjo do not celebrate birthdays, they are very conscious of relative age distinctions .
 Many different ethnic groups migrated over the centuries into what became known as Céte d'Ivoire . Ethnic groups migrated into the country from all over Europe .
 More than 60 ethnic groups make up the population of Céte d'Ivoire, each with its own distinct language or dialect and customs .
 Mandé are among the oldest settlers of Céte d'Ivoire and are found in the forest region . This group includes the Dan or Yacouba, the Malinkée, and the Dioula . The Mandé were among the first settlers of the region
 Islam was brought to Cote dIvoire by Malinké immigrants from the Mali Empire of the 13th to 18th centuries . Islam is particularly strong in the northern savannah area of the country . One-third of the population is Muslim .
 SAHara (Occupied by Morocco) is occupied by Morocco . It was occupied by Algeria, Algeria, Morocco and Morocco .
 A smaller number of Jola are found in the northern part of Guinea Bissau, just to the south of the Casamance region .
 Since the early 1980s, the Casamance region has witnessed political instability . The region has been plagued by political instability since the 1980s . It is now the world's most populous region .
 Travelers cross the vast arid scrublands of the Great Karoo in South Africa . Travelers who journey between the interior of South Africa and the coast cross the arid .
 Afrikaans that the Karretjie People speak is peculiar to them and enriched by characteristic words and sayings, such as skérbestuurders and klipbrille .
 Some farmers allow the whole Karretjie unit, i.e., not just the shearers, onto their property . Most shearers claim that they do not want to stay in a proper house . Some farmers even make housing available for shearers but most shearers prefer their own
 The Karretjie people mostly entertain themselves . People are mostly entertained themselves .
 Currently, nearly everyone professes membership in some organized religion—either Christianity or Iskam . Currently, most people profess membership of some organized religions .
 Kenya is divided into eight provinces under the authority of the president . Kenya's eight provinces are under the president's authority . The country is divided in eight provinces .
 The Italian language never caught on in Libya as French did in Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco . The Italians failed to assimilate or educate the population during its occupation, the Italian language did not catch on .
 Arabic, a Semitic language related to Hebrew and Aramaic, is spoken by nearly the entire population of Libya . Arabic is a highly evolved Semitic word related to the Arabic language .
 In Libya, traditional versus modern dress has not become a charged political issue . Unlike in other parts of North Africa, in Libya, it has not been a charged issue .
 The Maasai are thought of as the quintessential cattle herders of Africa . Yet they have not always been herders, nor are they all today .
 Zanzibar I Mafia I COMOROS MALAMIE Moroni . Moroni, ( Lake | Malawi Lubumbash, Dzaoudzi Kitwe ® 4 ZAMBIA Lilongwe _ | Mayotte .
 Ceremonies such as the eunoto, when warriors return to their villages as mature men, offer occasions for sustained partying and much merriment . Ceremony is a time to celebrate the return of mature men .
 Inhambane e men let their hair grow long so that they might be mistaken for women and would not be attacked . Men would let their long hair grow so they might not be mistaken as women .
 A rapidly increasing population, overcrowding, and the threat of rising sea levels produced by global warming are major problems that face Maldives . The Maldives is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 About 90% of Malians identify as Muslims . The country is home to the largest city in Africa .
 The name Malinke is just one of many similar names used for a large group of closely related peoples in West Africa . The name is mah-LING-kay, mah-linger-kay .
 The book’s main character, Kunta Kinte of the Mandinka people, personalized the terrible plight of African slaves and their families who were sold into slavery . The book's main character is Kunta .
 The result was overcrowded living conditions and difhculty finding enough jobs for the influx of migrants . The result of overcrowding living conditions is overcrowded conditions .
 In Mauritania, as in much of West Africa, Islamic Sufi brotherhoods known as tariqas gained importance around the 13th century .
 The Arabs, led by Ugqba bin Nafi, were by far the most influential conquerors of Morocco . Beginning in ad 662, the Arabs were led to Morocco .
 Hassan I] Mosque in Casablanca is the second largest mosque in the world (second only to the Great Mosque in Mecca) It can accommodate 25,000 inside and a further 80,000 in its courtyard .
 At this time, a large meal, known as sadaga, is offered to guests who join in mourning .
 MOSSI PRONUNCIATION: MOH-say ALTERNATE NAMES: Moose, Moshi, Mosi LOCATION: Burkina Faso, Céte d'Ivoire POPULATION: 5 to 6 million in Burkina .
 Pendleton, Wade C Katutura: A Place Where We Stay. Wade Cutsura: "Katutura is a place where we stay"
 Zinder Chad N'Djamena is the name of the African nation's first African Christian leader . The nation was founded in the 1920s and 1930s by African Christian groups .
 Vestiges of the past are seen in rural areas, where many women and men wear long loose robes of either white or bright colors . Women and men often wear loose robes in rural Africa .
 Niger was one of the world’s least known countries until the severe drought of the 1970s brought the terrible predicament of the Sahelian rural populations to the attention of Europe and North America . Niger is one of Africa's least-known countries .
 Major religious holidays are Christmas, Good Friday, Easter, Id ul-Fitr and Islamic New Year, and Prophet Muhammad’s Birthday .
 Waaqa created all other stars, animals, plants, and other creatures that live on the land, in air, and in water . Using the light of bakkalcha, Waaq created all the other stars and animals .
 Males between 32 and 40 years old played important roles and shared knowledge with the gondaala group, and carried out their leadership responsibilities . Those males aged 32 to 40 years play important roles .
 Infant mortality rate for Zhu I dasi is comparatively low among Africans . In 1980, it stood at 85 per 1,000 births; in 1980, the infant mortality rate in the Zhu dasi was 85 .
 Zhu I 6asi statistics are similar for other San groups, according to Botswana's health ministry surveys . Health ministry surveys done in Botswana suggest similar statistics for other groups . Zhu 6asi is a member of the Zhu I. 6asi tribe .
 Zhu I éasi, Nharo, and GI wi girls have a brief initiation at first menstruation, and Tshukhoe boys are circumcised . Zhu I . éasi and Nhara, . Nharu, and . GI wi . girls have an initiation at .
 The Zhu I dasi, for instance, make use of what they call hxaro networks that link persons who are related through common great-grandparents . The Zhu dasi are related to each other through their common ancestors .
 Gifts are called kamasi in Zhu I éasi and kamane in Nharo . Gifts are given in separate exchanges in Zhu-I-Zhu I-Nharo exchanges .
 Ponta do Praiao Catarina, Piende Lembat' Sao Tomé ‘ebinda 2024m.m. — “Agua Izé esta.” ‘Aguas Izé’ is the name of the first place in the
 The Portuguese city of Porto Alegre da Capa is located in the heart of the city . Visit the site to witness spirit possession .
 Since 1996 the Ministry of Education has established two institutions of higher learning in Sao Tomé and Principe . However, since 1996, only one institution has been set up in the country .
 Subsistence agriculture and fishing are the main activities for the majority of the people on the islands . Agriculture and fishing is the main economic activity for the islanders .
 Among the major challenges facing Sao Toméans in the 21st century are poverty, food insecurity, and the prevalence of malaria . The country is one of the most impoverished countries in the world .
 The Senegalese are overwhelmingly Muslim . The Senegalese are overwhelmingly religious .
 Seychellois folklore is as rich as its people’s cultural heritage . Astove Group is based in Coetivy Mayotte and the Mayotte Islands .
 Lake Tanganyika KR ~~ DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC of the CONGO Mbala® _, Pembal. Mbala . Mbala’s "Pembal" is the name of the Congolese village of Mbala, which is located
 Traditional Shambaa beliefs center on healing the land and the body . Lake Malawi Lubumbash, Dzaoudzi Kitwe, is one of the best beaches in Malawi .
 Somalia is located in eastern Africa on what is commonly known as the Horn of Africa . Somalia is known as one of the worst-hit countries in Africa .
 This form of attire is worn to attract females and is abandoned immediately after marriage . It is worn by women and is worn in the hope of attracting females .
 Islam was introduced to the northern Sudan by Arab traders as early as the 7th century ap. ap . Islam was first introduced to Sudan by Arabs in the early 7th Century ap.
 This traditional structure operates parallel to a ‘modern’ (post-European contact) structure, consisting of the administrative head of government, ie., the prime minister, and statutory bodies including a cabinet and a bicameral parliament, which enacts legislation subject to approval .
 ZIMBABWE *Bulawayo *Muhembo NAMIBIA BOTSWANA Windhoek  Windhoeks, ‘Mazambique,‘ } Walvis Bay Gaborone Inhambane d Pretoria  Johannesburg
 IB Maseru ’ SOU TH Sye20THO AFRICA’ collected at distant points to strengthen and purify the king .
 In many Tanzanian ethnic groups, heroes are illustrious ancestors who distinguished themselves in valor, intelligence, and generosity . Harare™ nt ZIMBABWE 4 FOLKLORE .
 As many as 15% of girls are subjected to female genital mutilation often performed by Ngaribas, traditional practitioners . Though illegal, though illegal, it is believed to be a form of mutilation .
 Today, Tigrififa speakers number about 6. million and are concentrated in Tigray state and in Eritrea .
 Amharic, the official language of Ethiopia, is so closely related to Tigrififa that most Tigray people have little difficulty communicating in Amharish .
 Tigrififia, Amharic, and the liturgical language Gi-iz are written with the same script . Tigriftifia is written in the same way as Amhic and Gi-iza .
 Tigray a knife is provided for a large piece of meat served to each guest at a wedding .
 The Tonga are concentrated in southern Zambia along the Kafue and the middle Zambezi rivers . They are believed to be the largest tribe in the world .
 Islam most likely came from the west and spread into the Air Mountain region in the 7th century ap. ap. Islam spread to the region from the east and west .
 Omar Khilf was one of the most prolific directors in North African cinema . He became a prolific director in the 1960s and 1970s . His films on anticolonial resistance were very successful .
 Tutsi refers to the people who live in the densely populated African countries of Rwanda, Burundi, and in border areas of neighboring countries . The word "toot-see" is used to refer to people living in Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of Congo .
 Mafia I COMOROS ey 1 Mayotte MALAWI ( Lake \ Malawi Dzaoudzi | Lilongwe ) ZAMBIA x ) ampula. I COMEROS ey .
 Lusaka b r tarare™ ae ZIMBABWE q e SS Juande Nova ~~ Mahajanga Ne M OZAM BIQUE refugees from the Mulenge region . Luska b rtarare™  ae . ae  Z
 About two-thirds of Ugandans are Christian, evenly divided between Protestants and Roman Catholics . Uganda is home to the largest city in the world .
 A chain, a bit of earth in a snail shell, and a five-toed chicken, told him to go down and create the earth . Monrovia, Liberia, is the capital of Sierra Leone .
 Nigeria's new parliamentary government set a priority on education . Universal primary education soon became the norm in southern Nigeria where the Yoruba live .
 In the rural areas of Zambia, the primary forms of recreation are drinking and traditional dancing . Zambia's main form of recreation is traditional dancing and drinking .
 Maseru sO UTH S4es0TH 0TH0TH0 AFRICA Port Elizabeth Luderitz e Cape Town . Cape Town, South Africa, Cape Town.
 Traditional forms of entertainment such as drinking, singing, and dancing have persisted in contemporary society . Drinking, singing and dancing continue to be part of modern society .
 God is known as uMvelingangi or uNkulunkulu, because he appeared first . God is also known as God of God, or God of the first . He appeared first.
 The 17 other states were Alabama, California, Florida, Georgia, IIlinois, Louisiana, Maryland, Michigan, Mississippi, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia .
 WorldMARK ENCYCLOPEDIA OF CULTURES AND DAILY LIFE . 12 Seattle e C A ¥ ¥ | | Winnipeg® ae . In other cases, the word "Winnipeg" is used in other words .
 Brazilians of African origin comprise nearly 10% of the total population of Brazil . Afro-Brazilian sects such as Condomble and spiritualist sects dominate Brazil's population .
 Followers of African-Brazilian religious sects carry offerings to lemanja, an African water goddess, on February 2, Iemanja’s Day .
 It is difficult to distinguish Afro-Brazilian customs from those of Brazilian society as a whole, says the author .
 With the onset of World War I in 1939, American men left their jobs to fight in the war, the U.S. suddenly suffered a labor shortage . The United States suffered a shortage of men in 1939 .
 All ethnic groups have cultural festivals in which dancers or parade participants wear traditional dress of their particular culture . Most US. immigrants quickly adapt to American-style clothing .
 American food is a colorful blend of many different ethnic traditions, as well as indigenous foods such as squashes and turkey .
 A primary problem for the Amish is the struggle to maintain their traditional ways in the face of the temptations of the modern world that surrounds them . Amish and similar groups are struggling to maintain traditional ways .
 The climax of the festival is J;OQuvert on the first Monday in August, when thousands of celebrants pour into the streets at 4:00 AM in a frenzy of dancing accompanied by steel drum and brass bands .
 Argentina derives its name from the Latin word for silver, argentum, and this is what drove the Spanish to explore the land during the 16th century . Argentina has a population of 40 million .
 The 5th Tango Dance World Championship took place in Buenos Aires, Argentina .
 The tradition began with Eva Duarte, an actress who became the nation’s patron saint through marriage to President Juan Perdn. She became a saint through her marriage to the president of Colombia .
 Spanish conquerors were efficient and successful in subjugating a large portion of the Inca Highlands of Peru . But they did not have the same luck in the eastern rainforests of Brazil . Campa is located in the southern part of the country .
 There are also evil spirits or kamdari, a term used to refer to that which is repugnant, malevolent, or reprehensible . Evil spirits are also known as evil spirits .
 Asian Indian families have world-mark ENCYCLOPIA of Cultures and DAILY LIFE . Austin e Winnipeg® Minneapolis. Austin e . Winnipeg. Minneapolis .
 Newborns have not lived in the U.S. long enough to have developed a large population of second and third-generation Americanborn children .
 The Aymara have existed for more than 2000 years and are considered more than an ethnic group . Roman Catholicism combined with indigenous beliefs; Seventh Day Adventist beliefs .
 Aymara is an amazingly versatile language in which—through sufhixes—a word can be concrete or abstract, noun or verb, and through which nuances can be incorporated into the language, something unknown to modern languages .
 Prince Kingston Caribbean Sea known celebration is Junkanoo, held on both Christmas and New Year’s .
 About 90% of the population is of African descent, descended from West Africans brought to the island to work as slaves on sugar plantations . The population of Venezuela is about 80% of its population .
 Coconut Bread 6 oz brown sugar 6 oz shortening 2 tsp almond extract . 1 cup milk 3 cups grated coconut 1% lbs flour 1 tsp powdered cinnamon cinnamon 1 tsp salt 1 tsp nutmeg 3 tsp baking powder Combine shortening and sugar .
 Mayan people inhabited for centuries the area know as Belize before the arrival of Europeans . Belizeans speak English; Spanish; local Creole; Roman Catholicism .
 A death in the Creole community is observed with an evening wake in the home of the deceased . A wake is observed in the homes of the dead .
 At that time the lingua franca was Tupi . Language used by different groups to communicate with each other . Language is Tupi, a form of Arabic .
 Words combining Portuguese and Spanish languages, known as Portufol, are common in Portuguese .
 More recently, the lambada topped the charts in the United States and Europe . The lambada has topped the U.S. and Europe.
 ATLANTIC 2 slacksdn a {Montgomery is *Savannah OCEAN plajn Wy a ware Baton®_< Rouge New Orleans . Tallahassee — Tampa, Tampa, * Orlando Lake > Okeechobee Miami Gulf of . Mexico .
 In the Prairies, the most common nonofficial language is German; in central Canada, Italian; in British Columbia, Chinese . In the Northwest Territories, Inuktitut; in the Yukon, the Athapaskan languages of the Déné family; and in
 Several Amerindian cultures such as the Atacamefio and the Diaguita in the north, and the Mapuche further south thrived in Chile prior to the arrival in the 15th century of Inca invaders from Peru .
 Eduardo Frei, the Concertacion’s candidate, was rewarded with 57.98% of the national vote . Chile was in the middle of the so-called “golden decade of growth” and Eduardo .
 Concertacidn’s candidate Ricardo Lagos, a former minister of education and public development, almost lost the election in 1999 . For the 1999 presidential elections the support for the incumbent coalition declined .
 People also enjoy excursions to the rich farmlands of the central valley, to the lake district, and to the southern Andes . Enjoy fishing, hiking, boating, white-water rafting, visiting farms, ski resorts, or thermal baths .
 Choctaw are originally from what is now the northwestern United States . They emigrated to present-day Mississippi and Alabama after hearing good land was plentiful in the east .
 Des Moines Chicagé ™ “Tinco® 7 Springfield / e Topekae (MSS, yy indianapolis ena ee one, iS ~—Artansas/~ ae a \ pits \ Nashville” 2 wr wy)
 Each of the three Choctaw bands was traditionally ruled by a district chief, or miko . The three bands were ruled by the miko, or district chief .
 This tradition continued into the 20th century in the work of José Asuncion Silva and many others . This tradition continues into the 21st century in Spain .
 Houstom > <1 Ny a ° © ©/Corpus Christi ae If of \ exico which is closest to the French of the original colonial settlers . Houstome > < 1 Ny a . ° © /Corpus . Christi .
 Focal points of Creole social life include Mardi Gras crews, knights of Peter Klaver (a black Catholic men’s society) and social clubs . Creole clubs are social clubs and social groups .
 The total Cuban American population in 2000, according to the United States Census, was 1,241,685 . The U.S. Census reported the population of Cuban American in 2000 .
 Americas Cuban Americans CANADA Winnipeg® Missouri Pp m > a Black Hills fey, “Tincoln’s 2 wfiss Topekae (MISS, / Colorado \Canyoy, Plateau Angeles)
 The Cuna believe that what is taken from nature must be replaced in some way . Mérida, eS es j Caribbean Sea NICARAGUA Managua .
 Many Dominicans believe in obeah, a collection of quasireligious beliefs and practices derived from Africa . Dominicans . believe in . obeah .
 Even the smallest towns have a dance hall, and there are annual merengue festivals in Santo Domingo, Puerto Plata, and Sosta .
 Since the 1970s, local dance rhythms have been influenced by U.S. disco . The steps have become less formal, and the music has gotten faster .
 A native percussion instrument, the guira, is a legacy of the Taino people who were among the island’s original inhabitants . The guira is a percussion instrument that is a native instrument .
 Christmas in many towns in Ecuador is celebrated with a colorful parade . Christmas in Colombia and Brazil is one of the world's most populous countries .
 In urban areas, many Ecuadorans go to peyias on weekends for a special night out . Ecuadorians go to the peyas on weekends to celebrate their birthday .
 Foreign-born Filipinos became eligible for US. citizenship during this time, making life in the United States much easier for Filipino immigrants . Foreign born Filipinos were able to obtain US. Citizenship .
 The Americas French Americans Lake of the 2) Woods Lake Superior Minneapolis . The Lake Superior Lake is the second largest lake in the world .
 Charlottetown | tet 8 Québec jf CANADA . Thunder Lake Bay. Thunder Lake . Bay. Quebec .
 The 'Quiet Revolution' began in 1960, when the province was swept by a wave of political, educational, religious, and economic reform . In 1945, there were growing demands for political autonomy in Quebec .
 Manaus ~~ ; z\ oe *santarérm ° nario ea | Toc, \To Bag Ls J Pdrto Velho rio Branco BRAZIL . Manaus .
 Grenada's successful three-year structural adjustment programme 1992-1994 . Grenada’s successful home-grown three year structural adjustment programmes 1992-94 . Grenadians were able to grow their own economy in Grenada .
 Maracaibo Caracas orinoce VENEZUELA Ciudad Panama ~ ) _Guayana PANAMA p \ ) San Cristobal * Medellin gp Bogota cal” COLOMBIA _-\ BRAZIL é Pdrto Vel
 The Spaniards established small ranches around Asuncion, many of them known for their harems of Guarani women .
 In 1993 Mecht was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, becoming an icon for ending violence in Guatemala . Mecht became an icon after being awarded the Peace Prize for his efforts to end violence in the country .
 Comision para el Esclarecimiento Histérico was established to shed light on human rights violations related to the armed conflict . When the peace agreements were signed, with the participation of the United Nations, the Comision was established .
 Puebla Mérida, S Se, > BELIZE, > Caribbean < HONDUR ei Sea, Tegucigalpa aes £) Spanish is the official language of Guatemala .
 Historical evidence suggests Amerindian peoples occupied the territory that is now Guyana around the 1st millennium Bc. Amerindians occupied the area around the time of the first century BC .
 Hundreds of people turn up for the seven-day festival of Ramayana Yajma in Brazil . Hundreds of Brahmins read and explain the Ramayan .
 Mission in Haiti, established in 2004, remains in the country to assist in peacekeeping and continued democratic freedom . The mission in Haiti remains in Haiti to assist peacekeeping .
 HAITI JAMAICA se o Parente SS Santo Domingo Prince Kingston Caribbean Sea of pirates, and colonial French . The Caribbean Sea was the birthplace of pirates .
 If they give up, they say “Bwa sech,” which means they eat dry wood . The penalty for not getting the riddle is eating dry wood, the penalty . If they don't solve it, they eat wood .
 Honduras was once an important zone of the Mayan empire during the pre-Columbian period . A series of archeological excavations have demonstrated that the country now known as Honduras was an important area of the empire .
 El Duende is an imp with a big sombrero and a taste for pretty young girls . He courts them by wearing red trousers and blue jackets and by tossing pebbles at them .
 The mondongo hondurefo recipe includes cleaned beef tripe, pig’s feet, vegetables, breadcrumbs, and a tomato sauce with spices and corn oil added .
 The Political Ecology of Poverty and Environmental Destruction in Honduras in Honduras . The political ecology of poverty and environmental destruction in Honduras is described as "political ecology" of poverty .
 Mary Kenney organized the garment workers in Boston, most of whom were also Irish American women . Kenney was an Irish American who organized the workers .
 Iroquois Soup 4 large mushrooms, sliced 1 medium onion, peeled and thinly sliced 2 cans beef consommé Dash black pepper % teaspoon salt 2 tablespoons yellow corn meal 1 package frozen haddock fillets 2 tablespoons minced parsley . 1 clove garlic, crushed ’4
 Actors George Takei and Pat Morita (Happy Days and the Karate Kid films) are well known to most Americans . Musicians including Yoko Ono, Toshiko Akiyoshi, and the jazz band Hiroshima have added elements of their Japanese heritage to their music .
 Baton 3 Rouge: New Orleans @ Tallahassee Cape Canaveral Lake Okeechobee Miami Ra bs i] Gulf of Mexico Jersey , Washington , Illinois , Texas , Virginia , Maryland , and Hawaii also have significant Korean American communities .
 Korean Americans have not settled in ethnic enclaves but rather are scattered throughout USS cities, towns, and villages . Although “Koreatowns” developed in Los Angeles and other large cities, for the most part Korean Americans don’t live in those areas .
 9% with a bachelor’s degree, and 3% with graduate degree . 9% of those with bachelor's degree, 3% graduate degree. 3% of people with a graduate degree in the region .
 Lebanese cuisine is a central element in Lebanese and Lebanese American society . Food is another central element of Lebanese American culture .
 One of the best-known festivals is the nquillatun, which dedicates the lands and the harvest to the gods and goddesses . The festival is still celebrated at the reservation of Huapi Island on Lake Ranco .
 The main indigenous sport is the chueca or palin, a game that resembles hockey . The palin is a game similar to the game played by the indigenous .
 Small manufacturing shops, on assembly lines, in sweatshops with the garment industry, in gardening and landscaping businesses, and in light construction .
 Many entered the U.S. legally and have become United States citizens . Many of them entered the United States legally and are now citizens of the country .
 Mexican Americans were one of the most decorated ethnic groups in World War II . Mexican Americans earned 39 Congressional Medals of Honor during the war .
 Latter-day Saints are members of the Christian sect known as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints . Mormons live in the United States and around the world . They have 13 million followers worldwide .
 By the 19th century, the U.S. and Canadian federal governments had become involved in Native America .
 Dee Brown, James Welch, Duane Niatum, Geary Hobson, Leslie Silko, Simon Ortiz, Louise Erdrich, Paula Gunn Allen, Linda Hogan, Beth Brant, Gerald Vizenor, and Wendy Rose, Joy Harjo, and Ray A Young Bear
 The Cafoncito Navajos descend from those who favored peace with the European Americans . They even worked as scouts for the U.S. Army in campaigns against their own people .
 Hdzho is the Navajo concept of beauty, harmony, balance, health, goodness, etc. It is also a concept of balance, beauty, balance and goodness . Navajo concept is harmony, harmony and balance .
 As in some other Spanish American countries, vos tends to replace tu as the singular familiar pronoun, with corresponding changes in verb conjugations .
 Americas Beans and corn tortillas are the basics of the Nicaraguan diet . eaten at midday, often followed by a siesta, or afternoon rest .
 El Giiegtiense is a farce going back to the 16th or 17th century that combines dance and pointed social satire . An important specimen of folk drama as well as dance is El Giietiense . The farce combines dance, social satire and folk drama .
 Little ~ *Atlanta. Little . Little . Rock ‘ y ¢ ( i ( Z)
 He married the female chief of the Huila region, Doha Maria Mendiguagua, and became chief of all the Indians . Eventually he married the woman he married to . He was the leader of all Indians .
 Earlier jewelry included nose-rings and breastplates . Today inexpensive earrings are popular among Paez women, as well as barrettes .
 Balboa crossed the isthmus and discovered the Pacific Ocean in 1513 . Vasco Nufiez de Balboa made an even greater impact on history as he discovered the ocean . The 1513 Spanish expedition led by Balboa found the ocean in the Pacific .
 The Indian population is about 150,000, with the Guaymi, Cuna, and Chocé the chief peoples . The Guaymien and Cuna are the main peoples .
 Theater is popular in Paraguay, and productions are staged in Guarani as well as Spanish . Theater is also popular in the region of Paraguay .
 At San Pedro de Casta, la fiesta del agua takes place the first Sunday in October . The festival is held at the San Pedro del Casta in San Pedro .
 The vast majority of dwellings in the pueblos jévenes are still under construction years after the initial incursion into the area . Most of the dwellings are under construction .
 Most Peruvians don Western clothes for both everyday and special occasions . Peruvian women wear Western clothes to celebrate Western holidays .
 The PWAA and other Polish American organizations worked to bring aid and moral support to the Polish nation, its people, and religious institutions . During the years of political freedom in Poland between the wars and for almost 50 years of Communist rule in Poland .
 Puerto Rico citizens were granted US. citizenship in 1917 . They were exempt from immigration quotas established in 1924 for other nationalities . Puerto Rican citizens were therefore exempt from the immigration quotas .
 Puerto Ricans cherish baseball, basketball, and a good game of dominoes . Like others in the Caribbean, Puerto Rico is home to baseball and basketball . Puerto Rico has a reputation for sportsmanship .
 The Quechua Indians of the central Andes are the direct descendants of the Incas . They are a mixture of pre-Columbian and Roman Catholic elements . The Incas are the descendants of their ancestors . The Quequua Indians live in Peru and Ecuador .
 Quechua, as part of a Mestizo society, participate in many of the manifestations of Western culture . The Quequua are part of the culture of the indigenous people in Peru . They participate in some of the most Western aspects of their culture .
 Other defectors include ballet artists Rudolf Nureyev, Natalia Makarova, and Valery Jalina Banov . Poet Joseph Brodsky, cellist and conductor Mstislav Rostropovich among those defecting .
 Baton® & Rouge _,New ' Orleans ce t ’ * Orlando Lake, Florida, is located in the Gulf of Mexico . Okeechobee Miami e@ Tampa, Tampa, Florida vedev.com .
 VINCENTAND, BARBADOS THE GRENADINES 2 i Aruba Netherlands “Antilles oe \ ae GRENADA’ ve a TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO Tortuga I . 1979 .
 Queen Elizabeth II, the British monarch, is the head of state . She is represented on the island by an appointed governor-general . The British monarch is represented in the country by a governor general .
 80% of all Salvadorans are Roman Catholic . More than 80% are Roman Catholics .
 Ilja A After the Revolution: Gender and Democracy in El Salvador, Nicaragua, and Guatemala . On Your Own Publications, 1995, Luciak, Ilja .
 The Sumu group has sometimes been called Ulwa and Twahka, which are actually two sub-tribes of the same family . Sumu is located in Nicaragua and Honduras, with 13,000-16,000 inhabitants .
 The traditional crafts of spinning, weaving, and dyeing cotton for clothes and household items such as sheets have been replaced by the production of more decorative items for marketing . Carved tree gourds, tuno bark tapestries, and majao bags are among the decorative items produced
 Manaus .— e ah . e ah \ ey Santarém 7 Amazon pee . a | chi { | | | \Wocan .
 The Swedish American Lutheran Church founded half-Norwegian American, served as Chief Justice of the Sua number of colleges that continue to offer high-quality edu| preme Court from 1953 to 1969 . Augustana College and Theological a powerful liberal voice when he ruled against the racial
 Another Chief Justice of the Supreme Court Adolphus College ; Bethel Institute of Swedish American descent was William Rehnquist, a strong conservative, who took office in 1986 and served until his death Kansas . North Park College in 2005 .
 John Anderson from Illinois ran unsuccessal prominence in the early 20th century . Anderson was a member of the Illinois state legislature .
 Carl Sandburg ran as a third-party candidate in the 1980 U.S. presidential election . Sandburg and science fiction writer Ray Ray Ray wrote for the 1980 United States presidential candidate .
 In visual arts, sculptor Carl Milles (1875—_ labor union activist in the early 1900s) Milles was an early labor union leader . Milles is known for his work as a sculptor .
 Hill designed a number of public fountains in both Sweden and the U.S. Hill was convicted of murder and executed in 1915 . Many believed he had and the United States, including the huge Meeting of the Wa_ ters in St. Louis .
 Swedish American John Ericsson designed the of the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers . The rivers are located in St. Louis, Missouri, which celebrates the convergence .
 Gustavus August Eisen is most remembered for founding the Sequoia NaSwedish parent or grandparent . He made numerous contributions in botany, zoology, and arFalco . Jake and Maggie Gyllenhaal all have a chaeology .
 Kris Kristofferson invented xerography in 1938 and went on to found the Xerox and rapper MC Lars . Chester Carlson has been successful in the field of music since his invention .
 A number of Swedish Americans have also made great contributions in the areas of business, industry, science, and politics . Glenn Seaborg discovered plutoni. Walter Hoving served as politics. Glenn Hoving was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1951.
 The Tenetehara, known also as Guajajara and Tembé, are a numerous Brazilian indigenous peoples . They are a number of Brazil's indigenous people .
 Tenetehara had sufficient territory to move their settlements when the gardens were used up, every five or six years . Vitoria is located in Brazil .
 While she was searching for her husband, Maira’s wife stayed one night in the house of Mukwiira and conceived a second time . While she found her husband she stayed at the house and conceived again . She stayed at Mukwiir's house to find her husband
 Maranaiiwa, the owner of the forest and animals that inhabit it, punishes Amerindians who needlessly kill some species, like white-lipped peccaries . Maranaiwa, a native Amerindian, has been in the forest since 2000 .
 A typical Tenetehara house is rectangular in shape, with the walls and roofs covered with babasst palm leaves . The walls, roofs and walls are covered with palm leaves, and the roof is covered with banes . A typical house is a rectangular rectangular house with a rectangular
 Athabasca CANADA Queen Charlotte . -” members of the nobility, and beneath them were the working-class people, the majority of the population.” .
 The nation of Trinidad and Tobago consists of two Caribbean islands that have been united politically since 1962 . Soho Press, 1992.
 These schools offer an 11-year study program in Ukrainian language, culture, history, literature, etc. Students will study in Ukrainian history, culture and literature .
 The Charruas and the Guarani, were the main tribes when the Europeans arrived . The Guaraani were the most important tribes when Europeans arrived in Europe .
 Spanish navigator Juan Diaz de Solis was killed by Charruia warriors . Several of his men, along with several of his crew, were killed by the warriors .
 In regions close to the Brazilian border, a Spanish-Portuguese dialect called Portufol is spoken . In regions near the border, however, the dialect is spoken in Spanish and Portuguese .
 The Vaupés Indians of Colombia comprise several major tribes, including the Caribs, the Cubeos, the Uananas, the Karapanas, the Tucanos, and the Macus . Colombia is a variety of Amerindian or mixed languages and dialects, including
 The ruling coalition began losing its base support in 1992 . It faced two coup attempts in 1992, and finally lost the presidency to Hugo Chavez, a political outsider .
 It is an annual feast day honoring the Virgin, known in Venezuela as Nuestra Sehora de Comoroto, Venezuela’s patron saint . The feast day is a feast day for the Virgin .
 Vietnamese Americans live in Minneapolis, Minnesota . Vietnamese Americans have a long history of Vietnamese culture .
 Neolithic revolution from about 10000 Bc saw the appearance of settled agriculture . Neolithic agriculture began in about 10,000 Bc .
 In mainland Southeast Asia, the other equally early hearth of agriculture, upland fringes of river valleys and areas along the coast had probably begun to practice farming soon after 10000 sc. sc. Uplers, uplers and parts of the coast may have begun farming as early as
 By about 2000 sc the Black Pottery Culture or Lung Shan in the north was building cities with pounded earth walls, making bronze, and producing early writing, while such developments were also present in the south .
 Within the privacy of the home, they call each other by nicknames, or laqubs . The couple has been married for more than 20 years .
 An honored guest would be served gabli—rice with raisins, shredded carrot, almonds, and pistachios .
 Ahirs seek recreation and entertainment at the numerous fairs and festivals of rural India . Ahirs are known for their folk activities, including folk activities .
 In the late 19th century, the central government created a colonial office for Hokkaidd’s economic development . The central government encouraged settlers from other parts of Japan .
 By 1993 the number of Ainu language schools had increased to 11; by 2007 the number had risen to 14 in Hokkaidé and a few in Kantd . By 2007 there had been a total of 14 schools in the region .
 Kosamainu led an Ainu rebellion against the mainland Japanese ruling the southern tip of Hokkaidd, called Matsumae . He lived in eastern Hokkaidé, and led the Ainu .
 Asia & Oceania 7 RITES OF PASSAGE . In preparation for adulthood, boys traditionally learned hunting, carving, and making tools like arrows . Girls learned weaving, sewing, and embroidery .
 The rate of Ainu children advancing from junior to senior high school increased from 41.6% in 1972 to 93.5% in 2006 . According to a 2006 survey conducted by Hokkaidd, in the municipalities .
 'Alawi sect believe Imam Alli lives in the sun; the Qamaris believe he lives on the moon . Other beliefs relate to objects of light, including the belief by one sect, known as the Shamsis .
 The first humans entered the Moluccas 40,000 years ago, the same basic stock that would go on to settle Papua New Guinea, the Melanesian islands, and Australia . Tauris, 2007.
 Asia & Oceania ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREESION . See the article entitled Indonesians. Indonesians .
 Since World War H, the culture of the U.S. has had a large influence on Australia . Australians are using many American expressions introduced by movies and television shows .
 ‘Anglo Indian’ has two meanings, one essentially historical and one in use today . ‘Goans’ and ‘Indians’ have two meanings: Goans and Goans .
 Vasco da Gama established a Portuguese colony on the Malabar coast of southwestern India in 1498 . Its beginnings go back to aD 1498 when Vasco established the Portuguese colony .
 The Asmat region of Papua is still very isolated . Papua Papua is very isolated and isolated . The region is known for its culture and culture .
 The Asmat are fighting to retain their traditional ways of life in the face of pressure by Indonesian administrators . Indonesian administrators are trying to protect the Asmat from pressure .
 Bahrain has been the only safe port on the Persian Gulf throughout history because of prevailing wind and weather patterns . The island nation is home to a population of 727,000 . The country has been one of the world's only safe ports for centuries .
 Bahraini women celebrate the last day of Ayd Al-Fitr, which ends the Muslim holy month of Ramadan . The holy month is Ramadan .
 The ball is actually a small bag padded with cottonseed or rice husk, % to 1 lb in weight, and variable size .
 The Bajau take less advantage of modern educational opportunities than Tausugs or other Samalans . B3EDUCATION: Bajaw take less of modern education opportunities .
 Marriage between members of different castes is now common in Indonesia . Before Indonesian independence a woman marrying a man of inferior caste would be banished with her spouse from their locality .
 Some 70% of the Balinese earn a living from agriculture, where water is sufficient . Nonirrigated crops include dry rice, maize, cassava, and beans .
 96 Balinese MSOCIAL PROBLEMS see the article entitled "Indonesians" See the article on Facebook for more details .
 The Balichi are a semi-nomadic tribal people inhabiting the southern mountains and coastal regions of South Asia’s west+ern borderlands . The Baluchi are the people of Pakistan, Iran, Afghanistan, Turkmenistan and Oman .
 In the 18th century, virtually all of the Baluchi tribes were united in a loose confederacy under the banner of Mir Adbullah Khan of Kalat . The 18th Century, the Baluch tribes united under a loose confederacy under the banner .
 Pakistan inherited the problems of the Balichi region, with the fiercely independent and warlike Balichi tribes resisting integration into the new political state . Pakistan also inherited the issues of the region, including the  Balichi tribe .
 Baltichi speakers today are estimated to number about 8 million people . Baltichi speaker today is estimated to be around 8 million speakers worldwide .
 If cultural rather than linguistic criteria are used, the Baluchi in Pakistan could total around 11 million in number . The Baluchi are an ethnic group of people in Pakistan .
 Some 1-2 million Baluchi reside within the borders of Iran, and a further 300,000 are found in Afghanistan . Baluchi live in Iran and Afghanistan .
 Baluchi communities are also found in Turkmenistan in Central Asia, in Oman in Arabia, and along the coast of East Africa, and also in the Pakistani city of Karachi . Baluchi people are believed to be around the world's largest tribe .
 In Pakistan, the eastern margins of Baluchistan are defined by the north-south-running Kirthar Hills and the Sulaiman Ranges . The region is also known as the Balochistan region .
 In southern Balichistan Province, the mountain ranges swing westward to parallel the Makran coast . The mountain ranges stretch westward, parallel the coast .
 Six individual dialects of Balichi dialects have been identified . Distinctions are made between Western, Southern, and Eastern Balu chi .
 Baluchi was written in the Persian and Urdu scripts . Baluchi is the name of the first Persian-Urdu-language novel .
 In keeping with Baluchi tradition, Doda’s death was avenged by his brother Balach . Balach avenged his brother Doda's death by killing his brother .
 For the Baltchi, religious beliefs and practices are very much an individual matter . The Baltchi family is proud of their religious beliefs .
 Names peculiar to the Balichi include Lalla, Bijjar, Kannar, and Jihand . Names of Balichi are peculiar to its people, including Lalla .
 The body is laid in a north-south direction, with the head turned toward the west, ie., facing Mecca . The head is turned toward Mecca, meaning the body lies in the opposite direction .
 The Marri Baltichi take food twice a day, in the morning and evening . They also take food at night and during the day .
 Many works recount tales of Baltichi heroes and all embody the very essence of Balichmayar, the Baluchi code of honor . The Baluchi Code of Honor is based on the ancient Baluchi culture of the Baltichi .
 Lori and Domb castes, though not of Baluchi blood, serve as professional musicians . The Lori, Domb and Lori castes also serve as pro musicians .
 Baluchi communities along the southern Makran coast derive their living from fishing . Some Baluchi people rely on fishing for their daily bread .
 They form an ethnic and cultural population that has a transnational distribution . Their natural affinities are more with their fellow Balachi in Iran and Afghanistan than with other Pakistanis .
 It is little wonder that the Baliichi have very little sense of identity with Pakistan . Pakistanis have little connection with Pakistan. Pakistanis are Pakistanis .
 Balichistan is one of the most underdeveloped areas of the country . This alienation is intensified by the failure of the national government to promote economic development in Balichistani .
 Many see poverty and lack of education as a major hindrance to economic and political advancement in Balichi . Many people see poverty as a big hindrance in their country's political and economic advancement .
 Even in major urban centers such as Karachi, children are at a disadvantage . Baltchi children are often disadvantaged in Pakistan's most populous cities .
 After the Chagai nuclear tests by Pakistan in 1998, some Baltchi students hijacked a PIA (Pakistan International Airways) plane to register their disapproval and draw international attention to the issue .
 Since early 2005, Bugti had been fighting the Pakistani Army with a private force of 5,000 loyal tribesmen in the mountains of eastern Baltichistan . Bugti, who was seen by locals as a leader, had been seen as leader in the region .
 It is a relatively compact country covering an area of 147,570 sq km . It is roughly the size of the state of Iowa . The country covers an area that is the same as Iowa .
 The conversion of local populations to Islam began after ap 1202, when Bengal fell to invading Turkish armies, and continued for several centuries . The conversion began in 1202 and continued several centuries later .
 Indigenous dance forms include the dhaili, baul, manipuri, and snake dances . Indigenous dances include the baul and manipuri dances .
 Levirate,e.e. when a women marries a deceased husband’s brother, and junior sororate, are permitted by most Bania groups . Junior sororate is permitted when a widower marries the deceased wife's younger sister, or widow's sister .
 A village includes one or more prayer-halls (langgar) or a mosque if the settlement is big enough . A bathing place (usually riverside) is also a place for a onceor twice-weekly market . The village includes a bathing place, a mosque, a bathing
 Batak belong to lineages that trace back to a common ancestor though the male line . Batak members of the Batak family trace to a shared ancestor through the male-line .
 Recreational activities among Bengalis vary to a considerable degree . The Bengalis are known for their activities in Bengalis .
 The name Bhil identifies various ethnic communities inhabiting the hills and forests of southern Rajasthan and neighboring areas of western India . Bhili is the name of a group of tribal tribes .
 Lhasa BHUTAN Chandrapur af e y Arabian aa \ ishna ~ gi { 4 — —— Sea e \ / \ | \ \ ys one \ ff ‘ Colombo, )Sri — LANKA \ \ \ Bangalore
 Bhutia is a generic term that identifies several socially unrelated groups of India’s northern mountain rim . People of India is Bhutanese; Buddhists; Hindus; People of Nepalis .
 The Bhutia are believed to have emigrated southward from Tibet in the 9th century aD or sometime after and settled in the Himalayan mountain ranges along the Indo-Tibetan border .
 In the days of Tibetan trade, the Bhutias were exposed to Jamas and their teachings . The Bhutia were also exposed to the teachings of Jamas .
 Wherever Hindus went, Brahmans followed, Hindus went to Southeast Asia . Brahmans were found in the 1st and 2nd centuries .
 In the Kacchi lowlands, river and canal irrigation support cultivation, but settlements in other areas of the Brahui region depend on ganats . In other areas, irrigation supports cultivation .
 Monks and nuns reside in monastic communities known as vihdaras in India or gompas in Tibetan Buddhism . Monks are monks and nuns who live in communities called vihdars in India . Gompas are known as a monastic community in Tibet .
 Muslim peoples of Sulawesi’s southwestern peninsula have long been renowned throughout the Indonesian archipelago as seafarers . The majority gains their livelihood from wet-rice cultivation . The Muslim peoples are renowned as shipbuilders, traders, pirates, mercenaries, and migrants .
 The ancient Chinese books called them Liao, Man, Li, Zhongiia, Yijia, etc. etc. They are called Liao and Man .
 Sakyas entered Burma and established kingdoms in northern Arakan and upper Burma at an early date . The exact link with the Chakmias is unclear, but the link is unclear .
 Amnesty International reports serious violations of human rights in the Chittagong Hill Tracts by Bangladeshi military personnel . The number of civilians killed is estimated at 2,500, with Amnesty International reporting serious violations .
 Pujds are performed for spirits of the hill, the wood, and the stream, with offerings of rice, fruit and flowers .
 A z 4:4) aie ee ae a ee ol Ae ol . A Chakmda woman with her children in the Bijoypur Chakma refugee village . The refugee camp is located in the northern part of the state .
 Chakmas live in the more remote, hilly areas of Bangladesh and neighboring countries . Their access to modern forms of entertainment is limited .
 Many Cambodian Cham are Sunni Muslim of the Shafi school, although there are traditionalist and orthodox branches . Many are Sunni Muslims .
 Women are viewed as important members of society, contributing materials and skills without which the group could not live . Women contribute materials to society without which they would not survive .
 Jadav and the Raidas are the main Chamar groups . Sea pita Bay is the birthplace of the Bengal region .
 The final step in marriage, the consummation or gaund, occurs at puberty . The gaund is a form of sexual intercourse .
 The main dish is Chinese ed in China originated with the Chinese, many are shared by the other nationalities . Friends and relatives visit each other and share .
 Children receive gifts—traditionally, money ina red envelope . was originally a ritual in honor of the divine Supreme Unity . Money in a red envelope was originally an act of love .
 China is in a period of transition, moving from a traditional to a modern society . China's social problems include a lack of social support for women and children .
 Besides movies and television, karaoke halls have recently been set up in almost all townships . Karaoke is popularized by movies and TV .
 The staple foods of the Derong include millet, corn, and buckwheat . The Derong people live on millet and corn, which they eat daily .
 In addition to farming, men are adept at carpentry and in building Dong-style wooden structures . Men are also adept at farming and building Dong style structures .
 Annual religious festivals attract thousands of Druze to some shrines, such as al-Nabi Shu’ayb . The Druze are known for their religious beliefs .
 In agricultural areas, the festivals of the Ewenki are not different from those of the Chinese .
 The frequent migrations of the Ewenki in the course of history have resulted in scattered communities . BbWworkork. Bbwork .
 Bajau; Hiligaynon; Ifugao; Ilocano; Iongot; Kalinga; Vol.: Mangyan; Maranao; Negrito; Tagbanua; T’boli; T'boli . Mangyan: Marana
 The Philippines by its very nature has encouraged the proliferation of distinct local cultures . Distributed among thousands of islands, the territory of the Philippines is itself divided by barriers of mountain and jungle .
 China mee at vere $ Sea A Lie uerto da Princesa ~ eHo ‘Chi Penh /( g > Minh GiLyepandamseni ina aKota Baharu .
 Those returning from long-distance trips expected to bring back presents (pasalubong) for those remaining at home .
 Jose Rizal’s patriotic poem “Mi ultimo adios’ and his anti-colonial novels Noli Me Tangere and El filibusterismo are the most famous examples of his anticolonial novels .
 The ancestors of the Gaoshan belonged to the Min-Yue people (inhabiting part of present-day Fujian and Guangdong provinces) and, more remotely, to the Baiyue of ancient China . The ancestors belong to the ancestors of today's Gaosh
 Gaoshan living in cities, their lifestyle is hardly different from that of the Chinese, says Goshan . As for the Gaoshans, they live a similar lifestyle to the Chinese .
 The Gonds are numerically the most important tribe in South Asia . The Gondi are the most significant tribe in the world . They worship ancestor spirit worship .
 The nahurdn involves the ritual purification of the mother and announcing of the baby’s name . Held on the 9th day after birth .
 The introduction of universal suffrage and the village panchayat system has raised the aspiration of the formerly servile Sora Jat vis-a-vis the Char Jat . The new system has also raised the aspirations of the previously servile .
 The Hakka are ethnic Chinese who have a distinct history, language and identity . They are distinct from other Chinese ethnic groups .
 Many traditional Hakka believe in geomancy . The belief that natural forces in the land and water can affect one’s fortune and well being .
 Ancient books of Han people recorded thousands of myths that have been enriched by folk tales among the people . The ancient books of the Han people included thousands of tales that were further enriched in folk tales .
 The concept of patriarchal clan is deeply rooted in Han society . The continuity of patrilineal family is a matter of prime importance, having a great impact .
 Hong Kong ~~ MACAU Ris Pw) / XX - and women marry the partners of their own choice. Men . Men . Women marry the partner of their choice .
 In some areas, when a girl becomes 17, she may wear an ornament called ouqiuqiuqi behind her head . The ornament is an ornament that is worn around the head of a girl .
 The Hani’s cultural and educational level is below the average of the national minorities of China . Hani's cultural and education levels are below average of China's national minorities .
 Almaty TURKMENISTA: Tashkent Ashkhabad aieien AFGHANISTAN 5 Kabul Islamabad PAKISTAN oe . a4 .
 Hiligaynon (as the name of both a language and an ethnic group) is also called “Honggo,” though this generally refers specifically to the dialect and people of Iloilo . Hilagaynon is also known as ‘Honggo’,
 Villagers performed pijd before their ancient gods and heroes . Villagers even turned their television sets into shrines, performing pijs .
 By the 5th century Ap, the sanctity of the cow was firmly established in Hinduism . The sanctity was established in the Hinduism by the Hindu god .
 The 18 Purdnas dating from the 6th to 16th century AD are non-Vedic works that have exerted a strong influence on present-day Hinduism . The Purdna are the works of non-vedic Hinduism that have been influential in Hinduism
 A 3rd century aD work called Natya Udstra is the ancient authority for these art forms . The art form forms were created in the 3rd Century aD art form of the same name .
 In traditional Hindu village society, castes were integrated into an economic system known as the jajmdani system . Castes are integrated into a system of economic system called the jjmdani .
 The Hmong (sometimes called Meo or Miao) are an aboriginal people of southern China . Animism is Animism; some fundamentalist Protestant Christianity . Hmong are sometimes considered pejorative by some .
 BWworks Hui production is very similar to that of the local people with whom they share a common territory . BWwork Hui's production is similar to those of their local people, and is very different to their production .
 There is very little information on the Jatmul language, although the New Testament has been translated into IatMul by missionary linguists .
 Jatmul women were the ones who maintained the cohesiveness of the community and relations with outside communities . While men were aggressive, combative, and quick to anger, women maintained the community's cohesitiveness .
 The Ifugao belong to a group of peoples inhabiting northern Luzon’s Cordillera Central . They are collectively known among Filipino lowlanders as “Tgorots,” a term that first appears in Spanish records as a label for mountaineers who came
 The Igorots are far from homogeneous, dividing into eight linguistic groups and four broad cultural types . The Iongot of the Caraballo range and Sierra Madre, the Igorots, are far more diverse than homogeneous .
 The Ifugao traditional religion recognizes as many as 1,500 named gods, divided into 35 categories associated with, to name, the most prominent, hero ancestors, celestial bodies, natural phenomena, diseases, and agriculture .
 The bacnang, a loanword from Ilocano meaning “rich,” are people who have become rich in non-traditional ways . They are rich primarily in commercial or agricultural ventures, such as owning hotels or restaurants .
 Modern education, administration, commerce, and tourism offer some Ifugao residents the opportunity for nontraditional occupations . Most remain farmers, but some are still farmers .
 Ilocanos were prominent in the nationalist movement, and many have risen to high office in the central government . Many of them have been in high-ranking positions in government .
 Calamian* Group @acloban 7 'e,Bacolod » Leyte e Palawan Cebu . Leyte  Negros, Negros and Negros . Sulu Sea .
 In 2000, 8.9% of households in the Hocos region had access to acommunity faucet, 16.8% to their own, 25.7% to a shared deep well . 2.3% obtained their water from springs, lakes, rivers, or
 Almost all farmers own the land they till, except for those who are tenants of owners who are urban professionals . Owners of the land include urban professionals, urban farmers .
 The question remains whether the culture of the ‘Bugkalut’ (as they call themselves) is actually a largely unchanged survival of ancient north Luzon, culture or a version of a more complex culture pared down to the essentials .
 Christian Gaddang, Isinai, Tagalog, and Ilocanos have settled the surrounding lowlands . 1970s figures estimated the number of Ilongot at around 2,500 people .
 Ilongot recognize a range of supernatural beings including a creator-overseer deity associated with the sun, as well as ancestral spirits . SRELIGION Ilongots recognize a variety of spirits including an ancestral spirit .
 Beginning with a pwrut, an initial confrontation between the man's and the woman’s parties, the installments include guns, bullets, metal pots, cloth, jewelry, and knives . The series includes a series of violent encounters between the men and women .
 In general having little inherited property, Hongot do not bequeath agricultural lands . Hongot have little inherited properties, having little agricultural land .
 The Ilongot trade baskets and metalwork among themselves, but most such wares circulate as part of bride-prices or inter-kin gifts . Most such items are traded among themselves .
 Ilongot barter dried meat, captured fawns, pigs, and chickens for bullets, liquor, cloth, salt, and knives from lowlanders . The tribe barters dried meat for bullets and liquor from lowlands .
 Adult Iongot are known to use a 12-m length of rattan with a hook at one end and a loop at the other to move through the trees . Adult Iongsot use a hook with a loop in order to move around the trees.
 The increasing invasion of Ilongot territory by other ethnic groups sparks violent confrontations between the Hongot and the new settlers . Hongot territory has been invaded by other groups .
 Formal education for the children of indentured Indian laborers in Fiji did not begin until 1898 . The children were indentured Indians working in Fiji .
 Followers of the Prophet Muhammad in the 7th century aD engaged in a dispute, after his death, as to who the rightful successor to the Prophet’s leadership was . The dispute was over who was rightful successor .
 Iran’s development has fluctuated considerably since the Islamic Revolution of 1979 . The country's development has changed considerably since 1979 .
 The next conquerors were the Iranian Sasanids, who took charge in ap 227, and then the Islamic troops, who entered the country in ap 636 .
 Shi’ites believe that the successors of Muhammad should have been from his close family . Ali should be first caliph . Shi'ites believe the successors should be from Muhammad's close family (or Ahi alBayt)
 Kurdish women wear pants under their dresses, while men wear baggy trousers tied with sashes . Women wear trousers under dresses, and men wear trousers tied to sashes to show off their clothes .
 Ma’mounia’s recipe includes lemon juice, sweet butter and semolina whipped cream . Add sugar and water in a large saucepan over low heat, stir constantly until sugar dissolves .
 iinaouy turned to the Holy Land after the Persian conquest of the Middle East but suffered great persecution under Greek, Roman, Byzantine, Byzantine and eventually Muslim rule until World War I . In the 1890s, a Hungarian named Theodor Herzl founded Zionism .
 Because of the great diversity in the Israeli population, there is no such thing as Israeli cuisine . Israeli cuisine is very diverse and very diverse .
 Israel’s social problems stem from the newness of the state and tensions between the Jewish and Palestinian residents . Israel's newness, the diversity of its population, and the tremendous diversity of the population, are among the problems .
 The Jats are a peasant caste widely distributed throughout northern India and Pakistan . They are widely distributed in northern India, Pakistan and India .
 In Pakistan, Muslim Jat women are subject to purdah and wearing the burga in public . Muslim Jats are also subject to the practice of wearing a burqa in public in Pakistan .
 Flores Sumba LEs Si ER SUNDA fone fe Sea INDIAN OCEAN tral Java), Hindu-Buddhist Tenggerese, and the Balinese-influenced tiyang Osing of the eastern salient .
 Javanese recognize several classes of supernaturals . They are called "supernatural" by the majority of the world .
 Each village has a balai desa (community meeting hall), several langgar or a mosque, and a school . Each village is a community meeting hall, a school, a mosque or a langgar .
 The east Javanese Iudruk is even earthier and more contemporary . Employing male performers for female as well as male parts, it is even more contemporary. Employing men for female and male parts .
 With the clearing long ago of the last virgin land, an equal inheritance system has meant that Javanese peasants must sup sup . The landless people must live on small landholdings .
 South Asia is home to several distinct communities of Jews . Jews of Koh-chin are the descendants of the ancient Chinese .
 The most likely theory holds that the Jews reached the Malabar coast sometime in the lst century Ap, following the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans . Most likely theory, however, holds that they reached the coast after the Romans destroyed Jerusalem .
 For the Cochin Jews, Passover or Pesah has the usual Jewish meaning, i.e., the celebration of the Exodus from Egypt . Passover is a Jewish holiday .
 KADAZAN PRONUNCIATION: kah-tah-CHAN ALTERNATE NAMES: Dusun LOCATION: Malaysia POPULATION: 514.400 LANGUAGE: Kadazandusun RELIGION: Christianity .
 Masbate 2, Ce ‘alamian’* 7 * Samar croup . Tacloban Pana @ lloilo, @2acolod (Leyte Palawan Cebu i *Cebu_| Negros Bohol: o
 Hong Kong ve Haikou South China Sea . Bandar Ser Seri Begawan / Kota Baharu | MALAYSIA _*® Kuala Lumpur .
 The ancestors of present-day Karakalpaks (who call themselves Qoragolpoglar) settled in the area during the 10th and 11th centuries . They came upon Turkic Qipchoq people, who referred to the newcomers from the Irtysh
 A hospitable and friendly person is highly respected and valued by the Kelabit . The Kelabit is a very hospitable, friendly person who is respected .
 Cambodia has been largely unknown to most of the world for much of the past century . Angkor Wat is one of the most famous sites in the world . Cambodia has a population of about 8 million and is predominantly Buddhist .
 The Konds are a tribal group found in the hills and jungles of Orissa in eastern India . They are a small number of Christians who live there .
 Anshan ) \o @ Hohhot, Tangshan\,_, e ‘yBaotou® ~ \& Béijing— Dalian Shijiazhuang / ° | / SOUTH KOREA ) 7 Yellow —* anzhou an
 Families may be as small as three or four or as many as a dozen . Families may have been as small or larger as a family of up to 12 children .
 Confucian tradition means Koreans value education very highly . Koreans have a long-standing Confucilian tradition of education .
 Success of Chinese Korean education and economic development is in sharp contrast with the low position of Korean women . The success of Chinese Koreans education and . economic development .
 The Islamic victory near the modern-day Iraqi city of Sulaimaniya in ap 643 . But they eventually gave in after the Islamic victory . The victory was a victory near modern-modern Iraqi city .
 Kurdish culture has a rich oral tradition, especially in epic poetry called lawj, which often tells of adventure in love or battle . Lawj is a form of epic poetry that tells of adventures in love and battle .
 Kuwaitis still wear traditional Arab clothing, such as the dishdasha with a ghutra . A ghutra is worn over a skull cap and held in place with an ‘aqal for men .
 A jirchii is a singer-poet, whereas an akin is a professional poet and musician-composer . A similar artist is a musician and composer .
 INDONESIA being honored, and blessings recited when the strings are tied . Blessings are recited in honor of the nation .
 Lao women pray at Pha That Luang during the Wai Thatluang festival in Vientiane, Laos . The festival is part of a religious celebration in Laos .
 Hundred of thousands of Laotians visit Vientiane to pay homage to a Buddha relic they believe is kept inside a pagoda . The relics are believed to be kept inside the pagoda, which they say is inside a temple .
 The second piece was wrapped in four smaller pieces of cloth, put on a leaf of a herbaceous plant, and left to drift about on the Wangian River . The other piece of cloth was wrapped up in a piece of fabric and put on the leaf of an herbaceous .
 Ancestor worship and belief in ghosts and gods are widespread among the Li . Ancestors worship are also widespread in the Li.
 Although available, movies and television are not yet popularized among the rural Li. Li.
 Since Hainan Province is now the largest special economic zone of China, the social economy has developed rapidly in an integrated way . The social economy is developing rapidly in China's social economy .
 Lingayats are members of a religious sect in India that dates from the 12th century ad. The Shoestring Press, 1967 .
 Women wear a bodice and sari, with the upper end passed across the front of the body and draped over the head . The upper end of the sari is passed across front and back of the head, draped over head .
 A Typological Analysis of Ritual and Associated Patterns in the Utinyasampddane . The Utinyaasampdane is a type of ritual and associated patterns in the United States .
 The chanting of Islamic texts, such as the Quran and the Barzanji, is often accompanied by the playing of tambourines (rebana, berdah, or k[erlompang), accompanies ceremonies . Tambourine accompanies ceremonies such as circumcisions
 The nuclear family is the basic unit of Malay society, consisting of a husband, a wife, and their unmarried children . It is the most important family unit in Malaysia .
 Even though Malay is the national and official language of Malaysia, Chinese, Tamil, and English are also widely spoken . Bali Sea JAVA Bali Lombok Bandun INDIAN OCEAN 3 .
 Initially the Chinese came to Malaya as traders, shopkeepers, planters, and miners . Bwork was born in Malaya .
 This ceremony is usually held on an odd-numbered date,e, the seventh, ninth, or eleventh day of the month . Ceremony is held on the 7th, 9th, or 11th, 11th or 7th day of month .
 The color of the pottu on the forehead is worn simply to match the color of women’s attire these days, regardless of their marital status . Even the color is worn to match that of women's attire, even if they are married .
 The persistent poverty and political powerlessness of rural Indians in Malaysia is one of the country’s best-known and most severe social problems . Rural Indians are one of Malaysia's worst-known social problems in the country .
 The Malays regard marriage and raising a family as the most important aspects of life . ToF AMILY LIFE: Malaysia is a nation of origin .
 Traditionally, the Malays dominated government and agriculture, while playing a relatively small role in commerce and industry . The Malays dominate government, agriculture and commerce, but play relatively small roles in industry .
 In addition to Mori Karaeng, traditional religion recognizes several classes of spirits . Bali Sea’ ali ; e Malang ~ Waa ye] Lombok .
 The wa’y, a unit larger still than the panga, has lost its functions by now but used to have animal totems and hold rituals that were taboo for outsiders' participation . The wa'y is a unit that used to be larger still and more than a p
 The group weave and dye their own clothing, which consists of short shirts and short sarongs . They weave, dye and dye themselves to make their own clothes .
 Hanuno’o have less access to modB f th lat H ern entertainment forms than other ‘minority’ groups . Hanuno'o are isolated in their isolation .
 Little Islamic influence (or, rather, the culture of the Islamized lowlanders such as the Maguindanao) can be found in Manuvw culture .
 American colonial administration (fully imposed on Mindanao only in the 1910s) discouraged the Manuvw’ from carrying arms .
 Since World War II, the threat posed by loggers and Visayan settlers has led the Manuvu for the first time to recognize a single datu as a spokesman for their entire ethnic group .
 In the endemic feuding before World War HU, villages sent raiding parties or commissioned a bahani’, an independent warrior (and such companions as he might recruit), to exact revenge .
 In raising bride-wealth or blood-money or forming a vengeance-taking party, an individual can rely on the assistance of kin from both paternal and maternal sides .
 Dance and music traditions (including gong-playing and the singing of the Tuwaang epic, a highlight of most social gatherings) resemble those of other Mindanao-Sulu peoples .
 Calamian® Group / N Es Sibuyan , Sea 7 p> , Masbate ¢acloban ey Q Bacolod . Families own two or more swidden fields, rotating their cultivation in twoto three-year cycles . Tools consist of machetes
 Large containers named Iukong or liwit are made from the bark of the red lauan tree and can store five to six sacks of rice . Large containers made from Iukong's bark can be filled with rice .
 The most pressing social problem for the Manuvu is the civil war that has taken place on Mindanao since the late 1960s . The civil war is the biggest social problem in the region .
 Maoris would keep lands and property and have equal treatment under the law as British subjects . Lord Howe I Tasman Sea c New Zealand promised Maoris that they would keep their lands .
 Elaborately decorated cloaks were an important item of dress for individuals of high status within Maori society . Cloaks were important items of clothing worn by Maori people .
 Masbate 2, Calamian Group Samar . Tacloban Pana @ lloilo, @2acolod (Leyte Palawan Cebu i *Cebu_| Negros Bohol: ov se Island Bay go : San Antonio e
 The Maratha homeland, ie., Maharashtra, falls into three broad geographic divisions . Maharashtra, Maharashtra, is one of the three Maratha states .
 In the past, the chieftains, nobles, and landowners of Maharashtra were drawn from the ranks of the Marathas .
 Marathas now live in cities and towns and follow urban occupations, e.g., commerce and government service, and professions such as teaching, medicine, and law . Maratha children play games that are common in Maharashtra and rest of India .
 Maronites take their name either from the 5th century aD saint, John Maroun, or the 8th century ap monk who took his name and became the first Patriarch of Antioch . Maronite takes their name from a 5th-century a.D saint who became
 Maronites, like other residents of Lebanon, watch television avidly . Maronite, like many other residents, watch TV avidly. Mar on TV .
 The Maronites suffered under Ottoman rule from the 16th century to the end of World War I . The arrival of European colonizers in the early 20th century worked to their advantage, especially because the Maronite shared the same Christian faith as Europeans .
 In many parts of Melanesia the all-purpose lJaplap has become the standard unisex item of clothing . Asia & Oceania .
 Many parts of Melanesia do not have access to formal, European-style education . Many Melanesian children do not attend formal schooling in Europe-style schools .
 Town-dwelling Melpa have access to electricity and many people enjoy watching television . Melpa residents enjoy watching TV and having access to water .
 Dancing for nights and days only takes place during festivals and wedding or funeral ceremonies . Dancing and singing for nights is banned in the UK .
 The Miao are still confronted with the problems of poverty and isolation . Because of their mountainous environment, the Miao have many problems to overcome .
 These are typically loose pants , a long tunic , and a scarf (dupatta) for women, and a kurta and tahband, a long piece of cloth wrapped around the waist, in the manner of a sarong, for men .
 The typical meal consists of unleayened bread made from wheat, or millets called jowar and bajra . Millets are made of wheat, and millets are known as "jowar"
 The main traditional foods of the Mongols are beef, mutton, and milk products . They are supplemented by grain and vegetables . The Mongols eat beef and mutton .
 Mongols are engaged in livestock husbandry, raising mainly sheep, cows, and horses . Mongols raise mainly sheep and cows, raising mostly sheep, horses .
 The Mons are an Austro-Asiatic people, closely related to the Khmers of Cambodia . They are a closely related people to Khmers in Cambodia . The Mons were originally from the Mons .
 Moro are adherents of Islam and their religion is a defining characteristic of their ethnicity . The Moro people are adherents to Islam .
 More than 80% of Moro population is employed in forestry, agriculture, and fishing sectors or as laborers . 80% are employed in agriculture, fishing and forestry .
 Social problems among the Moro remain lack of economic opportunities and violence tied to the Christian-Muslim conflict and anti-government insurgency . The Moro have been plagued by poverty and violence .
 The nuclear family is the basic unit of social organization among the Motu . ToF AMILY LIFE: "Nuclear Family" is the most important family unit in Motu society .
 Traditional division of labor in Motu society was along sex lines . The traditional division of work was based on sex .
 SPORTS Rugby is both a spectator and participant sport all over Papua New Guinea . Rugby is a popular sport in the country . It is both spectator and spectator sport .
 The hill tribes struggle for more autonomy from the lowland Cambodians . Hill tribes continue to struggle for autonomy from lowland people .
 The head of the family leads the worship of the household gods in the dding, a room set aside for this purpose in every Munda house .
 Most Mundas are involved in permanent, wet-rice agriculture today . Although in the past they practiced shifting cultivation, most Mundas practice shifting cultivation . Today they practice permanent wet rice agriculture .
 Mention is made of them in Assamese chronicles dating from the 13th century ap onwards . Mention was made of the Assameseseses .
 The Naga practice shifting cultivation and terraced agriculture by which they grow crops for trade as well as for their own consumption .
 Access to modern forms of entertainment is restricted to those who can afford it . Access to today's entertainment is limited to those with access to modern technology .
 Most Naxi believe in a religion called “Dongba’; others believe in Lamaism or Taoism . Naxis believe in the religion called Dongba' and believe in Taoism.
 If a family member is away, a bowl and a pair of chopsticks symbolizing his/her presence . Naxi should be put on the table. If a relative is away from the family, a chopstick and a bowl should be placed there .
 Cagayan ""Moro Gulf Sulu 1. { oo Davao e General @ Santos * ie , MALAYSIA A wo’ , at ——~_ Celebes Sea anito to the body to find out what is causing the trouble. Cag
 Education levels in Nepal are low, with over a third of the adult population having no formal schooling . Nepal is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Nepalis are overwhelmingly agricultural, with 93% of the labor force engaged in this sector of the economy . The economy is dominated by agriculture .
 It remains to be seen how the new government will deal with the serious social, economic, and ecological problems facing the peoples of Nepal today . Nepal is facing serious social and economic problems .
 Nickel mining and smelting is one of the major industries in New Caledonia . Nickel mining is a major industry in the island nation .
 Land rights are an important issue for indigenous New Caledonians . Land rights have been important issues for indigenous people for generations . The land is important to the indigenous community .
 Truk Is. In December 1989, a Cabi was released by Truk . Truk is the world's most famous cartoon character .
 In 2003, New Zealand had a total labor force of 1,985,100 people . New Zealand's labor force is the largest in the world .
 Before they reach puberty, young girls are ‘married’ to the god Narayan in the hi ritual . The ritual is believed to have taken place before puberty .
 Dayak is a catch-all term to distinguish traditionally animist peoples of the interior of Borneo from the Islamized and Malayified coastal population . Originally meaning ‘inland’ or ‘upriver’, Dayak means ‘land” or
 Austronesian peoples from the Philippines, farmers and seafarers, arrived in Borneo by 3000 sc. They had arrived in the Philippines by 3000 years ago .
 Most Ngaju support themselves by practicing swidden shiftingcultivation agriculture . Growing dry rice and other plants, such as cassava, ubi rambat, taro, eggplant, pineapple, banana, sugarcane, chili, gourds, and sometimes tobacco .
 From the fruits hatched out a god and a goddess; their divine descendants populated heaven, living under the kingship of one of their number . Sirao Uwu Uwu Zih6no.
 In the boro nadu ceremony, priests destroy totemic symbols at the spot where the Niasan ancestors descended from the upperworld . A giant tiger representing a ruler was carried on a platform and cast into the Gomo River .
 Stone pylons are raised for zaw6zaw6 jumping . Simulating the walls of enemy villages .
 Niasans support themselves through dry-field, swidden agriculture, growing yams, rice, maize, and taro . The few who have completed enough education to qualify for government jobs, Niasan support themselves .
 The islands are administered by India as part of the Union Territory of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands . Today, the islands are part of India's Union Territory .
 Religious festivals such as Christmas and Easter are celebrated by the Christian Nicobarese . Muslims observe Id ulFitr and Id ul-Adha .
 Largely because of their isolation, the Nicobarese have managed to preserve much of their traditional way of life . Largely due to their isolation they have been able to keep their traditional lifestyle intact . The Nicobararese are the most isolated island in the world .
 The maintenance of traditional culture in light of the influences of the outside world is one of the overriding problems facing the Ni-Vanuatu . The Ni-vanuatu has a history of social problems .
 The original inhabitants of Oman were pantheists, worshiping various goddesses and gods . They worshiped various gods and goddesses .
 The Semai-Senoi represent the largest subethnic group among the Orang Asli, numbering 34,248 people or 29.4% of the total Orang ASli population in 1999 .
 In the past the Oraons were hunters and gatherers, living off game and edible plants found in the forests . The Oraon are now known as the world's largest tribe .
 The sale of tribal land to non-tribal peoples continues to be a problem, despite the existence of legislation designed to prevent this . Land alienation among the tribals of the state is still a problem .
 Pakistan lies in the northwest of the Indian subcontinent . Pakistan is one of the largest countries in the world .
 Jinnah demanded a separate Muslim state in India and was ultimately responsible for the existence of Pakistan . Pakistan is an Islamic state, and Pakistanis are overwhelmingly Muslim in religion .
 The two great religious festivals celebrated by the Pakistanis are Id-ul-Fitr, celebrating the end of Ramadan, and Bakr-Id, the feast of sacrifice . The Pakistanis also celebrate Eid of Eid of Ramadan .
 Sweetened tea, buttermilk, or Jassi, a drink made from yogurt, rounds out the meal . Jassi is a yogurt-based drink .
 The singing of gawwalis, devotional songs, is extremely popular . Some qawwali singers enjoy the fame reserved for pop stars in the West .
 Hebrews settled in Palestine in 1900 Bc and had formed the kingdom of Israel, ruled by King David, by 1000 sc. Bc . The Hebrews were the first to settle in Palestine and formed a kingdom in Israel by 2000 Bc.
 Ramla Rehovot: Ashdod, Israel, Jordan, Egypt, Gaza Strip . Al Khalil’s Al-Shukairy. Al-Khan’a: “The leadership of the leadership of Ahmad Shukairy .”
 Most Palestinians are Muslim, the majority belonging to the Sunni sect . The majority of Palestinians are members of the Muslim sect . Most Palestinians live in a stateless state of Israel .
 The most traditional Palestinian meals are maqluba, musakhan, and mansaf . Maqluba is a traditional Palestinian meal .
 Several types of poetical songs are popular among the Pamiris, including the Jalaik and duduvik . The Pamiris are also known for their poetry .
 Pamiri work is dominated by collectivized agricultural chores . There are few tasks that are solely the domain of either men or women . Bwoork Pamiri is one of the world's oldest tribes .
 Bombay, Cal anh Bombay, ac ¢ Pune e \ \ dey dey. G] Dhaka, Dhaka .
 In many aspects, the ancient religion of Iran resembled that of the early Vedas of northern India . Iran's ancient religion resembles the Vedas in many aspects .
 Priests wear white robes, white turbans, and a mask while performing rituals . Men generally wear white for religious purposes . Priests and men wear white in religious ceremonies .
 Because the Pashtun do not all live within one country, they have differing social conditions . They generally live in societies with tight religious restrictions . The Pashtans have different social conditions, although they live in countries with tight social restrictions .
 The nomadic Penan earn their living primarily by hunting and gathering . Bwork is the Penan tribe of nomadic nomadic people .
 Despite Punjab’s overall prosperity, problems exist, including alcoholism in rural areas . Unemployment in the cities and alcoholism in the rural areas are common problems .
 The state was called Rajputdna in colonial British days, while its present name Rajasthan (“Land of Kings”) reflects the fact that the former states in the region were ruled by Rajas who, once they accepted British paramountcy in the 19th century
 Muslim women may wear the burga, a long robe that covers them from head to toe . The burga is a long-covering garment worn by Muslim women in Muslim dress .
 In urban areas, Rajasthanis who work in offices or for the government commonly wear Western style clothing . In rural areas, they wear Western clothing .
 Social problems in Rajasthan have their roots in poverty and the large proportion of tribal peoples in the state . The state is home to a large number of tribal people .
 As with all higher-caste Hindus, one of the most important rites of passage for the Rajput male is the investiture with the janeiu or sacred thread . Rajput men investiture is a ritual of initiation for Rajput women .
 The entire population of the region may join the funeral procession to the cremation grounds . In the case of an important landowner or thakur, the entire population may join .
 The upper body is covered by a cotton tunic or a short jacket that fastens on the right side . Rajasthanis call an angarhkd .
 Rajputs are hereditary landowners and soldiers and continue to follow these traditional occupations . Rajputi Rajputis are hereditary soldiers and landowners .
 Historically Rajputs have taken great pleasure in the elaborate rituals and ceremonies associated with their religion and their community . Rajputi are Rajputis who live in Rajasana, a Hindu state of India .
 The years since WWII have transformed Toraja society . World War II has transformed the country's society . The years have transformed the Toraja .
 Christianity has grown rapidly among the Toraja, claiming 64% as Protestants and 12% as Catholics . Since Indonesian independence, 64% of Toraja have been Protestants .
 In their homeland, the great majority of Toraja farm for a living . The majority of the Toraja people live in their homeland .
 Every village has a cricket pitch laid through the middle of the village green . Cricket is an important game for Samoans and every village has an important pitch .
 Migration out of the area is a major problem for both Samoa and American Samoa . Social issues are a major concern for the Samoan people .
 Santals are thought to have migrated to the Indian subcontinent long before the Aryans entered the country around 1500 sc. sc. The Santals were thought to be the first to arrive in the region around 1500s .
 Local residents objected to a Juarkhand High Court verdict that said that the state could conduct a country-wide search for qualified teachers . Local residents instituted a bandh that led to police firings and violence and even deaths .
 Most Sasak adhere to Islam, introduced from Java (according to legend), by a Javanese holy man, either Sunan Giri or Pangeran Sangopati, in the late 15th century .
 Villages are laid out in a rough grid with a berugag (meeting hall), family houses, rice barns, a mosque or a few prayer houses, a cemetery, and sometimes a playing field . Villages have a meeting hall, a rice barn, a few rice
 The main meals are lunch between 12:00 and 2:00 pm and dinner from 7:00 to 8:00pm . The main meal is served between lunch and dinner .
 Wet-rice is the primary crop, now grown in rotation with soybeans . The rice is now grown alongside soybeans in a rotation .
 The Sasak are famous for their ikat textiles, basketry, and pottery . They are also known for their pottery, textiles and basketry . Sasak is famous for its pottery and clothing .
 Shaykhs and their tribes give allegiance to the royal family as a matter of loyalty . The shaykhs are loyal to the Al Saud family, the king of Saudi Arabia .
 Bus services link cities and provide public transport within cities . Bus services provide transport services in cities and towns .
 elderly, orphans, or widows without incomes; home health care; rehabilitation of juvenile delinquents; nursing homes for the elderly; and orphanages for children . There are also provisions for social security pensions; . elderly, . orphans, . widows or widoms without incomes . elderly
 Older men often have to make do with cotton clothing that is ill-suited to the cold climate of Sherpa country . Older men, however, often make do for cotton clothing .
 Traditional Sherpa economic activities are centered on agriculture and trade with Tibet . Traditional Sherpas economic activities were centered on farming and trade . The Sherpa are believed to be the most successful Sherpas in the world .
 A major problem that the Sikh community faced in the recent past was that of Sikh separatism . The Sikh community has faced similar problems in the past, including the threat of terrorism .
 It was along this river that the Harappan civilization developed during the 3rd millennium sc. It was . Along this river, the Harappaan . civilization developed along the river . It is believed that this river was the source of the Harapan .
 People from all over the country attend his Urs, which is an occasion for the gathering of musicians, gawwéali-singers, and dancers .
 The meld held to observe this Urs is, in effect, a festival of Sindhi culture, folk music, and dance . Sindhi is a part of the world's largest Sindhi community .
 The Urs of Shah Abdul Latif, a mystic poet born in ap 1689, and Sachal Sarmast, an 18th-century poet, are also major festivals celebrated .
 The head is covered with a thin muslin scarf that is larger than the modern dupatta . Modern dupatta is made of muslin and a large muslin head scarf .
 Younger women wear the salwarkurta, or the siithan, a pyjama-type outfit, along with slippers and the scarf . Younger women are more likely to wear the sithan .
 Sindhis prepare Mughal-style dishes such as tandoori lamb or chicken, birydni (lamb or chicken cooked with rice), and rice pilaf . Sindhis also prepare tanduri lamb, chicken and tandori lamb .
 Important sites such as Mohenjo-Daro, Amri, and Kot Diji have left a record of the achievements of the ancient Harappan civilization in the areas of city-planning and building .
 Sindhis enjoy watching television or videos, seeing movies, playing cards, and socializing at cocktail parties . Sindhis also enjoy watching TV or videos and seeing movies .
 The PPP, in association with Nawaz Sharif’s Muslim League, formed the Pakistani government . Yousaf Raza Gilani, a loyalist of slain leader Benazir Bhutto, was the new prime minister . However, the PPP and the Muslim League
 About 80% of the Sinhalese people are rural and engaged primarily in subsistence agriculture . About 80 per cent of the people in Sri Lanka are rural .
 Sri Lanka suffered its worst natural disaster in centuries when it was hit by the December 2004 tsunami . The tsunami originated in South East Asia and originated in Sri Lanka .
 There is a great deal of diversity in South Korean religious life . South Korea is home to a great number of religious traditions .
 Most South Korean families face the common economic concerns of low wages, long working hours, and high rates of inflation . South Korea's economic woes include low wages and long hours of working hours .
 The linguistic patterns of Sri Lankans broadly mirror the ethnic composition of the island . Sea 3: Sri Lanka's linguistic patterns mirror that of Sri Lanka .
 Sri Lankans have access to radio and television, although television programming is scheduled only in the evening hours . Sri Lanka has access to television and radio .
 Since the Dutch takeover in 1905, there has been a significant expansion of wet-rice cultivation . Since then, wet rice cultivation has increased dramatically .
 West Java has the usual problems associated with a society in which there exists a large gap between the rich and the poor . West Java is one of Indonesia's most populous countries .
 Syrian Christians trace their origins to the lst century ap, when St. St. Peter the Apostle came to Syria . Syrian Christians are Syrian Christians .
 Religious dances and songs are part of the Syrian Christians’ cultural heritage .
 Syrians live in the Syrian Arab Republic, more commonly known as Syria, a land that has been inhabited for more than 7,000 years . The land is home to approximately 1. million refugees from Iraq and 500,000 from the Palestinian Territories .
 General e@ Santos a b yor MALAYSIA v war a ee ~—_ Celebes Sea termediary, to negotiate a marriage marriage . General Santos is a former President of the Philippines .
 Surugudin councils headed by ginu’u determine fines under a complex system of customary law and kinship obligations . The law is based on customary law, kinship obligation and social norms .
 Kinship is reckoned on both the mother's and father's sides . The incest taboo extends to third cousins on both sides of the family .
 The conversion of the Tahitians to Protestantism occurred early in the history of European-Tahitian contact . The conversion took place in 17th century .
 The leisure-time pursuits of Tahitians include movies, music, dancing, and television . Tahitian's leisure time pursuits include movies and music, dance, and TV .
 Traditional handicrafts, such as weaving, quilting, and carving, are learned and passed on from one generation to the next by “mamas . ‘mamas’ are considered the guardians of such sacred traditions .
 The topic of independence has been part of many political debates since the 1970s . The topic has been a major topic of debate for decades .
 Students may study until late at night or go to bed early and get up to study at 3:00 am. Students may have to study until 3:30 am.
 Indigenous people are at the bottom of Taiwan’s socioeconomic ladder . BbWORK Indigenous people at bottom of the socioeconomic ladder. Bbwork.
 Loss of their land, destruction of their cultural systems and dislocation arising from rapid, enforced social change at the hands of an invader culture—the Chinese—are the basic experiences of the Indigenous People of Taiwan .
 The national sport of the Tajiks, gushtingiri, has a colorful tradition . Gushtingir is a traditional sport played by the nation's national team .
 Calcutta, ; NY ( A ia \ Bangalore \ e \ \ Kokkilai eopaulany SRI ~~ LANKA considered a crime . considered a . crime .
 Tribal women, the AdiDravida, wear a considerably smaller garment that reaches just below the knees . Tribal women often leave the upper body bare . Tribal tribal women wear a much smaller garment .
 Although cities such as Madras and Coimbatore are manufacturing centers, Tamils work predominantly in agriculture . The Tamils are mostly farmers .
 Every year they perform solemn rituals during the flying WorldMARK ENCYCLOPIA of Cultures and DAILY LIFE fish season . They observe many taboos when catching and eating flying fish .
 Tao cosmos has eight levels supported by five massive tree trunks on the lowest plane . The Tao cosmos is supported by eight massive trees on each of its eight levels .
 Family is the most important social unit and the basic economic unit in Tao society . The family is the main social unit of Tao society and is most important in the country .
 Kinship extends to both the father's side and the mother’s side . It focuses on ties back three generations, i.e., up to and including second cousins .
 The province’s largest ethnic group, the immigrant Hiligaynon/Ilongo from the Western Visayas, constituted 52.4% of the population . The province is home to the largest immigrant group in the country .
 Masbate 2, Calamian Group Samar | Tacloban | Pana e lloilo, @bacolod (Leyte Palawan Cebu i *Cebu_| Negros Bohol: ov se gor r Island Bay,But
 The T’boli believe in a seven-level upper world inhabited by many gods, foremost of whom are the couple, Kadaw La Sambad and Bulan La Magoaw .
 At the other end of the house is the dél, the vestibule floored not with bamboo but with heavy wooden planks . The dél is floored instead of bamboo, the design is made from heavy wood planks and bamboo .
 Shorts are not generally seen in public, except on young children and as part of schoolboy uniforms . Shorts not generally worn in public except for young children .
 49% of the Thai labor force works in the agricultural sector, but this is changing rapidly . Approximately 49% work in agricultural sector .
 Thailand is a rapidly developing nation, with continuously high economic growth . Thailand's rapid economic growth has led to social problems in recent years .
 The herdsmen also raise a hybrid ox, which is the best draught animal of the plateau as well as a source of milk . The hybrid ox is a hybrid of sheep and goat .
 Timorese, through the wars in the 20th century, have managed to retain much of their cultural heritage . M4CULTURAL HERITAGE: Timoresse are still proud of their culture .
 The vast majority of the Timorese are involved in agriculture, living in village societies . 8.2% of the land is arable and over half of this is under permanent cultivation .
 Each of these has a number of exogamous clans that are patrilineal . descent is traced through the male line . The clans are patriarchal, with descent traced through males .
 Tasman Sea eee ‘Wellington South |. ~~ a y ~~ ¢ Dunedin Stewart |.2°~ ranking person. New Zealand's highest ranking place in the world is Dunedin .
 In precontact Tongan society this wraparound cloth, called ngatu, was the same for men and women . It measured around 8 ft in length and 6 ft in width . In pre-contact Tongans, it measured around eight ft .
 Turkmen women also sew a distinct type of embroidery called keshde, which adorns the collars and fringes of their clothing . The Turkmen embroidered their clothing with a distinct kind of embroidered thread . Turkmen also embroidered clothing with an embroidered embro
 Turks Atatiirk established a democratic republic ruled by codes of law shortly after World War I, ending sovereignty of Islamic law in the country . Although the Turks as a people are Muslims, their country has been a secular state since shortly after WWI .
 The services sector accounts for 41.2% of jobs in the Turkish economy . A growing tourist industry is a key part of the economy's growth .
 In addition to singing and dancing, movies and television are the most popular entertainment of the Uighurs .
 People cook young, vitamin-rich wheat plants in huge cauldrons overnight until the swmalak is done in the morning . Swmalak was made from a young crop of wheat .
 Sri Lankan aboriginals, also known as Veddas, chat in a mud hut at the village Dambana in central Sri Lanka . Some of them claim that if they stayed in the vicinity of the cave, the spirit of the deceased would be displeased, and they
 The Veddas were originally hunters and gatherers, but many subsequently took up shifting agriculture or even permanent cultivation . Many subsequently became farmers .
 The Vietnamese practice a number of different religions, sometimes several at the same time . Vietnamese practice several religions at different times .
 Work varies enormously in Vietnam, but a basic division can be seen in the city versus that done in the countryside . The work done in Vietnam's capital, the city, can be compared to the countryside's .
 Hainan roof made of the bark of the China fir tree . C44 NA __® Guangzhou®> Nanning a 7 ~ MACAU Haikou Tonkin roof made from bark .
 Asia & Oceania: When both of them fall deeply in love, they ask their parents to confirm their will to get married . The film is based on the story of a young couple who fell deeply into love . It is set to be released on Blu-Ray and Blu-
 There are now primary schools in large villages and middle schools in small towns . Primary schools now open in villages and small towns across the world .
 Yao economy is based principally on agriculture, mainly on rice . Yao economy based mainly on agriculture . World's largest city is one of the world's largest cities .
 Yao inhabit a rugged mountainous environment, which does not allow significant increases of their traditional crop yields . The Yao live in rugged mountainous areas, which do not have significant increases in their traditional crops yields .
 There are continued reports of discrimination, sexual harassment, wage discrepancies, and other gender related problems . However, there are still reports of harassment, and wage discrepancies .
 The arabica coftee beans are still considered among the best in the world . The trade has since suffered from international competition .
 The qadhis are descendants of pre-Islamic Yemeni rulers who are traditionally scholars and judges . The descendants of the Qadhis were traditionally scholars, judges .
 The nuclear family, called ‘ayla in Arabic, is the basic social unit of Yemeni society . It is called 'ayla' in Arabic .
 Women’s afternoon gatherings are known as fafritas . Here, marriages are arranged, goods sold, and information and experiences shared .
 Use of the narcotic qat is a significant problem in Yemen, although most Yemenis would disagree . The use of qat in Yemen is a major problem in the country .
 Yemen is fairly arid and a significant portion of the country’s supply of water is being used in inefficient irrigation of gat plantations . Yemen is a relatively arid country and its water supply is largely inefficient .
 The ancestors of the Yi were called the Qiang, one of the more ancient national minorities in China . They were one of China's oldest national minorities . They are called the Yi .
 When they leave home, men and women all wear black wool cloaks, which are decorated by a long fringe at the bottom .
 Zhuang have traditionally engaged in agriculture and in forestry . Zhuang are traditional Chinese people engaged in farming and forestry .
 Iron replaced bronze as the metal of choice in southeastern Europe around 1000 sc. Around 1000 sc, iron replaced bronze . Iron was used to replace bronze in the region .
 Sparta used the phalanx to defeat Athens in the Peloponnesian War of the late fifth century Bc. The city-state that made most effective use of it was Sparta, which defeated Athens . Sparta was one of the most successful city-states to
 The Adjarians are seldom mentioned outside of their native land . They are a mixed Sunni Muslim and Orthodox Christian people .
 Adjarians once again Christian. Borzhomi , Khashur (ARMENIA) will be redressed by making Adjarian once again Christians . Borzhomomomar .
 Now one of the largest cities in Albania, Shkodra is located in the northern part of the country . It was also the capital of IIlyria, which was also known as IIlyrian .
 Albania, then known as the Thema of Illyricum, became a province of the eastern section of the empire in AD 325 . When the capital of the Roman Empire was transferred from Rome to Byzantium, Albania was a province .
 The General of the Dead Army is a novel about how an Italian general, accompanied by a Catholic priest, collected the remains of Italian soldiers who had fallen in World War II . The novel is published by Kadare, a son of a former Italian general .
 Fascinating local traditions and superstitions include a custom called Andresle practiced in Ilzach . The custom is said to be practiced in the region .
 Altay is a term used to refer to a number of Turkic ethnic groups in the Russian Federation inhabiting the Altay district located in South Siberia . The Altai Republic in Russia (the Altay Mountains of South Siberia) is home to 68,000 people .
 The researchers distilled a mildly alcoholic drink of fermented mare’s milk called chegéin . They also distilled a drink of mare's milk known as chegésin .
 Altay life consisted of tending and milking the herds, making felt, and doing agricultural work such as planting and harvesting barley and mowing and gathering hay . Altay lived in Altay for centuries .
 In the 5th century ap, it was invaded by the Vandals and then by the Visigoths . In the 6th century, the city was conquered by the Romans . It was invaded in the 4th century by the Vikings .
 Among the best known are the solea, seguiriya, peteneras, fandango, tango, and tanguillo . The solea is one of the most popular Spanish dances .
 Other standouts are the manzanilla of Sanlicar, the white wines of Cadiz, and the Moriles, Montilla, and Malaga wines, among others .
 The autonomous principality of Andorra is a tiny, mountainous nation in Western Europe . The Andorrans are known for their culture and culture .
 Farga /@ de Moles | e Arcabell operation. Europe xX \ ANDORRANS 4 6 8 10 Miles 6 8 Kilometers . Europe x.X \ Andorans 4. 8 Miles 6. 8 Kilometres .
 Between the 1st and 5th centuries ap, Armenian kingdoms fell alternately under the political and cultural influence of the Roman and Iranian empires, between which they were situated .
 In the lst century Bc, under the rule of Tigran the Great, Armenian influence extended from the Caucasus mountain range to Cilicia, as far east as the Caspian Sea and as far south as Egypt .
 Some of the more famous epics include Ural Batir, an ancient epic about the formation of the Bashkir people . Idheiigey mendn Moradhim, which describes historical events in the Golden Horde in the 15th century .
 In édhldii, the singer is able to produce two notes at once in his or her throat . The singer produces two notes in the throat .
 Vizcaya, Guiptizcoa, and Alava, which make up three of the four Basque provinces, were unified in 1980 as the Basque Autonomous Community . Its inhabitants were granted limited autonomy, recognition of their language and culture, and control over their schools and
 Belgium is home to a population of about 10. million . The country has endured centuries of foreign invasion and occupation by many .
 Secondary education begins with four years at a middle school called a collége, followed by three years spent at a general lycée for those planning to go on to college or at a vocational lycee .
 Bulgaria has undergone a difficult period of political and economic change since the collapse of communism in 1989 . Like the republics of the former nation of Yugoslavia, the country has undergone political, economic change in recent years .
 Bulgarian Muslim bride looks at her make-up during her two-day wedding ceremony in the village of Ribnovo, Bulgaria . A large majority of Bulgarians are Muslim .
 “MONGOLIA their own spirits or gods that had to be respected. Ulan Bator” ~~ “Their own spirits were their own gods . They had to respect them,” says Bator .
 “Gibraltar of honor, devout Catholicism, pragmatism, devotion to family, and integrity.” Oporto Barcel Madrid ad SPAIN PORTUGAL . Lisbon Balearic a Islands — sevilla Malaga .
 Women’s traditional festive costumes include much elaborate lacework in both black and white . Balearic Islands e sevilla 2 Malaga .
 A regular sardana session, or audacié, consists of half a dozen dances, each lasting about 10 minutes . A regular audacé session consists of about 10 dances .
 Married women are considered to belong to the culture of their husbands . This is particularly true for women, as married women are seen as part of the culture .
 Pollution has led to high rates of tuberculosis and other diseases among the modern Chukchi . Pollution caused by Soviet-era mining and industry, poverty, poor diet and medical care have led to disease rates .
 Khanty | 3 pS / \yManisysk ¢ oe hes oe >Moscow . i SIBIRSKOYE \ | | Aetna Te \ ‘Any ay % a ( PLOSKOGRYE Jn. Jn.:
 In the culture of the Upper Chuvash, Mari elements are recognizable in the culture . The Lower Chuvas preserved the ethnic features of the Bulgar Chuvashes . The Mari elements of the culture are still recognizable in Mari elements .
 Traditional food was very simple—corn meal, sheep’s cheese, ground walnuts, fresh fruit, and dried or smoked meat . The traditional food was simple: corn meal and sheep's cheese .
 The emerging idea of Yugoslav unity outside the Habsburg empire was gaining momentum . Some hoped to unite the South Slavs in one state and defend their territory from stronger, non-Slayic foreign powers .
 By 1939, the government of the Yugoslav prince and the new Croat leader, Vladko Maéek, agreed on a formula for Croatia’s autonomy within Yugoslavia . The new Croatian leader was the leader of the Croatian Republic of Yugoslavia .
 Most Croats relax and socialize in the cafes that line the main streets of large cities and small towns alike . Croats, especially young people, relax with their local cafes in large cities .
 The most significant social problems in Croatia today are still related to the 1991 warfare between the Croats and the Serbs, who were joined by an insurgent Serbian minority in Croatia . Croatia is still struggling to cope with the conflict between the two sides .
 Hamlet is performed every year in the courtyard of Kronborg Castle, located in Helsingor, where the Hamlet of legend is said to have lived . Hamlet was said to live in the castle's courtyard .
 The Dolgans are one of approximately thirty “Numerically Small Peoples of the North” in Russia . The Dolgan language is a native form of shamanism . The language is spoken in Russian .
 The area that is now called England was first united by the Romans in the Ist century ap. ap. The Romans first united the area that was first called England . The area was united by Romans in Ist Century ap.
 Modern English has evolved from Old English and Middle English . Middle English was in use from AD 1100 until the late 1400s . Modern English is derived from the Germanic tongue of Anglo-Saxon .
 Sis standing the speech of the English because the people of their respective countries refer to many of the same things using different terms . The people of each country use different terms.
 Sweden's Gotland Vitsyebsk® Bornholm Ct ~* Kaliningrad ® Minsk . Poland's Poznan stopped the Red Army .
 Bator aoe 2 MONGOLIA MAJOR HOLIDAYS Evenki festivals are essentially shamanist rituals performed to ensure success in hunting by honoring the spirits of the animals upon which the Evenki depend for survival .
 Bering Strait Chukchi Sea ‘Anadyrskiy Zaliv Bering East ' Anadyfie Sea Siberian > Sea ARCTIC OCEAN Wrangel |. & 40% y oun vk eo New Siberian Is. equ 1VAYOY
 She conspires to feed her brother to Chélere, but his animal friends come to the rescue and slay and cremate the monster . The monster is killed and creamed by the animals .
 The Even tety is very similar in form to the khegilme and sun of the Evenki . The sides and hems of Even robes are trimmed with fur . The Evenki are very similar to the Evenkoyan .
 In one traditional Even dance, the participants form a circle facing each other, link arms, and begin to move slowly from left to right . The hed’e is a traditional version of the Even dance .
 Traditional pre-war homes were wooden and those in the country often constructed by the owner with the help of neighbors, an example of the custom of communal assistance called talkoot . Pre-war houses were wooden, with wooden walls and wooden floors .
 The typical buffet of fish, meat, cheeses, and fresh vegetables eaten with bread and butter is called smorrebrod in Denmark and smorgasbord in Sweden . In its Finnish incarnation, voileipdépoytd is known as voilipd
 Popular dishes from Finland’s neighbor, Russia, include borscht, beet soup with sour cream, and blini, a type of pancake .
 Finns excel at individual rather than team sports, particularly at activities that require stamina . Finns are known for their stamina and their ability to withstand physical exertions .
 Flemish region was able to obtain generous international aid in the years following World War II . Its large labor force and relatively low wages drew increasing foreign investment in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Frisians traded hides to the Romans during the Ist century ap but successfully fended them off when they demanded tribute payments . The Romans were forced to retreat from the region by Ap 70 .
 They use them as functional footwear and not just for tourists or tradition . They are not just tourists, but they are also functional footwear .
 Like in the rest of the Celtic world, bagpipes accompany traditional dances like the mufeira . Bagpipes have been played in the past by traditional musicians .
 Popular snacks served at tapas bars in Galicia include grilled sardines, roasted small green peppers and fetilla cheese . The region is famous for its cheese, which is made of the region's fetilla .
 Like people in other parts of Spain, Galicians enjoy socializing at the region’s many tapas bars . Galician people can buy a light meal and a drink at the bars where they can eat .
 Abkhazians (an indigenous Caucasian group related to the Adyghe and Cherkess nations of North Caucasia) and the South Ossetians (who speak an Iranian-based language) wish to secede from Georgia . Both the Abkhazi and South Oss
 Germany is one of the continent's largest and most populous nations . Germany is an independent republic in north central Europe . Over 82 million live in Germany .
 Greek cooking exemplifies the Mediterranean cuisine, where olive oil predominates . The Mediterranean cuisine is known for its olive oil .
 For the most part of Hungary's traditional folklore of Hungary is dying out . For most of Hungary, the folklore of the country is dying .
 Hungarian folk music is known for its pentatonic scale, adapted by such 20th-century composers as Béla Barték and Zoltan Kodaly . The csardas is a popular folk dance, a popular dance .
 The major population centers are the capital city of Reykjavik, Képavogur, Hafnarfjérdur, and Akureyri . The population is estimated at 1,500 .
 Iceland's contributions to modern literature include late 19th-century children’s works by the priest Jon Sveinsson and Eyvind of the Hills .
 The traditional rural home was narrow and rectangular, and built from a combination of stones and mortar (made from mud, lime, or mud, or whatever material was locally available) often with a thatched roof .
 Their Turkic-speaking neighboring peoples and tribes called them qalmaq, or galmuq, from which the Russian spelling Kalmyk has been derived . The Russian spelling of Kalmyks has also been derived from the name of Kalmaq .
 Anomaly (6 ~ uid yy e Yekaterinburg ® -@Rostoy ng Samara ° oe e eA os RAVNINA Pg PU e/ Chelyabinsk ~ ) Black ° > (iO wy ] Sea —
 The Dérbdéd dialect is spoken by the Dorbéd of Astrakhan and Stavropol Provinces . It varies in some rather insignificant ways from the Torgtid and Buzawa dialects .
 To die or pass away is likx Onggrx, but taal or burxn bolx is for lamas and high secular clergy . To die, or to pass away, is to die or die in a manner of manner .
 The first sign of the revival of Buddhism in Kalmykia can be dated to January 1989 . The first kKhurul began to function in Elista .
 Some common Koriak male names are Yoltygyingyn, Akket, Talvavtyn, Otap, and Pepe . Female names include Leqgi, Galgangav, Gylvangavyt, and Kokok .
 Until the Soviet government began to establish schools in Koriakia in the 1920s and 1930s, virtually all Koriak were illiterate . Only a few were literate in Russian, learned from Russian settlers or Russian Orthodox missionaries .
 Although the drum used in shamanist rituals is considered sacred, it is often beaten for entertainment . The drum is used for entertainment in shamanistic rituals .
 Kosovo’s prime minister in 2008, Hashim Thaci, was accused of having once headed up a criminal network involved in a wide range of illicit activities . In 2008, Thaci was prime minister .
 Latvia joined the United Nations in 1991 and the World Trade Organization in 1999 . Latvia joined the U.N. in 1991 . Latvia is one of the largest economies in the world . Latvia has the largest GDP in the country .
 Latvian costume consists of a large, colorful, pleated skirt worn with a white blouse and a short, round hat . During folk dances and traditional ceremonies, many women wear the traditional costume . Latvians are known for their colorful, colorful costumes .
 Hafaldb, another favorite, is a dish made with a cornand wheatflour dough formed into small loaves that are boiled, left out to dry, sliced, and then fried .
 Until the 1980s, Soviet policy changed to allow peoples within the Soviet Union to speak out against the government without fear of being punished .
 During World War I, Lithuanian towns and villages were utterly destroyed . Lithuanian villages were destroyed during the war . Many of Lithuania's towns were destroyed .
 Government concession to minority’s demands for right to establish their own schools and a university . Relations seem to have improved somewhat.
 Malta was one of the few countries not to require visas of Jews fleeing Nazi persecution in WWII . Today’s small Jewish community dates back to the French and British rule of Malta .
 CG RAVNINA . c ~ / Sche Vabinsk \ _ Black . (DD ws sOrmsk / Sea . ; J ne Kara Sea Baltic Sea . . Poluostrov C Yamal Gydanskiy (Poluostrow, — e Rest
 Elbrut 18,51 No Re Qaraghandy® 7 KAZAKSTAN UZBEKISTAN . Keremet, Akpatyr, and Kugu Jeng.
 The 19th century produced many outstanding Romanian authors, such as the poet Mihai Eminescu; the storyteller Ion Creanga; the linguist, writer, and historian Bogdan Petriceicu Hasdeu . Titu Maiorescu was the literary critic Tit
 Jacques-Frangois-Léonor de Matignon was heir of one of the most illustrious families of Normandy . Honoré I Honoré ruled Monaco until 1795, but spent more time in his Paris residence and in Normandy than in the principality .
 Monaco-Ville, the oldest section, is the site of the prince’s palace, which is located on a promontory called le Rocher . The gardens, Saint Nicholas Cathedral, and the Oceanographic museum, are also the site .
 Monaco's cuisine is essentially Mediterranean in nature, with plenty of olive oil, fresh tomatoes, onions, garlic, black olives, and anchovies . Monaco’s cuisine, like that of the neighboring cities on the French Riviera, is basically Mediterranean .
 The Oceanographic Museum and Aquarium is located at the water’s edge and towering over a cliff . It was inaugurated in 1910 by Prince Albert I, grandfather of Prince Rainier III, and internationally recognized scientist and oceanographer .
 In 1356 Zeta became an independent entity under one of these clans or great families, the Bal8i¢ family . The Bal8¢ family was one of the great families of Zeta . Zeta is now a member of the Bal family .
 When people meet for the first time, each introduces himself or herself . As they shake hands in pairs, each repeats his or her own name .
 Gekostoy ‘isa ‘~-Ufa dS” / RAVNINA eS eh a o/ Chelyabinsk \ Black Sy ~ { Sea ~ {Sea | \ } Sa —— F Mt. Mt. Gekstoy �
 Kurosawa’s film was based on the memoir by early 20th century Russian explorer Vladimir Arser’ev . Dersu the Trapper describes his Nanai guide who accompanied Arsen'ev during his explorations of the Maritime Province of Japan .
 A ‘ ’ ies S ansatd ae we AN / Go RAVNINA Be *Chelyabinsk “ <y ( Nennyay4 Fann, ov. Fann) A ’ ‘ies ‘ ies “ �
 London Berling,  Hannover, Hannover and Leipzig are located in Germany . Berlin is located in the heart of the city of Frankfurt .
 Since World War II, there has been an increase in the incidence of unmarried people living together . The divorce rate has also risen as well as the divorce rate .
 ‘Nivkhs were forced out of their widely scattered settlements and shipped to a handful of larger villages . ‘Vjadivosto ° JAPAN ie a Uldn Bato™’
 The Kingdom of Norway is part of Scandinavia in northern Europe, together with its neighbors Denmark and Sweden . Norway is one of the largest countries in the world .
 Norwegians enjoy watching televised competitive skiing and speed skating events . Norweigians also enjoy watching TV shows on skiers and skiers .
 In the spring two clans, the Aleegeetee and the Boreetee, stage a mock battle . In the summer, the two clans stage mock battle in the spring . The Aleegetee clan is said to be the largest in the world .
 Dagestan is located in the Caucasus Mountain region between Russia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia . The name Dagstan refers only to the territory of Dagestans . The population is 2,600,000 .
 Marshal Jozef Pitsudski seized power in 1926 and introduced authoritarian rule in 1926 . Poland was able to sustain a parliamentary democracy for only a few years . Marshal Pitsubski is a figure of heroic proportions in modern Polish history .
 The Poles are a deeply religious people . Cluj-Napoca is a city of religious significance in Romania .
 The Polish church had a rather distant relationship with Rome until 1978 . Cardinal Karol Wojtyla was chosen to become Pope John Paul HJ, the first Polish person to be so honored .
 Typical desserts include stewed fruit, fruit dumplings, pancakes with fruit or cheese, and jam donuts called paczki .
 Henryk Sienkiewicz for Quo Vadis, a story about the times of Roman emperor Nero . Wladyslaw Reymont for Chiopi, an epic novel of Poland . Czestaw Mitosz and Wislawa Szymborska
 At some point during their migration from India, scholars believe, their original name, Dom, or Domba in the plural, was altered phonetically to Rom and Roma . The group gradually disintegrated until they intermingled and became one people culturally .
 After the execution of Ceaus,escu and the ousting of many Communist officeholders, a hastily garnered government made up mostly of former Communists and headed by Ion Iliescu took over the reins . Romania is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Before World War I, Romania had a large Jewish population, most of whom have since emigrated to Israel, the U.S. and Western Europe .
 There is a growing industrial and commercial base, which employs one-third of the labor force . Among the natural resources are oil, gas, and coal, much of which has dwindled since World War I .
 It is closest in structure to the Latin spoken in the first centuries aD by the average Roman citizen on the street .
 Mamailiga is one of the staples of the Romanian diet and, in a sense, is the national dish . The dish is a staple of the country's diet .
 The invartita and hategana are the most popular dances in Transylvania . The most popular dance dances in the region are the invartitita and Hategana .
 The Russians are a people of mixed origins . Russian Orthodox, Roman Catholicism, other Christian, Islam, Buddhism, Judaism, other 1.0 .
 After World War II, the Soviet Union quickly rebuilt its military and became a leading ideological and military rival of the United States . The Soviet Union is now a major ideological rival to the U.S.
 Chukchi 4. j J en 2 Sea , (} a heey ARCTIC OCEAN i “\ Zaliv ( East / Anadyr@ Siberian . Sea ] y Bering Sea or the Bering . Sea . United States who claim Russian ancestry
 Under a Sakha constitution passed in 1991, an elected Sakha parliament, called IJ Tumen (“meeting for solidarity”) has become influential . Sakha has an elected parliament and an elected president . An elected parliament has also become influential in Sakha politics .
 AW yy Barents Sea Kirkene ' ' ' ~ Murmansk e Arkhangel'sk * Lulea Oulu RUSSIA FINLAND Lake Onega » Tampere Lake Ladoga Helsinki re, St. St. Helsinki re .
 In one traditional secular courtship ritual, a man circled the Javvo of his lover with his reindeer and sledge . If the woman regarded his suit favorably, she came out and unharnessed the re-edeer . In another traditional ritual, the woman unhar
 Yugoslavia experienced great turbulence during World War I . Interethnic violence raged throughout duration of the war . Some factions fought against Nazi occupation and division of Yugoslavia .
 NATO peacekeepers continued to keep peace between the ethnic Albanian majority and the Serb minority within Kosovo as of 2008 . Kosovo Force was a NATO force that kept peace between ethnic Albanians and Serbs .
 Europe SERBS 75 Miles Kosovska 7 Mitrovica tu KOSOVO a) BULGARIA . Pristina and passes down from generation to generation .
 The push for religious instruction in public schools began after the fall of Milosevic in 2000 . The push to have religious instruction began immediately after the rise of the former Yugoslavia .
 Medieval Serbia was under the Byzantine sphere of influence . When it emerged as a strong, independent kingdom under the Nemanji¢ dynasty, the Serbian Orthodox Church was its central institution .
 The Krivan mountain peak, a Slovak national symbol, is located in the High Tatras . It is the highest mountain peak in the country and is a national symbol .
 Spanish folkloric tradition is very rich and one finds elements with origins as diverse as Celtic, Roman, Germanic, Jewish and Moorish . Folkloric traditions are very rich in Spanish folklore, with origins in Celtic and Roman .
 Favorite beverages include milk, ldttél (a type of beer with almost no alcohol), and strong coffee .
 Sweden has a number of universities, including those in Stockholm, Linképing, Goteborg, Uppsala, Lund, Umea, Vaxjé, Karlstad, Lulea, and Orebro . Sweden is home to the largest university in Sweden .
 Outstanding Swedish athletes include alpine skier Ingemar Stenmark, tennis great Bjérn Borg, and golfer Annika Sérenstam .
 Characteristic forms include Fahreimebodeli, wooden pails with decorated bases, Sennenstreifen and Wéchterbild . Large-scale paintings of cow herders traditionally found on window shutters .
 Of all the Turkic ethnic groups living within the former Soviet Union, the Tatars historically lived farther west than any other Turkic nationality . The Tatars live in Russia, Russia and Ukraine .
 Tuvan scholars feel that the present writing system is still inadequate for representing the sounds of spoken Tuvan and is in need of reform . Qaraghandy , KAZAKSTAN J * _ Ulan Bato® ¥ MONGOLIA oe ‘Alma At
 Tuvan singers are famous for a special type of singing called khédmei . It is known in English as “overtone,” “throat,’ or “harmonic” singing .
 Another important rite of passage in the life of young Tyrolese is completing secondary school . Passing the secondary-school leaving examination called Matura (Maturita) is often a reason for a large celebration with family and friends .
 Ukrainian is the official state language of Ukraine . Ukrainian is also known as "Kazakstan" and "Alma Ata"
 The origin of the bandura dates back to the 7th century Ap, when it was used mainly to accompany epic ballads and folk dances .
 The clothing of Vlach shepherds was simple and comfortable . Traditionally, the clothing of the shepherded was simple .
 Belgium's Walloons comprise the country’s French-speaking population . The Walloons live in Belgium's southern provinces . They live in the country's southern regions and speak French .
 Tchantchés, identified with the city of Liege, wears patched trousers and a floppy hat with tassels .
 Walloons take a four o'clock coffee break called a goiter, often consisting of coffee and a piece of pie . Walloons drink a lot of coffee, and the common custom is to take a coffee break at four .
 Since World War I, coal mines have closed and traditional heavy industries have fallen into decline . However, the country's coal mines and heavy industries are in decline .
 Welsh people enjoy movies and television in their spare time . Welsh people also enjoy TV and movies .
 See Bhutia Bomvana v1:587 Bhundu Boys v 1:610 Bhutanese v3:137-142 . See Bhute. v3 :142 Hindus v 3:319 Lepchas v4:559 Muslims v 4:693 Bhutians v
 Europe Bullfighting v5:467 Buman Buyi v3:181 Zhuang v4:1056 Bunong Buyi . Buyi:181 Gaoshan v 3:181 . Zhuang: 1056 Bunu buyi .
 Chadians v1:111-117 Chadic languages . See Sri Lanka Chadian Chadians . Chadians are Fulani, Fulani and Cameroonians .
 Europe Irtysh River v3:460 Tru v1:574 Trula v4:981 Isabella of Castile v5:102 Ishkashims. Europe. Europe . Europe .
 Jad Bhutia v3:143 Jaen province, Spain v5:42 Jagga. See Tjo J Jabal an Nusayriyah Mountains v3.32 Jacob of Edessa v4:924 . See Jad Jal an . Nus
 See Konds Index Konds v3:510-514 Kongo language v1:35-36 See also Bakongo Konkani language Goans v3 :266 Konstantinov, Aleko v5:92 Kony dialect v1 :305 Kopet Dag Mountains
 See Malinke v1:375 Mandinka language . See also Chewa Manga language . Manggarai v4:606-610 Mangyan language . see also Chewan Manga language v1.425 .
 See Yi National Foundation Day v3:412 Native North Americans v2:384—-396 Aleuts, Amahuacas, Choctaw and Comanches .
 See Timorese Ndebele v1:415-420 Xhosa v 1:587 See also Zimbabweans Njabulo v1.196 Ndzundza .
 See Udmurts Vridi Canal v1:294 WwW Wadden Sea v5:197 Wahgi Valley v4:639 Waidjewa language v4.903 Waiganga Valley v3:271 .