 Both sides realized that they had come very close to war over the issue, and they realized that such a war had to be avoided . The U.S. and Russia realized that it had to avoid a war .
 Download PDF PDF PDF Page Citation Cite Share Link Share Expert Answers . Use this article to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 Our certified Educators are real professors, teachers, and scholars . They use their academic expertise to tackle your toughest questions . We are happy to feature some of the world's most interesting answers .
 Educators go through a rigorous application process, and every answer they submit is reviewed by our in-house editorial team . Every answer submitted by educators is reviewed and reviewed by the team .
 When the war ended, the two countries were hostile towards each other . Although they had fought as allies, when the war was over, they had become hostile .
 See This Answer Now . Join the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you know about stories you saw on CNN iReport . Visit CNN.com/Heroes for more questions .
 The United States feared worldwide communist domination, and the USSR resented the U.S. approach to foreign relations, which it perceived as interventionist .
 In the years following World War II, especially after 1949 when the Soviets first tested an atomic bomb, it turned into an arms race . After 1949, the Soviet Union first tested a nuclear bomb .
 Each feared the other might initiate nuclear warfare, so each developed larger and larger arsenals of nuclear weapons . Each feared each other might start nuclear warfare .
 In 1959, Fidel Castro became the leader of Cuba and aligned the Caribbean island nation with the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro was the Cuban leader and aligned Cuba with the USSR .
 The Americans had already installed nuclear weapons with the ability to reach the Soviet Union in Western Europe and in Turkey . Nikita Khrushchev decided to counter this move by installing nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. already had nuclear weapons capable of reaching Western Europe .
 Khrushchev reasoned that missiles on the island would deter future attacks . The U.S. had already launched one failed invasion of Cuba, and the island had already been attacked .
 American spy plane flying over Cuba took a photograph of the construction of a ballistic missile installation . President John F Kennedy and his advisors went on high alert after the photograph .
 Kennedy took the more moderate approach of a naval blockade or quarantine of the island . However, Kennedy did not agree with a quarantine or naval blockade .
 On October 22, 1962, he informed the American people about what was happening . President Kennedy informed the U.S. about what he believed to be an assassination attempt .
 He warned that the U.S. would use military force to prevent ships bearing weapons from reaching Cuba . He warned the United States would use force to stop any ships carrying weapons .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev sent messages back and forth trying to put an end to the crisis . Kennedy and his government tried to end the crisis at the height of the Cold War .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw missiles from Cuba in exchange for Kennedy's promise that the U.S. would not attack Cuba . Kennedy's deal was made in return for a promise not to attack the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy also secretly agreed to remove the U.S. missiles from Turkey . Kennedy agreed to pull the missiles out of Turkey .
 A telephone communication link that became known as the Hot Line was installed between the White House and the Kremlin . The Hot Line is a phone-in-persona communication link between the two countries .
 The two countries initiated negotiations that eventually resulted in nuclear test ban treaties . The talks led to nuclear test bans on nuclear weapons .
 On the downside, the Soviets increased their research into intercontinental ballistic missiles that would be capable of reaching the U.S. from the Soviet Union . The Soviets increased research into . intercontinental . ballistic missiles . The Soviet Union increased its research .
 The positions of the United States and the Soviet Union were not actually equal . Keep in mind, strategically speaking, that the U.S. and the USSR's positions were actually not equal .
 From the contrary, from the Soviet perspective, they were at a very real disadvantage vis-a-vis the U.S. The Soviet Union was at a real disadvantage, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 From the perspective of the Soviet Union, basing missiles in Cuba would allow the Soviets to apply counter-pressure, as they would be able to similarly threaten the American population centers on the East Coast . The U.S. would also want to use the Cuban missile base to counter-
 The U.S. could not afford to stand by passively and allow the Soviet Union to proceed unchallenged . Naturally, given the stakes, the United States couldn't afford to sit by passively .
 What resulted was an incident that came frighteningly close to starting Nuclear War . The incident came close to a nuclear war .
 It served as a wake-up call to both sides, who acted decisively to ensure that a similar incident would not occur in the future . Both sides of the line of fire have been cleared of any wrongdoing .
 The main effect of the crisis was to make the two countries more cautious about coming into conflict . The two countries have been more cautious since the crisis .
 During the Cold War, the U.S. and the USSR were in competition to dominate the world . During the 1950s, the United States and the Soviet Union were in a rivalry .
 The United States was capitalistic and democratic and thought that communism was evil and aggressive . The U.S. considered communism to be an evil, aggressive and capitalistic, the U.K. thought that it was evil .
 The USSR was communist and thought that A) communism would inevitably take over the world and B) the United States was out to destroy it . The USSR thought that the U.S. would destroy it. The United States thought that communism was inevitable . The U.K. was out
 The U.S. placed nuclear missiles in Europe that could hit the Soviet Union . Because of the USSR, the United States feared the USSR . The missiles were placed in Europe because they could hit Soviet Union.
 Because the Soviets feared the US, they tried to put nuclear missiles in Cuba so that they could threaten the U.S. as well . The Soviets tried to do this so that the US could also threaten the United States .
 The Americans feared and distrusted the Soviets, they worried that the USSR would actually use the missiles in Cuba . The U.S. worried about the use of the missiles .
 The United States feared the Soviets and though they were out to take over the world, they felt that the USSR would start to try to take more and more if the United States did not stop them in Cuba . The U.S. feared the Soviet Union would try and take over Cuba
 This encouraged them to compromise with each other, to set up direct communications for use in times of crisis, and to be somewhat less aggressive so that they did not come into direct conflict .
 Use this information to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on eNotes . In the U.S. college of higher education, visit eNotes.com for more information .
 The United States feared worldwide communist domination, and the USSR resented the U.S. approach to foreign relations . This conflict became known as the Cold War .
 Fidel Castro became the leader of Cuba and aligned the Caribbean island nation with the Soviet Union . Each feared the other might initiate nuclear warfare, so each developed larger and larger arsenals of nuclear weapons .
 The U.S. had already launched one failed invasion of Cuba . Khrushchev reasoned that missiles on the island would deter future attacks .
 He warned that the U.S. would use military force to prevent ships bearing weapons from reaching Cuba . The subsequent days were filled with apprehension .
 The U.S. could not afford to stand by passively and allow the Soviet Union to proceed unchallenged . The incident came frighteningly close to starting Nuclear War .