 Appendix E of the Report of the President's Special Review Board refers to 14 case studies that were prepared for the Board .
 4-5 page draft memoranda were prepared by scholars who were contacted by members of the Board's staff . Draft memoranda will be released in the fall .
 The shorter 2-page memoranda on the same case studies were prepared by the Board staff as summary memoranda of the 4-5 page drafts .
 These case studies should be viewed in context of which they were requested by the President's Special Review Board and its staff .
 Board determined it would be useful to examine the operation of the NSC system in a variety of real-world situations . Board determined to examine more fully the working of the National Security Council system .
 Board members identified a number of issues and incidents from the Truman Administration through the Reagan Administration that they believed might be instructive . Case studies should be drafted quickly to refresh their memories of the events, to serve as background material .
 The Board's staff contacted several scholars about these issues and incidents . The Board requested that they produce draft memoranda of 4-5 pages in length summarizing the relevant facts and highlighting certain areas of interest .
 The_ memoranda were supported by relevant extracts from books, articles, and other unclassified primary and secondary source material . The_ memoranda were supported by . relevant extracts of . books and articles .
 As requested by the Board's staff, these memoranda were prepared by their respective authors as drafts under the severest of time constraints .
 President Kennedy chose a path of action that in his judgment entailed a l-in-3 chance of nuclear war . Kennedy chose to take the risk of a nuclear war with the U.S. President Kennedy .
 This crisis began in October of 1962 when a U.S. U-2 flying over Cuba discovered the Soviet Union in the midst of a secret attempt to introduce strategic nuclear missiles (MRBM's and IRBM's) into Cuba -contrary to all public and private assurances by Soviet
 President Kennedy immediately concluded that this Soviet action was unacceptable . President Kennedy said it was unacceptable to the Soviet Union . The incident occurred in March 1968 .
 Assembling the EXCOM, he weighed the issues and options, the pros and cons . The EXCOM is the largest government body in the world .
 He changed his own mind several times during the course of these deliberations .
 President George W. Bush initially favored an air strike on the missiles . He chose instead a naval blockade of Soviet shipments of arms to Cuba as a first step and announced this to the world .
 Kennedy's last card worked. It was denied y such n our European dge was ynin -wi thou t or even members in the treatment their ""20th a t t tached as Kennedy's final card worked .
 Krushchev announced on Sunday, October 28 that the missiles would we be withdrawn, and the crisis subsided . The crisis was over and the missiles were withdrawn from the Soviet Union .
 This is generally regarded as the ""finest hour"" of the Kennedy Presidency . The Kennedy Presidency is generally seen as one of the most important moments of his presidency .
 The President rise air strike jority favored rations, the Se issi le ; it make issile from the led reserve . Most f the EXCOM f deliberation f deliberated .
 Robert Kennedy was impressed with the Tojo dead set against any surprise attack . National Security Advisor, McGeorge Bundy approached Krushchev without provoking him .
 Ha he wo tialiy uld hav between on the the the in the curi ty uld e lead 3.3.5.5 . Ha hewo tialy uld . hav .
 Post Vietnam, the War Powers Act sought to assure a greater congressional role in war-making . Post Vietnam War, the Act sought a greater role in Congress in making war decisions .
 The issue of war making, and the decision to take actions that might trigger war,_poses dramatic questions the Commission faces in a way that toucJie_s a central Constitutional issue; namely, the respective roles of President and Congress in making war .
 Presidents have from the beginning sent troops into battle without declarations of war . Presidents have shied away from Congress in making decisions about war decisions .
 The crisis blew up suddenly. For the first time in the mi< clear age. The two superpowers found themselves in a sort of moral road test of their apocalyptic powers. j The crisis blows up suddenly .
 The United States and the Soviet Union have had no comparable collision since then . The crisis served some purposes . The U.S. and the USSR have no comparable collisions since then.
 Khrushchev's humiliation may have hastened his fall . On the other hand, the humiliation that he suffered may hasten his fall, says historian John Avlon .
 The experience may be partly responsible for both the Soviet military buildup in the past two decades and the enthusiasm for nuclear disarmament . Now on the 20th anniversary of the testis, six of Kennedy's men have collaborated .
 Theodore Sorensen. special counsel to the President: and McCeorge Bundy. special assistant to the president for national security affairs. Theodore S. Bundy. . Theodore Sorennsen . special counsel . to the . President: The President's deputy secretary of state and secretary
 In the years since the Cuban missile crisis, many commentators have examined the affakand offered a wide variety of conclusions . Many commentators have concluded that the missile crisis was a failure .
 It seems fitting now that some of us who worked with President Kennedy during that crisis should offer a few comments, with the advantages both of participation and hindsight .
 The importance of accurate assessment of interests between the two superpowers is evit and coniinuou ognition of the need for thorough overflight, not without its hazards, that produced the decisive photographs .
 The usefulness and scope of inspection from above, also employed in monitoring the Soviet missile withdrawal, should never be underestimated . The usefulness of the inspection, also used in monitoring of the Soviet withdrawal, is never underestimated .
 The President wisely took his time in choosing a course of action . A quick decision would certainly have been less carefully designed and could well have produced a catastrophe .
 The fact that the crisis did not become public in its first week made it easier for President Kennedy to deal with it with a maximum of care and a minimum of outside pressure . President Kennedy was able to make his decision with a minimum amount of care . The crisis didn't become public until
 Americans should respect the need for confidential and careful deliberation in dealing with a major international crisis . Not every future crisis will be so quiet in its first phase, but Americans must respect that, especially in the first phase .
 United States naval forces, quickly deployable for the blockade of offensive weapons that was sensibly termed a quarantine, made the difference . The availability of United States ground and air forces sufficient to execute an invasion if necessary, made a difference .
 American nuclear superiority was not in our view a critical factor, for the fundamental and controlling | reason that nuclear war . already in 1962. already in . 1962 . U.S. nuclear superiority not a 'critical factor'
 No i one of us ever reviewed the nuclear balance for comfort in those j hard weeks . "No i one i one  reviewed the nukes for comfort for comfort," says President Obama .
 The quarantine was matched by a diplomatic effort that ignored no relevant means of communication with both our friends and our adversary . The political and military pressure created by the quarantine was . matched by . the diplomatic effort .
 Communication to and from allies in Europe was intense, and their support sturdy. Communication to . and from our allies was intense . The UK has been in touch with the EU for more than a decade .
 The Organization of American States gave the moral and legal authority of its regional backing to quarantine . The quarantine made it plain that Soviet nuclear weapons I were profoundly unwelcome in the Americas .
 Adlai Stevenson drove home with angry eloquence and i unanswerable photographic evidence of the Soviet deployment and deception .
 " Effective communication is never more important than when ' such intelligence was unavailable sooner," says the U.S. ambassador to France .
 Robert Kennedy told Ambassador Dobrynin that any attempt to treat the Presidents unilateral assurance as part of a deal would simply make that assurance inoperative . Robert Kennedy made it plain to ■ Ambassador Dobynin that .
 In the successful resolution of the crisis, restraint was as important as strength, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . "Restraint is important as strong as strength," he says .
 The decision that the missiles in Turkey should be removed was one that the President had full and unquestioned authority to make and execute . The decision was made and executed by the President, CNN's Richard Quest said .
 He recognized that an invasion by United States forces would be bitter and bloody, and that it would leave festering wounds in the body politic of the Western Hemisphere . An invasion by U.S. forces would ■ be bitter, bloody .
 Riak had te«.n ,h^L in lhesprm » of l%.1 Secretary < our own President, whose cautious determination . Me .dv comi comi SSi.i. Riak .
 If the Russians held their course for a mere seventy-two hours, we would have to escalate a step, probably by bombing Cuban sites . The U.S. would probably need to bomb Cuban sites if they continued to hold course .
 If Khrushchev's capability to calculate and control was something like his own, then neither s might suffice to guide them both through that third step without holocaust . Neither s might be enough to guide the two countries through that step without war .
 The Constitution contemplated enforced collaboration between the President and his fellow politicians on Capitol Hill . In warmaking, the Constitution contemplated enforcing collaboration with the President .
 In practice, as the missile crisis illustrates, a strong role for Congress is by no means assured . Congress is not always as strong as it might be in practice .
 Any modern President stands at the center of a watchful circle with whose members he cannot help but consult . Any modern president must consult with his inner circle of advisers, he says .
 President is more dependent on Executive officials for advice as well as execution than our Constitution makers could have anticipated two centuries ago . Today, indeed, he is . Today he is more . dependent on . Executive officials . for advice and execution .
 Political accountability conferred on each, firsthand, legitimacy as an agent of the people . Political accountability confers on each of the candidates .
 The Constitution's democratic element consisted mainly in reserving to these men the great decisions on the use of force . Indeed, our Constitution's . democratic element was reserving . to these . great decisions . on the . use of . force .
 Neither are colleagues in the sense of sharing either his legitimacy or accountability . But neither are they colleagues . Neither are in the same sense of accountability or legitimacy .
 The group that made fundamental choices for the U.S. during the missile crisis . Consider again the group made fundamental decisions for the United States during the crisis .
 First, there was the President as constitutional Commander in Chief, nationally elected . Now, there is the President of the U.S. as a national elected president .
 No member of the Senate or House stands astride the action channel for decisions on nuclear war . The U.S. Senate and the House of Representatives will not be able to vote on the issue .
 None is consulted unless the President so chooses as a matter of discretion . None of the President's staff is consulted on the issue .
 Congress remained ignorant of the Soviet missiles in Cuba during the first week of Ex Comm deliberations . In October 1962, 1962, Congress remained unaware of Soviet missiles .
 Only on October 22, two hours before his broadcast to the world, did the President assemble the leaders of both houses, advise them of the missiles, and inform them that he had decided to respond with a naval quarantine .
 The Congressional leaders disagreed strongly with the course of the President had chosen . President Obama has been criticized for his actions in the past .
 Senator Fulbright urged that the U.S. respond more forcefully to the situation in Syria .
 Senators insisted that they had been informed, not consulted . The record show that the record show they had not been informed .
 No member of Congress deeply involved in subsequent decisions during the week that followed . Nor were members of Congress involved in the decision to take action .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Chairmdn of the Joint Chiefs, and the White House Assistant for National Security Affairs. Agency. Agency . Agency Agency Agency, the Joint. Chiefs of. Staff, and White House. National Security. Affairs Agency Agency.
 When the President chose blockade, no one but the Secretary of Defense had both the authority and the information to oversee its implementation . The President's decision to blockade was made by President Obama .
 Bundy learned about the missiles from the CIA; the Director of the CIA, John McCone, and the machine under him served as the ""eyes and ears" of the United States government in keeping abreast of developments in Cuba . Bundy was the CIA Director and the Machine under him
 The need for information, analysis, and assistance in implementation meant that Deputy Secretaries and even the relevant Assistant Secretaries also were included .
 Sorensen had joined JFK when he went to the Senate in 1953 . He was among his closest personal and programmatic advisers as well as speechwriter .
 John AfivlWOT(l Kennedy) assesses the full spectrum of his responsibilities as President . Sorensen, and even more Robert Kennedy, helped John . Kennedy assess the full range of responsibilities .
 Kennedy insisted that no major national security decision be made without including RFK and Sorensen in the process . RFK insisted on the national security apparatus alone in making the decision .
 Fourth, there were surrogates, some of them officials, some from private life . Some of the surrogates were government officials . The surrogates are surrogates .
 Dean Acheson was a former Secretary of State; Robert I,ovett was Secretary of Defense . Robert Iovett is a former Defense Secretary and Secretary of the State Department .
 They were involved because the President happened to value their judgment . He knew others valued their judgment, especially in the ""bipartisan foreign policy establishment" on Capitol Hill and off .
 Adlai Stevenson was a former Democratic presidential candidate and liberal . His official role as Ambassador to the U.N. outweighed the importance of his official role .
 Douglas Dillon is the Secretary of the Treasury's former Undersecretary of State . The presence of Dillon attests to the weight accorded to his department in matters of foreign affairs . Dillon is a representative character as Eisenhower's former State Secretary .
 The importance of the individuals in the circle becomes clear as one reflects on the extraordinary role they played in their lives . The significance of the individual individuals in this circle becomes .
 Decisions passed through the President's hand but were not simply the product of his mind alone . Decisions were made through the hand of the President .
 Both the definition of the issue and the choice of the U.S. response emerged from deliberations of the group . The U.N. has been criticized for its response to the situation in Syria .
 Robert Kennedy's account is suggestive, both about individual perceptions and preferences, and about the process by which the group came to the blockade . Robert Kennedy: "Robert Kennedy is suggestive" Robert Kennedy is a member of a group that came to blockade .
 Since World W II our government has often tried to square the circle oJF this incompatibility by tinkering with structure . Usually one suffers as th, „,hn henchts^ The missile crisis seems a rarity in just this m,,m, week"
 Efforts have been made to tighten up procedures for official consultation and loosen their constraints upon the White If . If ,sc. will be made to loosen constraints on the White .
 Sometimes efforts of both sorts have been made at once, with contraelicte.ry consequences . Sometimes efforts were made in the same way, with the consequences .
 Each Administration has begun by altering the structure it inherited to cure a ""weakness"" in its nrc^ deccsors practice as observed from the outside .
 The National Security Council was created by act of Congress in -947 . Secretary of Defense James Forrestals revenge on Franklin Roosevelt for the latter's tendency to keep all threads in his own hands .
 The subordinate committee structure was said to be a cure-all for alleged disorder under Truman . Eisenhower later sponsored the Planning Board and Operations Coordinating Board .
 Nixon restores a somewhat comparable structure, ending the excesses"" of the Johnson White House . But he ties it to a presidential staff more formidable in numbers and in jurisdiction than his predecessors ever had employed . Nixon now restores"" a somewhat similar structure .
 Reportedly he saw it as an indispensable piece of machinery for a crisis-time, indispensable because so flexible and so removed from vested rights or interests . Reportedly saw it . as an . indispensable because . so flexible .
 The very term ""Ex Cotiim"" was barred from current use . Thus he ordered it disbanded, to the dismay of some members .
 In this, although not consciously, he followed Truman's practice at the outbreak of the Korean War . The Korean War began in 1950s .
 Kennedy's decision to disband the Ex Comm is expressive of the underlying dilemma . Kennedy’s decision to disassociate himself from the ex-Commons was expressive of his dilemma .
 There appear to be no ways whereby a President can be assured routinely, at all times and places, of the information and control he needs . While simultaneously assuring to officials the hearings, the hearings and the due process, the appeals, and the appeals they require of the White House .
 Even at the farthest remove from routine, the missile crisis above all, these two assurances seem barely, temporarily compatible . The crisis is at a distance from routine but seems to be temporary .
 Risks of rule lie as much in bureaucratic momentum as in presidential misjudgment . Yet risks of rule lies quite as much as in bureaucracy as in misjudgement .
 Frustrated, uncomprehending bureaucrats can be as much a danger to us all, and to a President, as faults in his own knowledge, or his judgment, or . his temperament . Frustration is as much as a problem for the President, and for us, as
 The check and balance system we encounter in the Missile Age does not appear to check or balance its destructive hazards . The check-and-balance system in the missile age does not seem to check .
 For this there is no help in sight from any source except the human qualities of prudence, luck r and fortitude displayed in 1962 by 14 men for thirteen days .
 They were intensely conscious of the paradox of rulership as manifested by the course of Jiiltory up to their time . They were keenly aware of the contradictions in rulership of their time.
 On the one hand, the common goqd required that political power be placed in some human hands . On the other hand, it was necessary that the government be put in some people's hands .
 Only by yielding considerable discretion to a central public authority could secure the common defense, law, order, or personal liberties . Only by giving discretion to the central authority, citizens can secure their own liberties .
 To establish a powerful public authority was to create enormous risks of the misuse of power . But on the other hand, to establish a public authority creates enormous risks, he says .
 As so often before, the rulers, being human and thus fallible, might choose unwisely, or might implement their choices clumsily, at awful cost . The rulers are human and so fallible .
 Our Constitution makers aimed at an ciiectivc central government, else they would not have come to Philadelphia . The Constitution makers intended to create a central government in Philadelphia .
 No m;m was entrusted with unlimited prerogatives; neither 13* Aft*nd)ord was the mob. Neither 13*Aft*.nd was a mob. No m.m. was entrusted . with unlimited . prerogrogatives . Neither 13-Aft
 A goodly group of men, each with a piece of power, backed by a constituency, would scrutinize each other, balancing each other as they tried to fit their pieces into governance . Instead, a goodly . group of . men would scrutinise each other and balance each other
 The ultimate expression of authority was war, and there this general pattern was applied with special care . Then as now as now, the ultimate expression was war . The general pattern of authority in the world was applied in the 1930s .
 The model evidently was the English royal prerogative as modified by Parliaments control over the purse . The model was modified by the power of the purse, not the monarch .
 The Senate as a parliamentary body was to share in making treaties of alliance or of peace . The Senate was to make treaties with alliance or peace treaties .
 "Our President, as substitute for King, had no prerogative to do these things alone," says President Obama . "We are not going to be able to do this alone," he says .
 What he retained, alone, was actual command of such armed forces as Congressional enactments gave him leave to raise and keep .
 It thus was the intention that recourse to war required a collaborative judgment by the whole body of men in national elective office . It was intended to be a joint decision by all of the country's elected officials .
 Presidents could not declare war, congressmen could not deploy troops . Presidents and congressmen were not allowed to deploy troops in war zones .
 "On this as on all lesser issues, these men were to check and balance one another," says the British Prime Minister .
 Presidents have sent troops into battle without declarations of war . Yet from the start of our development under the Constitution, President Obama has sent troops to battle without declaring war .
 This has occurred regularly since Thomas Jefferson dispatched marines against the Barbary pirates . This has happened regularly since he dispatched marines to fight Barbary Pirates .
 For a partial listing, see U.S. Department of State, Right to Protect Citizens in Foreign Countries by iMiuling Force, memorandum of the Solicitor for the Department of the State, 3rd rev. ed., 1934 .
 T J ,,,cy usc '' ,h,ir own own own »"""" m"" tiority to send forces into war without a declaration So •So wo.dd Kennedy have done, it seems, had there heen . Third week of crisis .
 Thirteen Oa,js affords us many clues as to why modem Presents have shied away from Co^ss fa 1 |T„ <lec,s,„n s about war .
 As i, turned out, this was pell he best kept secret in American history . "I'm not sure what happened to me," he said .
 In that process, he could not commit himself to anyone without forfeiting maneuver room in dealing with Khrushchev . He could have lost maneuver room to deal with the Soviet Union .
 These did not declare themselves with any blinding light like the Japanese attack in 1941 . The Japanese attack was not like that of the Japanese in 1941.
 Everything had to be done almost at once, under the relentless pressure of contemporary technology, says CNN.com chief executive .
 Time and time limit the number of men with whom the Commander in Chief can engage in meaningful consultation . Dispatch was of the essence. Dispatch was the essence of the President's decision .
 To maximize the; prospect of a wise and viable choice, some interests cannot be excluded . Some interests can be excluded from the choice of the president .
 In the missile crisis the issue was pre-eminently a matter of defense and diplomacy . It depended throughout on the capability of our intelligence and posed the possibility of military action . The missile crisis was a major concern for the United States .
 Natural parochialism, stemming from the governmental positions of these men, guaranteed that consideraions of defense, diplomacy, intelligence, and military action would be voiced, says historian .
 Congressional action of that sort had last been taken in December 1941 against the Axis Powers . Congressional action was last taken against Axis Powers in 1941 .
 Nine years later it implied, both publicly and internationally, not limited hostilities, but rather total war pursued to enemy surrender . The U.S. declared war after the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 It implied no other termination than by peace treaty, with Senate ratification, or by resolution of the two houses of Congress . Also it implied that termination would be terminated by treaty or resolution of two houses .
 Truman was endeavoring to limit warfare, not to spread it, and to end it expeditiously . Truman was trying to limit war, not spread, and end it quickly .
 In these terms there could be no role for Congress as a partner in decision . Congress could not have a role in decision making, says CNN's John Sutter .
 On the fifth day or the sixth day he might have sought a resolution of support . On Monday he would have sought to find a resolution, but he did not .
 He chose not to do so, lest it blur for his successors the command authority at their disposal . He chose instead to keep the authority at his disposal, not to blur it .
 President Obama pointed to the United Nations under a Senate-approved treaty, justified his action by a United Nations resolution, and asked Congress for the money and controls to prosecute the war .
 Truman paid a heavy political price for failing to make Congress share his June decision . As the fighting dragged on after Chinese intervention, he paid a political price .
 Truman's party was defeated in the 1952 elections and the Presidency of Dwight D, Eisenhower . To it can be attributed the defeat to the defeat of Truman's Party in 1952 .
 As pioneered by Eisenhower, this formula required tension in the area that patriotic congressmen could not refuse, and good fortune that the future use of force, if any, was short-lived . The formula required first such tension in such tension, and second such good fortune, that the use
 Eisenhower twice employed the formula, meeting both requirements, once off the China coast, once in the Middle East . Eisenhower's formula met both requirements .
 A naval incident off North Vietnam sufficed for the Tonkin Culf Ik-solution, but the use of force proved not to be short-lived . The incident was the first naval incident to occur off the coast of North Vietnam .
 Johnson could have had Congress ratify his decision . After Americanization of the Vietnam War in the first seven months of 1965, 1965, Congress ratified its decision .
 "To do so would have meant public acknowledgment that we had entered upon large-scale hostilities likely to last several years," he says .
 This would have precluded a low-posture, low-visibility approach . It would have precipitated sharp divisions between ""hawks"" and ""doves,"" subjecting the war effort to intense pressures from each .
 As months of war turned into years, however, the President stood alone, a lightning rod for dissent . The President was the President of the United States .
 The Tonkin Culf Resolution of 1964 may have covered the President's course . Formally, the Tonkin . Resolution of . 1964 may . have covered . the course of the President .
 Congressional disillusion fueled by a feeling of having been duped . Thereafter, once the war had expanded, Congressional disillusion was fueled by having had dupeded . Congressional disillusion is fueled by the feeling that having had to be duped.
 When senators became President Johnson's critics,;' they tended to attack him sharply and bitterly . They tended to be attacked him sharply .
 Attacks by congressmen helped legitimate dissent in the country, encouraging others, especially in universities and the media . Attacks by Congressmen helped to legitimate dissent, according to the author .
 The character of Congressional criticism gave some credibility to eharges that the war was not only senseless and immoral, but alSo illegal . Moreover, the character of the Congressional criticism .
 For a nuclear crisis it is hard to fault the balance struck in 1962, tipped all the way toward the President in an Ex Coin .
 Secrecy, flexibility, uncertainty, and urgency — each alone makes a strong argument . Secrecy and flexibility are key to the success of the U.S. government, says President Obama .
 When a nuclear exchange impends, formal Congressional participation is not only inconvenient, but impracticable, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "When a nuclear attack ... it's inconvenient to Congress to participate in such an exchange."
 In the missile crisis, if presidential decision had escalated to nuclear war, Congressional ratification would have been a mockery or moot . Congressional ratification was a mockery, or moot, in the case of a nuclear war .
 President. is, and probably remains, the nation's Final Arbiter . Here the President is the final arbiter .
 President Kennedy was assassinated in October 1962 . President Kennedy died in November 1963 at the age of 65 at age of 60 .
 In limited warfare the geography, the weaponry, the scale, and the intensity are all subject to bargaining, overt or tacit . The geography, weaponry and the scale of the battle are all up for bargaining . In limited war the geography and the weaponry is all up to bargaining .
 A war declared by Congress cannot formally end without further act of Congress . A war declaration by Congress must be formally ended without further action by Congress .
 Americans are more accustomed now than in Korean days to draw distinctions among ""wars,"" The fear of 1950 that an invocation of formalities associated last with World War II might signal an unlimited intent to citizens at home or governments abroad still weighed upon the White House as recently as 1965 .
 President Johnson prosecuted the Vietnam War at a substantial price . The price of foregoing ""war powers,"" constitutional and statutory, was the price of the war .
 The White House has vast authority in home-front spheres like economic mobilization, public order, news management . These confer on the White House vast authority .
 During the Korean War the Supreme Court decided that these powers flowed only from wars declared by Congress . The Korean War was the first time the court ruled that the powers flow only from Congress declared war .
 This suggests how strong the case appears, at least from the perspective of two Presidents . The case appears to be strong, according to two Presidents.
 Vietnam's cost, both human and material, and its duration, coupled with the absence of agreed success or even agreed purpose, has brought into being an opposed perspective, strongly espoused in the Senate . White House legitimacy has been subject to sustained attack from a variety of sources in the country
 Not since Korea has there been so much discussion of the need to limit presidential freedom on the i 4 6 Afteru* military side of foreign policy . The U.S. has not been able to fully implement its foreign policy in North Korea .
 The; current counterargument, opposing White House logic, is least of all a matter of form, much more of substance . The White House's current counter argument is less of form than form, it's substance .
 The issue is not literal adherence to the Constitution's terms but rather functional equivalence for their intent . The l>ody of elected men on Capitol 1 1 ill share in White House decisions at the time warfare begins .
 The power of the purse dews not suffice; withholding funds from forces in the field is not a practicable course for most elective politicians . withholding funds is not an easy way to get around the world, says the author of the book .
 What is wanted is a voice before those forees get committed beyond recall . What is also wanted is the voice of the public to voice their views on the issues of national security .
 A number of devices aimed at ""redressing the constitutional balance"" have been proposed in Congress . The devices are aimed at 'redressing constitutional balance'
 These span a spectrum from requiring formal action to regularizing informal consultation . These spans a spectrum of requirements from formal to informal action .
 Other proposals are sure to be forthcoming as the Vietnam War drags on .
 From the perspective of the last twenty years, even the least of these proposals places an extraordinary constraint upon the President, says President Obama . The White House has been in touch with the Obama administration for more than 20 years .
 Right up until Pearl Harbor, Franklin Roosevelt was more constrained than any other recent President . Roosevelt was constrained by the depth of his presidency until he was in office .
 Witness the tortuous process by which he transferred fifty overage American H7 Afterword destroyers to Great Britain after the fall of France .
 Whether President* should now be so constrained, and if so how, are inajters for judgment .
 The closer one looks at these proposals ^he more complicated are the issues to be judgc-d . The closer you look at the proposals are the more complicated .
 Americana* dalfrr on this issue: Some favoring World War II, Korea, and Vietnam alike, some wishing .we had stayed out of all three . Many drawing distinctions among them .
 It as well to recall that in 1812, and again in 1898, the President took the lead in forcing war upon the country .
 Spanish-American War mi#hl would have been fought five years earlier had not been fought . Pres. Cleveland made plain that he would not wage it even if he declared it .
 There is obvious disagreement among Amerk-iam, on what may he appropriate . The president of the U.S. should be allowed to use the word 'honorably'
 "The importance of this consideration is clear. For those involved in making choices about these proposals, the importance is clear," the author says .
 The effect of realignments on the influence of our political champions and opponents is important . For those of us who watch from a distance, it's important for us to see how political realignment affects our politics .
 Legislation calls for successive majorities starting with subcommittees . Legislation called for successive majority majorities starting to subcommittee hearings .
 Short of a tidal wave of public sentiment, one can't count on legislative action without counting heads . Short of tidal wave, one cannot count on legislation without count on heads .
 These are the bane of constitutional reforms adopted to keep some contemporary problem from ever occurring again . Reforms adopted to stop some contemporary problems never occurring again. They are often the result of a constitutional reform .
 In order to avoid, forevermore, the crisis that ensued in the four months from FDR's election to inaugural, we so shortened the learning time for Presidents-elect as to invite fiascos like the Ray of Pigs . We so shortened the learning .
 Politically these issues are alive as products of Vietnam, once ""Johnson's war,"" now Nixon's . Nixon's. Vietnam was once "Johnson's. war" now "Nixon's" Vietnam .