 The film is set on set at 8 p.m. ET . It's the first time the film has ever been shown in the U.S.
 The Caribbean was the Caribbean and it was nuclear missiles . Except it was really the Caribbean . It was, actually, extremely dangerous .
 Yesterday, President Kennedy announced to the world that there are Soviet Medium Range Ballistic Missiles on Cuba . He announced a blockade to stop any further weapons arriving on the island .
 He claimed that there was no desire from the U.S. to take unilateral action and start a war . But the actual plan that he has set in motion includes an invasion of Cuba and possibly even the total annihilation of Cuba .
 Until now, it has been Operation Anadyr a bold, secret adventure to even the odds a bit with the Americans in the nuclear arms race . Until now it was a bold and secret adventure for the CIA .
 When it became apparent that the American announcement was coming, they convened their version of EXCOMM, that’s the executive Committee of the National Security Council . The committee is the executive committee of the national security council .
 Nikita Khrushchev is under increasing political pressure as his economic reinvigoration plans are failing . His de-Stalinising reforms are stalling, and now his grand foreign relations adventure is on the brink of failure .
 Chairman of the Supreme Soviet, Leonid Brezhnev formally the head of state, but in practice the second most powerful politician in Russia . Leonid was formally the . head of the . Supreme Soviet . But in practice, he was the second . most powerful . politician in practice
 Brezhnev is a longtime faithful Khrushchev friend and ally, but has secretly started moving away from his failing leader . Breznev was a longtime loyalist, but is now a secret ally of the late leader .
 Khrushchev friend and ally Alexei Kosygin was a close ally of the late Soviet leader . Kosyin was a key ally in the Soviet Union . He was a friend of the Soviet leader during his time in Moscow .
 He is drifting away from his failing friend and will eventually lead the coup against him and become the next Premier in 1964 . He will eventually become the Premier League's next Premier .
 He is the only member of the Politburo that opposed Operation Anadyr . As we already know, he’s the only person to oppose the operation . He is also opposed to the operation by the Kremlin .
 He was the first to visit Cuba after the revolution and knows the Cuban situation better than anyone else in the room . He was also the first person to visit the island country after its revolution .
 Mikoyan also favors a rapprochement with the United States and liberal reforms . He says he wants to see more liberal reforms in the country .
 His brother Artem Mikoyan is the airplane designer that partnered with Mikhail Gurevich, to create the MiG aircraft designs . On a side note, Artem is the brother of Artem . Artem and Artem are the airplane designers that collaborated with Mikhail .
 He leads Khrushchev’s main opposition and favors a hard line against the West . He is a former leader of the Soviet Union and a former member of the Communist Party .
 Shelepin is a serious Communist hardliner and the architect of communist rebellions and revolutions in other parts of the world . He is known for his role in a series of Communist rebellions, revolutions and revolutions .
 As such, he was instrumental in helping Castro take control of Cuba . He believes in an aggressive militarist foreign policy .
 Defense Minister Marshal Rodion Malinovsky opposes the use of nuclear arms in any conflict . Malinowski is a traditional military man that opposes nuclear arms . He is opposed to nuclear weapons .
 Co-creator and early supporter of Operation Anadyr now questions the operation as having gotten out of hand . He was a co-creator of the operation but now questions its effectiveness .
 He’s a career military man and doesn’t get involved in the political side of things, he says . ‘I’m not interested in politics,’ he says. ‘He’ll be a military man. I’ve been
 With the time difference, this is two hours before Kennedy’s address, and they have received neither a letter from Kennedy, nor a transcript of his coming statement, but they have been informed that they are on their way . The time difference means that they have not received a letter
 Most ships are too far away from Cuba to make it across the blockade line before it takes effect . But one very important ship with a four-ship escort is close enough to maybe make it into port before the blockade .
 The Aleksandrovsk carries 24 1-megaton nuclear warheads and 44 14-kiloton warheads for tactical cruise missiles . It is a large, Swedish-built cargo ship, carrying 24 1 megaton warheads .
 Malinowski opines that the U.S. will not go to war over the situation, if not further provoked . He says the United States will not be further provoked by the situation in Syria .
 He believes that Kennedy’s statement is a stunt for the upcoming elections, but he also believes that further provocation could worsen the situation quickly .
 Khrushchev is concerned with the legality of his actions in the wake of the U.S. invasion of Vietnam . He says he is concerned about the legality .
 They do have a defense treaty with the Cubans, but it is secret, so this revelation makes them look bad . This revelation weakens the legality of the treaty, which is secret .
 They argue about announcing the treaty immediately via radio but don't do it since it’s unclear if this would help, or worsen the situation . It's unclear how effective this would be, or how effective it would be .
 The hardliners advocate allowing the forces on Cuba the discretion to use their tactical arms in case of U.S. aggression .
 If such an order became known it would give the United States justification to strike back with atomic force . Malinowski points out that if such a order becomes known it gives the U.S. justification to attack back .
 Remember we’re still ahead of Kennedy’s TV speech . Especially if it came out that the order was given before Kennedy‘s address . Remember that we were still ahead . Remember we were given the order .
 There’s also a risk that actions resulting from the blockade could escalate into a nuclear exchange . The blockade could also lead to a nuclear war .
 They decide to order the Cuban forces not to use the nukes, and decide to revisit the subject in the morning . For now, they decide to give up on the issue, and then revisit the issue .
 Agricultural Specialist Pavlov, aka General Pliev, will make his troops combat ready in Cuba . They will, however, inform the Agricultural Specialist on Cuba to make his forces combat ready .
 All ships still in the Mediterranean to turn back to Soviet ports . They order all ships still . in the . Mediterranean to return to Soviet . ports .
 The ships that are in the Atlantic, but have no chance of reaching Cuba before the blockade takes effect, are ordered to hold for now . The ships ordered to stay put for now, but the blockade is expected to take effect .
 The Aleksandrovsk, with her deadly cargo of warheads totaling over 30 megatons of explosive power, is to proceed to the closest Cuban port . The Russian ship is carrying 30 megaton warheads and is to travel to Cuba .
 They create a laundry list of actions, including informing allies and the public about the situation . They draft a resolution for the UN Security council and write a strongly worded protest note to President Kennedy .
 USSR Ambassador to the UN, Valerian Zorin, will start preparing for a face off with his American counterpart, Adlai Stevenson . They will also immediately inform USSR Ambassador Valorin to prepare for the face-off with Stevenson .
 The most significant decisions they take, though, are military or about legality of action . Most significant decisions are made about legality and military matters, though .
 Operation Kama is a response to the permanent placement of United States subs armed with ballistic nukes in the port of Holy Loch, Scotland . The U.S. has placed nuclear missiles in Holy Loch in Scotland's Holy Loch . The operation is codenamed Kama .
 The four submarines are still far away from the blockade line, but are to proceed as ordered and try to run the line . Now, the four submarines have been ordered to try and run the .
 This decision will eventually prove central to the chaotic escalation of the crisis, says CNN's John Defterios . "This decision will ultimately prove central" to the chaos, he says .
 Last, but not officially announce the defense treaty with Cuba; this too will prove central to the outcome of the crisis .
 The Soviets have decided to stay their course, but will try to avoid a direct confrontation on the blockade line . So... the Soviets have stayed their course .
 The Organization of American States is the continental organization of cooperation between the countries in South and North America . President Obama meets with all of the members of the OAS .
 Under the Rio Treaty on mutual assistance between the OAS states in case of aggression, several other nations will participate actively in the blockade . The Rio Treaty is based on mutual aid between the nations .
 Argentina, Colombia, Dominican Republic, and Venezuela will provide ships, air support, or even ground forces . Venezuela, Colombia and Dominican Republic will also provide ships and air support .
 Trinidad and Tobago offers the use of the Chaguaramas Naval Base to warships of any OAS nation for the duration of the blockade .
 Kennedy then spend the rest of the day in a series of meetings dealing with the details of how to enforce the blockade and still minimize the risk for outbreak of general war .
 At 6 PM, he signs Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba at the Oval Office . At 6 p.m. he signs the Proclamation .
 The blockade will go into effect at 1400 hours Greenwich time tomorrow, October 24, 1962 . The blockade is the first of its kind .
 When the last meeting with EXCOMM ends, the Kennedy brothers are alone in the room with the recorder still on . The Kennedy brothers were left alone with the recording still on when the final meeting ends .
 The President is on the Phone with the First Lady and then returns to his brother . The President returns to the phone with his brother, who is in the middle of the conversation .
 If they get this mean on this one, it’s just a question of where they go about it next .
 Bobby Kennedy expresses frustration about not having direct communication with the Soviets . The President asks about the spy Georgi Bolshakov, who has been Robert’s liaison with them .
 In any event, it’s the sickening thing that to be getting very mad about . . They revealed about this horror that would embarrass me in the election, he says .
 Bobby Kennedy now goes to an off-the-record meeting with the USSR’s Ambassador to the US, Anatoly Dobrynin . The meeting takes place in Moscow .
 Dobrynin repeats his statement from previous meetings that there are no missiles on Cuba . He repeats previous statement that there were no missiles in Cuba .
 Kennedy advises Kennedy to check his facts with his government and returns to the White House . Kennedy advises him to check facts with government and return to White House. Kennedy: "It's not a lie. It's a lie"
 President joins British ambassador David Ormsby-Gore for drinks with British ambassador . President splits from dinner party and joins David Cameron for drinks .
 Kennedy immediately calls Defense Secretary McNamara and has the line moved moved . Kennedy calls McNamara after the incident and has his line moved .
 On opposite sides of the iron curtain that night, the two most powerful men in the world go to bed fretting and worrying about their political future . The rest of the world sleeps restlessly in fear of the nuclear world war .
 The blockade goes into effect on Day 9 when the blockade begins . It looks like Soviet ships might try to pass after all . Join us tomorrow for Day 9 of the blockade .
 We are planning to do an even more ambitious project, covering Pearl Harbor minute by minute in real time on December 7th .
 If you’d like to see that the please support os on patreon at patreon.co or tg.tv, we are nowhere near close to having the funding for that, and it is your support . Please support us on patron.co .
 Don't forget to subscribe, and ring that bell to never miss the TG action .