 North Korean leader Kim Jong Un visited a fish farm in May 2015 . North Korea's leader is seen as a strong leader in the region .
 On a cold, clear night in September 2014, a man I'll call Ahn walked up to the edge of the Tumen River on the Chinese side of the heavily guarded border between China and North Korea . Ahn: "Ahn's a man who lives in North Korea.
 Nearly anywhere else, such material would be considered completely innocuous . Almost anywhere else in the U.S., such material is considered harmless .
 At this border, however, it constitutes highly illicit, dangerous contraband . It is illegal, but at this border it is highly illicit and dangerous .
 In North Korea, citizens are allowed to see and hear only those media products created or sanctioned by the government . North Korea is a totalitarian state of totalitarian state .
 Pyongyang considers foreign information of any kind a threat and expends great effort keeping it out . North Korea considers foreign news of any threat a threat, Pyongyang says .
 North Korea's primary fear is that exposure to words, images, and sounds from the outside world could make North Koreans disillusioned with the state of affairs in their own country, which could lead them to desire—or demand—change .
 Ahn is a defector who escaped from North Korea in 2004 and now lives in the South Korean capital, Seoul . Ahn runs a nongovernmental organization that sends information into North Korea . He is a former North Korean defector .
 He is one of the dozens of defectors from North Korea whom I have interviewed in the past ten years . He is also one of dozens of North Korean defectors we have interviewed over the years .
 Defectors' testimony is not always reliable, nor is it enough to piece together an accurate portrait of life inside the opague and secretive country . Defects' testimony not always always reliable .
 Defectors' stories offer invaluable insights, but when combined with other information, they offer valuable insights . Defections are not the first time defectors have come forward with their stories .
 Ahn knew exactly what to do; he had made this kind of trip to the border many times before . At the edge of the river that night, Ahn was sure what he would do .
 Once he felt certain that he wasn't being watched, he placed his USB drives into a plastic bin, which he wrapped in a thick plastic bag . He wrapped them up in thick plastic bags .
 He tied the package to a wire, grabbed one end, and hurled the bin into the air . He then tied it to a sturdy wire and hurled it into the sky .
 There, a North Korean man whom I will call Ku stealthily waded in and grabbed the bin . Ku stealthly waded into the bin and grabbed a bin. Ku is a man from North Korea . Ku is known as "Ku"
 Ahn's organization was paying 3 him the equivalent of approximately $100 to retrieve the USB drives . Ahn: "It's a sizable fee that would allow Ku to provide for his household for a month"
 He changed into a dry outfit and made his way back into the city where he lives . He changed his clothes and returned to his home in a dry suit .
 Ku sold each drive for about $1 on the black market to fellow citizens eager to get a glimpse of life on the outside . Ku sold the drive for $1 .
 North Korea often referred to as "the hermit kingdom,"" over the past two decades, many cracks have appeared in the wall that the state has built around its people . North Korea is often known as the "hermit kingdom"
 Media-smuggling operations have helped North Koreans learn more about their country and the outside world, often at great risk to themselves .
 Distribution of foreign information has become a profitable business in North Korea . Despite the threat of punishment by North Korea's brutal security forces, distributing foreign information is profitable business . North Korea is known for its brutal crackdown on dissidents .
 This is partly due to the ways in which the country's traditionally closed economy has changed in the past 20 years . This is because of the changes in the way the economy has evolved in the last 20 years.
 From 1994 until 1998, an extraordinary famine swept North Korea, killing hundreds of thousands . Hundreds of thousands—perhaps even millions—of people died in the famine .
 In response to its failure to feed its people, the government allowed small markets known as jangmadang to open so that people could buy basic goods from one another or barter .
 The jangmadang represented a rudimentary form of capitalism profoundly at odds with hard-line communism and state control of the economy that had been enforced for decades .
 When famine finally subsided, the regime decided to continue tolerating most of the jangmadang . It may have been a recognition that the state alone could not reliably provide for the majority of its people .
 Around three-guarters of North Korean population depends partly or solely on private market activity in order to survive . According to the most reliable estimates, around three-quarters of North Koreans depend on the private market .
 Mangyongbyong cruise ship is operated by the North Korean state tourism agency . Cruise ships are operated by North Korea's state-run tourist agency .
 So-called gray markets have made it easier to distribute banned technologies and media . More conventional black market has also aided the influx of outside information .
 North Korea currently derives much of its GDP from drug production and trafficking, currency counterfeiting, and money laundering . North Korea's GDP currently derives from drug and trafficking .
 The illicit networks that support such activities have also created distribution opportunities for foreign media, says CNN.com . The illicit network that supports such activities has also created .
 North Korea has a surprisingly robust network that links ordinary citizens to the outside world through contraband cell phones, laptops, tablet computers, and data drives . Today, a motley crew of 5 foreign nongovernmental organizations, defectors, smugglers, middlemen, businessmen, and b
 Digital goods have come to play an important (although often invisible) role in North Korean society . North Korea's digital goods have become an important part of its society, but often invisible .
 More North Koreans than ever before now fully perceive the gap between the rosy picture that the regime paints of their country and its leaders and the far grimmer reality . Thanks to smuggled media, more North Koreans are now fully aware of the gap .
 Many have come to understand that the outside world hardly resembles the wasteland of deprivation, immorality, and criminality that official propaganda depicts . Just as important, many have also come to realize that the world is not a wasteland .
 This burgeoning awareness poses little short-term danger for the regime of Kim Jong Un . North Korea remains highly capable of repressing its people, says South Korean diplomat .
 A growing digital underground might represent a long-term existential threat to totalitarian society . But in totalitarian society where authorities' legitimacy and power depend on their ability to delude the population, a growing underground might be a threat .
 North Korea is sure to remain a potential source of regional instability for a long time to come no matter what outsiders do . With its expanding nuclear arsenal and penchant for provocation, North Korea will continue to be a source of instability in the region .
 Governments, organizations, and individuals seeking ways to make North Korea a less repressive place and a less dangerous international actor should take heed of the power of information to change the country from inside .
 On June 11, 2012, a flash flood hit Sinhung County, in the North Korean province of South Hamgyong, North Korea .
 Han Hyon Gyong desperately tried to keep her family's portraits of the country's founder, Kim II Sung, and his son and successor, Kim Jong II, above floodwaters . A 14-year-old schoolgirl tried to protect her family from the floodwaters in North Korea
 For her efforts, the government posthumously granted her the Kim Jong II Youth Prize . For her effort, she was awarded a posthumous award .
 Her parents, teacher, and Youth League leaders also received awards for helping foster her patriotism .
 Such extreme devotion to the regime reflects the power of juche, North Korean's official ideology . Juche emphasizes the country's self-sufficiency and venerates the rulers of the Kim dynasty as guasi deities .
 In 1974, Kim Jong II sought to systematize juche by issuing a list called ""Ten Principles for the Establishment of the One-Ideology System" Most of the principles involved acknowledging the authority of the supreme leader and pledging total obedience to the state .
 Kim demanded that all North Korean citizens memorize the principles and adhere to them in their daily lives . The order was enforced through weekly ""self-criticism"" sessions and peer surveillance .
 During weekly meetings in classrooms, offices, and factories, citizens recite the ten principles . Citizens are called on to criticize themselves and one another for failing to live in perfect accordance with juche .
 North Koreans begin participating in these sessions around the time they enter first grade . North Koreans participate in the sessions at the start of their education .
 The state does everything it can to ensure that as they grow older, they are exposed to as little contradictory information as possible . The state has inculcated juche into its citizens from a very young age .
 North Korean can commit a crime punishable by consuming banned media . One of the most serious crimes that a North Korea can commit is to consume banned media.
 On a single day in 2013, the government executed 80 people in seven cities for violating such laws, a South Korean newspaper reports .
 Every North Korean household has a state-sanctioned radio that broadcasts official propaganda throughout the day .
 The volume of these radios can be adjusted, but they cannot be turned off entirely . The volume can also be adjusted by adjusting the volume of the radios .
 All news reports and broadcasts go through several rounds of internal censorship before they appear . All news broadcasts and broadcasts are censored before they are published .
 Kim Jong Il's book Guidance for Journalists instructs reporters to carry articles in which they "unailingly hold the president in high esteem, adore him and praise him as the great revolutionary leader"
 North Koreans have no Internet access . With the exception of a few hundred or perhaps a few thousand elites, North Koreans lack access to the Internet .
 Officials are tasked with scouring the Internet for material that they deem safe enough to add to the closed network . Trusted officials will only add select scientific articles and health-related information to the network .
 All households have to register electronic media eguipment with local authorities . All households must register their electronic media equipment with authorities .
 Inspectors go door-to-door to see what's inside people's media players . Sometimes inspectors go door to door to check what's in the media players' homes .
 If they find illegal content, they make arrests and seize the contraband, which they send to their superiors in Pyongyang . The North Korean government sends the content to Pyongyang .
 Prior to the spread of USB drives, forbidden movies and TV shows were often smuggled into the country on DVDs . USB drives were used to smuggle forbidden movies, TV shows and DVDs .
 To prevent people from guickly ejecting and hiding DVDs when a raid began, inspectors shut off the electricity for an entire apartment building before entering it .
 The inspectors would confiscate all the DVD players, turn the electricity back on, plug them in, and press the eject buttons to find out what they had been watching .
 Efforts highlight just how nervous digital technologies make the regime nervous .
 The government's use of the internet is a tool to better surveil its people and inundate them with propaganda . But they are a double-edged sword that also gives the government a tool of surveillance .
 North Korea now has around three million cell phone users . North Korea, with an estimated population of around 25 million, has around 3 million cell phones .
 Almost all of them are limited to the state-run Koryolink provider and network . They can make only domestic calls, which are subject to freguent monitoring . Almost all are able to make calls in the country .
 Some illegal phones have been smuggled into North Korea for use near the border, where they can connect to Chinese networks . Some people now have illegal phones that are smuggled in North Korea .
 Security services use detectors that can track down illicit calls that last longer than five minutes . The security services use the detectors to detect illicit calls lasting longer than 5 minutes .
 To avoid detection, one must make a brief call, relocate, then call again to continue the conversation . So to avoid detection one must move away from the phone, then continue the call .
 Cell phones can carry content that authorities don't want people to see, but they are also easier to track than other conduits of illegal information . Cell phones are a better way of tracking illegal content than other methods .
 Data transfers are monitored tightly and can alert authorities to anyone who might be accessing banned material . Data transfers can be monitored tightly to alert authorities who might have accessed banned material.
 Police officers often stop mobile phone users on the street to inspect their devices for sensitive content . Police officers sometimes seize phones and mete out punishments on the spot .
 Koryolink has incrementally added features such as cameras to its devices . The company has slowly rolled out services such as text messaging and video calling .
 Portable media players are harder to track than cell phones, regime says . Cell phones are also hard to track, but portable media players can be harder to do .
 Many North Koreans can now purchase black-market Chinese-made MP4 devices that play videos stored on smuggled memory cards . The devices are now available on black market in North Korea .
 MP4 players are small, and rechargeable batteries last for about two hours at a time, allowing people to watch movies without needing to plug in . Most North Korean households lack access to electricity .
 North Koreans have also embraced the Notetel, a portable device that can access media like a computer does . It can also function like a television and a radio . North Koreans also use the device to access media via USB drives and memory cards .
 Chinese-made devices began appearing on the black market around 2005 . They cost between $30-$50, depending on the model .
 The regime cracked down on them first but then legalized them in 2014 after reguiring that all Notetels be registered with local authorities . The regime has been cracking down on the popular devices since then .
 Since last summer, defector10 led news organizations have reported that the regime has reversed course and is back to prohibiting the possession of these devices .
 Inspectors sometimes burst into a home and check to see if any media players are warm from use . Inspectors often burst into homes to check if media players have been warm enough .
 Many Notetel users keep a legal North Korean DVD in their device at all times . They can conceal the USB drive holding the illegal media that they've been watching, conceal it .
 The power, and danger, of Notetels is that they overcome "surveillance and power outages,"" Sokeel Park of Liberty in North Korea said in March .
 North Korea viewed from the Chinese side of the Yalu River, September 2016 . North Korea views from China's border with North Korea are seen from China .
 North Koreans have developed various security protocols for watching banned media . North Korea has developed security protocols to protect its citizens from the internet . The North Korean government is cracking down on North Korea's internet .
 Families huddle close together to watch illicit movies and TV shows, sometimes sharing earbud headphones . If held in just the right position, earbuds produce enough sound for a few people to hear .
 The North Koreans most affected by the influx of digital technology are young people . The JanGMADANG generation is the first generation to be affected by digital technology .
 North Koreans enjoy historically unprecedented access to foreign information . Many defectors say this is undermining the grip that juche has traditionally held on young North Koreans .
 Every young defector I have met had watched foreign films and shows, had read foreign books and knew a decent amount about the world outside North Korea before escaping .
 Defectors say they are not unrepresentative in this respect . Many young North Koreans with no interest in leaving their country nevertheless take the risk of obtaining foreign media . Defects say that many young North Korean young people take risks of foreign media access .
 Min Jun: "In our generation, young people get together in each other's homes, put on South Korean K-pop" As Min Jun, a recent defector in his early 20s, told me, ""In our . generation, we get together and have a little dance
 On its own, such exposure to foreign culture probably wouldn't mean much . But it's a good thing to learn about foreign culture, he says .
 Young North Koreans have access to outside media and digital technology . But a number of other factors also set young North Koreans apart from older generations .
 Those younger than 35 are known as the jangmadang generation . They came of age buying food and other goods at small, semilegal markets . Those younger are about a guarter of the population .
 They have rarely, if ever, stood in lines to collect state-allotted rations, as their parents and grandparents did for decades . Their parents, grandparents did, as did their parents, as they did, for decades.
 As a result, they are more capitalistic, more individualistic, and more likely to take risks . They are capitalistic and individualistic and more often take risks, experts say .
 Young North Koreans see themselves as more selfreliant than their parents . Younger North Koreans don't feel as though they've received much of value from their government . Youngers are more self-reliant because they don't receive much value from government .
 North Koreans continue to obey the laws and publicly respect the regime . Young defectors claim that behind closed doors, their friends back home freguently mock the leadership .
 North Koreans have developed a more accurate perception of their country and the world . Many have begun to feel a profound sense of betrayal .
 A totalitarian state built around a cult of personality could be corrosive in totalitarian state . That feeling, in turn, has fed a sense of distrust, which could prove corrosive .
 The regime forbids the formation of unofficial student groups and sports teams . The regime has also banned unofficial sports teams and unofficial groups .
 North Koreans are not allowed to host a social gathering late at night or stay overnight away from their hometown in another person's home . Without express permission, North Koreans can't host a party or stay away from home in North Korea .
 The regime has also made it extremely difficult for North Koreans to trust one another by developing a massive network of neighborhood-level informants and offering rewards for exposing anyone who criticizes the government . North Koreans have also developed a network of informants .
 Authorities have vastly improved their ability to monitor digital communications, making it extraordinarily difficult to send sensitive messages, much less organize . Finally, the authorities have vastly better .
 Anyone with an interest in reducing the threat that the Kim regime poses to its own people and to the rest of the world should support the distribution of foreign information and media in North Korea .
 Traditional diplomacy and sanctions have failed to push North Korea toward political and economic reform . Traditional diplomacy has failed to move Kim toward political reform and away from saber rattling and defiance .
 For decades, some of the world's most persistent and skilled negotiators have sought to engage, entice, and coerce him, his father, and his grandfather . For decades they have sought, enticed, and coerced him into a deal .
 If major powers have undertaken covert actions to encourage a coup, those too have failed . The coup is likely to be a repeat of the U.S. President Barack Obama's failed coup .
 Pyongyang's nuclear weapons now deter any overt attempts at regime change and the use of major military force . North Korea now has nuclear weapons to deter overt attempts to change the regime .
 Boosting the flow of outside information and cultural products may well be the single most sustainable and costeffective way to encourage that . Boosting outside information is the most sustainable way to boost tourism in the U.S. and the economy .
 Nongovernmental 14 organizations in South Korea, the U.S. and elsewhere work to get digital technology and foreign media into North Korea . Governments, philanthropic groups, and individual donors should consider funding nongovernmenting organizations .
 North Korea is trying to get outside information into the hands of North Korean military officers, intellectuals, and political elites . Especially important is efforts to get information into North Korea's military officers and intellectuals . North Korea has not been able to reach out to the outside world for years .
 Nongovernmental organizations train North Korean defectors to collect media products and get them across the border . Also of great value are projects by nongovernment organizations to train defectors .
 Critics say North Korean authorities will have little trouble cracking down if they come to believe that a line has been crossed and that too much illicit information is reaching the public . Critics of such efforts claim that North Korea will be able to crack down if it comes to believe a line is crossed .
 North Koreans have shown an intense thirst for foreign media, says CNN.com . But this position is too dismissive of the intense interest shown in foreign media . North Korea has shown an eagerness to engage with foreign media in recent years, it says .
 North Koreans have tasted forbidden fruit and have made it clear that they want more . North Koreans risk severe punishment just to steal a glimpse of the outside world while hiding under the covers .
 How the Information Underground Is Transforming a Closed Society is an essay from which this essay is adapted . How the information Underground is transforming a closed society is a book .
 As it became clear that the attacks had been carried out by jihadist terrorists, I came to feel a new sense of responsibility toward my son . The father-of-one says he feels responsibility for his son beyond the intense demands of parenthood .
 Ambassador to Russia: "I try to bring to my work an attitude of openness to ideas and possibilities" "Today, I am the ambassador of the United Arab Emirates to Russia," she says .
 I have written a series of letters to Saif, with the intention of opening his eyes to some of the guestions he is likely to face as he grows up .
 I want my sons and their generation of Muslims to understand how to be faithful to Islam and its deepest values while charting a course through a complex world . I want them to understand Islam's deepest values, its deepest value .
 I want them to discover through observation and thought that there need be no conflict between Islam and the rest of the world . I want to make it clear that Islam is not a problem in the world, he says .
 "I want them to understand that even in matters of religion, there are many choices that we must make," she says . She says .
 I want my sons' generation of Muslims to realize that they have the right to think about and to decide what is right and what is wrong, what is Islamic . What is Islamic and what's peripheral to the faith is peripheral to it, he says .
 Others say violent extremists who belong to groups such as the Islamic State are not true Muslims . Others say that violent extremists such as Islamic State extremists are not Muslims .
 Although I loathe what the terrorists do, I realize that according to the minimal entry reguirements for Islam, they are Muslims . I'm a Muslim, but I'm not afraid to admit that they're Muslims, even though I'm loathe .
 Islam demands only that a believer affirm that there is no God but Allah and that Muhammad is Muhammad is his messenger . Islam demands that there be no God, Muhammad is Allah's messenger .
 Major religious institutions in the Islamic world have refused to label them as non-Muslims, even while condemning their actions . That is why major religious institutions have rightly refused to name them as Muslims .
 It is too easy to say that jihadist extremists have nothing to do with us. It's too easy for the UK to think that terrorists are nothing to blame for our problems .
 Even if their readings of Islamic Scripture seem warped and out-of-date, they have gained traction . Even if they seem warped, they've gained traction. Even though their readings may seem warped or out of date .
 As extremists' ideas have spread, the circle of Muslims clinging to other conceptions of Islam has begun to shrink . What worries me is that as extremism' ideas spread, Muslims cling to other ideas of Islam have begun to shrinks .
 Only extremists seem to speak and act in the name of Islam . And as it has shrunk, it has become guieter and more and more . Only the extremists speak out against Islam, only the extremists .
 We need to speak out, but it's not enough to declare in public that Islam is not violent or radical or angry . Islam is a religion of peace, but Islam is peace, says the Muslim leader .
 We need to demonstrate how it is expressed in our lives and the lives of those in our community . We must show that it is reflected in our own lives .
 I am not saying that Muslims such as you and I should accept blame for what terrorists do. I'm not saying we should accept that Muslims should accept responsibility for terrorism, I said . I'm happy to say that Muslims are not accepting responsibility for what they do, he said .
 I'm saying that we can take responsibility by demanding a different understanding of Islam . I am saying that . We can take . responsibility for demanding a . different understanding, he said .
 We can make clear, to Muslims and non-Muslims, that another reading of Islam is possible and necessary . We can also make clear that Islam is not just Islam, but Islam is a matter of concern .
 We need to act in ways that make clear how we understand Islam and its operation in our lives, says Mohammed Ali . And we need to make clear that Islam is not just a religion, says Ali .
 I believe we owe that to all the innocent people, both Muslim and non-Muslim, who have suffered at the hands of our coreligionists in their misguided extremism . I believe that we owe it to all those innocent people .
 Many people outside the Muslim world have become committed Islamophobes fearing and even hating people like you and me, sometimes with the encouragement of political leaders . Taking that sort of responsibility is hard, especially when people outside of Muslim world fear and hate people like yourself and me .
 When you feel unjustly singled out and attacked, it's not easy to look at your beliefs and think them through, 19 especially in a public way . You can't think about your beliefs in public .
 You may be certain of your beliefs about something today, only to wake up with doubts tomorrow . You may have doubts about something you believe about today or tomorrow .
 Many Muslims are leery of acknowledging any gualms about their own beliefs . To admit this in today's environment is risky, many Muslims are wary of acknowledging their beliefs .
 Some of the greatest scholars of Islam went through periods of confusion and doubt . Some of Islam's greatest scholars were at times of confusion or doubt .
 Abu Hamid al-Ghazali was born in Persia in the eleventh century . He has been hugely influential in Islamic thought since then . The philosopher and theologian is a major figure in Islamic history .
 His works are treasured today, but during his own lifetime, he was so doubtful about many things that he withdrew from society for a decade . He withdrew from social life for 10 years, withdrawing from society .
 Although we don't know much about what troubled him, it's clear that he was unsure and even fearful . The actor was clearly fearful and unsure when he died .
 Ghazali, who until then had been esteemed as a scholar of orthodox Islam, brought Sufism, a spiritual strain of Islam, into the mainstream . He was renowned for his work in the field of Islamic literature .
 He opened up Islamic religious experience to spiritualism and poetry, which many considered foreign to the faith .
 Some Muslims demand that we accept only ideas that are Muslim in origin . Ideas that appear in the Koran, the early dictionaries of the Arabic language, the sayings of the Prophet, and the biographies .
 Meanwhile, we must reject foreign ideas such as democracy, they say . Meanwhile, they maintain. Meanwhile, democracy is not possible in the U.S.
 Democracy is a sin against Allah's power, against his will, and against his sovereignty, they say . Confronted with more liberal views, which present discussion, debate, and consensus building as ancient Islamic traditions, they contend .
 From reading many of their statements, it is clear that they have little understanding of how people can come together to make communal decisions . In fact, from reading them, it was clear that many of them have little knowledge of how they can make collective decisions .
 The government that I represent is a monarchy, but I feel no need to condemn proponents of democratic reform as heretics . I'm not a monarch, but a democratic reformer, I'm a democrat, I say . The government is a constitutional monarchy .
 I might not always agree with them, but their ideas are not necessarily un-Islamic . I might always agree, but I might agree to them, I think they're not unIslamic. I might never agree to disagree with them. But their ideas, I might say .
 As extremist ideas have spread, the circle of Muslims clinging to other conceptions of Islam has begun to shrink .
 Muslims are concerned about the mixing of the sexes . Muslims believe mixing of sexes is a foreign practice in Islam .
 Some Muslim-majority countries mandate the separation of the sexes in schools, universities, and the workplace . The separation of sexes is a key part of Muslim culture .
 Authorities in these countries present such rules as being ""truly Islamic"" and argue that they solve the problem of illicit relationships outside of marriage . Authorities in some countries present them as being 'truly Islamic' and say they solve  the problem .
 Research and study of such issues, often forbidden, might show that no such effect exists . But research could show that such an effect exists, experts say .
 Governments in much of the Muslim world have no satisfactory answers to those questions, because they often don't bother to ask them . Governments in many Muslim countries have no answers to the questions, says CNN's Richard Quest .
 Saif, 21, was brought up in a household where women are strong, educated, focused, and hard-working . You have been brought up with a strong family, including your mother . Saif's mother is a strong and focused woman, he says .
 If someone suggested to you that men are somehow more valuable or more talented than women, you would scratch your head . If you think men are more valuable and more talented, you'd scratch it out of your head.
 When I was your age, sermons that I heard at mosgue taught that women were inherently inferior. But when I was . age, I heard sermons . that taught that . women were . inherently inferior, he said .
 Men are strong, intelligent, and emotionally stable—natural breadwinners . Men were strong and intelligent, emotionally stable . Men are also strong and smart enough to be successful men .
 That view of women persists in parts of the Muslim world, as well, as in many other places . That view persists in many Muslim countries, including the U.S.
 It is certainly not the only possible view of women afforded by Islam, but it is a powerful belief, and one that enjoys a great deal of political, legal, and financial support .
 I am proud that your mother and your aunts are all educated and work in professions that they chose . I'm proud of your mother, your aunt and uncle, and your aunt, for their education .
 The roles demanded by conservative readings of Islamic texts have hardly stopped any of these women from raising families and taking care of their husbands . Doing so has hardly stopped them from raising their husbands, they say .
 The women in your life defy the strict traditionalist view, which presents women as fundamentally passive creatures whom men must protect from the ravages of the world . They are not just passive creatures, but they are powerful and powerful women .
 Traditionalists base their position on women on a different argument, one that is rarely discussed openly, especially in front of non-Muslims, because it is a bit of a taboo .
 Such relationships develop when a woman lives in a home 22 where she is given little love and self-respect . But such relationships also develop when she is not given love and respect, she says .
 All too often, women are punished for such relationships, while the men involved escape censure . This inconsistency is an unacceptable inconsistency, says author .
 This traditionalist position is based, ultimately, on a desire to control women, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . He says it is based on the desire to 'control' women .
 Women do not need to be controlled; they must be trusted and respected . But women should not be controlled, they should be trusted, respected, she says .
 We trust and respect our sisters, our mothers, our daughters, and our aunts . We must provide the same respect and respect to other women . We trust our sisters and mothers, we must respect other women, we say .
 The Muslim world is home to many sexual harassment and exploitation in the Muslim world . We don't know why we're seeing so many cases of sexual harassment in Muslim countries .
 Saif, I want you to see that there is nothing written in stone that places Muslim women below Muslim men . Saif: "There are no laws that say Muslim women should be below men," he said .
 Treating women as inferior is not a religious duty, it is simply a practice of patriarchal societies . Treating female inferior is a practice, says Dr. Michael Wolking .
 There are many models of how Muslim women can live and be true to their faith . Within the Islamic tradition, there are many examples of Muslim women living true to faith .
 There are Muslim women who have looked into the origins of the hijab and have concluded that there is no hard-and-fast rule reguiring them to wear it . There are also a burga or a nigab, which cover far more .
 Islam calls on women to be modest in their appearance, but veiling is actually a pre-Islamic tradition . Veiling is not required in Islam, but it is an ancient Islamic tradition .
 The limits placed on women in conservative Muslim societies have roots not in Islamic doctrine, but in men's fear that they will not be able to control women . Men fear that women, if left uncontrolled, will overtake men by being more disciplined, more focused, more hard-working, more
 People say it when criticizing official corruption in Muslim countries and when pointing out the alleged spread of immorality . The phrase is often used to refer to official corruption .
 The most famous iteration of this expression is the slogan ""Islam Is the Solution,"" which has been used by the Muslim Brotherhood and many other Islamist groups . The slogan is used by many Islamist groups and is often referred to as Islam Islam .
 The slogan is a shorthand for the argument that all the most glorious achievements in Islamic history occurred under some system of religious rule . All the knowledge production, the wealth—occurred under some religious rule, the slogan says .
 If we want to revive this past glory in the modern era, we must reimpose such a system . Therefore, if we want a revival of the past glory, we need to reimpose the system .
 This argument holds that if a little Islam is good, then more Islam must be even better . This argument is based on the fact that Islam is a good thing, rather than bad .
 ISIS has unbridled enthusiasm for an all-encompassing religious state, or caliphate . The most influential proponent of that position today is ISIS . ISIS, with its unbridged enthusiasm for a religious state or caliphate, is a key proponent .
 The genius of this proposition is that any difficulties or failures can be attributed to the people's lack of faith and piety . ISIS and the Muslim Brotherhood are among the fanatical theocrats of the Islamic world .
 Leaders need not fault themselves or their policies; citizens need not guestion their values or customs . Leaders should not be faulted for their policies or values, but for their citizens .
 "Piety will take us only so far, and relying entirely on Allah to provide for us, to solve our problems, to feed and educate and clothe our children," she says .
 The Arab nation, the Arab street, and the Islamic ummah are important to the Muslim community, writes Saif Ahmed .
 Muhammad had built a large group of followers out of nothing . At some stage, it became big enough to be referred to as a distinct entity . Muhammad's followers are now considered a distinct group .
 The concept of the ummah has allowed self-appointed religious authorities to speak in the name of all Muslims without ever asking the rest of us what we think . But the concept has been allowed to be used by religious authorities .
 The idea of an ummah also makes it easier for extremists to depict Islam as standing in opposition to the West, or capitalism, or to any number of other things . Extremist extremists can depict Islam and all of the world's Muslims as opposition to capitalism, capitalism or other things
 In that conception of the Muslim world, the individual's voice comes second to the group's voice . In the Islamic world, individual's voices come second to those of the group, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 We have been trained over the years to put community ahead of individuality . We have put community before individuality, we have been told . We are proud of our community, we say, and we are committed to it .
 The phrase itself sounds almost unnatural to me, as though it refers to a category that doesn't exist . Muslims have long been encouraged to embrace the worldview that Muslims are supposed to embrace .
 There is no need to return to a glorious past in order to build a glorious future . There is also no need for a return to the glorious past to build the future of football .
 Dialogue and public debate about what it means to be an individual in Muslim world would allow us to think more clearly about personal responsibility, ethical choices, and the respect and dignity that attaches to people .
 It might lead us to stop insisting solely on our responsibilities to the ummah and start considering our responsibilities . We might come to see ourselves as individuals, not as members of groups allegedly opposed to Islam .
 Instead of asking one another about family names and bloodlines and sects, we might decide to respect one another as individuals regardless of our backgrounds . We might decide not to ask about bloodlines or sects .
 We might begin to more deeply acknowledge the outrageous number of people killed in the Muslim world in civil wars and in terrorist attacks carried out not by outsiders but by other Muslims . We might also acknowledge the number of Muslims killed in Muslim world .
 We might memorialize these people not as a group but as individuals with names and faces and life stories . Not to deify the dead but rather to recognize our responsibility to preserve their honor and dignity . We might also honor those who survive and honor the people who survive .
 In this way, the idea of the Muslim individual might help us improve how we discuss politics, economics, and security . The Muslim individual may help us better discuss politics and economics .
 If you and other members of your generation start looking at yourselves as individuals first, perhaps you will build better societies . If you look at yourself as individuals instead of society, you can help build a better society .
 There is no need to return to a glorious past in order to build a glorious future . You might take hold of your fates and live your lives in the here and now, recognizing that there are no need for a past .
 Our personal, individual interests might not align with those of the patriarch, the family, the tribe, the community, or the state . We might not be the same as the patriarch or the family or the community .
 The embrace of each Muslim's individuality will lead to a rebalancing in the Islamic world in favor of more compassion, more understanding, and more empathy . But the embrace of individual Muslims will not lead to more compassion and understanding .
 If you accept the individual diversity of your fellow Muslims, you are more likely to do the same for those of other faiths, as well . You accept the diversity of Muslims and other faiths .
 Muslims can and should live in harmony with the diversity of humanity that exists outside of our faith . Muslims should also be able to live in peace with people outside of their faith, Muslim leader says .
 "We will struggle to do so until we truly embrace ourselves as individuals," says the author . But we'll struggle to embrace ourselves until we embrace ourselves individually, he says .
 He is the author of Letters to a Young Muslim , from which this essay is adapted . He is also a Muslim .
 No one knows how the foreign policy of the Trump administration will take shape, or how the new president's priorities will shift .
 Not since Franklin Roosevelt's 29 administration has U.S. foreign policy debates this fundamental . But not since FDR's 29th administration has such debates have taken place .
 United States grand strategy has been shaped by two major schools of thought . Both are focused on achieving a stable international system with the United States at the center . The U.S. grand strategy was shaped by the two major school of thought.
 Hamiltonians believed that it was in the American interest for the United States to replace the United Kingdom as ""the gyroscope of world order,"" in the words of President Woodrow Wilson's adviser Edward House during World War I . The financial and security architecture in place for a rev
 When the Soviet Union fell, Hamiltonians doubled down on the creation of a global liberal order, understood primarily in economic terms . Hamiltonians responded to the fall of Soviet Union by doubling down on a global order . The U.S. is now the world's only superpower .
 Wilsonians, meanwhile, also believed that the creation of a global liberal order was a vital U.S. interest . Wilsonians conceived of the order in terms of values rather than economics, not economics .
 Wilsonians sought peace through the promotion of human rights, democratic governance, and the rule of law . Wilsonians saw corrupt and authoritarian regimes abroad as a leading cause of conflict and violence .
 The disputes between and among these factions were intense and conseguential, but they took place within a common commitment to a common project of global order . The disputes were intense but not congrugruential, as well as those of the factions .
 The grip of the globalists on U.S. foreign policy thinking began to loosen in recent decades . As that project came under increasing strain, the grip on the globalist began to loosen .
 Public increasingly disenchanted with what it saw as costly failures the global order-building project began to challenge what the foreign policy establishment was preaching . More nationalist, less 30 globally minded voices began to be heard, and a public disenchaged with what they saw as the costly failures of
 Jeffersonian and Jacksonian schools of thought were prominent before World War II but out of favor during the heyday of the liberal order, have come back with a vengeance .
 Jeffersonians argue that reducing the U.S. global profile would reduce the costs and risks of foreign policy . Jeffersonians, including today's so-called realists, argue reducing the United States' global profile is a good idea .
 The U.S. seeks to define its interests narrowly and advance them in the safest and most economical ways . They seek to define United States interests narrowly, advance them the safest ways .
 Libertarians find allies among many on the left who oppose interventionism and want to cut military spending . Libertarians take this proposition to its limits and find allies with many on left .
 Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas seem to think they could surf the rising tide of Jeffersonian thinking during the Republican presidential primary .
 For Jacksonians, the United States is not a political entity created and defined by a set of intellectual propositions rooted in the Enlightenment and oriented toward the fulfillment of a universal mission . Jacksonians formed the core of Trump's passionately supportive base . The United States should not be defined by intellectual propositions
 It is the nation-state of the American people, and its chief business lies at home . The nation's chief business should be at home, rather than abroad, it says .
 Jacksonians see American exceptionalism as rooted in the country's commitment to the eguality and dignity of individual citizens . Jacksonians say exceptionalism not as a function of the universal appeal of American ideas, or even as a . function of a unigue American vocation to transform the world
 Jacksonians believe the U.S. government is to fulfill the country's destiny by looking after the well-being of the American people in their national home . Jacksonians say that while interfering with individual freedom that makes the country unigue, the government should not interfere with freedom .
 It took a particular combination of forces and trends to mobilize it this election cycle, and most of those were domestically focused . Most of the election cycle was domestically focused.
 In seeking to explain the Jacksonian surge, commentators have looked to factors such as wage stagnation, the loss of good jobs for unskilled workers, the hollowing out of civic life, a rise in drug use . Many associate life in blighted inner cities with conditions associated with life in
 Identity and culture have historically played a major role in American politics, and 2016 was no exception . Identity, culture and politics have historically been a major part of American politics . 2016 was an election year for the first time in the country .
 Jacksonian America felt itself to be under siege, with its values under attack and its future under threat . Jacksonian Americans felt themselves under siege . The Jacksonian U.S. felt it was under attack .
 Trump seemed to be the only candidate willing to help Jacksonians fight for its survival . Trump was the only person willing to fight for the city's survival .
 Not since Franklin Roosevelt's administration has U.S. foreign policy debates this fundamental . Not since FDR's administration, foreign policy has been debated in the United States . The debate is the first in decades to be debated over foreign policy .
 For Jacksonian America, certain events galvanize intense interest and political engagement, however brief . For Jacksonians, these events galvanized interest and engagement, but brief . This week's events will be remembered for their impact .
 When an enemy attacks, Jacksonians spring to the country's defense, says historian . One of these is war, when an enemy is at risk, the Jacksonians will defend themselves .
 The most powerful driver of Jacksonian political engagement in domestic politics is the perception that Jacksonians are being attacked by internal enemies, such as an elite cabal or immigrants .
 Jacksonians worry about the U.S. government being taken over by malevolent forces bent on transforming the United States' essential character . Jacksonians are concerned about the future of the country's essential character being transformed .
 They are not obsessed with corruption, seeing it as an ineradicable part of politics, they say . They see it as a part of their own country's future . They say they are not interested in corruption, but they are concerned about it being ineliable .
 They care deeply about what they see as perversion, when politicians try to use the government to oppress the people rather than protect them, they say . They say they care deeply .
 Many Jacksonians came to feel powerful forces in the U.S. elite, including the political establishments of both major parties, in cahoots against them . And that is what many Jacksonians felt was happening in recent 33 years .
 Jacksonians came to believe that the American establishment was no longer reliably patriotic, with ""patriotism"" defined as an instinctive loyalty to the well-being and values of Jacksonian America . Many Jacksonians believed that the establishment was not reliably patriotic .
 Many Americans with cosmopolitan sympathies see their main ethical imperative as working for the betterment of humanity in general . Many Americans are cosmopolitan, but not cosmopolitan. They see their moral duty as helping humanity .
 Jacksonians locate moral community closer to home, in fellow citizens who share a common national bond . Jacksonians look for moral community in their own country .
 If the cosmopolitans see Jacksonians as backward and chauvinistic, Jacksonians return the favor by seeing the cosmopolitan elite as near treasonous . People who think it is morally guestionable to put their own country, and its citizens, first .
 Jacksonian distrust of elite patriotism has been increased by the country's selective embrace of identity politics in recent decades . Identity politics has been a major problem in the United States .
 The contemporary American scene is filled with civic, political, and academic movements celebrating various ethnic, racial, gender, gender and religious identities . The contemporary U.S. scene is full of civic and political movements .
 Elites have gradually welcomed demands for cultural recognition by African Americans, Hispanics, women, the LGBTQ community, Native Americans, Muslim Americans . Elites are gradually welcoming demands for recognition by many of them .
 Most Jacksonians don't see themselves as fitting neatly into any of those categories . Yet the situation is more complex for most Jacksonians, who don't think they fit neatly .
 Whites who organize around their specific European ethnic roots can do so with little pushback . Italian Americans and Irish Americans, for example, have long and storied traditions in the parade of American identity groups . Whites are able to organize around specific European roots without pushback.
 There are taboos against claiming a generic European American or white identity . But increasingly, those older ethnic identities have faded, and there is taboos .
 Many white Americans find themselves in a society that talks constantly about the importance of identity . White Americans find that identity offers economic benefits and social advantages based on identity—for everybody but them .
 For Americans of mixed European background or for the millions who think of themselves simply as American, there are few acceptable ways to celebrate or even connect with one's heritage .
 Jacksonians see American exceptionalism not as a function of the universal appeal of ideas, but as rooted in the country's commitment to the equality and dignity of individual American citizens . Jacksonians believe that America's exceptionalism is rooted in its commitment to equality .
 There are many reasons for this, rooted in a complex process of intellectual reflection over U.S. history . The reasons don't necessarily make intuitive sense to unemployed former factory workers and their families .
 Growing resistance among many white voters to what they call "political correctness" and a growing willingness to articulate their own sense of group identity can sometimes reflect racism, but they need not always do so .
 People constantly told that they are racist for thinking in positive terms about what they see as their identity may decide that racist is what they are, and that they might as well make the best of it .
 The rise of the so-called alt-right is at least partly rooted in this dynamic, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The emergence of the Black Lives Matter movement and the scattered, sometimes violent expressions of anti-police sentiment in recent years compounded the Jacksonians' sense of cultural alienation . It's not simply because of race, but it's because of the emergence of Black Lives Matters .
 Jacksonians instinctively support the police, just as they support the military . Jacksonians "immediately support" the police and the military, police say .
 Those on the frontlines protecting society sometimes make mistakes . But mistakes are inevitable in the heat of combat, or in the face of crime, they say .
 It is unfair and even immoral, many Jacksonians believe, to ask soldiers or police officers to put their lives on the line and face great risks and stress, only to have their choices second-guessed by armchair critics .
 Protests that many Americans saw as a guest for justice, therefore, often struck Jacksonians as attacks on law enforcement and public order . Protests were often seen as an attempt at justice, not justice, by Jacksonians .
 Gun control and immigration were two other issues that crystallized the perception among many voters that the political establishments of both parties had grown hostile to core national values .
 Non-Jacksonians often find it difficult to grasp the depth of the feelings these issues stir up . Proposals for gun control and immigration reform reinforce suspicions about elite control and cosmopolitanism .
 Many Jacksonians consider the Second Amendment to be the most important in the Constitution . The right to bear arms plays a unigue and hallowed role in Jacksonian political culture .
 Americans see the right of revolution, enshrined in the Declaration of Independence, as the last resort of a free people to defend themselves against tyranny . But they see that right as unenforceable without the possibility of bearing arms .
 A family's right to protect itself without reliance on the state is not just an ideal ideal but a potential practical necessity . It's something that elites don't care about or even oppose, they say .
 Most non-Jacksonians misread the source and nature of Jacksonian concern . As for immigration, here, here is also a concern, and here is immigration, too .
 There has been much discussion about the impact of immigration on the wages of low-skilled workers . There has also been some talk about xenophobia and Islamophobia .
 Jacksonians in 2016 saw immigration as part of a deliberate and conscious attempt to marginalize 36 them in their own country . But Jacksonians say immigration is part of an attempt at marginalizing 36 people .
 Talk among Democrats about an ""emerging Democratic majority"" based on a secular decline in the percentage of the voting population that is white was heard in Jacksonian America as support for a deliberate transformation .
 Jacksonians hear elites' strong support for high levels of immigration and their seeming lack of concern about illegal immigration . They do not immediately think of their pocketbooks, they do think about their pocketbook .
 They see an elite out to banish them from power—politically, culturally, demographically . They see them out of power; they see them as an elite .
 The recent spate of dramatic random terrorist attacks fused the immigration and personal security issues into a single toxic whole . The attacks have fused immigration and security issues together into a toxic whole.
 In November, many Americans voted their lack of confidence in the governing classes more generally and their associated global cosmopolitan ideology . In short, in November, they voted for a party not a particular party but the governing class more generally .
 Many Trump voters were less concerned with pushing a specific program than with stopping what appeared to be the inexorable movement of their country toward catastrophe .
 Many previous presidents have had to revise their ideas substantially after reaching the Oval Office . Trump may be no exception. Trump may have to revise his ideas substantially .
 It's not clear what the results would be of trying to put his unorthodox policies into practice . Nor is it clear just what would happen if he tried to do so .
 At the moment, Jacksonians are skeptical about the U.S. foreign policy of global engagement and liberal order building . But more from a lack of trust in the people shaping foreign policy than from a desire for a specific alternative vision .
 They oppose recent trade agreements not because they understand the details and conseguences of those 38 complex agreements' terms, but because they believe that the negotiators of those agreements did not necessarily have the United States' interests at heart .
 Most Jacksonians are not foreign policy experts and do not expect to become experts . "Most Jacksonians don't expect to be experts," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If they believe in a leader or a political movement, they are prepared to accept policies that seem counter-intuitive and difficult, they will accept them, says CNN's John Sutter .
 They no longer have such trust in the American establishment, and unless and until it can be restored, they will keep Washington on a short leash . They will keep the U.S. establishment on short leash until it is restored .
 Jacksonians know that Trump is ungueguivocally on their side . To paraphrase what Irving Kristol wrote about Senator Joseph McCarthy in 1952, there is one thing that Jacksonian know about Trump . Kristol: "To paraphrase, there are one thing about Trump that he
 The United States' global order-building project is hardly flourishing, the author says . And their concerns are not all illegitimate, he says .
 "The right to bear arms plays a unique and hallowed role in Jacksonian political culture," the mayor says . The right to keep arms is a key part of Jacksonian politics .
 Western policymakers became infatuated with some dangerously oversimplified ideas . Western policymakers are in danger of over-simplifying ideas, say experts .
 They believed capitalism had been tamed and would no longer generate economic, social, or political upheavals . But they believed capitalism would not generate economic or social upheavations . They believed it would not happen again .
 They felt illiberal ideologies and political emotions had been left in the historical dustbin and were believed only by "bitter losers" as Barack Obama famously put it in 2008 . "Bitter" losers are people who "cling to guns or religion or antipathy toward people who aren't
 A liberal world order was simply a matter of working out the details. Time and the normal processes of history would solve the problem, he says . Time would solve it, he writes .
 It is increasingly clear that globalization and automation have helped break up the socioeconomic model that undergirded postwar prosperity and domestic social peace . The next stage of capitalist development will challenge the very foundations of both the global liberal order and many of its national pillars, the author says .
 In this new world disorder, the power of identity politics can no longer be denied . Identity politics is no longer a matter of concern in the new world .
 Western elites believed that in the twenty-first century, cosmopolitanism and globalism would triumph over atavism and tribal loyalties . Western elites believe in the 21st century that globalism will triumph over tribalism . In the U.S.
 They failed to understand the deep roots of identity politics in the human psyche and the necessity for those roots to find political expression in both foreign and domestic policy arenas . The U.S. should use identity politics as a tool for foreign policy .
 Gemeinschaft fought back against the onrushing Gesellschaft, in the classic terms sociologists favored a century ago . And they failed to understand that the very forces of economic and social development that cosmopolitanism and globalization fostered would generate turbulence and eventually resistance
 The challenge for international politics is less to complete the task of liberal world order building along conventional lines than to find a way to stop the liberal order's erosion and reground the global system on a more sustainable basis .
 International order needs to rest not just on elite consensus and balances of power and policy but also on the free choices of national communities . Communities that need to feel protected from the outside world as much as they want to benefit from engaging with it, writes CNN.com.com .
 WALTER RUSSELL MEAD is James Clarke Chace Professor of Foreign Affairs and 40 Humanities at Bard College . He is a Distinguished Scholar at the Hudson Institute . Mead: We need to find a way to make sure that the U.S. doesn't
 In 2014, The Washington Post published the results of a poll that asked Americans about whether the U.S. should intervene militarily in Ukraine .
 Only one in six could identify Ukraine on a map; median response was off by about 1,800 miles . Median response was 1,200 miles off the median response by 1,600 miles .
 This lack of knowledge did not stop people from expressing pointed views . However, they were able to express their views on the internet .
 In fact, the respondents favored intervention in 42 direct proportion to their ignorance .
 The people who thought Ukraine was located in Latin America or Australia were the most enthusiastic about using military force there . Put another way, the people who think Ukraine is located in .
 The following year, Public Policy Polling asked a broad sample of Democratic and Republican primary voters whether they would support bombing Agrabah . Public Policy polling found that the majority of those polled said they supported bombing the city .
 Nearly a third of Republican respondents said they would, versus 13 percent who opposed the idea . The poll was conducted by CNN iReport.com .
 Democratic preferences were roughly reversed; 36 percent opposed, and 19 percent in favor . 36 percent of Democrats were opposed, 36 percent were in favor of Democratic policies .
 Liberal Democrats crowed that the poll showed Republicans' aggressive tendencies . Liberals crowed about the GOP's aggressive tendencies in the poll . The poll was the latest in a long line of polls showing Republicans are aggressive .
 43 percent of Republicans and 55 percent of Democrats polled had an actual, defined view on bombing a place in a cartoon . Experts in national security couldn't fail to fail to notice that .
 Increasingly, incidents like this are the norm rather than the exception, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 It's not just that people don't know a lot about science or politics or geography, it's also that they lack a lot of knowledge about science and politics .
 The bigger concern today is that Americans have reached a point where ignorance is seen as an actual virtue . Americans should be aware of what is generally considered established knowledge in public policy, the author says .
 To reject advice of experts is to assert autonomy, a way for Americans to demonstrate their independence from nefarious elites . Americans should reject advice from experts and insulate their fragile egos from being told they're wrong .
 This isn't the same thing as the traditional American distaste for intellectuals and know-it-alls . It's not the traditional . This is not the case for intellectuals or know-alls, it's a matter of people who want to be intellectuals .
 Principled, informed arguments are a sign of intellectual health and vitality in a democracy . Principled and informed arguments should be heard in the U.S. democracy .
 "I'm worried because we no longer have those 43 kinds of arguments, just angry shouting matches. I'm worried that we're not going to have those kind of arguments," she says. "We're not talking about it, just shouting matches."
 When I started working in Washington in the 1980s, I guickly learned that random people I met would instruct me in what the government should do about any number of things, particularly my own specialties of arms control .
 At first I was surprised, but I came to realize that this was understandable and even to some extent desirable . At first, I was shocked, but then I realized that this is understandable, and even desirable .
 We live in a democracy, and many people have strong opinions about public life, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We live in an open democracy," he says .
 Policy specialists have been subject to lengthy disguisitions on taxes, budgets, immigration, the environment, and many other subjects . Over time, other policy specialists had similar experiences, with laypeople subjecting them to long-formulations .
 If you work on public policy, such interactions go with the job, and at their best, they help keep you intellectually honest . If you're a public policy expert, these interactions are a good thing .
 In later years, I started hearing the same stories from doctors and lawyers and teachers and many other professionals . "I started hearing from doctors, lawyers, teachers and other professionals," she says .
 These were stories not about patients or clients raising informed guestions but about telling professionals why their professional advice was misguided or even wrong . These stories were stories from patients and clients telling the professionals why they were wrong .
 The idea that the expert was giving considered, experienced advice worth taking seriously was simply dismissed . The idea of the expert being giving considered . considered . experienced advice was dismissed .
 By the death of expertise, I do not mean death of actual expert abilities, the knowledge of specific things that sets some people apart from others in various areas . The death of expert abilities is not death of knowledge, but death of specific abilities .
 There will always be doctors and lawyers, lawyers and engineers, other specialists . There will be doctors, lawyers, engineers and other specialists in the world, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Most sane people go straight to them if they break a bone or get arrested or need to build a bridge . And most sane people do it if they need to be arrested, or need a bridge, they say .
 "Experts as technicians" is a kind of reliance on experts as technicians . The use of established knowledge as an off-the-shelf convenience as desired as desired. But that represents a reliance on expertise as technicians as technicians.
 Bernie Sanders was a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination in April 2016 . Bernie Sanders is a former Democratic presidential candidate in Michigan .
 The larger discussions, from what constitutes a nutritious diet to what actions will best further United States interests, reguire conversations between ordinary citizens and experts .
 We prosper because we specialize, developing formal and informal mechanisms and practices that allow us to trust one another in those specializations and gain the collective benefit of our individual expertise . We prosper as we specialize because we trust each other in our own specializations .
 If that trust dissipates, both democracy and expertise will be fatally corrupted . Neither democratic leaders nor their expert advisers want to tangle with an ignorant electorate . Neither do they want to deal with the ignorant electorate, says David Cameron .
 At that point, expertise will no longer serve the public interest; it will serve the interest of whatever cligue is paying its bills or taking the popular temperature at any given moment . Expertise won't serve public interest at that point; expertise will serve cligue interests .
 In the original American populistic dream, the omnicompetence of the common man was fundamental and indispensable . The common man is indispensable in America's original American dream, author says .
 It was believed that he could, without much special preparation, pursue the professions and run the government . He was believed to be able to do so without special preparation .
 He knows that he cannot even make his breakfast without using devices, more or less mysterious to him, which expertise has put at his disposal . When he sits down to breakfast and looks at his morning newspaper, he reads 46 about a whole range of vital and intricate issues and acknowledges, if
 Hofstadter argued that this overwhelming complexity produced feelings of helplessness and anger among a citizenry . He said the citizenry knew itself to be increasingly at the mercy of more sophisticated elites . Hofstadters argued that the complexity of complex issues was to blame .
 In 2015, Ilya Somin observed that the problem had persisted and even metastasized over time . Somin: "The problem has even metastated over time. It has persisted"
 The ""size and complexity of government" have made it difficult for voters to monitor and evaluate the government's many activities, he wrote .
 Voters are no better able to guide public policy than they were in Hofstadter's day, and in many respects, they are even less capable of doing so . Despite decades of advances in education, technology, and life opportunities, voters are still no better at guiding public policy .
 Today, campaigns against established knowledge are often led by people who have all the tools they need to know better . Campaigners often have no idea what they are going on to say .
 Anti-vaccine movement gained its greatest reach among people such as the educated suburbanites in Marin County, outside San Francisco . At the peak of the craze, in 2012, almost eight percent of parents reguested a personal belief exemption from the obligation to vaccinate their children before
 These parents were not medical professionals, but they had just enough education to believe that they could challenge established medical science . They felt empowered to do so, even at the cost of their own and everybody else's health .
 Experts can be defined loosely as people who have mastered the specialized skills and bodies of knowledge relevant to a particular occupation . Experts are defined loosely by people who routinely rely on them in their daily work .
 Experts are people who know considerably more about a given subject than the rest of us . We usually turn to them for education or advice on that topic . Put another way, experts are people with more knowledge about a subject .
 They don't know everything, and they're not always right, but they constitute an authoritative minority . Their views on a topic are more likely to be right than those of the public at large .
 In part by formal training, education, and professional experience, applied over the course of a career . In part, by . education, . experience, and . professional experience . applied to the job .
 Teachers, nurses, and plumbers all have to acguire certification of some kind to exercise their skills . The certification is a signal to others that their abilities have been reviewed by peers and met a basic standard of competence .
 Guilds can use it cynically to generate revenue or protect their fiefdoms with unnecessary barriers to entry . Credentialism can run amok, and guilds can also use it to protect their own fiefdom .
 It can help separate real experts from amateurs or charlatans . But it can also reflect actual learning and professional competence . It can also help separate amateurs and charlatan from experts .
 Beyond credentials lies talent, talent, an immutable but real guality that creates differences in status even within expert communities . Talent creates differences of status even in expert communities, experts say .
 Beyond both lies a mindset, an acceptance of membership in a broader community of specialists devoted to ever-greater understanding of a particular subject .
 Every 48 professional group and expert community has watchdogs, boards, accreditors, and certification authorities . Their job is to police its own members and ensure they are competent and live up to the standards of their own specialty .
 Experts are often wrong, and the good ones among them are the first to admit it . Their own professional disciplines are based on a constant process of identifying errors and correcting them, which ultimately drives intellectual progress .
 These days, members of the public search for expert errors and revel in finding them . Yet these days, the public gives themselves license to disregard all expert advice they don't like .
 We've all been trapped at a party where one of the least informed people in the room holds court, confidently lecturing the other guests with a cascade of banalities and misinformation . We're all trapped at parties where one person holds court .
 The Dunning-Kruger effect is real, and it's real, after the research psychologists David Dunning and Justin Kruger . It's called ""the Dunning" effect,"" after research psychologists .
 The less skilled or competent you are, the more confident you are that you're actually very good at what you do . The essence of the effect is that the less skilled you are is that you are very good .
 We are moving toward a Coogle-fueled, Wikipedia-based collapse of any division between professionals and laypeople . Wikipedia is moving toward the collapse of the divide between professional and layperson, says author .
 Few people are willing to accept that they have a lousy sense of humor or a grating personality . To some extent, this is true of everybody, in the same way as everybody .
 Most people rate themselves higher than others would regarding a 49 variety of skills . As it turns out, most people are more likely to rate themselves highly than others .
 Less competent people overestimate themselves more than others do, study finds . But less competent people underestimate themselves more often than others, study shows .
 A whole battery of studies have confirmed that people who don't know much about a given set of cognitive, technical, or social skills tend to grossly overestimate their prowess and performance . Whether it's grammar, emotional intelligence, logical reasoning, or financial knowledge, studies have shown .
 College students who hand in exams that will earn them Ds and Fs tend to think their efforts will be worthy of higher grades . Chess players, bridge players, and medical students, and elderly people applying for a renewed driver's license, similarly overestimate their competence .
 The absence of a guality called ""metacognition,"" the ability to step back and see your own cognitive processes in perspective . The reason turns out to be the absence of an absence of the guality known as metacognitions .
 Good singers know when they've hit a sour note . Good directors know when a scene in a play isn't working, good singers know what's wrong . Good people are self-aware people who know they're out of their depth, good directors know .
 Their less successful counterparts can't tell . This can lead to a lot of bad music, boring drama, and maddening conversations .
 It's hard to educate or inform people who, when in doubt, just make stuff up . Worse, it's very hard to tell people who just make up stuff up, even if they're wrong .
 The least competent people turn out to be the ones least likely to realize they are wrong and others are right . They are most likely to respond to their ignorance by trying to fake it, and the least able to learn anything .
 The problems for democracy posed by the least competent are serious are serious, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Even competent and highly intelligent people encounter problems in trying to comprehend complicated issues of public policy with which they are not professionally conversant . But even competent people face problems in dealing with complicated issues, such as public policy, they say .
 Confirmation bias is the tendency to look for information that corroborates what we already believe . Most prominent of those problems is confirmation bias, which is often mistaken for confirmation .
 This peer-review process is generally invisible to laypeople, however, because of the checking and adjustments take place before the final product is released . This peer review process is invisible to the laypeople .
 Outside the academy, arguments and debates usually have no external review or accountability at all . Outside the academies, debates and debates often have no outside review, accountability .
 Facts come and go as people find convenient at the moment, making arguments unfalsifiable and intellectual progress impossible . Facts come in and out of context, but intellectual progress can't be achieved in the world .
 The gap between informed specialists and uninformed laypeople often gets filled with crude simplifications or conspiracy theories . And unfortunately, because common sense is not enough to understand or judge plausible alternative policy options, the gap is often filled with conspiracy theories.
 Conspiracy theories attractive to people who have a hard time making sense of a complicated world . Conspiracy theories are attractive to those who have little patience for boring, detailed explanations .
 They are also a way for people to give context and meaning to events that frighten them . They are often a way to give people context and give context .
 Without a coherent explanation for why terrible things happen to innocent people, they would have to accept such occurrences as nothing more than the random cruelty of either an uncaring universe or an incomprehensible deity .
 Just as individuals facing grief and confusion look for meaning where none may exist, so, too, will entire societies gravitate toward outlandish theories when collectively subjected to terrible national experience .
 This is why they spiked in popularity after World War I, the Russian Revolution, the Kennedy assassination, the 9/11 attacks, and other major disasters . Growing now in response to destabilizing contemporary trends, such as globalization and persistent terrorism, they say .
 Donald Trump was a candidate for president of the United States in September 2016 . Donald Trump is a former Republican presidential candidate for the first time .
 Conspiracy theories can produce a moral panic in which innocent people get hurt . At their worst, conspiracy theories can result in a panic, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Even when they seem trivial, their prevalence undermines the sort of reasoned interpersonal discourse on which liberal democracy depends . But even when it seems trivial, they undermine the notion of reasoned discourse on the side of society .
 Political beliefs are subject to the same confirmation bias that plagues thinking about other issues . Political beliefs among both laypeople and 52 experts are subject subject to confirmation bias, experts say . Political opinions among laypeople are often subject to a confirmation bias .
 Political views are deeply rooted in a person's self-image and most cherished beliefs . But misguided beliefs about politics and other subjective matters are even harder to shake, says author .
 What we believe says something important about how we see ourselves, making disconfirmation of such beliefs a wrenching process that our minds stubbornly resist . Put another way, what we believe means something important for us to see ourselves .
 Most people simply drive one another crazy arguing rather than accept answers that contradict what they already think about the subject . As a result of their own biases, most people simply shoot the messenger, to boot . The problem is that most people are unable to see their biases .
 The study found that when exposed to scientific research that challenged their views, both liberals and conservatives reacted by doubting the science rather than themselves . Even more disturbing, the study also found that both conservatives and liberals reacted by questioning themselves .
 Ask an expert about the death of expertise, and you will probably get a rant about the influence of the Internet . WELCOME TO THE IDIOCRACY. Ask an ex-professor about the impact of the internet .
 Digital age has accelerated the collapse of communication between experts and laypeople by offering an apparent shortcut to erudition . The digital age has simply accelerated the decline of communication, writes Andrew Hammond .
 It has allowed people to mimic intellectual accomplishment by indulging in an illusion of expertise provided by a limitless supply of facts . It has been a problem for many of the world's most successful people, writes Simon Cowan .
 The countless dumpsters of nonsense parked on the Internet are an expert's nightmare . They are a dumpster of nonsense on the internet .
 Some of the smartest people on earth have a significant presence on the Internet . Some of them are known as the "smartest" people in the world .
 Ordinary people who already had to make hard choices about where to get their information now face endless webpages produced by anyone willing to pay for an online presence . People already have to choose between newspapers, magazines and television channels .
 Of course, this is no more and no less than an updated version of the basic paradox of the printing press . The printing press is a modern form of printing technology .
 The convenience of the Internet is a tremendous boon, but mostly for people already trained in research . It's mostly for those who have some idea what they're looking for, but who are already trained .
 It does little good, unfortunately, for a student or an untrained layperson who has never been taught how to judge the provenance of information or the reputability of a writer, says CNN.com.com .
 Libraries, or at least their reference and academic sections, once served as a kind of first cut through the noise of the marketplace . Libraries are no longer as a place for libraries, but as libraries, they are a place to learn about the world's business .
 The Internet, however, is less a library than a giant repository where anyone can dump anything . The Internet is less than a library but a repository for anything you want .
 In practice, this means that a search for information will rely on algorithms developed by for-profit companies using opague criteria . For-profit algorithms will be developed by companies using criteria .
 It reguires the ability to find authentic information, sort through it, analyze it, and apply it . It's important to be able to sort through information and analyze it .
 Technological optimists will argue that these objections are just so much old-think, a relic of how things used to be done, and unnecessary now because people can tap directly into the wisdom of crowds .
 The aggregated judgments of large groups of ordinary people sometimes produce better results than the judgments of any individual, even a specialist . It is true that the aggregated . judgments are sometimes better than those of individual individuals .
 This is because the aggregation process helps wash out a lot of random misperception, confirmation bias, and the like . This is due to the process of aggregation and confirmation bias .
 Understanding how a virus is transmitted from one human being to another is not the same thing as guessing the number of jellybeans in a glass jar . Understanding the virus's transmission is not as simple as guessing how many jellybeans are in a jar .
 The whole point of the wisdom of crowds is that the members of the crowd supposedly bring to bear various independent opinions on any given topic . Moreover, the point of crowds' wisdom is that they bring together independent opinions, the author says .
 The Internet tends to generate communities of the like-minded, groups dedicated to confirming their own beliefs rather than challenging them . In fact, however, the Internet is more likely to generate groups of the same-minded people .
 Social media only amplifies this echo chamber, miring millions of Americans in their own biases . Social media is mired in an echo chamber that mires millions in their biases .
 The most innocent and most common are what we might think of as the ordinary failures of science . The most common failures are that they are often the most innocent .
 Individuals observe a phenomenon or examine a problem, come up with theories about it or solutions for it, and then test them . Individuals, or even entire professions, observe and examine a phenomenon and examine it .
 Most errors are eventually corrected, but most errors eventually corrected . Sometimes they're right, and sometimes they're wrong, but not always correct .
 Intellectual progress includes a lot of blind alleys and wrong turns along the way . Intellectual progress has a lot to do, and it's not always easy to discover .
 Experts can go wrong, when they try to stretch their expertise from one area to another . Experts can also go wrong when trying to stretch expertise to another area, experts say .
 This is less a failure of expertise than a sort of minor fraud, he says . He says it's not a real expert in the specific area under discussion . It's freguent and pernicious and can undermine the credibility of an entire field .
 Experts must own their mistakes, air them publicly, and show the steps they are taking to correct them . When they do fail, experts must own up to their mistakes and air them .
 The standards forjudging policy work tend to be more subjective and politicized than the academic norm . This happens less than it should in the world of public policy, says Julian Zelizer .
 Policy professionals should be more transparent, honest, and self-critical about their far-fromperfect track records . Still, for their own credibility, policy pros should be honest about their track records, experts say .
 Laypeople must educate themselves about the difference between errors and incompetence, corruption, or outright fraud . Laypeople should cut the professionals some slack regarding the former while insisting on punishment for the latter. Laypeople, for their part, should educate themselves .
 The skepticism that I advocate amounts only to this: that when experts are agreed, the opposite opinion cannot be held to be certain . When they all hold that no sufficient grounds for a positive opinion exist, the ordinary man would do well to suspend his judgment .
 Russell: "These propositions may seem mild, yet, if accepted, they would absolutely revolutionize human life” The results would challenge so much of what so many people feel most strongly, Russell says .
 Government and expertise rely on each other, especially in a democracy, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The technological and economic progress that ensures the well-being of a population reguires a division of labor, which in turn leads to the creation of professions . In turn, the division of work is created in the workplace .
 Theodore Dwight Woolsey was Yale's first president . Woolsey is a former Yale president . He was elected by Yale's Board of Trustees .
 Dictatorships, too, demand this same service of experts, but they extract it by threat and direct its use by command . The service is essential to dictatorships, but it can be extracted by threat or by threat .
 In a democracy, the expert's service to the public is part of the social contract . In a democratic society, experts must serve the public, and their service is a public service . In the U.S. it's important to ensure that the public has access to information .
 Citizens delegate the power of decision on myriad issues to elected representatives and their expert advisers . Experts, for their part, ask that their efforts be received in good faith by a public that has informed itself enough .
 When that foundation erodes, experts and laypeople become warring factions and democracy itself is a casualty . Democracy itself can become a casualty, decaying into mob rule or elitist technocracy .
 Americans have become almost childlike in their refusal to learn enough to govern themselves or to guide the policies that affect their lives . Americans are almost child-like in refusing to learn and govern themselves, says CNN's John Sutter .
 This is a collapse of functional citizenship, and it enables a cascade of other baleful conseguences . This is the collapse of function, and this is not the first time it has happened in the UK .
 In the absence of informed citizens, for example, more knowledgeable administrative and intellectual elites do in fact take over the daily direction of the state and society, writes David Frum .
 Unelected bureaucrats and policy specialists in many spheres exert tremendous influence on the daily lives of Americans . U.S. politicians and bureaucrats exert enormous influence on daily lives .
 The celebration of ignorance cannot launch communications satellites, negotiate the rights of U.S. citizens overseas, or provide effective medications . And populism actually reinforces this elitism, and populism reinforces it, she says .
 Faced with a public that has no idea how most things work, experts disengage . Experts disengage, choosing to speak mostly to one another . Expert: "Experts disengage" when faced with public's lack of understanding .
 Like anti-vaccine parents, ignorant voters punish society for their own mistakes . Voters punish society at large for their mistakes .
 Americans have developed increasingly unrealistic expectations of what their political and economic systems can provide . This sense of entitlement fuels continual disappointment and anger . Meanwhile, Americans have an increasingly unrealistic expectation of what they expect from the government .
 When people are told that ending poverty or preventing terrorism or stimulating economic growth is a lot harder than it looks, they roll their eyes . Ending poverty and preventing terrorism is harder than they think, they say . It's not easy to end poverty or prevent terrorism or stimulate economic growth .
 Unable to comprehend all the complexity around them, they choose instead to comprehend almost none of it . Then sullenly blame elites for seizing control of their lives, they blame them .
 Politicians are rarely experts on any of the innumerable subjects that come before them for a decision . And politicians are very rarely experts . Politicians rarely become experts on many subjects before they make decisions .
 By definition, nobody can be an expert on China policy and health care and climate change . That's why actual experts are usually brought in to advise the elected laypeople charged with making authoritative decisions .
 Benjamin Franklin supposedly asked what would emerge from the Constitutional Convention being held in Philadelphia . Benjamin Franklin was supposedly asked by Benjamin Franklin what the Convention would emerge . Franklin's answer was "What would emerge"
 Americans forget that the form of government under which they live was not designed for mass decisions about complicated issues . Americans too easily forget that they live in a nation not designed to make complex decisions .
 Neither was designed for rule by a tiny group of technocrats or experts . Neither was meant to be ruled by a small group of experts or technocrats .
 It was meant to be the vehicle by which an informed electorate could choose other people to represent them, come up to speed on important guestions, and make decisions on the public's behalf .
 The workings of such a representative democracy are exponentially more difficult when the electorate is not competent to judge the matters at hand . The working of democracy is difficult when it is more difficult than when voters are not competent .
 Somin: "When we elect government officials based on ignorance, they rule over not only those who voted for them but all of society"
 Too few citizens today understand democracy to mean a condition of political eguality in which all get the franchise and are egual in the eyes of the law . Too many citizens today don't understand democracy .
 "Every opinion is as good as any other, regardless of the logic or evidentiary base behind it," the author says . "They think of it as a state of actual eguality, in which every opinion is valid," he says .
 The sooner American society establishes new ground rules for productive engagement between educated elites and the society around them, the better . But that is not how a republic is meant to work, and that's not how it works, the sooner .
 Experts need to remember, always, that they are the servants of a democratic society and a republican government . Experts must always remember they are servants of the democratic society .
 Their citizen masters, however, must eguip themselves not just with education but also with civic virtue that keeps them involved in the running of their own country . The country's citizens must also have civic virtue to keep them in touch with their own nation, says Nelson Mandela .
 Laypeople cannot do without experts, and they must accept this reality without rancor . Laypeople must accept that they can't do without expert advice, and must accept it . Lay people must accept the reality of the world's need for experts, not rancor, they say .
 Experts, likewise, must accept that they get a hearing, not a veto, and that their advice will not always be taken . Experts must accept they get their advice, not always taken, experts must accept it .
 The bonds tying the system together are dangerously frayed . At this point, the bonds tied to the U.S. system are frayed. At this time, they're all at risk of fraying .
 Public discourse will be polluted by unearned respect for unfounded opinions . Unless some sort of trust and mutual respect can be restored, public discourse is polluted by unfettered opinions . Public discourse must be restored to trust and respect for each other .
 In such an environment, anything and everything becomes possible, anything is possible, including the end of democracy and republican government itself . And in such a situation, anything could be possible, says Julian Zelizer .
 The Campaign Against Established Knowledge and Why It Matters is from which this essay is adapted . The campaign against established knowledge and why it matters is based on the book, "Established Knowledge"
 Donald Trump's election as U.S. president threatens to upend the world's most important bilateral relationship . Donald Trump was elected president of the United States in November .
 As president-elect, he reversed four decades of United States policy when he spoke by telephone with Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen . He declared that the United States was not bound by the ""one China"" policy, the diplomatic understanding that has underpinned Washington's approach to Beijing since
 Trump's actions, however, have only compounded deeper problems in the Sino-American relationship . The U.S. President's actions have only added to deeper problems .
 Recent Chinese policies have fueled concerns that the country seeks to overturn the post-Cold War geopolitical order . China has been accused of trying to overturn a new geopolitical order in recent years .
 Xi Jinping has begun to modernize China's military, gradually transforming the regional balance of power . President Xi Jinping is gradually transforming China's regional power .
 Many observers now believe that efforts to integrate China into the international system have failed . East Asia will have to contend with a dangerous, revisionist power .
 China is not the only revisionist power in the U.S.-Chinese relationship . But it's not only China is a revisionist in the relationship, it's also a major revisionist .
 Since the end of World War II, the U.S. has pursued a strategy aimed at overturning the status guo by spreading liberalism, free markets, and United States influence around the world . Since the war, the United States has pursued an effort to overturn China's status gu
 The United States' posture stokes fear in Beijing and beyond . Just as Chinese revisionism alarms Washington, the U.S. posture in China is also stoking fear .
 As Trump begins his presidency, he would do well to understand this fear . The fear is that he will not be able to live up to his presidency .
 The risk of crises, and even war, will grow if Trump introduces instability into areas of the relationship that posed few problems under previous U.S. administrations, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Trump could ease tensions if he pursues a less revisionist strategy than his predecessors . But he may ease tensions with the U.S. president if he follows a less conservative approach .
 Chinese policymakers deny that their country is a revisionist power . Policymakers deny that they are revisionist powers .
 China says it wants to defend regional status guo that the U.S. is threatening . They claim that China seeks merely to defend a regional status Guo .
 China's claims to many of the region's disputed islands date back centuries, they argue . After all, they say, China's claim to the islands dates back centuries . The islands are disputed by China and the United States .
 Chinese policymakers point out that the ""ninedash line/' a demarcation of Chinese claims that runs along the edge of the South China Sea, has appeared on Chinese maps since the 1940s . The line has been used by Chinese policymakers since then .
 According to Beijing, the South China Sea has always been, and will always be, Chinese territory . China, in other words, remains a status guo power, not a revisionist one. China, however, has always remained in the region .
 China rarely sought to enforce its territorial claims until recently . But even if its claims are not new, China rarely tried to enforce them until recently.
 For the past few years, China has grown increasingly assertive in its territorial disputes .
 Beijing declared an ""air defense identification zone"" over the Senkaku Islands in 2012 . The islands are known in China as the Diaoyu Islands, which are currently controlled by Japan but which China also claims .
 Today, its navy, coast guard, and ""maritime militia"" of fishing boats deny Philippine vessels access to the area .
 China has presided over an extraordinary construction project in the South China Sea . The country has built a string of artificial islands in the region .
 China has drilled for oil in the waters of the contested Paracel Islands, ignoring Vietnamese protests . China has ignored Vietnamese protests and kept Vietnamese ships away from the area .
 China is not the only revisionist power in the U.S.-Chinese relationship . China not only revisionists in the relationship, it's also a revisionist in other key areas .
 Over the past few years, China has modernized its military . What's more important is that China is modernizing its own military .
 Former U.S. Pacific Fleet intelligence chief says China is building coast guard vessels at an 'astonishing rate' Some of the largest coast guard ships in the world are among the largest .
 China is also improving its conventional ballistic missiles, which threaten U.S. bases and ports in the region . The missiles threaten Guam Air Force Base, on Guam, a crucial United States military hub .
 These moves jeopardize the U.S. strategy for projecting power in East Asia, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The move jeopardizes the entire United States strategy, he says .
 In the eyes of all but Beijing, this clearly counts as revisionist behavior . Beijing has been accused of being revisionist in recent years .
 It has touched off a flurry of activity among countries that feel threatened by the U.S. And it has also touched off activity among other nations that are threatened .
 Australia has strengthened its military and deepened its alliance with the U.S. Australia has a strong military presence in the Middle East . It has also deepened an alliance with Washington .
 Singapore is not a United States treaty ally but a longtime U.S. partner . Singapore has increased its defense spending and has begun to work more closely with the United States Navy .
 Hanoi and Washington have begun to move toward closer security cooperation . Despite the legacy of the Vietnam War, the U.S.-Vietnam War has been a major source of cooperation in the region .
 Japanese leaders have rejected military statecraft for more than half a century . Japan has rejected statecraft in more than 50 years . President Obama has been criticized for his lack of foreign policy .
 Japan has reinterpreted its constitution to permit more military activism . Under Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Japan is forging closer ties with other countries worried about Chinese revisionism .
 Taiwanese Coast Guard patrol ship near the coast of Itu Aba, which the Taiwanese call Taiping, in South China Sea, November 2016 .
 Japan's actions to date have been modest, especially when compared with how great powers normally behave when confronted by a rising power in their neighborhood . Changes in the Japanese defense posture often generate alarmist headlines .
 The Japanese public is preoccupied with a lagging economy and an aging society . It has no interest in 67 military statecraft and has disapproved of security reforms pushed by Abe .
 Tokyo could increase its military spending from the current one percent of GDP to two or three percent . But as the world's third-largest economy, Japan has tremendous latent power . A sufficiently alarmed Tokyo could decide to increase its . military spending .
 Chinese officials argue that U.S. interference has caused its neighbors to respond with alarm . But China's own revisionism is to blame, they say . Chinese officials say the United States has caused alarm in China .
 Tokyo stepped up only when it felt threatened, as it did in the late 1970s when the Soviet Union launched a military buildup in Asia . Washington constantly entreated Japan to play a more active military role in the U.S.-Japanese alliance .
 Today, Japan is responding not to United States pressure but to Chinese assertiveness . Japan's response is to China's assertiveness, not U.S. pressure, it's to China .
 Beijing must understand how threatening its actions appear if it wishes to successfully manage its relations with its neighbors and with Washington . Beijing must also understand that its actions are threatening if it wants to manage relations with neighbors and Washington .
 U.S. foreign policy officials argue that the United States seeks merely to uphold the status guo in East Asia . Like their Chinese counterparts, they say they want to uphold China's "status guo" status . The United States says it wants to uphold East Asia's status gu
 They want to maintain military predominance in the region through a policy of a ""rebalance"" to Asia . The policy is designed to prevent a return to an era when countries settled disputes unilaterally and by force .
 The U.S. does favor the status guo . The United States wants to preserve the current global economic system and its network of military alliances .
 At its heart, United States grand strategy seeks to spread liberalism and U.S. influence . But at its heart is the heart of the United States' grand strategy .
 After World War II, the U.S. formed a network of partners, supported by military alliances and international institutions . The United States sought to expand it after the war and sought to strengthen it .
 Prosperity and peace, created through trade and institutions, would prevail among the members of the liberal zone . Prosperity, peace would prevail through trade, institutions, according to the president .
 As democracy and economic interdependence deepened, war would become less likely and respect for human rights would spread . As the zone widened, peace would be less likely, respect would spread, he said .
 Washington sought to pull countries into its orbit, regardless of whether they accepted its values . Washington sought the pull of the U.S. regardless of what it believed, it said .
 In time, perhaps engagement with the U.S. and with the liberal order would encourage the spread of liberalism to those countries, too .
 The U.S. has pursued this transformational grand strategy all over the world, says President Obama . The United States has pursued it all over, says Obama .
 In Europe, after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the U.S. and its allies did not preserve the status guo. The United States and its . allies did . The United . States and . its allies didn't preserve the . status gua .
 NATO has absorbed all of the Soviet Union's former Warsaw Pact allies and some former Soviet territories, such as the Baltic states . Instead, they pushed eastward, enlarging NATO to absorb all of Russia's former allies . NATO has also absorbed some of the former Soviet territory of the Baltic
 In Ukraine, U.S. and European policymakers encouraged the overthrow of a pro-Russian government in 2014 and helped install a Western-leaning one . U.K. and EU policymakers encouraged overthrow of pro-Russia government in Ukraine .
 In the Middle East, U.S. policymakers saw the 2003 invasion of Irag as an opportunity to advance democracy in the region . The 2003 invasion was seen as a chance to advance the region's democracy . The invasion was followed by the 2003 Gulf War .
 During the Arab Spring, they viewed the uprising in Libya as another chance to replace an anti-American dictator . They encouraged the spread of democracy elsewhere as well as elsewhere .
 Underlying the U.S. recent engagement with Iran is a desire to promote liberalization there, too . The United States has been engaged in Iran in recent years .
 The U.S. can encourage liberalism while acknowledging that its grand strategy appears deeply threatening to outsiders . The United States can encourage liberalism while acknowledging its strategy appears to be deeply threatening .
 In East Asia, the U.S. has maintained and strengthened its longtime alliances with Australia, Japan, and the Philippines . The United States has also courted new partners, such as Malaysia and Singapore .
 With its policy toward Vietnam, the United States may encourage a dramatic change in the regional status guo . And with its policy, the U.S. may encourage the change in Vietnam's status .
 Vietnam's relations with the United States have been bitter since the Vietnam War . Historically, Vietnam, which borders China, has fallen within its larger neighbor's sphere of influence .
 Vietnam and the U.S. have deepened their economic ties in the past few years . In the past, they have resolved previous disputes, and explored greater security cooperation .
 Vietnam is expanding its military ties with U.S. allies, including Australia, Japan, and the Philippines . Vietnam is also expanding its ties with Australia and Japan .
 In each of these regions, U.S. diplomatic, economic, and military policies are aimed not at preserving but at transforming the status guo . In each region, the United States is trying to transform, not to preserve, but to transform the status Guo .
 U.S. foreign policy elites often dismiss the notion of ""spheres of influence" as outdated, Cold War-era thinking .
 The U.S. goal is to replace the old-fashioned competition for spheres of influence with a single liberal sphere led by the United States . The United States wants to replace an old fashioned competition with a one liberal sphere of influence .
 China has gained greater influence in institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank . China is gaining influence in the world's most powerful institutions .
 The country both profits from and—increasingly, by virtue of its wealth, talent, and expertise—contributes to the liberal order . The U.S. is increasingly prosperous and contributes to that order .
 Its military modernization and regional assertiveness challenge U.S. primacy in Asia . It challenges the principle that countries should resolve territorial disputes through peaceful adjudication . The United States should resolve its territorial disputes peacefully, the Hague says .
 China has introduced significant economic reforms in recent years . Many observers believe the country's support for liberal economic development is behind reforms .
 Beijing argues that the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, a Chinese-led international development bank, will uphold good governance and environmental protection . Beijing says the bank is committed to good governance .
 It harasses, arrests, and tortures political activists and suspected enemies . It represses secessionist groups, such as the Mongolians, the Tibetans, and the Uighurs .
 China obstructs its liberal partners' efforts to promote 71 human rights across the globe . China also obstructs attempts to promote human rights in 71 countries .
 In the 1990s, China opposed UN intervention in Bosnia and Kosovo, arguing that the West should respect national sovereignty . China has been critical of the West's intervention in the past .
 China has vetoed multiple UN Security Council resolutions calling for a political solution to Syria . And regarding Syria, China has vetoed multiple UN . Security Council resolution calling for political solution has been blocked .
 President Barack Obama attends a town hall meeting in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, May 2016 . President Obama was in Vietnam for the first time .
 For illiberal countries, the inherently transformational nature of U.S. grand strategy appears deeply threatening . United States foreign policy elites too often fail to recognize this, says Julian Zelizer .
 U.S. and European efforts to encourage Ukraine to join NATO and the EU menaced Russia . Russian President Vladimir Putin lashed out at the efforts . Putin's comments come in response to the efforts of the EU and the United States .
 This is not to excuse Putin's military aggression; he had other choices . Putin had 'other choices' to make, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 NATO members' inability to see how the expansion of their alliance threatened Russia represented a serious failure of strategic empathy . NATO's failure of empathy is a serious problem for the U.S. But NATO members must see how Russia's expansion of its alliance threatens Russia, writes CNN.com's
 In East Asia, adding Vietnam to the list of U.S. regional partners would seem to follow naturally from a strategy of spreading democracy and free markets . It might insulate a liberalizing Vietnam from the coercive influence of its powerful neighbor .
 A U.S. alliance with Vietnam would represent a dramatic departure from the status guo, and China would see it as such . But a . United States alliance with . Vietnam would be a departure from . the status . guo . China would consider it a departure .
 China could react in similar way to Vietnam as Russia did toward Ukraine, analysts say . U.S. foreign policy analysts sometimes invoke the benefits of closer relations with Hanoi without mentioning how threatening it would appear to Beijing .
 U.S. policymakers should not automatically defer to China and Russia, says U.N. policymakers . United States should not defer to Russia and China, it should not, say officials . Russia and the United States have a long history of economic cooperation .
 The U.S. needs to take into account how these great powers will likely react to its policies . But to understand the real tradeoffs of a given policy, they need to take account how they will react, he says .
 The United States' transformational strategy has had, and will continue to have, a profoundly positive effect on the world . One can argue that the U.S. has had a transformational . effect on world .
 One can argue that it is simply a manifestation of self-interested U.S. expansionism . Or one can argue the United States is simply seeking to expand itself .
 It's hard to argue that U.S. policy has sought to support the status guo . It's not easy to argue, however, that United States policy has been favorable to China . China's relationship with the United States has been strained in recent years .
 Proponents of the post-World War II U.S. grand strategy might argue that there is no reason to adjust it now . Proponents say there are no reasons to adjust the grand strategy .
 They might insist that challenges from China and Russia demand, if anything, a stronger U.S. commitment to spreading liberalism . But they might insist, if nothing, they might say, that challenges must be met with a strong commitment to liberalism .
 The U.S. should strengthen its security commitments in eastern Europe and extend new ones there. According to this view, the United States should strengthen security commitments .
 In Asia, the U.S. should strengthen its alliances, align itself more closely with Vietnam, and clarify its commitment to defend Taiwan .
 China, unlike the Soviet Union, does not have a revolutionary ideology . China is not a communist state, unlike Russia, it is a socialist state .
 Realist critics might caution that as the global balance of power changes, so must U.S. grand strategy . By contrast, realist critics may caution that the United States grand strategy must change .
 China's rise and Russia's resurgence make this strategy too provocative . Today, however, China's . rise and . Russia's . resurgence make it too provocative to engage in such a provocative strategy .
 Washington must be wary of a growing risk of great-power conflict, says U.S. expert . Washington must also be wary, he says, of a potentially catastrophic escalation . All three countries possess nuclear weapons, including Russia .
 Critics would have Washington prioritize great-power stability over its transformational goals . These critics would rather have Washington prioritized stability over security goals .
 The best way forward is a compromise between the approach of the liberal internationalists and that of the realists . The realists are realists, the realist, the internationalists say . The world's future is in the hands of Russia and the future of the West .
 Washington should continue to look for opportunities to promote liberalism, but it should do so through less threatening policies and in regions where its actions are less likely to have strategic repercussions for U.S. relationships with some of the world's most powerful countries .
 The United States can support the building of institutions and civil society in Africa, Latin America, and parts of Asia and the Middle East without threatening the core interests of other great powers . For example, the U.S. can support institutions in Africa and Latin America .
 U.S. policymakers should be wary of extending alliances to the borders of China or Russia or advancing democracy within those 74 countries . The United States should not extend alliances to China's borders or Russia's borders, say experts .
 If Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee, had won the presidential election, the U.S. would probably have continued to pursue its transformational strategy .
 It's much less clear how Trump's presidency will shape U.S. grand strategy and relations with China . It's unclear how it will shape the United States grand strategy in China .
 On the one hand, the Trump administration could prove destabilizing . On the other hand, it could prove deeply destabilizing for the U.S. President .
 Trump's phone call with the Taiwanese president has introduced real uncertainty about U.S. policy toward Taiwan . The call could shatter a delicate compromise that has held for four decades .
 If the Trump administration pokes sticks into more areas where previous U.S. and Chinese governments have forged compromises, it will preside over a deterioration of an already troubled relationship .
 Trump could reduce tensions if he proves less assertive about promoting liberalism than liberal internationalists who have presided over U.S. foreign policy since the end of the Cold War .
 Although Trump has not outlined his views on grand strategy, he seems less concerned with transforming the world's political system . He seems more interested in making good bilateral deals for the United States .
 Vietnam is a weak nation embroiled in a territorial dispute with a great power . So Trump might dismiss an alliance with Vietnam as a bad deal . Trump cares little about promoting further liberalization in Asia .
 If Trump's pragmatism makes him more willing than liberal internationalists to compromise, his leadership could prove stabilizing in this respect .
 In attempting to transform anarchy into liberal order, the U.S. has pursued an idealistic, visionary, laudable goal . The United States has pursued a laudable, visionary goal .
 The United States and its partners need not necessarily defer to that fear, but they must understand it . The U.S. and its allies must understand that fear .
 JENNIFER LIND is Associate Professor of Government at Dartmouth College . She is a Dartmouth professor of Government .
 The impulsiveness, combativeness, and recklessness that characterized Donald Trump's election campaign have survived the transition into the presidency . What is clear, however, is that the impulsiveness and combativeness that characterized his election campaign has survived . The president's impulsiveness has survived, but not
 Trump has continued to challenge accepted norms, break with diplomatic traditions . He has responded to perceived slights or provocations with insults or threats of his own .
 The core of his foreign policy message is that the U.S. 77 will no longer allow itself to be taken advantage of by friends or foes abroad . President Obama has said he will not allow the United States to take advantage of others abroad .
 After decades of ""losing"" to other countries, he says he is going to put ""America first"" and start winning again .
 President Richard Nixon developed the ""madman theory" to frighten his adversaries into believing he was so volatile he might do something crazy if they failed to meet his demands . Trump's reputation for volatility is firmly established, and he seems particularly well suited to employ that tactic .
 The problem is that negotiations sometimes fail, and adversaries are themselves often brazen and unpredictable . "Negotiations sometimes fail," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Nixon's madman theory —designed to force the North Vietnamese to compromise —did not work . After all, Nixon's 'madman theory' did not work, says historian .
 Putting the theory into practice reguires the capacity to act judiciously at the appropriate moment, something that Trump, as president, has yet to demonstrate . Trump has not demonstrated that he is capable of acting judically at appropriate times .
 A failed diplomatic gambit can lead to political instability, costly trade disputes, the proliferation of dangerous weapons, or even war . A failed business deal allows both parties to walk away unscathed if disappointed, a failed deal can be disastrous .
 History is littered with examples of leaders who, like Trump, came to power fueled by a sense of national grievance, only to end up mired in a military, diplomatic, or economic conflict they would come to regret .
 There is a real risk that events will turn out far worse . Trump's erratic style and confrontational policies could destroy an already fragile world order . Iran, China, or North Korea are the most likely targets .
 In the narratives that follow, everything described as having taken place before mid-March 2017 actually happened . The narratives follow the events described in the narratives below .
 That which takes place after that date is—at least at least at the time of publication—fiction .
 It is September 2017, and the White House is consumed with a debate about options for escalation with Iran . It's September 2017 .
 Another dozen Americans have been killed in an Iranian-sponsored attack on U.S. soldiers in Irag, Iran . President Obama frustrated that previous air strikes in Iran failed to deter this sort of deadly aggression .
 He is tempted to retaliate much more aggressively this time but also knows that doing so risks involving U.S. troops even further in what is already a costly and unpopular war . He had promised to avoid the sort of ""mess"" he had promised .
 President Obama now sees that this conflict probably became inevitable when he named his foreign policy team and first started to implement his new approach toward Iran . Looking back, he now sees this conflict became inevitable .
 Well before his election, Trump had criticized the Iran nuclear agreement as ""the worst deal ever negotiated"" and promised to put a stop to Iran's "aggressive push to destabilize and dominate" the Middle East .
 Some of his top 79 advisers were deeply hostile to Iran and known to favor a more confrontational approach . His first national security adviser, Michael Flynn, Michael Pompeo, Mike Pompeo and Steve Bannon are among them .
 Trump whipped up anti-Iranian feelings and consistently misled the public about what the nuclear deal entailed . Trump consistently misled public about the deal, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Critics claimed the rhetoric was reminiscent of the Bush administration's exaggerations of Irag's weapons of mass destruction programs in the run-up to the Irag war .
 The administration announced a range of new sanctions on 25 Iranian individuals and companies involved in the ballistic missile program . Two days later, the administration announced the sanctions .
 Iran dismissed the administration's tough talk . Perhaps just as predictably, Iran dismissed it as a nation's toughest talk .
 It continued to test its missiles, insisting that neither the nuclear deal nor UN Security Council resolutions prohibited it from doing so . It insisted neither the deal nor the UN Security . Council resolutions prevented it from testing missiles, it said .
 Ali Khamenei, Iran's supreme leader, taunted Trump for his controversial immigration and travel ban . Khamenei thanked him for revealing the "true face" of the United States, Khamenei said .
 U.S. efforts to get Russia to limit Iran's role in Syria were ignored, adding to the White House's frustration . The White House was frustrated at the lack of cooperation from Russia and Iran .
 Growing U.S. pressure on Iran did not immediately lead to the collapse of the nuclear deal . To the surprise of many, growing United States pressure on Iranian nuclear deal did not lead to a collapse .
 Trump ended the Obama administration's practice of encouraging banks and international companies to ensure that Iran benefited economically from the Iran deal .
 He expressed support for congressional plans to sanction additional Iranian entities for terrorism or human rights violations . Top officials insisted that was permitted by the nuclear deal . He also said he supports sanctions for terrorism, human rights abuses .
 Iran complained that these ""backdoor"" sanctions would violate the agreement yet took no action . Iran complained the sanctions would breach the agreement . Iran said it would be a violation of the agreement if they were imposed .
 By March 2017, U.S. officials were concluding internally that Trump's tougher approach was succeeding . Some of the administration's supporters began to gloat that it was succeeding, they say .
 Iranian ships take part in naval war game in the Persian Gulf and the Strait of 81 Hormuz in April 2010 .
 Different behavior from either side could have prevented relations from deteriorating . Different behavior on either side would have prevented deteriorating relations .
 Iran had continued its provocative behavior, including the unjustified detention of dual U.S.-Iranian citizens, throughout the spring . Hardline factions within Iran had their own interest in spiking the deal .
 Iran's new president declared that in the face of U.S. ""noncompliance,"" Iran would resume certain prohibited nuclear activities, including testing advanced centrifuges and expanding its stockpile of low-enriched uranium . Hassan Rouhani, a hard-liner, defeated Hassan Rouhani in the
 Washington is abuzzed with talk of the need for a new effort to choke off Iran economically or even a preventive military strike . Washington was suddenly abuzz .
 The Trump administration had been confident that other countries would back its tougher approach . The U.S. had warned allies and adversaries alike that they must choose between doing business with Iran and dealing with the United States .
 China, France, Germany, India, Japan, Russia, South Korea, and the United Kingdom all said they had been working on the deal before the U.S. sought to renegotiate it .
 The EU even passed legislation making it illegal for European companies to cooperate with the U.S. secondary sanctions . The EU has also passed legislation banning companies from cooperating with the United States .
 As the United States feuded with its closest partners, tensions with Iran escalated further . The U.S. and Iran have been at odds with each other for years .
 The Pentagon stepped up patrols in the Strait of Hormuz and loosened the rules of engagement for U.S. forces . Frustrated by continued Iranian support for the Houthi rebels in Yemen .
 25 Iranian sailors were killed when an Iranian patrol boat aggressively approached a U.S. cruiser . The incident occurred in circumstances that are still disputed . The United States ship responded with deadly defensive force, killing 25 Iranians .
 The outrage in Iran bolstered support for the regime and led to widespread calls for revenge, which the country's new president could not resist . The outrage bolstered support in Iran, which led to the new president .
 Iranian-backed militia group Kataib Hezbollah killed six U.S. soldiers in Irag . Less than a week later, the Iranian backed militia group killed six United States soldiers .
 Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif spoke directly to the U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry and Iran's Foreign Minister John Zarif in January 2016 . With the American public demanding retaliation, some called for diplomacy .
 The administration wanted nothing to do with what it considered the Obama administration's humiliating appeasement of Iran . Obama administration considered the move "humiliating" Iran . But the administration did not want to get involved .
 Trump authorized a cruise missile strike on a known Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps intelligence headguarters, destroying three buildings and killing a dozen officers and an unknown number of civilians . The strike was to teach Iran a lesson .
 As nationalist fervor grew in Iran, Tehran escalated the conflict, calculating that the U.S. public had no desire to spend more blood or treasure in the Middle East . Trump's advisers predicted that Iran would back down, but that didn't .
 Kataib Hezbollah and other Shiite militias in Irag, some directed by Iran, launched further attacks on United States personnel . U.S. personnel were killed in the attacks .
 Iran abandoned the limits on its enrichment of uranium, expelled the UN monitors, and announced that it was no longer bound by the agreement . Washington reimposed the sanctions that had been suspended by the nuclear deal .
 CIA concludes Iran is now on the path to a nuclear weapons capability . The president's top advisers briefed the president in the Oval Office .
 Some counseled restraint, but others insisted that the only credible option was to destroy the Iranian nuclear infrastructure with a massive preventive strike . The U.S. is reinforcing the United States presence in Irag to deal with likely Iranian retaliation .
 Pompeo, a longstanding advocate of regime change in Iran, argued that such a strike might also lead to a popular uprising and the ousting of the supreme leader . Pompeo: Such a strike could also lead .
 Once again, nervous allies stepped in and tried to broker a diplomatic solution . The situation has been described as a major diplomatic crisis .
 They tried to put the 2015 nuclear deal back in place, arguing that it now looked attractive by comparison by comparison . The 2015 deal was put in place last year .
 U.S. strikes on Iran's nuclear facilities in Arak, Fordow, Isfahan, Natanz, and Parchin led to retaliatory counterstrikes against United States forces in Irag . Iran vows from Tehran to rebuild its nuclear program bigger than before .
 The president had vowed to stop sguandering American lives and resources in the Middle East . He now finds himself wondering how he had ended up at war there .
 China's national flag was raised during the opening ceremony of the Beijing 2008 Olympic Games at the Bird's Nest Stadium in August 2008 .
 Experts are calling it the most dangerous confrontation between nuclear powers since the Cuban missile crisis . It is October 2017, and experts say it could be the worst nuclear confrontation between the U.S. and Russia since the 1960s .
 A clash in the South China Sea has led to casualties on both sides and heavy exchanges of fire . The U.S.-Chinese trade war escalated well beyond what either side had predicted . The United States and China are engaged in a trade dispute .
 There are rumors that China has placed its nuclear forces on high alert . China is believed to have placed nuclear forces in high alert status .
 Of the many foreign targets of Trump's criticism during the campaign and early months of his presidency, China topped the list . China was one of the many targets of the president's withering criticism .
 As a candidate, Trump repeatedly accused the country of destroying American jobs and stealing U.S. secrets . Trump has been accused of destroying jobs, stealing secrets from America .
 Not long after the election, Trump took a congratulatory phone call from Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen, breaking with decades of diplomatic tradition and suggesting a potential change in the United States' ""one China"" policy .
 It wasn't clear whether the move was inadvertent or deliberate, but either way, Trump defended his approach . He insisted that the policy was up for negotiation .
 In February 2017, after a call with Chinese President Xi Jinping, President Trump announced that the United States would honor the ""one China"" policy after all .
 Asia experts were relieved, but it must have infuriated the president that so many thought he had backed down . Asia experts say it must be infuriated by the thought he backed down on the issue .
 Some dismissed the statement as overblown rhetoric, but Beijing did not . Beijing said it would not accept it was overblown . Beijing did .
 Peter Navarro is the author of The Coming China Wars and Death by 86 China . Navarro has written provocative books that describe U.S. relations in zero-sum terms and argue for increased tariffs and trade sanctions .
 Navarro regularly invoked the specter of military conflict with Beijing . Navarro argued that tougher economic measures were necessary not only to rectify the U.S.-Chinese trade balance but also to weaken China's military power .
 The early rhetoric worried many observers, but they took solace in the idea that neither side could afford to confront each other .
 In June 2017, North Korea tested yet another long-range missile, which brought it closer to having the ability to strike the U.S. Trump demanded that China check its small ally and announced ""serious conseguences"" if it refused .
 China had no interest in promoting North Korea's nuclear capacity, but it worried that completely isolating Pyongyang could cause the regime to collapse . China worried that isolating North Korea could cause millions of poor North Korean refugees streaming into China and leaving behind a united Korea ruled by Seoul .
 China agreed to another UN Security Council statement condemning North Korea . China extended a suspension of coal imports from the country but refused to take further action . China has agreed to a UN statement condemning the North Korean state .
 Xi saw the U.S. as a greater danger to China than North Korea was, Xi said . He refused to be bullied by Washington .
 The United States current account deficit with China had swelled, driven in part by the growing U.S. budget deficits that resulted from Trump's tax cuts . At the same time, the United States. current account deficits with China have swelled .
 China's intransigence over North Korea convinced the White House that it was time to get tough . That, combined with China's inaction, convinced the U.S. to get tougher .
 The days of letting China take advantage of Americans are over, experts say . Outside experts, along with Trump's own secretary of state, warn against the risks of a dangerous escalation .
 In July, the administration formally branded China a ""currency manipulator"" (despite evidence that it had actually been spending its currency reserves to uphold the value of the yuan) and imposed a 45 percent tariff on Chinese imports .
 Trump announced the new measures would remain in place until China boosted the value of its currency, bought more U.S. goods, and imposed tougher sanctions on North Korea .
 The president's more hawkish advisers assured him that China's response would prove limited . China's dependence on exports and its massive holdings of U.S. Treasury bonds will prove limited, they say .
 Americans underestimated the intense nationalism that the U.S. actions had stoked . But they underestimated the intensity that the United States had stoked, they say .
 Xi announced that China was taking the U.S. to the World Trade Organization over the import tariff . He imposed a 45 percent countertariff on United States imports . Within days, Xi announced he had imposed the counter tariffs .
 The Chinese believed that the reciprocal tariffs would hurt the U.S. more than China . Americans bought far more Chinese goods than the other way around . The resulting inflation would hurt Trump's blue-collar constituency, the Chinese believed .
 Americans were more willing to make sacrifices than the Americans were . Even more important, they felt they were willing to sacrifice more than other Americans .
 China started using some of the cash resulting from the sales to buy large stakes in major U.S. companies at depressed prices . The move only fueled a nationalist reaction in the United States .
 Trump called for a new law to block Chinese investment in the U.S. President Barack Obama has been critical of China .
 Trump announced that if China did not start treating the U.S. fairly, Washington might reconsider the ""one China"" policy after all .
 Trump speculated publicly about inviting the president of Taiwan to the White House and selling new antimissile systems and submarines to the island . Bannon argued that it was better to have the inevitable confrontation with China while the United States still enjoyed military superiority .
 China responded that any change in U.S. policy toward Taiwan would be met with an ""overwhelming response" Experts interpreted that to mean at a minimum cutting off trade with Taiwan and military strikes against targets on the island .
 Over one billion Chinese on the mainland committed to the country's nominal unity . Few doubted that Beijing meant what it said .
 China's normally tepid National Day celebrations turned into a frightening display of anti-Americanism . On October 1, China's National Day turned into an anti-U.S. anti-America display .
 It was in this environment that an incident in the South China Sea led to the escalation so many had feared . The incident was in a tense environment that led to an escalation in the region .
 A U.S. surveillance ship accidentally rammed a Chinese trawler that was harassing it . The details of the incident are murky, but it was triggered by heavy fog .
 A Chinese torpedo struck and badly damaged a United States destroyer, killing three Americans . A People's Liberation Army Navy frigate fired on the unarmed United States ship . A United States Navy destroyer fired on a Chinese ship, killing the Americans .
 Officials in Beijing wonder whether he even speaks for the administration . They fear that Trump will accept nothing short of victory .
 Leaked U.S. intelligence estimates suggest a large-scale conflict could lead to hundreds of thousands of casualties, draw in neighboring states, and destroy trillions of dollars' worth of economic output .
 With nationalism raging in both countries, neither capital nor capital sees a way to back down . But with nationalism raging, neither city nor country will back down.
 Military parade marking 70th anniversary of the end of World War // in Beijing, China, September 2015 .
 North Korea has just launched a heavy artillery barrage against targets in Seoul, killing thousands, or perhaps tens of thousands . It is too soon to say, but it is too early to say . The next Korean War is likely to be the first in 90 years .
 U.S. and South Korean forces have fired artillery and rockets at North Korea's military positions and launched air strikes against its air defense network . North Korea is now unified under United States command, according to the provisions of the Mutual Defense Treaty .
 Kim Jong Un has issued a statement promising to "burn Seoul and Tokyo to the ground" if the ""imperialist" forces do not immediately cease their attacks . North Korea has a stockpile of nuclear and chemical weapons, a reference to its stockpile .
 Even Trump's harshest critics acknowledge that the U.S. had no good choices in North Korea . North Korea is not a good choice for the United States, critics say .
 North Korea tested a missile capable of delivering a nuclear warhead to the continental United States . Washington had expected some sort of a response when it struck the test launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile .
 Few thought North Korea would go so far as to risk its own destruction by attacking South Korea . But few thought it would go far as far as risking its own own destruction .
 Now, Trump must decide whether to continue with the war and risk nuclear escalation . Trump must choose whether to risk escalation or accept what will be a humiliating retreat .
 Some of his advisers are urging him to guickly finish the job, whereas others warn that doing so would cost the lives of too many of the 28,000 U.S. soldiers stationed on the peninsula .
 Assembled in the White House Situation Room, Trump and aides ponder their terrible options . Trump and his aides ponder the terrible options.
 For more than 20 years, the paranoid, isolated 91 regime in Pyongyang had developed its nuclear and missile capabilities . North Korea seemed impervious to incentives and disincentives alike .
 The 1994 Agreed Framework, a 1994 deal to halt North Korea's nuclear program, fell apart in 2003 when Pyongyang was caught violating it . George W Bush administration abandoned the deal in favor of tougher sanctions .
 Experts estimated that North Korea possessed more than a dozen nuclear warheads in 2017 . North Korea was stockpiling the material for more, experts said .
 North Korea thought to have missiles capable of delivering warheads to targets throughout Asia . They also thought to be testing missiles that could give it the capacity to strike the West Coast of the United States by 2023 .
 Early in the administration, numerous outside experts and former senior officials urged Trump to make North Korea a top priority .
 Accepting total dismantlement of the country's nuclear and missile programs was not a realistic nearterm goal . Most called for negotiations that would offer a package of economic incentives and security assurances in exchange for a halt to further testing .
 A critical component, they argued, would be outreach to China, the only country that might be able to influence North Korea . A critical part of the strategy is outreach to the Chinese, they said .
 Trump announced plans for a $54 billion increase in U.S. defense spending for 2018, with corresponding cuts in the budget for diplomacy . Trump also announced plans to increase the budget of diplomacy for 2018 .
 In March 2017, Tillerson traveled to Asia and declared that ""the political and diplomatic efforts of the past 20 years"" had failed and that a ""new approach"" was needed .
 Critics urged the administration to accompany its military buildup with regional diplomacy, but Trump chose otherwise . Critics urged that the move be accompanied by diplomacy .
 Unlike what his predecessor had done with Iran, he said, he was not going to reward bad behavior . Unlike what he had done, he would not reward Iran's behavior .
 The White House agreed with critics that the best way to pressure North Korea was through China . But it proved impossible to cooperate with Beijing while erecting tariffs and attacking it for ""raping"" the United States economically .
 It occasionally incited South Korea, launching shells across the demilitarized zone and provoking some near misses at sea . The North Korean government occasionally incites South Korea .
 The war of words between North Korea and the U.S. escalated on Twitter . The president said he would not allow Pyongyang to test a nuclear-capable missile that could reach the United States .
 National Security Council meets to discuss North Korean nuke threat . Joint Chiefs of Staff briefed president on his options . Intelligence community picked up signs that North Korea was about to nuke North Korea .
 He could try to shoot down the test missile in flight, but shooting carried a high risk of missing . Even a successful intercept might provoke a military response .
 He could do nothing, but that would mean losing 93 face and emboldening North Korea . He could also do nothing to stop North Korea, which he could embolden the North .
 North Korea could destroy test missile on launch pad with a barrage of cruise missiles . Or he could block North Korea's path to a nuclear deterrent, enforcing his redline .
 These frightening futures are far from inevitable, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter . CNN's iReport: "Learn from the FUTURE"
 For all the early bluster and promises of a dramatic break with the past, U.S. foreign policy may well turn out to be not as revolutionary or reckless as many fear . Indeed, for all the bluster, many fear, it may not be as revolutionary and reckless as
 Trump has already demonstrated his ability to reverse course without compunction on a multitude of issues, from abortion to the Irag war . Sound advice from some of his more seasoned advisers could moderate his potential for rash behavior .
 Imagine if a ghost from the future could have given world leaders in 1914 a glimpse of the cataclysm their policies would produce . The ghost of the future from 1914 could have shown world leaders what would have produced .
 U.S. President Lyndon Johnson could have seen what escalation in Vietnam would lead to a decade later . Or if in 1965, United States President Lyndon . Johnson could . have seen escalation in . Vietnam .
 U.S. President George W Bush could have been shown a preview of the results of the invasion of Irag. Or if in 2003, he could have shown the results .
 In each case, unwise decisions, a flawed process, and wishful thinking did lead to a catastrophe that could have been, and often was, predicted in advance .
 Maybe a massive military buildup, a reputation for unpredictability, a high-stakes negotiating style, and a refusal to compromise will convince other countries to make concessions that will make America safe, prosperous, and great again .
 An earlier version of this article overstated the link between growing U.S. budget deficits and the value of the dollar . The error was corrected after a correction by the Washington Post's John D. Sutter .
 Growing budget deficits would likely lead to a growing current account deficit . But they would not necessarily drive up the value of the dollar . In fact, growing deficits would not lead to an increase in the dollar value .
 From 2013 to 2015, he was Special Assistant to the President and White House Coordinator for the Middle East, North Africa, and the Gulf Region . He was President Obama's Special Assistant Secretary of State Hillary Clinton .
 The intelligence community's mission is to provide national leaders with the best and most timely information available on global affairs and national security issues . Information that, in turn, can help those leaders achieve their foreign policy objectives .
 The president is the country's top intelligence consumer and the only person who can authorize a covert action . Intelligence can provide early warning of brewing trouble, identifying and disrupting threats before they materialize .
 For the relationship between intelligence producers and consumers to work effectively, each needs to understand and trust the other . Intelligence producers and consumer consumers need to trust each other, experts say .
 The most common misperception about the intelligence community is that it makes policy, not information . The intelligence community does not make policy, it makes information, not informational information .
 A new administration considers and articulates what it stands for and what it hopes to achieve . It develops policies and informational priorities, and then it deploys resources of the intelligence community based on those priorities .
 The intelligence community, in other words, cannot operate in a vacuum . Intelligence community, however, can't operate in such a vacuum, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The White House must be disciplined in its tasking . If everything is a priority, then nothing is, the White House will not be able to succeed .
 Without regular dialogue and guidance, the intelligence community will do what it can to respond appropriately to global changes . Intelligence community will improvise ways to balance competing reguests .
 The tradeoffs often go unnoticed by senior policymakers until a crisis exposes deficiencies in intelligence collection . But the tradeoffs are often unnoticed by policymakers until the crisis exposes them .
 The intelligence community needs regular access to all senior national security policymakers, including the president, vice president, secretary of state, defense, homeland security, and national security adviser .
 If the producers of intelligence don't know the status of ongoing operations and negotiations, their product will not be responsive to the consumers' needs and will be dismissed as irrelevant .
 The reward for warning about something too early is to be ignored, and the risk for warning too late is to risk becoming the latest example of intelligence failure . The reward is to warn too late that intelligence failure is to ignore .
 Intelligence producers and consumers need to have established a good working relationship long before the crisis hits . Intelligence producers need to work well together during a crisis, when the stakes are highest . The stakes are at the highest in intelligence when the crisis occurs .
 Personal connections and regular briefings can help establish trust and mutual understanding . Personal connections can help set up trust and establish trust, experts say .
 Noncrisis periods are opportunities to work on the relationship and prepare for the future . When a crisis does hit, there is no time for on-the-job training and coming up to speed on how to best utilize intelligence assets, says CNN.com senior editor .
 The intelligence community's relationship with senior policymakers must be close and trusted . Neither party will be able to do its job well, or else neither party will do it well .
 Intelligence professionals have to be careful not to get drawn into policy debates or partisan politics . At the same time, intelligence professionals must avoid getting drawn into partisan politics, CNN says .
 Intelligence officers should refuse to give an opinion on policy, says David Cameron . Intelligence officers do not make policy, so they should not give it, he says .
 The training and culture of intelligence officers underscore this ethos . Intelligence officers are trained to be 'prepared for the most difficult task'
 The American system of government reguires a new president to place his full trust in the intelligence community . The intelligence community loyally served his predecessor right up until the inauguration .
 This is a lot to ask, especially if senior administration figures have little experience with the intelligence community . The White House has been criticized for its lack of intelligence experience .
 The 99 potential for distrust is high, but intelligence officers are loyal, trustworthy, and committed to serving the president . Intelligence officers will be loyal and trustworthy to serve the president, CNN's John Sutter says .
 They serve without regard to political affiliation and are trained to present their findings without personal or political agendas . They are trained not to engage in political campaigns .
 The briefer found the premise of the guestion abhorrent . Not only did the briefer not know, but as would most of his colleagues, he found it abhorrent.
 The new administration should take care not to make assumptions about the political leanings of the intelligence community . It should not infer that it knows how intelligence officers voted .
 Most members of the intelligence community are careerists who have served under both Democratic and Republican administrations . Unlike in other U.S. government departments, there are many political appointees .
 The whole point of the National Security Act of 1947 . was to foster a professional national security community inoculated against partisan politics . The National Security . Act . which codified modern . governmental arrangements, was . to foster . national security .
 Concerns raised when political adviser was added to the National Security Council's Principals Committee . This is why public concerns were raised when a political adviser is added to a committee .
 When intelligence officers brief senior policymakers, they are there to do a job, not to score political points . Intelligence officers brief policymakers not to be loved or to score politics points, they say .
 Senior administration officials are invested in the policies of their administration, but intelligence officers are not . Intelligence officers are also invested in their policies, but not in the policy making .
 It is the essence of the intelligence community's creed to speak truth to power . Those who do so responsibly are considered heroes of the profession . Intelligence community is proud to honor those who speak out against the government .
 Many assume that the intelligence community tries to predict the future . The intelligence community has a history of predicting the future, including the CIA .
 Intelligence officers present the intelligence that has been collected, assess it, and evaluate possible actions and outcomes . Intelligence officers are presented with the results of their assessment .
 They anticipate possible contingencies and warn about possible dangers, but don't try to predict results . They do not try and predict results, but they do try to anticipate results, they say .
 The relationship between intelligence officers and policymakers resembles that of scouts and coaches . The relationship is similar to that of scouting and coaches, says CNN's John Defterios .
 A scout is responsible for studying the strengths, weaknesses, and tendencies of the other team . Scouting is a job of studying strengths and weaknesses of the opposing team . Scouts are also responsible for scouting the other teams .
 The coach can then decide how to deploy the team and what plays to execute . Armed with that information, the coach then decides how to execute the plays .
 Nobody expects the scout to correctly predict the final score before the game is played . The scout's goal is to help the coach win, but nobody expects him to accurately predict the score .
 The importance of the intelligence community's relationship with the president cannot be overstated . The intelligence community has been in touch with the White House since 2008 .
 Policymakers new to government must understand intelligence operates in a world of uncertainties and changing realities . Policymakers must understand that intelligence operates with changing realities, says David Cameron . The U.S. government has been forced to rely on intelligence to make decisions .
 Intelligence officers are forced to deal with partial bits of information, some sources who faithfully report inaccurate information that they mistakenly believe is correct, and other sources who are deliberately trying to mislead and deceive .
 Intelligence is cumulative, and earlier reports may prove less accurate than later ones, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Intelligence is cumulative," he says .
 As more intelligence is collected, analysts can dismiss some reports that they had once credited . Analysts can now dismiss some of the intelligence that they once credited, analysts say .
 This natural and correct dynamic should not be seen as waffling or simply changing the story . This is not a waffled or simply changed the story, it's a natural and right dynamic .
 When intelligence community gets it wrong, it must own its mistakes . Intelligence community must own mistakes, says Sen. Rand Paul .
 These professionals owe the country, the president, and themselves an understanding of what went wrong, why, and what measures have been taken to ensure the same mistakes are not repeated .
 Former CIA director says CIA needed the CIA in the aftermath of the invasion of Irag in 2003 . No stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction were found, contrary to our judgments, he says .
 I put together a special team to find out where we had gone wrong, and then, borrowing a practice from the U.S. Navy, I ordered a ""safety stand-down" for all analysts at the CIA to ensure that the lessons learned were conveyed to everybody .
 In a culture of secrets, some may try to gloss over problems in hopes that the mistakes are never discovered .
 It is incumbent on the leadership of the intelligence community to hold their officers accountable . The intelligence community should be held accountable and demand that mistakes be acknowledged .
 Policymakers should be able to aggressively guestion analytic judgments and raw reporting without being accused of politicizing intelligence . Policymakers shouldn't be charged with politicizing their intelligence, CNN.com reports .
 Politicization can occur only when intelligence professionals alter their findings to meet policymakers' desires, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Politicization only occurs when intelligence experts change their findings"
 Aggressive guestioning should be welcomed because it forces analysts to defend their reasoning . It leads to deeper understanding of the raw reporting that underlies their judgments, CNN.com senior editor says .
 Policymakers need to understand not only what the intelligence community knows but also what it doesn't know . Policymakers must also understand what they don't know about the U.S. intelligence community, experts say .
 The intelligence community now carefully conveys the level of confidence it places on the judgments it makes . Having learned from the mistakes made about Irag, the intelligence community is carefully conveying confidence .
 Policymakers sometimes go too far and try to intimidate analysts into changing or shading their judgments to fit a political objective . Policymakers often try to change or shade their opinions to fit political objectives .
 Rumsfeld and Wolfowitz established the Office of Special Plans at the Pentagon in the run-up to the Irag war to find politically desired linkages between Saddam Hussein and al Qaeda . When that doesn't work, some have set up their own intelligence shops .
 Policymakers can't politicize intelligence professionals who refuse to go along, they say . But policymakers cannot politicize them, they can't do so, they argue .
 Intelligence officers have to take risks to gain an edge over their targets . Intelligence officers must take risks in order to gain a better edge over targets .
 "They must face unimaginable dangers and overcome incredible obstacles just to collect small but critical fragments of an unknown story," says CNN.com .
 The essential national service they provide should not be dismissed, minimized, or overlooked by the president or senior policymakers . President Barack Obama should not dismiss them, he says, as a result .
 Law enforcement officers, first responders, and members of the military and intelligence services are the only Americans who voluntarily agree to run mortal risks for their fellow citizens . First responders, first-responders, and military members are among those who volunteer to help .
 Their service and that of currently serving officers should be respected . Their service is being respected by the public, the BBC says .
 Policymakers cannot politicize intelligence professionals who refuse to go along . Policymakers can't politicize the intelligence community, officials say . Intelligence professionals should not be politicized, they say .
 When using intelligence, policymakers need to be risk takers of a different kind . Policymakers need to take risks of using intelligence to get ahead of the curve .
 A presidentially approved covert operation may be blown, leading to death, embarrassment, or retaliation . The operation may lead to death or embarrassment . A covert operation could be blown .
 A foreign leader may learn that U.S. intelligence has been monitoring his or her phone calls . Foreign leaders could learn that United States intelligence is monitoring their phone calls.
 Covert action can range from propaganda to coup plotting to paramilitary operations . Covert actions can include propaganda, coup plots, paramilitary operations and propaganda .
 Used judiciously, it can be an effective foreign policy tool, but it cannot substitute for not having a policy in the first place . The U.S. should not use it as a tool for foreign policy .
 Traditionally, covert action was the mandate solely of the CIA, with operations reguiring a finding personally signed by the president and timely notification of Congress . Operations reguired a finding signed by president and notified Congress .
 New policymakers with appropriate clearances will need to fully understand the extent of this activity and the potential risks engendered by it . New policymakers need to understand the risks of such activity, says the author .
 Both policymakers and the intelligence community are accountable to the U.S. people, but ensuring such accountability can be difficult .
 These days, it is not always clear where a foreign threat ends and a domestic threat begins . Government agencies need to share intelligence in order to prevent disasters .
 Such sharing raises legitimate concerns about civil liberties and privacy . However, given the power and reach of U.S. capabilities for intercepting communications, such sharing raises concerns .
 A healthy debate on these issues is both necessary and wise . A healthy conversation and debate are both necessary, wise. A healthy discussion is necessary, and wise, says CNN.com .
 The intelligence community does not ignore such concerns, but often, it wants to address the tension between collection and protection in classified venues such as the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court or the National Security Council .
 Those concerned with civil liberties want them addressed in the public domain . But those concerned with the issue want them to be addressed in a public place .
 The American people must be confident that internal controls are appropriate and that external oversight has sufficient visibility to be effective . However, the balance must be achieved, the U.S. should be confident of internal controls .
 A new administration can bring a fresh perspective on how best to organize and modernize the intelligence community . Positive change should be embraced and welcomed by intelligence professionals, authors say .
 The new national security team needs to balance a desire for change against the potential disruption drastic change may cause in the intelligence mission . The new team, however, must balance the need for change with the potential for disruption .
 Disruption can be a positive force in technology and business, but it could carry serious risks . Intelligence community could be at risk of disruption, intelligence officials say .
 As the complexities of international challenges facing the U.S. become clear, the value of intelligence in dealing with those challenges may lead senior administration officials to rely more heavily on the intelligence community .
 Mike Pompeo, the director of the CIA, Gina Haspel and Dan Coats are well positioned to lead the intelligence community into the future . Mike Pompeeo is the CIA's director of national intelligence, Gina Gaspel is the deputy director .
 The importance of the intelligence community's relationship with the president cannot be overstated . But the importance of their relationship with him cannot be overemphasized .
 If human sources don't believe that their intelligence will make a difference, they may not take the extra chance to meet with a case officer . Human sources may not want to meet up with case officers .
 If friendly foreign intelligence services believe that their most sensitive information might be leaked to the public as part of political score-settling, they will hold back and be disinclined to share .
 Leaders of the intelligence community must be able to walk into the president's office at any time and be received openly and professionally, says President Obama . "Leaders of the Intelligence community must walk in to the White House," says Obama .
 The members of the U.S. intelligence community serve their country proudly and help it remain strong . Members of the United States intelligence community are patriotic .
 Their professionalism is a bulwark of American democracy, and they should be respected for the work they do . The professionalism of the U.S. democracy is important to the nation's democracy .
 Policymakers' misconceptions about intelligence professionals and their motivations could endanger U.S. national security . Unless guickly rectified, policymakers' misconceptions could endanger national security.
 The relationship needs to be recalibrated, with policymakers gaining a deeper understanding of and appreciation for the work of intelligence professionals . The mission in which ""alternative facts"" have no place has no place in the intelligence community .
 Every new U.S. administration takes several months to staff itself properly, master new responsibilities, and develop a comprehensive strategy .
 The administration has already executed a noticeable course shift on foreign policy and international affairs . Some of its early outsider rhetoric and personnel has been replaced with more conventional choices . But the administration is already executing a noticeable change on foreign affairs .
 If it can continue to elaborate and professionalize its new approach, it could achieve a number of successes . The U.S. should continue to professionalize and improve its approach .
 President Donald Trump has concluded that the greatest threat to U.S. national security is North Korea's accelerating nuclear and missile programs . North Korea may give Pyongyang the ability to launch nuclear-tipped missiles at the continental United States in a matter of months or years .
 The president seems to have concluded, correctly, that several decades of U.S. policy, mostly consisting of sanctions and on-again, off-again negotiations aimed at ridding North Korea of nuclear weapons, have failed . The president also seems to . He seems to conclude, correctly
 A fourth possibility, that of regime change, does not gualify as a serious option, since it is impossible to assess its chances or conseguences . A regime change is not likely to be considered serious, but it is possible to assess the chances of it .
 In theory, the U.S. and other powers could accept a North Korean nuclear capability and rely on deterrence to lower the risk of an attack . The U.N. could also rely on missile defenses to reduce the damage should one occur .
 The acceptance option means living with a perpetual risk of catastrophe . The problem is that deterrence and defenses might not work perfectly . Acceptance is the only way to avoid catastrophe .
 Pyongyang would still be able to transfer its weapons to other actors for the right price . Even if Pyongyang were deterred from using the weapons it developed, it could still transfer them to other players .
 Even if its nuclear capability were never used or transferred, acguiescence to North Korea's continued possession of nuclear weapons would further dilute the nonproliferation regime . It would lead Japan and South Korea to rethink their nonnuclear postures, possibly leading them to rethink nonnuclear
 The problem here is that any such strike would be a huge leap into the unknown with possibly devastating conseguences . The problem is that such a strike is a massive leap in the unknown and potentially devastating consequences .
 Officials could not know in advance just what a military operation would accomplish and how the North Koreans would react . North Korea could not be expected to react to the operation .
 Pyongyang's ability to destroy large parts of Seoul using conventional, nonnuclear forces would need to be coordinated with extreme care . The South Korean government is leery of the intervention option, and so any moves along these lines would need careful planning .
 The unattractiveness of both acceptance and intervention is what keeps bringing policymakers back to the third option, trying to cap and reverse the North Korean nuclear threat through negotiations . Negotiating North Korea is a third option .
 The challenge on this front is not just getting back to the table but also figuring out how to make rapid progress once there . So the challenge is getting back on the table and how quickly it can be done .
 The interim deal could best be executed as a bilateral agreement between the U.S. and North Korea . Other governments should be kept informed through consultations, U.N. officials say .
 Talks should have a deadline for reaching agreement, to ensure that Pyongyang doesn't use the talks simply to buy time for further progress on its weapons programs . The talks should have to be held on to a deadline to reach agreement .
 The North would have to agree to pause its testing of warheads and missiles . The U.S. and South Korea would need to agree not to strike North Korea during the same period .
 North Korea would get some sanctions relief and an agreement formally ending the Korean War, a form of de facto recognition . In exchange for accepting a comprehensive, open-ended freeze on its nuclear and missile programs, North Korea gets sanctions relief . North Korea also would get a ban on transfers of
 Follow-on talks would deal with denuclearization and other concerns (such as human rights) in exchange for an end to the sanctions and the normalization of ties . The talks would also deal with the end to sanctions and end to ties with North Korea .
 An interim agreement would not solve the North Korean nuclear problem, but it would keep it from getting any worse . It would lower the risks of war and instability, as one could imagine in the current circumstances .
 Chinese pressure on North Korea would be essential to achieve such a deal . This option would build logically on the administration's early investment in good relations with its counterpart in Beijing .
 Even if diplomacy failed again, at least the U.S. would have demonstrated that it tried negotiations before turning to one of the other, more controversial options .
 Ill Overtime, ""America First" will lead others to put themselves first, says President Barack Obama . Ill overtime, 'America First' will lead other Americans to put others first .
 North Korea is the most urgent item on the national security agenda . The U.S. relationship with China should focus on cooperation over North Korea, the author says .
 The two countries' economic integration gives both Washington and Beijing a stake in keeping relations on course . China and the U.S. are both involved in the world's largest economies .
 China's leaders are likely to focus for the foreseeable future on domestic concerns more than foreign policy ones . The United States should let them do so, and the U.S. should let it do so . China's foreign policy is likely to be more important for its own interests .
 The Trump administration should avoid adopting positions on these issues that could either trigger a distracting crisis or compromise U.S. interests . That means leaving in place long-standing United States policies on bilateral issues such as Taiwan, trade, arms sales and the South China Sea .
 The result would be a ""North Korea first,"" but not a "North Korea only,"" U.S. policy toward China . The result of the U.N. policy would be the result of a "first,"" policy toward North Korea .
 It would have made more sense for Washington to work with the other signatories to amend the TPP . The U.S. appears to be doing what it does in regard to the North American Free Trade Agreement .
 The understanding would be codified and voted on at the same time as the trade agreement itself, as a binding package, to reassure critics of the agreement's critics .
 The EU is imperfect in many ways, but it remains a source of peace and prosperity on the continent . The EU remains an imperfect but important source of stability and peace in Europe, says David Cameron .
 Its continued erosion or breakup would represent a major setback for U.S. allies and the United States itself, both strategically and financially .
 The EU's next few years will already be tense thanks to negotiations over the negotiations over Brexit and possible crises in Italy and elsewhere . The EU is already in the midst of a crisis in Italy, Italy and Italy .
 The U.S. has little leverage to bring to bear on the continent's immediate future . Washington should voice its support for the EU and stop signaling its sympathy for its opponents .
 Russia has been aggressively supporting just such anti-EU forces in order to weaken and divide what it sees as a hostile foreign actor . Russia's interference in Western elections needs to be thoroughly investigated and aggressively countered, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Washington's challenge will be figuring out how to support Europe and NATO and check Russia's political skullduggery . Washington will be open to cooperation with Moscow on making at least parts of Syria safe for residents .
 The administration has made its point that NATO members ought to spend more on defense . Going forward, it would be more useful to discuss how to get more defensive bang for the bucks spent .
 There is no case for bringing Ukraine into NATO, but there is one for doing more to support its self-defense . And there is also a case for supporting Ukraine in NATO, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Sanctions against Russia levied over its actions in Ukraine should continue until those actions stop or, in the case of Crimea, are reversed . Consistent with this, sanctions against Russia should continue to continue .
 The strike reinforced the international norm against the use of weapons of mass destruction . It sent a reassuring signal to local partners, who, during the Obama years, had become increasingly worried about Washington's willingness to back up threats .
 The challenge now is to embed such actions in a broader strategy toward the Syrian conflict and the Mideast at large .
 However desirable a change of regime in Syria may be, it is unlikely to come from within anytime soon . Change of regime would be incredibly difficult and costly to accomplish from without .
 The U.S. is not well positioned to ensure that a successor regime will be more desirable . Nor is the United States well positioned for a replacement regime, he says .
 Washington should concentrate its attention on attacking the Islamic State, or ISIS, for the foreseeable future, writes CNN's John Avlon .
 Turkey is a United States ally, but it can no longer be considered a true partner, U.S. President Barack Obama says . Turkey is no longer considered a "true partner" in the United States, Obama says. Turkey is not a true ally in the world, he says
 Turkish foreign policy seems to be the suppression of Kurdish nationalism, even at the price of undermining the anti-ISIS effort . Under Recep Tayyip Erdogan's increasingly authoritarian rule, Turkey's anti-Kurdish nationalism is being suppressed .
 Washington correctly chose to increase its armed support for Syrian Kurds fighting ISIS . Because this will cause friction with Ankara, it should reduce U.S. dependence on access to Turkish military bases .
 The Iran nuclear deal is imperfect, but the administration has been right not to tear it up and start over . President Obama has been wrong not to start over Iran's nuclear deal with Iran .
 The U.S. should insist on full compliance with the agreement's terms, counter Iran's regional push for influence where it can, and prepare for how to constrain Iran's nuclear might after the deal expires .
 At the same time, Washington should resist being drawn in too deeply on the side of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates in Yemen, writes CNN's John Avlon .
 The conflict in Syria is fast becoming a military disaster and a humanitarian tragedy . The fact that the rebels are backed by Iran is insufficient justification for getting trapped in a guagmire, says Peter Bergen . He says the conflict is becoming a 'military disaster'
 "The struggle against terrorism will be long, difficult, and never fully successful," says President Obama . "We will never be fully successful" says Obama .
 There is no reason to believe that the situation is ripe for resolution or ambitious diplomatic efforts . The situation is not likely to be resolved, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The administration should concentrate on reducing the odds of violence around Jerusalem's holy sites . The U.S. should focus on strengthening the hand of Palestinian moderates, limiting settlement activity, limiting settlements .
 The struggle against terrorism, jihadist and otherwise, will inevitably be long, difficult, and never fully successful, says President Obama . "The struggle against terror will inevitably never be fully successful," he says .
 Terrorism cannot be eliminated, only combated, and such an effort will continue to reguire a mix of intelligence sharing and cooperation with friendly governments, and occasional military action . The effort continues to be a combination of intelligence and cooperation .
 The number of U.S. forces deployed in Irag, Syria, and the region more generally will likely need to be maintained or selectively increased .
 U.S. wants China to be a responsible stakeholder in the international system . Bush administration framed the issue as one of whether Beijing was prepared to act as "responsible stakeholder" in the system .
 The concept is a useful one and applies now to the United States, the founder and dominant power within that system . It applies to the U.S. as it is now a dominant power in the world of power .
 The Trump administration has shown a clear preference for not involving the U.S. in the internal affairs of other countries .
 Such realism is often warranted, given Washington's multiple priorities and limited leverage in such matters . Washington needs to be realistic about its priorities and its limited leverage, the author says .
 But there is a danger in taking this approach too far, since prudent nonintervention can all too easily shade into active support for deeply problematic regimes . The U.S. should not engage in intervention in the Middle East .
 Careless relationships with "friendly tyrants" have burned the U.S. often in the past . It is worrying to see Washington take what look like the first steps down such a path again with Egypt, the Philippines .
 Friends need to speak candidly to friends about the errors they may be making, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Friends need to be honest about mistakes they may have made"
 Such communications should normally take place privately and without sanction, such as those from the U.S. government .
 U.S. tarnishes its reputation, encourages even worse behavior, and sets back efforts to promote more open societies and stability around the world . But they do need to occur, lest the United States tarnish its reputation .
 The president should also understand that what he says about U.S. institutions, including the media, and Congress, is listened to closely around the world . That has the potential to reduce respect for the United States while encouraging leaders elsewhere to weaken the checks and balances on their rule .
 Colombia was racked by civil war and served as a major source of drugs coming into the U.S. In recent memory, for example, it was a source of war-torn Colombia . Colombia's civil war has been a major problem for the United States .
 The provision of hundreds of millions of dollars in U.S. aid has helped stabilize the country and secure a delicate peace . Since then, the United States has provided aid to the country .
 Similar stories play out when Washington helps foreign partners address terrorism, piracy, drug trafficking, poverty, deforestation, and disease .
 When it gives aid wisely and conditionally, the U.S. is not a soft touch but a smart investor . The United States is not soft touch, but smart investor, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The administration would do well to tone down some of its rhetoric on trade . The White House should tone down its rhetoric .
 Technological innovation has been a much more important source of domestic job losses than trade or offshoring . Embrace protectionism will only encourage others to do the same, in the process killing off more jobs .
 The last, in particular, is a multipurpose tool that could at once create jobs, increase competitiveness, and build the country's resilience against natural disasters and terrorism . It could also be used to create jobs and increase competitiveness in the country .
 Immigration should be treated as a practical more than a political issue, says Simon Tisdall . Immigration is a practical matter more than political issue for the U.S.
 The danger to the country supposedly posed by immigrants and refugees has been exaggerated and is not a major national security threat . However the American body politic ultimately decides to handle legal and illegal immigration policy, the U.S. has a problem .
 The administration should cease gratuitously insulting its southern neighbor by insisting that Mexico pay for a border wall . President Barack Obama's administration should stop insulting Mexico by insisting to pay for the wall .
 Singling out individuals from Muslim countries for special scrutiny and differential treatment risks radicalizing significant numbers of their coreligionists, at home and abroad .
 The administration must be careful not to set the country on a path of rapidly increasing debt . The administration needs to be careful, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A combination of steep corporate and individual tax cuts, higher levels of defense spending and higher interest rates, and no reform of entitlements will do just that . The danger is that a combination of tax cuts and higher defense spending will do that, says Julian Zelizer .
 Financing the debt will come to crowd out other useful forms of spending and investment (reducing American competitiveness) and leave the United States more vulnerable to market forces and the politically motivated decisions of governments that are large holders of U.S. Treasuries .
 Russia's interference in Western elections needs to be thoroughly investigated and aggressively countered, says Julian Zelizer . Russia must be investigated thoroughly and aggressively, Zelizer says . Russia's election interference in the U.S. should be investigated, he says .
 The agreement is a model of creative multilateralism, one totally consistent with sovereignty . The administration would be wise to embrace it, the author says .
 The targets set for U.S. greenhouse gas emissions are goals the United States set for itself . As a result, the government retains the right to change them, when and how it sees fit .
 The good news is that the United States can meet its Paris goals without sacrificing economic growth . The availability of new technologies, state and local regulations, and the reguirements for access to many global markets will likely mean that .
 The administration hurt itself by underestimating the complexity of running the government . It took a petulant and idiosyncratic approach to appointments, the administration said .
 Most senior national security and foreign policy staff positions are being filled on temporary basis by civil servants or have been left open entirely . This is hampering effective government operations, government officials say .
 Any thoughts of a major bureaucratic restructuring should be postponed until the administration is filled with the reguisite number of gualified officials . The administration should also be filled with more officials .
 Trump prefers informal decision-making process, with various voices included and many points of entry, and presidents get their way . Trump clearly prefers an informal process, and he gets his way .
 If the administration wants to avoid the dangers that come with excessive improvisation, it needs to ensure that the formal National Security Council policy process dominates the informal one . But such an approach has downsides as well as upsides .
 The less steady they judge those hands to be, the more they may decide to look out for themselves, ignoring Washington's reguests and considering side deals .
 Freguent policy reversals, even those that are welcome, come at a substantial cost to the U.S. credibility and to its reputation for reliability . The United States' credibility is at risk .
 Down that route lies the unraveling of the postwar order that the U.S. has worked so hard to create and maintain . The United States has worked to create, maintain and create the world's post-war order .
 It's important not to forget that the U.S. has been remarkably well served by this order . The United States has served this order well .
 U.S. policymakers overreach in Korea, Vietnam and Irag have led to overreach by the U.N. forces . The result is because of overreach rather than a reguirement to act on behalf of the order, the author says .
 Many of its components need to be modernized or supplemented . New rules and arrangements needed to deal with the various challenges of globalization .
 New challenges may have arisen, but the old challenges have not gone away, so the old solutions to them are still necessary even if they are no longer sufficient . The old solutions are still needed, even though they are not sufficient .
 The strategic focus for U.S. foreign policy should be preservation and adaptation, not disruption . The United States and those willing to work with it can better contend with regional and, even more, global challenges that increasingly define this era .
 It has been interpreted abroad as suggesting that friends and allies now come second, at best . It has also been interpreted in the UK as suggesting it is now more important than allies .
 Over time, "America First" will lead others to put themselves first, which will make them less likely to take into account (much less give priority to) American interests and preferences .
 The slogan also reinforces the mistaken notion that there is a sharp tradeoff between money and effort spent on international affairs and those spent on domestic concerns .
 In a global world, Americans will inevitably be affected by what happens beyond their country's borders . Americans are affected by the events beyond their borders, says CNN's John Sutter .
 National security is determined by how well a country meets its external and internal challenges alike . The U.S. needs both guns and butter, and national security is defined by its ability to meet challenges alike, experts say .
 The United States now spends only half the percentage of its wealth on defense that it did during the Cold War . The good news is that the U.S. can afford both: It can now afford both .
 If the administration does decide to retain the phrase, it should recognize its shortcomings and counteract them . The administration should also be aware of its shortcomings .
 This means finding ways to make clear that although the U.S. does follow its own interests, it does not do so at its friends' and partners' expense . This means making clear that . although the United States does follow . Its friends and partners are at risk .
 U.S. patriotism can be defined and operationalized in ways compatible with responsible global leadership . American patriotism can also be defined in ways that are compatible with global leadership, says President Obama .
 The Trump administration's challenge is finding out how to do that from here on in is the administration's .
 It is time for the U.S. government to admit that it has failed to prevent North Korea from acquiring nuclear weapons . North Korea has nuclear weapons and intercontinental ballistic missiles that can reach the United States .
 In 1962, the standoff included one volatile leader, Castro, who held radical misperceptions of the conseguences of a nuclear war and surrounded himself with yes men . Castro was a volatile leader .
 North Korea and Iran are not in compliance with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, for them, all bets are off . Defense Secretary Robert Gates guickly added that "for them all bets were off" for them .
 The history of unsuccessful U.S. decapitation attempts, including those launched against Muammar al-Qaddafi in 1986 and the Iragi leader Saddam Hussein in 1991 and again in 2003 .
 Reducing the risk of war will therefore reguire an end to U.S. threats of first-strike regime change . The United States will therefore no longer threaten regime change in Syria, writes Peter Bergen .
 The U.S. should continue to extend its nuclear umbrella to South Korea to reduce the incentive for Seoul to acguire its own nuclear arsenal . The United States should also extend the nuclear umbrella, which South Korea should also continue .
 German troops cross the Soviet border, 22 June 1941 . German troops crossed the border with the Soviet Union in 1941 .
 Toseph Stalin achieved little through the first four decades of his life . Stalin died at the age of 80 in 1945 in a state hospital in Moscow .
 He was born in 1878 to a poor family in Gori, Georgia, then part of the Russian empire . He was the son of a wealthy family .
 Stalin's childhood, illnesses and mishaps included, was largely normal for the time . Stalin's illness, illness and mishap included, but it was not unusual for Stalin's life .
 He received good marks in school and got his poems published in well-regarded Georgian periodicals .
 He did not sit for his final exams at the Tiflis Seminary and failed to graduate . He failed to sit for final exams and did not graduate from the Seminary .
 The 39-year-old Stalin was a leading member of the new Bolshevik regime . Suddenly, he was a leader in the Soviet Union . He was one of the youngest members of the Communist Party .
 He played a central role in the Russian Civil War and the creation of the Soviet Union . He was a key figure in Russia's civil war and creation of Soviet Union.
 Stalin seized his chance to create his own personal dictatorship inside the larger Bolshevik one . A month later, Lenin was incapacitated by a stroke, and Stalin seized the chance .
 The vast shadow of Stalin the despot often hides Stalin the human being . Stalin's human being is often hidden in the shadow of his despot .
 He smoked a pipe, using tobacco from cigarettes, which he would unroll and slide into the pipe . He would then light the pipe with matches, then light with matches .
 Stalin had a passion for books, which he marked up and filled with placeholders to find particular passages . Stalin's passion was to mark up and fill in placeholders with passages he found in books .
 His personal library would ultimately grow to more than 20,000 volumes . He would eventually grow to 20,500 volumes .
 Stalin's favorite was probably Anton Chekhov, who portrayed villains, not just heroes, with complexity . Among Russian authors, Stalin liked Anton Chekov's work . Stalin's favourite author was probably Chekovich, a playwright .
 He spent more time reading Sovietera literature . Still, judging by the references scattered among his writings and speeches, he spent most time .
 Stalin's manners were coarse, and his sense of humor was perverse . Stalin's sense of humour was perverse, and he was a great admirer of Stalin .
 He edited out his jokes and foul language from the transcripts of official gatherings . But he cultivated a statesmanlike appearance, editing out jokes and language .
 Stalin's unusual gait was called Geza, a Gori-dialect term for Stalin's gait after an accident . Stalin had developed the gait in an accident and was nicknamed Geza by a childhood chum .
 A childhood bout with smallpox had left lifelong scars on his nose, lower lip, chin, and cheeks . The scars include a lower lip and lower lip .
 His pockmarks were airbrushed out of public photographs, and his awkward stride was hidden from public view . His awkward stride has been hidden from view since his death .
 People who met him saw his disfigured facial disfigurement and odd movement . They also discovered that he had a limp handshake and was not as tall as he appeared in photographs .
 Napoleon stood five feet seven inches, roughly the same as Napoleon and one inch shorter than Adolf Hitler . Napoleon was one inch smaller than Hitler and Napoleon was the shortest man alive .
 Most people found that they could not take their gaze off Stalin, especially his expressive eyes . And yet, despite their initial shock on seeing him for the first time, most people couldn't take their eyes off him .
 Stalin saw himself and his country as menaced from every direction . Stalin's dream palace was his own dream palace . He saw himself as a threat to his country .
 Triumph shadowed by treachery became the dynamic of both the revolution and his life . The revolutionary's life was shadowed in the way of his revolution and the revolution .
 His drive to build socialism would prove both successful and shattering, and deeply reinforcing his hypersuspicious, vindictive disposition, he says . His drive would prove successful and shatter, he writes .
 In the Marxist conception, capitalism had created great wealth by replacing feudalism, but then promoted only the interests of the exploiter class, at the expense of the rest of humanity . The Marxist conception of capitalism was that it had created wealth but promoted exploitation of the exploited .
 Once capitalism was overcome, the forces of production would be unleashed as never before, the thinking went . The thinking was that capitalism would allow production to be unleashed, never before . But capitalism was never overcome, and the forces were never unleashed .
 Exploitation, colonization, and imperialist war would give way to solidarity, emancipation, and peace . The revolution would end exploitation, colonization and war would end with solidarity and emancipation .
 Logically, socialism would be built by eradicating private property, the market, and ""bourgeois" parliaments . Socialists would put in their place collective property, socialist planning and people's power .
 Of course, as Stalin and many other Marxists avowed, the capitalists would never allow themselves to be buried . The capitalists would not let themselves be buried, Marxists said .
 They would fight to the death against socialism, using every means, including lies, espionage, murder . This was a war in which only one class could emerge victorious, they said .
 The most terrible crimes became morally imperative acts in the name of creating paradise on earth . The most horrible crimes became moral imperative acts .
 The purported science of Marxism-Leninism ostensibly explained why the world had so many problems and how it could be made better . Marxist-Leninistism was an attempt to explain the world's problems with a role for all . The science was supposed to explain how the world was made better
 People's otherwise insignificant lives became linked to building an entirely new world . People's lives were linked to the creation of a new world. People's life was linked to helping build a new planet .
 To collect grain or operate a lathe was to strike a hammer blow at world imperialism . To operate a lathane lathe or collect grain would strike a blow at imperialism .
 People under the age of 29 made up nearly half of the Soviet population, giving the country one of the youngest demographic profiles in the world . The youth proved especially attracted to a vision that put them at the center of a struggle to build tomorrow today .
 Stalin indulged the prolonged ovations he received in public . Whether Stalin's objections reflected false modesty or genuine embarrassment remains hard to say, but he indulged .
 He could flash burning anger; he could glow with a soft, capacious smile . But he could also flash with a hard-looking smile .
 He could be solicitous and charming; he latched on to perceived slights and compulsively sought revenge . He could also be solicituous and charming, but he could be ruthless .
 He prided himself on his voracious reading and his ability to guote the wisdom of Marx or Lenin . He resented fancy-pants intellectuals who he thought put on airs .
 He possessed a phenomenal memory and a mind of scope . His intellectual horizons were severely circumscribed by primitive theories of class struggle and imperialism .
 He almost never visited factories or farms, or even state agencies, instead reading about the country he ruled in secret reports and newspapers . He developed a feel for the aspirations of the masses and incipient elites .
 His authority was rooted in a dedicated party, a formidable governing apparatus, and Marxist-Leninist ideology, he says . His colossal authority was . rooted in dedicated party and a formidable government apparatus .
 His power was magnified many times over by ordinary people, who projected onto him their ambitions for social justice, peace, abundance, and national greatness . But ordinary people projected their ambitions onto him, he said .
 Dictators who amass great power often retreat into pet pursuits, expounding interminably on their obsessions and paralyzing the state . Dictator often retreats to pet pursuits and paralyzes state .
 Stalin's obsession was a socialist great power, and he labored day and night to build one . But Stalin was obsessed with the idea of a great power . He labored to build a socialist state of power, but his obsession was socialism .
 At age 20, Hitler found himself on a bread line in Vienna, Austria . Hitler's inheritance and savings nearly spent nearly spent . Hitler was on the bread line at age 20 .
 He had twice been rejected from Vienna's Academy of Fine Arts . He had been staying in a homeless shelter behind a railway station .
 Hitler got himself into a group home for men . Hitler lived in the home with his aunt . Hitler spent the rest of his life in a home for boys .
 He managed to find odd jobs, such as painting picture postcards and drafting advertisements . He also found odd jobs such as drafting advertisements and painting postcards .
 When the authorities finally caught up with him, they judged the undernourished and gloomy youth unfit for service .
 In August 1914, he joined the German army as a private . He fled across the border to Munich, and joined the army in August 1914 .
 He ended World War I still a private, but the war's aftermath transformed his life . He ended his private life as a private soldier, but his life changed dramatically .
 He would be among the many who migrated from the political left to the right in the chaotic wake of imperial Germany's defeat .
 Under Stalin, the most terrible crimes became morally imperative acts in the name of creating paradise on earth . Under Stalin the crimes were moral imperative acts to create paradise on Earth .
 Film footage from 1918 shows Hitler marching in the funeral procession of provincial Bavaria's murdered leader, a Jewish Social Democrat . He is wearing two armbands, one black (for mourning) and the other red . Hitler is wearing one of the black and red armbands .
 He had no profession to speak of but appears to have taken part in leftist indoctrination of the troops .
 Ten days before Hitler's 30th birthday, the Bavarian Soviet Republic was guickly crushed by the so-called Freikorps, made up largely of war veterans .
 Hitler remained in the military because a superior, the chief of the German army's ""information"" department, had the idea of sending him to an antileftist instructional course and then using him to infiltrate leftist groups . Hitler was sent to an anti-fascist instructional course .
 Hitler had earned a reputation as a transfixing far-right agitator, but Hitler remained a marginal figure . Hitler remained marginal figure in the 1930s .
 During his first two weeks in prison, Hitler refused to eat, believing he deserved to die, but letters arrived congratulating him as a national hero . Hitler refused food during his time in prison but letters of congratulations arrived .
 Richard Wagner's daughter-in-law, Winifred, sent him paper and pencil, encouraging him to write a book . Richard Wagner wrote a book about his life in New York, New York .
 Hitler had an attendant in confinement, Rudolf Hess, who typed his dictation, creating an autobiography dedicated to the 16 Nazis killed in the failed putsch . Hitler had to write his autobiography in confinement .
 That this Austrian member of a fringe political movement would become the dictator of Germany, and Stalin's principal nemesis, was scarcely imaginable .
 The richest opportunities perceived by Stalin and Hitler were often supposedly urgent ""threats"" that they inflated or invented . The richest opportunity perceived by the Soviet leaders were often false or inflated . Hitler and Stalin invented the richest opportunities .
 History is driven by the interaction of geopolitics, institutions, and ideas, but it takes historical agents to set it all in motion . History takes place in the hands of historical agents, such as Vladimir Putin .
 Stalin's direct experience of Germany consisted of just a few months in 1907 in Berlin, where he stopped on the way back to Russia from a Bolshevik meeting in London . Stalin stopped in Berlin on his way back from meeting with a Bolshevik in London in 1907 .
 Stalin was a Germanophile, admiring that country's industry and science . Stalin admiring Germany's modernity . Stalin was an admirer of science and technology in Germany .
 In 1933, Hitler was handed the wheel of the great state Stalin admired . Then, in 1933, he was handed control of the state he admired .
 The lives of the two dictators had run in parallel, as historian Alan Bullock wrote . The two dictators' lives had run parallel .
 It was not only the German people who turned out to be waiting for Hitler . Hitler was not the only German people waiting for him, he was waiting for his own death .
 On June 21, 1941, Stalin paced and paced in his Kremlin office, with his usual short steps, gripping a pipe . Stalin's face-off was the first time he had been seen in the face of the world's greatest enemy .
 The Imperial Senate formed its own triangular stronghold inside the Kremlin . Stalin's wing was a fortress within the fortress, and Stalin's .
 Even regime personnel with regular Kremlin passes needed a special pass to enter Stalin's wing . Even the regime personnel needed special passes to enter the Kremlin .
 The walls in the offices were lined with shoulder-height wood paneling, under the theory that wood vapors enhanced air guality, and the elevators were paneled with mahogany .
 Lenin's death mask is on display in a display case with his death mask . Lenin died in a house in Lenin's hometown in Moscow, Russia . Lenin was assassinated in April 1918 .
 In the main office, between two of the three large windows that let in afternoon sun, sat a black leather couch where, in his better moods, Stalin sipped tea with lemon . Stalin was in his best moods at the time of his early days .
 He paced to control his explosive emotions or, alternatively, to unnerve those in his company . Over the years, people who were granted an audience with him surmised he paced .
 He would be the only one in the room standing, trundling back and forth, sidling up to people while they were speaking . Invariably, he would be an only one standing standing .
 Only a few intimates knew that Stalin suffered nearly constant pain in the joints of his legs, which may have been a genetic condition . Stalin suffered from a condition which partly alleviated his movement movement .
 He also shooed away black ravens from the Kremlin grounds . He touched the leaves on the trees and touched the trees .
 Stalin had eliminated private property and made himself responsible for the Soviet eguivalents of Washington, Wall Street, and Hollywood all rolled into one . Washington and Hollywood were all rolled together into one, and all rolled in one person .
 He complained of fatigue, especially toward the end of his long workdays, and suffered from insomnia . He never acknowledged publicly that he had insomnia, which he never acknowledged .
 Rumors of various health problems had circulated abroad, and the use of foreign doctors had long ago been discontinued . Rumors were circulated abroad .
 For long periods, Stalin resisted being seen by any doctor, and he had ceased using medicines from the Kremlin pharmacy that were issued in his name .
 Hitler was a master improviser who grasped opportunities that came his way . Hitler was known for his improvisational skills . Hitler's improvisation was master improvisation .
 A few decades after its opening, in the early fall of 1812, Napoleon had arrived with his invading forces . Napoleon had invaded the site .
 Members of the French Grande Armee defecated in the Kremlin's Orthodox churches and taken potshots at the holy icons . Many Protestants and Catholics from Germany, Italy, and Poland were among those defecating .
 Napoleon ordered the Kremlin blown to pieces after retreating Napoleon ordered it blown up . After cunning Russian resistance starved the occupiers, the Kremlin was blown up by Napoleon .
 Heavy rains limited the damage, but the explosives destroyed parts of the walls and several towers . Heavy rains damaged the walls, but explosives destroyed several towers, walls and towers . The explosion was the largest in the history of World War II .
 The long, red-carpeted corridors around the Little Corner were attended by an army of sentries . The long-red carpeted corridors of Little Corner are attended by a large army of guards .
 The ""Man of Steel" was being stalked from afar by the Kazakh national poet . But he says he is not afraid of the dangers of the world's most dangerous animals .
 Hitler's troops had occupied the Balkans, Denmark, the Low Countries, Norway, and northern France . Hitler's forces had occupied several countries, including Denmark, Norway and France .
 Leaders loyal to the fuhrer ruled Bulgaria, Croatia, Finland, Hungary, Italy, Romania, and Spain . They ruled many of the world's most important countries .
 Hitler essentially controlled all of Europe from the English Channel to the Soviet border . Only Sweden and Switzerland remained neutral, and both were cooperating with Nazi Germany economically .
 London could never overturn Berlin's continental dominance . True, the defiant British still refused to come to terms, but Berlin still dominated Europe .
 Stalin was strictly observing the nonaggression pact that Germany and the Soviet Union had signed in August 1939 . The pact was signed by the two countries .
 Hitler needed to keep the Soviet Union out of a possible anti-German coalition with France and the United Kingdom . Hitler had decided to swallow Poland by force by force .
 As Hitler rampaged across Europe, Stalin avoided having to face Germany's military might . Taking advantage of the situation, he annexed the Baltic states, eastern Poland, and Bukovina and Bessarabia .
 Stalin received advanced machine tools and state-of-the-art weaponry from Germany . In exchange for Soviet grain and oil, Stalin also received advanced weapons and tools .
 Stalin's apprenticeship in high-stakes diplomacy had shown him to be cunning but also opportunistic, avaricious, obdurate . Stalin's apprentice in diplomacy was cunning but opportunistic . Stalin had shown himself to be opportunistic but also avricious, he said .
 This had worked, until Germany—aided by the cornucopia of Soviet raw materials—conguered France in the summer of 1940, and Germany was freed up to turn its troops toward the Soviet Union . This had been working until the war broke out in 1940 .
 In Moscow, German embassy personnel were evacuating, taking with them oil paintings, antigue rugs, and silver . The embassy was evacuated from the Russian capital .
 The Soviet secret police reported that the Italian embassy, too, had received instructions to evacuate . The Italian embassy was also ordered to evacuate by the Soviet government .
 Stalin's top aide, Alexander Poskryobyshev, was sweating profusely, his window open but the leaves on the trees outside were utterly still .
 He was indispensable, handling all the phone calls and document piles in just the way the despot preferred . "He was indispensable," he said. "He handled all the documents and documents in the way he preferred"
 Stalin allowed Lavrenti Beria, the feared head of the secret police, to imprison Poskryobyshev's beloved wife as a "" Trotskvite "" in 1939 . Stalin had given Lavrenty Beria the power to imprison her as a Trots
 Poskryobyshev sat at his desk trying to cool down with a bottle of mineral water . He said: "I'm not going to let it cool down, but I'm going to do it"
 Poskryobyshev placed the latest intelligence, delivered by a field courier, on Stalin's desk . The latest intelligence was delivered by the field courier . Stalin's office in Moscow was the scene of a battle between Stalin and Stalin .
 Reports were contradictory, contaminated with obviously false information, and often delivered with skepticism . The reports were contradictory and contaminated, but often delivered by skepticism .
 In London, the Soviet ambassador to the United Kingdom wrote in his report that he considered a German attack ""unlikely"" despite having received information to the contrary from British intercepts of secret German military communications .
 In Berlin, the Soviet ambassador to Germany, after months of eguivocation, averred that Germany's actions signaled an imminent invasion . The Soviet Ambassador to Germany averted that the invasion would be imminent .
 For Stalin, the guestion was not whether war with the Nazi regime was inescapable but whether it was this year . For Stalin it was whether the war with Nazi regime in the 1930s was inevitable . The guestion, for Stalin, was not that war with Hitler was in
 14 specific dates that intelligence reports had identified as the day when Germany would attack had come to an end . The invasion warnings had accumulated on his desk, but 14 dates had been identified .
 The invasion window would soon shut, because of the short time remaining until the onset of winter . "The invasion window is soon shut," the official said .
 Stalin took the screaming headlines to be planted provocations . But knowing how he himself made use of the press, Stalin used the press to plant provocations, he did so again . Stalin's use of press was a form of provocation .
 He reasoned that the Americans and the British wanted nothing more than for the Germans and the Soviets to become embroiled in war . He said that the U.S. and Britain wanted to get involved in war with the Soviets .
 He knew that Germany was experiencing severe shortages and reasoned that it needed even more supplies from him . He reasoned that a German invasion would be self-defeating because it would put those supplies at risk . A German invasion of Germany would put the supplies of the country at risk, thus a
 He knew that Germany had lost World War I because it had fought on two fronts, and so he reasoned that the Germans understood that it would be suicidal for them to attack the Soviet Union in the east before defeating the United Kingdom .
 Stalin concluded that the buildup of German forces on his doorstep was not a sign of imminent attack but rather Hitler attempting to blackmail him into giving up territory and making other concessions without a fight . This kind of reasoning had become a trap for Stalin, allowing him to conclude that the colossal buildup of
 A brilliant Nazi disinformation campaign fed the Soviet global spy network with incessant reports about German demands that would follow the vast eastern military buildup . Indeed, a brilliant Nazi . disinformation campaign .
 Even Stalin's best intelligence said both that war was coming and that there would be blackmail . Thus, even Stalin's intelligence said that war would be coming, blackmailing .
 When Stalin damned his intelligence as contaminated by disinformation, therefore, he was right . When Stalin's intelligence was contaminated by . disinformation, it was right. When Stalin was right, he had been right. He had been wrong.
 The despot had no idea which parts were disinformation and which might be accurate intelligence . But the despot was not sure which parts of the information were accurate .
 Soviet counterintelligence noted vigorous German recruitment of disaffected people in the Baltic region, Belarus, and Ukraine . Disaffected people formed underground groups and engaging in terrorism long after Stalin's supposed annihilation of the perceived fifth column during the Great Terror .
 Overburdened Soviet rail lines that were needed to transport troops westward were swamped with tens of thousands of ""anti-Soviet elements" being deported .
 German tanks, warplanes, and pontoons had advanced into an inner zone protected by barbed wire . The wire was being removed from the inner zone .
 The click and whir of German motors resounded across to the Soviet side of the frontier . It was the first time the U.S. military aircraft had flown over the border to Russia .
 At the centerpiece of the Little Corner, a felt-covered conference table, Stalin held countless sessions devoted to war preparations . Stalin had held countless meetings devoted to preparing for war . Stalin's "Little Corner" was the centerpiece .
 Soviet military production grew even faster than GDP for a decade . He had forced into being upward of 9,000 new industrial enterprises during three Five-Year Plans .
 It had 25,000 tanks and 18,000 fighter planes, three to four times the size of Germany's stocks . It had 18,500 fighter planes and tanks, 3 to 4 times Germany's stock .
 Stalin had spies spread rumors that, if attacked, Soviet aircraft would assault Berlin with chemical and biological agents . Stalin also had rumors that if attacked Berlin, Soviet planes would attack Berlin with biological and chemical agents . Berlin would be attacked by Soviet aircraft, according to rumors .
 Stalin clung to his belief that Germany could not attack Russia before defeating the United Kingdom . Stalin believed that Germany would not be able to attack the UK before defeating Russia .
 Winter War between the Soviet Union and Finland exposed Soviet military weaknesses to Hitler and Stalin . Winter War exposed Soviet weaknesses not just to Hitler but also to Stalin .
 The Red Army was still in the middle of a protracted post-Finland technological upgrade and reorganization . The Soviet Union was in the midst of a technological upgrade .
 The Soviets possessed only around 1,800 advanced heavy tanks . The rest of their tanks were too light relative to their German counterparts . The Soviets' tanks were much lighter than German tanks .
 The most advanced Soviet warplanes made up just one-guarter of the air force . Similarly, the most advanced aircraft were made up of one-third of the force .
 Stalin's war preparations also bore the mark of his executions of thousands of loyal officers, especially top commanders such as Vasily Blyukher and Mikhail Tukhachevsky . Stalin executed thousands of officers, many of whom he executed under torture, in 1938 .
 85 percent of the officer corps was 35 or younger; those older than 45 constituted around one percent . 85 percent now are 35 or older; one percent are 45 percent; 85 percent are 35 years old .
 Fully 1,013 Soviet generals were under age 55, and only 63 were older than that . Only 63 of the generals were over age 55 .
 Stalin was keenly aware of these realities, and lately, the despot's morose side had gotten the upper hand . The despot was keen on these realities . Tonight's episode will be broadcast at 9 p.m. ET .
 June 21 happened to be the summer solstice, the longest day of the year . It must have seemed interminable, but it must have been the longest .
 At 5:00 PM, Stalin ordered that party secretaries of all Moscow wards were to stay at their posts . Stalin ordered the party secretary to remain at his posts at 5:30pm .
 At 6:27 PM, Molotov entered the Little Corner—the first visitor, as usual . At 6.27pm, he was the first visitor to the little corner of the world .
 The discussion apparently revolved around recent developments pointing toward war and Stalin's dread of provocations that might incite it . Stalin feared provocations would incite it, Stalin said .
 The two largest armies in world history stood cheek by jowl on a border some 2,000 miles long . The two biggest armies in the world stood cheek jowl in front of the world's largest armies .
 Most conspicuously, German forces had occupied their firing positions; the Soviets had not . The Soviets had also occupied their positions .
 Stalin allowed covert strategic redeployments to the western border from the interior . Stalin had allowed . covert strategic . redeployment of . the western . border .
 He feared it would only play into the hands of hawks in the German military who craved war and were scheming to force Hitler's hand . But he would not permit the assumption of combat positions, he feared .
 Soviet planes were forbidden from flying within six miles of the border . Soviet planes would not be allowed to fly within a six-mile radius of border .
 Timoshenko and Georgy Zhukov, another senior military commander, made sure frontline commanders did not cause or yield to provocation . Timoshenko: "Frontline commanders don't cause, yield to provoke"
 Soviet commanders could be liguidated by their own side if their forces returned any German fire . Soviet forces could return any fire from their own forces if they returned any .
 Soviet intelligence was now reporting that not just Germany but also its eastern allies—Finland, Hungary, Romania, and Slovakia—were at full war readiness .
 Stalin, having long ago ceded the initiative, was effectively paralyzed . Stalin had ceded control of the initiative . But Stalin had long ago been effectively paralyzed.
 Just about anything he did could be used by Hitler to justify an invasion . Hitler could have used it to justify invasion of Germany . Hitler's actions could have been used as a pretext for invasion .
 At 8:00 PM, a courier arrived to give Stalin, Molotov, and Timoshenko this new piece of intelligence in sealed envelopes . The courier arrived at 8:30 PM, and delivered the intelligence to the Soviet Union .
 Zhukov phoned in to report that yet another German soldier had defected across the frontier and was warning of an invasion within a few hours . The Russian general called in to say that he had been warned of a possible invasion .
 Zhukov ordered to the Kremlin, along with the just-departed Timoshenko . Timoshenko was the prime minister of Ukraine, a former ally of Russia .
 Molotov and Beria parroted Stalin's denials that Hitler was going to attack . The two peasant-born commanders could see that Germany was coiled to invade . Beria: "Molotov, Beria could see" Germany was ready to invade Russia .
 Stalin insisted that he possessed superior information and insight . Still, when Stalin insisted otherwise, they presumed that he had superior insight . They presumed that Stalin had superior information .
 The pair evidently used the defector's warnings to urge a general mobilization . In Stalin's mind, this was tantamount to war . The pair's actions were seen as a signal to prepare for war .
 Stalin had himself tried to engage Hitler even as he waited for the blackmail demands he expected Hitler to issue . Stalin tried to negotiate with Hitler even though he expected him to issue blackmail demands . Stalin had been waiting for Hitler for months .
 Stalin, instead of continuing to wait for an ultimatum from Hitler, could have preempted it . Stalin could have been preempted by the dictator's decision to strike .
 Hitler feared that the wily Soviet despot would somehow seize the initiative and unilaterally, publicly declare dramatic, far-reaching concessions to Germany . Hitler feared it would be impossible to trust the Soviet leader .
 Stalin appears to have discussed possible concessions with Molotov, but if he did, no record survives . No record survives of Stalin's meeting with the Soviet leader .
 Stalin expected Germany to demand Ukraine, the Caucasian oil fields, and unimpeded transit for the Wehrmacht through Soviet territory to engage the British in the Near East and India . Evidently, Stalin wanted Ukraine and the Caucasus oil fields .
 A cunning despot could have publicly declared his willingness to join the hostilities against the United Kingdom, exacting revenge against the great power he most reviled . It would have robbed Hitler of his argument that the British were holding out against Germany in anticipation of eventual Soviet assistance .
 Stalin clung to his belief that Germany could not attack Russia before defeating the United Kingdom, even though the British did not have an army on the continent and were neither defending territory there nor in a position to invade from there .
 When his spies out of Berlin and elsewhere reported that the Wehrmacht had ""completed all war preparations,"" he did not grasp that this meant that day one would bring full, main-force engagement .
 In the Little Corner, while the relatively heated discussion with Timoshenko and Zhukov continued, Molotov stepped out . In the little Corner, the discussion continued, while Timoshenko was in the middle of the discussion .
 Schulenburg arrived directly from overseeing the burning of secret documents at the embassy . Schulenberg arrived promptly, direct from overseeing burning of documents . He arrived at the scene from the embassy where the documents were burned .
 The envoy had been deeply disappointed that the Hitler-Stalin Pact had turned out to be an instrument not for a territorial deal over Poland to avoid war but for the onset of another world war .
 He had gone to Berlin to see Hitler and persuade him of Stalin's peaceful intentions but had come back empty-handed . Now he feared the much-rumored German-Soviet clash, and recently he feared a clash with Hitler .
 In desperation, Schulenburg had sent his embassy counselor to Berlin to try one last time, but this had failed as well . The embassy counselor had sent one last attempt to get back in touch with the president .
 Molotov demanded to know why Germany was evacuating personnel, thereby fanning rumors of war . He demanded that the evacuations of personnel were not related to the war, but to rumors of a war . Molotrov: "It's not a war"
 During a state visit to Germany in November 1940, Molotov had gone toe to toe with Hitler in the gargantuan new Reich Chancellery . During that visit, he argued over clashing spheres of influence in eastern Europe . During a visit to the German capital in 1940,
 Around 10:00 PM, the winds gushed, billowing the curtains at open windows . Suddenly, around 10:30 PM, amid the still suffocating heat, the wind gushed .
 Stalin yielded to his insistent soldiers and accepted their draft directive . Stalin eventually agreed to the draft . Stalin's draft directive was accepted by the soldiers .
 Timoshenko and Zhukov rushed out of the Little Corner at 10:20, armed, at long last, with an order for full-scale war mobilization, Directive Number 1 . Timoshenko: "Directive Number 1"
 The despot deleted an insertion by the despot that if the Germans attacked, Soviet commanders were to attempt to meet them, to settle any conflict . The military men had managed to delete an insertion .
 Soviet commanders up and down the frontier were hosting performances, as they generally did on Saturday nights .
 Attendees included the commander of the critical Western Military District, Dmitry Pavlov; his chief of staff; and his deputies . Attendees also included the . Western Military . District commander of Russia’s Western Military. District .
 Six German aircraft crossed the frontier in Pavlov's region on a recent night . Six German planes had crossed the border in the region on the night .
 Pavlov overheard saying on the phone about reports of German actions . Pavlov was overheard saying he was unhappy with reports of the actions of Germans .
 As soon as Pavlov put the phone down and prepared to greet a visitor, the phone rang again . Pavlov had to put the receiver down and prepare for a visitor to arrive .
 The commander of the Kiev Military District called the defense commissariat to report that another German had crossed the border . He reported that Wehrmacht soldiers had taken up their firing positions, with tanks at their start lines .
 Hitler had composed letters explaining his decision to attack the Soviet Union to the leaders of Nazi-allied states . Hitler's letters were sent to Nazi leaders in the days leading up to the attack on Soviet Union . Hitler wrote the letters explaining the attack to the world's leaders .
 Hitler's adjutant Nicolaus von Below noticed that the fuhrer was ""increasingly nervous and restless and restless" Adolf Hitler was "increasingly restless and nervous"
 Hitler did not sleep for a second straight night in his residence in the old Reich Chancellery . Hitler didn't sleep for the second night in a row .
 Goebbels had just finished watching Gone With the Wind when he summoned the Nazi leader . He summoned him to a meeting in Berlin, Germany .
 The two walked up and down Hitler's drawing room for guite a while, finalizing the timing and content of Hitler's war proclamation for the next day . Hitler's proclamation would focus on ""the salvation of Europe"" and the danger of waiting any longer .
 Goebbels left at 2:30 AM, returning to the Propaganda Ministry, where staff had been told to await him . Staff were told to wait for him at 2.30 AM .
 Most intended recipients in Soviet frontline positions failed to receive Directive Number 1 . Most of the intended recipients were intended to receive the directive .
 Wehrmacht advance units, many disguised in Red Army uniforms, had already crossed the border and sabotaged Soviet communications . Soviet communications were also sabotaged .
 Russia considered itself a providential power with a special mission in the world but lagged behind the other great powers . Russian rulers launching forced modernizations to overcome or at least manage the asymmetry of a country that considered itself .
 The urgent guest for a strong state had culminated, once more, in personal rule . Personal rule had culminated in a personal rule of the state .
 Stalin's regime defined the terms of public thought and individual identity . Stalin himself personified the passions and dreams of a socialist modernity and Soviet might .
 With single-sentence telegrams or brief phone calls, he could spur the clunky Soviet party-state machinery into action . He could invoke discipline and intimidation, but also galvanizing young functionaries who felt close emotional ties to him . Millions more would never come close to meeting
 "In worldview and practice, it was a conspiracy that perceived conspiracy everywhere and in everything, constantly gaslighting itself," says author . "It was always a conspiracy," he says of the conspiracy .
 In administration, it constituted a crusade for planning and control that ended up generating a proliferation of improvised illegalities, a perverse drive for order, and a system in which propaganda and myths about ""the system"" were the most systematized part .
 Amid the cultivated opacity and patent falsehoods, even most high officials were reduced to Kremlinology . Even most high . officials are reduced to . Kremlinology.
 The cult of the party's and especially Stalin's infallibility proved to be the most dangerous flaw of Stalin's fallible rule . The fanatical hypercentralization was often self-defeating, but the cult of party's, especially Stalin, proved to have been most dangerous .
 Anti-Westernism was the core impulse of this longstanding Russian-Eurasian political culture . By inclination, Stalin was a Russian nationalist in the imperial sense, and anti-Westernistism was a core impulse .
 Initially, the ambitious Soviet guest to match the West had actually increased the country's dependency on Western technology and know-how . Initially, it was hoped that Soviet guest would match West's need to match West .
 Stalin's regime went on to develop its own sophisticated military and related industries to a degree unprecedented for even a military-first country . But after importing technology from every advanced Western economy, the Stalinist regime developed its own military .
 The Soviet Union mostly sought, or could manage, only nonaggression pacts . Geopolitically, however, whereas tsarist Russia had concluded foreign alliances for its security, .
 Its sole formal formal alliance, formed with France, lacked any military dimension . The country's sole formal alliance was with France .
 Stalin insisted on calling fascism ""reactionary,"" a supposed way for the bourgeoisie to preserve the old world . Stalin insisted that fascism was a way to preserve an old world, Stalin insisted .
 Hitler turned out to be someone neither Marx nor Lenin had prepared Stalin for . Stalin was not prepared to deal with Hitler, but he did .
 For a time, he recovered his personal and political eguilibrium in his pact with Hitler, which deflected the German war machine, delivered a bounty of German industrial tools, enabled the conguest and Sovietization of tsarist borderlands, and reinserted the Soviet Union into
 Hitler's ability to extract profit from the immense danger Hitler posed to Europe and the world had run its course . But far earlier than the despot imagined, he had run out of business .
 Stalin refused to come to grips with the new realities, and not solely out of greed for German technology . This generated unbearable tension in Stalin's life and rule, yet he refused to accept it .
 Stalin was blinkered by ideology and fixed ideas . Stalin's insight into the human psyche, demonic shrewdness, and sharp mind was sharp . Despite his insight into human psyche and shrewd mind, Stalin was not a believer .
 Stalin remained obsessed with British imperialism, railing against the Treaty of Versailles long after Hitler shredded it . Churchill controlled not a single division on the Soviet frontier, yet Stalin believed Hitler was negotiating with the British behind his back .
 For Hitler, the 1939 pact had been a distasteful necessity that, with luck, would not endure very long . With luck, it would not be a very long long . Hitler's choice was to be Hitler's own .
 His racial, social Darwinistist, zero-sum understanding of geopolitics meant that both the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom would have to be annihilated in order for Germany to realize its master-race destiny .
 He thought in terms of domination of the European continent, which reguired Lebensraum—living space—in the east . To be sure, in the immediate term, he thought .
 He foresaw domination of the world, which would reguire a blue-water fleet, bases rimming the Atlantic, and a colonial empire in the tropics for raw materials .
 Hitler faced a stark choice of either agreeing to deepen the pact with Stalin and taking on the entire British Empire . It would mean conceding at least a partial Soviet sphere in the Balkans and on the Black Sea . Or, alternatively, freeing himself from the infuriating dependency on Moscow and taking
 Hitler did not possess the air or naval capabilities or the depth of resources to prevail militarily over the United Kingdom . However, he did have the land forces to attempt to smash the Soviet Union .
 Hitler expected to be aided more and more by the vast resources of the United States, the U.S. Nazi leader wanted to be able to defeat the Soviet Union . The U.K. had a long-term commitment to victory over the British .
 Hitler and the German high command knew that the Soviet Union was not poised to attack, the invasion amounted to a preventive war all the same in his logic . The Soviet Union is only getting stronger and might itself attack at a time it deemed more advantageous .
 Hitler had offered the British government a version of the pact he had concluded with Stalin . The British government did not accept it . Hitler was pushing Japan to attack British positions in East Asia .
 The Nazi leader had grasped the British imperial mindset, and he was sincere when promising that, in exchange for a free hand on the continent, he would keep the British Empire intact for now .
 He continued to hold out hope that the United Kingdom, patently weak militarily on land and therefore unable to defeat him, would come to terms with him .
 Moscow and London have common interests between London and Moscow, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin sees London and Russia as having common interests, says Putin .
 Hitler turned out to be someone neither Marx nor Lenin had prepared Stalin for . Stalin was not prepared to deal with the dictator .
 During the preparations for the blitzkrieg against the Soviets, Hitler continued to devote resources to preparing for a long naval and air war against the British and the U.S. Hitler spent most of his time preparing for the battle against the Soviet Union .
 Germany was sinking its ships and bombing its cities, and it had lost its position in the Balkans, historian says . "It had lost control of the Balkans," he says .
 After German paratroopers had captured Crete, the British position seemed grievously imperiled . The British position in Crete was threatened by the German invasion .
 It envisioned the subdivision and exploitation of Soviet territories, as well as a pincer movement against the Suez Canal and British positions in the Middle East . It also envisioned the conguest of Gibraltar, northwestern Africa, and the Spanish and Portuguese Atlantic islands .
 Eventually, there would need to be a German base in Afghanistan for seizing British India . Eventually, the German base would be needed in order to seize British India.
 Had Hitler thrown all his might into this ""peripheral strategy"" rather than invading the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom might not have survived . The United Kingdom may have survived without the help of Hitler's efforts .
 The war with the Soviets would have gone ahead at some point, but with the British knocked out of the picture, it would have been impossible to imagine .
 There would have been no British beachhead to assist an eventual U.S.-led Allied landing in western Europe .
 Stalin's greatest shaper of his identity was the building and running of a dictatorship . He assumed responsibility for the Soviet Union's power in the world . Stalin assumed responsibility in the creation and creation of the state .
 Stalin had grown accustomed to moving millions of peasants, workers, workers—whole nations—on his own initiative, often consulting no one . In the name of socialism, Stalin, Stalin moved millions of people across a sixth of the earth . Stalin, in his Kremlin office, had grown
 Stalin's dealings with Hitler differed from British appeasement in that he tried deterrence as well as accommodation . Stalin tried deterrence and accommodation in his dealings with the dictator .
 Stalin's policy resembled British appeasement in that he was driven by a blinding desire to avoid war at all costs . But Stalin's policies resembled that of the British policy of appeasment .
 Neither his fearsome resolve nor his supreme cunning was in evidence in 1941 . Neither his . resolve nor . supreme cunning—which had enabled him to vanguish rivals and spiritually crush his inner circle—was in evidence .
 He shrank from trying to preempt Hitler militarily and failed to preempt him diplomatically . He failed to try and preempt Hitler diplomatically, failing to do so militarily .
 In the end, however, the guestion of who most miscalculated is not a simple one . "In the end of the year is not an easy decision to make, but it's not always easy to make .
 Bismarck had built his chancellorship on avoiding conflict with Russia . But he was determined to avoid conflict with the West . He was assassinated by the Nazis in July 1918 .
 When a bust of Bismarck was transferred to Hitler's new Reich Chancellery, it had broken off at the neck . When the bust was transferred from the old . Reich . Chancellary, it was moved to the new Reich .
 A replica replica of a replica was hastily made and artificially aged by soaking it in cold tea . A replica of the original was made and aged artificially aged using cold tea.
 Waiting for Hitler.29-1941 is the second in a three-volume biography of the Soviet leader . The book was published in 1941 .
 Counterfeit coins are nearly indistinguishable from authentic coin and remain so, even in the face of skeptical but impatient fact-checking . Their counterfeit posts were nearly identical to authentic coin .
 Metadata can provide a digital signature to identify actors on the Internet . Metadata—the data about data -- can provide the digital signature of a user .
 The Web allows us to examine timelines, serialize events, and identify primary sources . And the Web itself allows these stories to be serialized and serialized .
 Some signatures are harder to find than others than others, but they are all there . You just need to know where to look and what to analyze, and where to find them .
 The language comes from a cybersecurity bill that United States Senator Rob Portman introduced last spring . Portman's cybersecurity bill was introduced by Senator Portman last year .
 U.S. now has dedicated resources to confront efforts to spread false narratives that undermine democratic institutions and compromise America's foreign policy goals . According to co-sponsor Chris Murphy .
 With modest funding and proper oversight, the Global Engagement Center will help the government reach back in time and across virtual space . The center will help ensure streams of data are not contaminated by statesponsored misinformation or falsehoods .
 The State Department is not known for agility or innovation . Unfortunately, the State Department does not have the ability to innovate .
 Too often we are using nineteenth century bureaucracy, with twentieth century technology, to fight twenty first century adversaries . Too often, we often use nineteenth century technology to fight modern adversaries, too often .
 We've made progress since ISIS first came onto the world stage, but as the challenges and adversaries morph, agility will continue to be key . We have made progress in the fight against ISIS, but we need to adapt quickly and adapt .
 Portman's legislation, network architecture, and operational practices, would protect the public . There are other steps Washington and the media can take now, Portman says .
 Her report was followed by Silicon Valley publisher Tim O'Reilly's outline of a basic verification framework last month . He took the steps he took to fact-check an Internet ""meme"" that claimed to correlate crime rates to voting trends .
 The story was easily proved false, but doing so reguired personal persistence and the ability to make creative connections between authentic root sources .
 Few people could, or would, invest the amount of time that Zimdars or O'Reilly recommend . But computers are not intimidated by a mountain of pattern-matching tasks .
 From a technological perspective, these are surprisingly easy problems to address, and we can do so safely, securely, and reliably . We can do this safely and securely, we can use our technology to solve these problems .
 Most reputable news organizations do not invest time and treasure in confirming sources and facts . Representative democracy becomes a mayhem of funhouse mirrors, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Place a big boulder in the middle, and the current will divert around it, although the water level may rise in the vicinity of the blockage .
 Internet packets are designed to remember the precise path they take to keep the aggregate flow manageable and predictable . In this analogy, the drops of water are data packets, and Internet packets can be used to remember their precise path .
 Network gateways can always determine where a message originates . The network gateways are the tributaries to and channels from the aggregate flow . They can also determine the source of a message .
 Although it is impossible to predict what will happen downstream, it is easy to know how many nodes a packet passed through on its way from its source to a waypoint .
 We can hear and not see people we can hear but not see, by their phone number, by the sound of their voice and by their interests . So too can we authenticate real news. We can also authenticate people's interests. We do so in the same way that we
 We can do this by generating (through machine learning or by brute-force pattern-matching) a signature that reconstructs the flow of a packet . We can use this signature to reconstruct the flow in a packet.
 We can examine the waypoints of the packets between source and destination to determine its origin . We can patiently maintain a record of trustworthy signatures over time .
 Technology can distinguish between uncontaminated springs of news and manufactured springs that have been poisoned with misinformation or disinformation . In that way technology can guickly distinguish between news and misinformation .
 As long as media and readers are unable to guickly and reliably expose fake news, it will undermine the public's ability to govern itself . Fake news is a problem for the public, says Simon Tisdall .
 The inability to unmask statesponsored Internet propaganda could well pose a very real threat to national security, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Even an imperfect automated sorting process is better than nothing . That's why even an imperfect process is good than nothing, says CNN.com .
 The inability to unmask state-sponsored Internet propaganda could well pose a very real threat to national security . State-sponsored internet propaganda is a real threat, says CNN iReporters .
 The scourge of misinformation is as old as language itself, but Internet-fast global manipulation is relatively new . It's easier to manipulate the Internet to spread misinformation, but it's not always easy to do .
 The good news is that there are methods and systems that can help ordinary users discern what's reliable from what's invented . There are methods to help ordinary people discern what is reliable .
 Major distribution platforms—from network and cable news to web-based platforms that service billions of users—should move toward sensible solutions that do not censor, but that do provide citizen consumers with an indication of reliability .
 Software applications will learn how to catch spam, much like they already catch spam in email . Software applications already catch email spam, but it's not always easy .
 The erosion of these traditional norms on the Internet scuttles authentic debate on the rocks of superstition, impulse, emotion, and bias, says the author .
 We are optimistic that the United States can fight back against fake news and foreign influence in U.S. elections . With new public-sector investment and private-sector innovation, we are optimistic, we say .
 MARTIN J O'MALLEY is a former two-term Governor of Maryland and Baltimore Mayor of Baltimore . O'Malaley is a two-time Governor of Baltimore and two terms Mayor of Maryland . He is also a former Maryland Governor and Baltimore City Mayor .
 PETER L LEVIN is Adjunct Senior Fellow in the Technology and National Security program at the Center for a New American Security . He is CEO of Amida Technology Solutions, Inc. and CEO of the company .
 A few days before his inauguration as president, Donald J Trump took aim at the U.S. most important allies . Trump has taken aim at NATO allies .
 Trump's words marked an extraordinary departure from the norms of the postwar transatlantic relationship . The president's words were a departure from a norm of the post-war relationship .
 For decades, the U.S. and the EU have been each other's most important foreign policy partners . They have been joined at the hip in promoting liberal democratic values and trading .
 Sapin's prediction is unlikely to hold, but it's unlikely that it will hold, he says . Sapin: "Europe's future is not going to be a long-term problem"
 People tend to define their identities not only in reference to those with whom they share values and cultures, but also in opposition to those they do not . The first is that people tend to . define their identity not only . But also in . reference to . those with . whom they .
 Social psychologists argue that the construction of a sharply drawn other encourages group solidarity . Social psychologists have long argued that a sharply-drawn other encourages solidarity . The construction of the other encourages social solidarity .
 Europe-wide antiwar demonstrations took place on February 15, 2003, in Athens, Helsinki, London, Madrid, Paris, and Rome . Millions marched against then President George W Bush and the imminent U.S. invasion of Irag .
 Citizens across the EU reviled Bush for what they viewed as his illiberal warmongering and rejection of international treaties on climate change and human rights . Bush was accused of what they saw as an illiberal war on the planet .
 European intellectuals such as Jacgues Derrida and Jurgen Habermas heralded the protests as evidence of a newly united continent . The protests were seen as an attempt to unify Europe .
 A global financial crisis and soaring income ineguality have brought economic stagnation to millions on both sides of the Atlantic . The world's economic stagnation is being brought to an end by the financial crisis .
 Many Europeans now view the EU as either the source of the problem (especially in the countries most hurt by the eurozone crisis) or as an accessory to it . They blame EU policies supporting open borders and free movement of people for much of Europe's malaise .
 Many of Europe's populist leaders have embraced the new U.S. president . That is why many of the heads of France's National Front and Italy's Five Star Movement and Northern League have embraced him .
 If the U.S. cannot play the role of a unifying other for the EU, perhaps there is another way that Trump's jabs could solidify the bloc .
 Political communities often rally around the flag and solidify their national identities during apparent crises . What is more important is that they rally around their national identity during crises .
 Trump could unify the EU should offer only lukewarm comfort to the union's supporters . Here again, the answer to the question is only a little comfort .
 Trump's inflammatory comments do not pose an immediate existential threat to the bloc . Trump's remarks do not threaten the EU, however, as they are not an immediate threat .
 Even if that dynamic materializes, its effects might be drowned out by popular demands for political change . The dynamic might drown out by years of economic austerity and technocratic leadership . But even if that happens, it might also drown out the demands for change .
 The imagined community of Europeans that the EU has constructed offers only watered-down versions of the cultural and emotional attachments of traditional nationalism . The EU's imagined community offers little silver linings, says David Cameron .
 The threats that Trump may present to the ELF are therefore unlikely to bring about an immediate or heartfelt embrace of the European project .
 His stance may encourage the kind of authoritarian populism that has already taken hold in Hungary and Poland . Instead, it may encourage authoritarian populism .
 The liberal institutions, created in the United States' image, acted as a bulwark against the Soviet Union and underwrote prosperity and stability . Trump has promised to restore the same kinds of American wealth and power that Trump has pledged to restore .
 As it manages the conseguences of Trump's election, it must also face its own shortcomings . The U.S. has a history of not being able to manage its own problems .
 EU leaders and citizens must confront the passions of populism head on, says David Cameron . EU leaders must respond with a full-throated defense of the EU's achievements while building the capacity to deal with the union's challenges, he says .
 As for the United States, it may be in a deeper hole, since it must confront the possibility that many of the institutions that have historically underpinned its supremacy may be dismantled . The U.S. is in a deep hole, as is the U.N.
 U.S. President Donald Trump has spent his first weeks in office disrupting relations with allies and adversaries alike . The president's first week in office is expected to disrupt relations with the world .
 He apparently remains determined to enact an executive order temporarily banning immigration from seven Muslim-majority countries . Despite the early judicial rulings against his efforts, he is determined to act .
 It often means paying up front for benefits that are hard to see until you lose them, or that will only be obvious when you really need them . Paying up front means paying for benefits you can't afford to wait for them to see .
 Sometimes, successful foreign policy even means keeping real victories guiet . Sometimes, it even means winning real victories .
 Invisible foreign policy doesn't appeal to a president who cares about showmanship and flashy successes, says President Barack Obama . "Invisible foreign policy" isn't going to appeal to the president, says Obama .
 Trump's initial storm of activity seems to have calmed in recent days . There is no evidence that he has turned to the kind of guiet, routine actions that make U.S. foreign policy run smoothly .
 Such efforts are not dramatic, but they are essential, and their absence could severely undermine U.S. interests . The absence of these efforts could harm the United States interests .
 The policies that Trump decries have something in common with each other . Invisible benefits of the policies that he decries are 'boring' and 'invisible'
 Free trade, alliances, and non-splash diplomacy all come with public costs and less visible benefits . Free trade and alliances come with fewer visible benefits, but they come with less visible costs .
 Freetrade agreements make it cheaper for everyone to buy consumer goods like televisions . But because such a benefit is spread out among all Americans, any given shopper at Best Buy is not likely to give the free-trade agreements themselves much thought .
 Residents notice the costs when a factory closes down in their town . They certainly notice, however, the costs . They say they notice the loss of jobs .
 A survey of the ingredients of Trump-branded goods reveals that even Trump himself doesn't think that buying American is always the best deal for entrepreneurs .
 The benefits of alliances and diplomacy are also largely invisible . Less obvious is that the benefits of these alliances are also invisible .
 Rex Tillerson's apparent marginalization from decision-making would make sense only to a president who views diplomacy as marginal . Secretary of State Rex Tillerson has been sidelined from public diplomacy in recent weeks .
 Thomas Schelling, Nobel Prize-winning scholar, noted that all of us tend to prioritize short-term gratification over long-term benefits .
 Elites have agreed that a liberalizing trade environment, a robust network of alliances, and regularized diplomacy provide worthwhile benefits . Elites agree that liberalizing a trade environment and regularizing diplomacy provide useful benefits .
 The trick also stops policymakers engaging in policies like protectionism that seem like a guick win but can be seriously damaging . In addition to providing benefits that are hard to see, such as the lower costs of goods thanks to trade .
 The Smoot-Hawley tariff was introduced in 1930 to protect the U.S. economy from foreign competition . It ended up prolonging the Great Depression .
 Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act changed the institutional blueprint according to which American trade policy is set . After this dismal experience, the Reciprocrocation Act was passed .
 The new format helped make protectionism easier to resist by giving the president advance authority from Congress to negotiate trade agreements . All of these generated increasingly durable political support for free trade .
 Alliances and day-to-day diplomacy force policymakers and the public to pay the premiums on insurance policies that they may need when things get tough . The insurance policies are important insurance policies for policymakers .
 Strong alliances have helped keep major wars at bay for 70 years, both directly, and indirectly, through the balance of power that strong alliances help reinforce . They have also helped to keep major war at bay through good relationships with allies and partners .
 Trump berated Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull for his comments . This is one reason why Trump's berating of Turnbull was so shocking . The Australian PM is the prime minister of Australia .
 Over 17,000 Australians served in the Korean War and over 60,000 in Vietnam War . Australia's contributions to conflicts in Asia are an important reminder of Australia's importance to the United States' future position in Asia in the face of a rising China .
 Most Democratic and Republican foreign policy elites still back a version of the liberal international order . But they need to step up as Trump challenges it, says Julian Zelizer .
 There are important pockets of support even within Trump's administration, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Trump's rise is not simply a story of popular revolt against the liberal order . However, it's not simply the story of a revolt against liberal order, says David Frum . Trump's success is not just a story, he says .
 Trade preferences are shaped by many of the same forces that drove the presidential vote, rather than by the specifics of trade policy . Rather, trade preferences often reflect economic or social anxieties rather than specific trade policies .
 Most voters probably weren't thinking much about alliances and diplomacy when they cast their ballots . But even if they had, it's doubtful they would train their fire on longtime U.S. partners .
 Americans asked if countries were allies or enemies of the U.S. in a survey conducted just before the revelation of the troublesome Australia call .
 Trump made these issues salient by weaving a campaign narrative around concerns about free-trade deals and paying too much to support rich allies . Trump made the issues salient .
 All this will severely complicate any efforts to restore faith in the order . All this is likely to complicate efforts to rebuild faith in order .
 It will always be difficult to get voters roused about something as abstract as the liberal international order . It's not merely a problem of better messaging, it's a problem for voters .
 It's up to those elites who still recognize and prioritize the invisible benefits that the system has provided to protect or promote it . Instead, it is up to them to prioritize and prioritize those invisible benefits .
 Someone will have to tell Trump to take a trip to Germany without the expectation of bringing home a deal .
 Strong alliances with Australia, Japan, and South Korea will be useful if there is a confrontation with China . China itself lacks allies, especially since it lacks allies .
 Someone will have to point out to Trump that trade protection leads to price hikes at Walmart . Someone must have pointed out to the president that price hikes lead to higher prices .
 Some foreign policy victories need to stay invisible, say elites . They may also have to remind Trump that he won't be able to take public credit for some of them .
 Foreign policy is largely about the dogs that didn't bark, the project that takes time to bear fruit, or the story that must stay secret . Crisis stability, terrorism prevention, intelligence gathering, and many other aspects of foreign policy are largely about these dogs .
 Elites still need to confront criticisms of the existing order that Trump has exploited . Elites must confront the criticisms of existing order, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 NATO allies do need to get serious about spending a minimum of 2 percent of their GDP on defense . Meeting the target would have major defense implications, but rather to maintain political support from NATO's chief benefactor . Only Estonia, Greece, Poland, the United Kingdom and the United States manage
 The track record of the postwar international order has been written in invisible ink . The world's post-war post-apartheid international order was written in 'invisible ink'
 If we are not successful in defending it, its benefits may finally become plain to see, because they are gone . The benefits of the U.S. should be seen, but they may never be seen again if they're gone .
 Western observers are often blind to social currents within the Muslim world . Western observers often overlooks social currents in Muslim countries such as Egypt .
 In large part, this was because the collapse of old regimes, which had suppressed Islamism domestically, created new spaces for jihadists . The collapse of the old regimes created new places for jihadists, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 These spaces included both literal ungoverned territory and discursive spaces, where radicals were newly able to engage in dawa. or proselytism . These spaces were both literal and discourse spaces, which included both discourses .
 Today, a new type of discursive space is opening up in the Muslim world . Today, it will foster a very different set of ideas, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Ahwaa's project was little-noticed at the time, but it was revolutionary . The project was the first of its kind in the world, and it was a success .
 The creation of an online platform where LGBT people could candidly discuss the issues affecting their lives, such as romantic relationships or tensions between Islam and gay rights, was thus a direct challenge to deeply inscribed cultural and religious norms . The creator of the online platform was created by a group of LGBT
 Ahwaa heralds a wave of challenging ideas that, fueled by rapidly rising Internet penetration, will soon inundate Muslim-majority countries . The Internet penetration of the Muslim world is fueling the rise of Internet penetration .
 Online communications, by their nature, give marginalized social and political groups a space to organize, mobilize, and ultimately challenge the status guo . Online communications give marginalized groups a place to organize and mobilize .
 In the MENA region, online spaces like Awhaa will give sexual minorities the ability to assert their identity, rights, and place in society . In the region, sexual minorities will be able to express their identity and rights .
 The rise of religion-critical discourses will in turn trigger a backlash from conservative forces who fear an uprooting of traditional beliefs and identities . The rise in these discourses is expected to trigger backlash from conservatives .
 The coming social tsunami should be visible to anyone who knows what signs to look for, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The past two decades in the West have seen an extraordinarily rapid revolution in LGBT rights . The internet has enabled the rapid growth of the LGBT community in the world . The Internet has been a major factor in the evolution of gay rights .
 By the time Obama left office, same-sex marriage was a constitutionally protected right, it was inconceivable that a viable Democratic candidate would oppose it . And by the time he was leaving office, it had become inconceivable .
 President Donald Trump is doubtless the most pro-LGBT Republican nominee of all time . Indeed, the transformation has affected both sides of the aisle .
 The increasing confidence and visibility of LGBT people allowed them to move the needle on gay marriage, first incrementally and then more assertively, as public opinion began to shift . The increasing visibility of the LGBT people helped them to push the needle .
 In Muslim-majority countries Internet penetration rates have long lagged behind those of the developed world . But this state of affairs is changing, and this is changing .
 In 2010, Internet penetration rates in sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East were just 10. percent and 29. percent, respectively . Internet World Stats: Sub-Saharan African and Middle Eastern penetration rates were 10.9 percent .
 By 2016 Internet penetration had risen to 28 percent in sub-Saharan Africa and 57 percent in the Middle East . Internet penetration in the region has risen by 57 percent, according to CNN.com .
 Some Muslim countries have been at the forefront of the global boom in Internet access . Saudi Arabia's rate more than doubled from 2007 to 2016 . Tunisia's rate over the same period went from 13 percent to just under 50 percent .
 Most Muslim societies consider discussions of homosexuality and LGBT rights to be off-limits . With regard to sexuality, for instance, most Muslim societies have no discussion of homosexuality .
 Most countries institutionalize anti-LGBT discrimination through their legal systems, such as the state of the nation's legal system . Most institutionalize discrimination through legal systems .
 Homosexual acts are illegal in all Muslim-majority MENA countries, with the exception of Jordan and Bahrain . Homosexuality is illegal in most of the world's Muslim majority .
 LGBT-identifying individuals can also be threatened by vigilantes . In addition to state violence, vigilantes can also threaten LGBT-identified individuals .
 In 2014, a Pakistani man killed three gay men he had met online, explaining that he had done so to send a message about the "evils" of homosexuality .
 Throughout the region, conservative religious authorities have played a critical role shaping public attitudes and establishing social norms around homosexuality .
 Prominent Qatar-based preacher Yusuf Qaradawi has described homosexuality as a "" perverted act . He has endorsed the killing of homosexuals and endorsed the death of homosexuals .
 People critical of religion, such as apostates, atheists, and blasphemers, are similarly stigmatized . It is little wonder that apostates and atheists are also stigmatized. It is also little wonder why apostates are often stigmatized in the U.S.
 A 2016 Pew Research Center report found that 18 of the 20 countries in the MENA region have criminalized blasphemy . While 14 have banned apostasy, 18 of 20 countries have also criminalized apostasy in the region .
 Vigilante violence can imperil atheists, sometimes even those who defend religious freedom . It can also imperil those defending religious freedom in the United States .
 For his stance on the issue, Taseer was gunned down in January 2011 by his own bodyguard, Mumtaz Qadri, a committed Islamist . He was shot by his bodyguard in 2011 .
 Public rage followed Taseer's assassination, but significant portion of it was directed at the murdered governor rather than his killer .
 When Qadri went to trial, lawyers showered him with rose petals as he walked into the courthouse . When he went on trial he was showered with rosepetals .
 In such a hostile environment, critics of religion and members of the LGBT community are often forced to remain in the shadows .
 For reasons of legality and personal safety, being too loud can be a bad idea . Being too loud is also a good idea for the public .
 A recent article in the Journal of Child and Family Studies noted that coming out ""has been described as an essential component in identity formation and integration" and carries a variety of mental health benefits related to improved self-esteem .
 Coming out can result in exposure to discrimination and rejection by friends and family . Conversely, coming out can also result in exposing you to discrimination or rejection .
 In terms of the social stigma it invites, leaving the Islamic faith can also be seen as a kind of coming out, albeit one generally devoid of the celebration that often accompanies outwardly accepting one's LGBT identity . Leaving Islamic faith often invites social stigma, leaving Islamic faith is also a kind
 Internet boom will accelerate the process of coming out for marginalized groups . Yet for both marginalized groups, the Internet boom is likely to accelerate the coming out process .
 Online space offers a relatively safe environment where people can assemble, interact, and build relationships . Whereas offline space is hostile, online space offers an environment for people to assemble and interact . Online space is a relatively hostile environment, but it's a safe place to gather, interact .
 The Internet allows marginalized individuals to discuss intimate and controversial issues with anonymity . The anonymity of online communications can help marginalized individuals discuss intimate issues .
 The Internet allows like-minded people from disparate corners of the world to find one another and create virtual communities . The Internet, furthermore, allows likeminded people to find each other and create online communities .
 An atheist living in rural Egypt may not know anyone else who shares his views . An atheist may not be alone in Egypt .
 To appreciate the impact that increased Internet penetration will have on religiously conservative societies, it is crucial to understand how online interaction changes the behavior of members of marginalized communities .
 The psychologists Katelyn McKenna and John Bargh coined the term identity demarginalization to explain how people with marginalized and concealable identities interact with one another online .
 People with marginalized sexual and political views highly valued the opinions of peers in their online social networks . The study found that people with marginalized views valued their peers' opinions in their social network .
 Members of marginalized groups come to more fully embrace their marginalized identities as they engage online with other like-minded people . Members of the marginalized groups can identify themselves online with others who support them .
 Online forums are "an ideal space for maintaining and validating" a marginalized identity, according to a 2008 study .
 McKenna and Bargh concluded that once their identities were demarginalized, people began to consider revealing their identity publicly . People began to think about revealing their identities after their identity was demargined .
 Marginalized communities in the MENA region have not yet mastered the online environment, but they recognize the promise of digital engagement . The region's marginalized communities have yet to master the digital environment .
 LGBT activists in North Africa have established niche online magazines . LGBT activists have established online magazines in the region .
 Amir Ashour set out to establish Iraq's first LGBT organization . He gauged interest by reaching out to personal contacts and contacting people through Grindr and Tinder, he says .
 MENA-based atheists have begun carving out a foothold on social media . MENA atheists have similarly begun carving a foothold in social media in the region .
 Conservatives have launched coordinated online harassment campaigns designed to get Facebook to suspend atheist accounts . These groups have been targeted by conservatives .
 One tactic involves posting pornographic images to atheist pages, then immediately reporting the images to Facebook .
 Some Islamists have also reported atheists for allegedly Islamophobic hate speech . Some atheists have also been reported for allegedly insulting Muslims .
 In February 2016, Facebook suspended at least nine atheist groups with a combined following of over 128,000 members . The social media company quickly restored the pages after they were suspended .
 Despite efforts to silence the online atheist community, the Internet remains a refuge . Despite these efforts, the internet is a refuge for atheists .
 Saudi atheists use Facebook and Twitter to engage in discussions about secularism and religion . Saudi atheists set up in-person underground meetings in Saudi Arabia .
 Atheists in their forties and fifties only recently revealed their views after interacting with younger atheists online . The man, who went by a pseudonym, said he had met atheists in their 40s and 50s who had only recently recently revealed views .
 Some atheist activists have even begun to operate online under their real names, eschewing pseudonyms that many still use for protection .
 In 2013, Egyptian atheists created the Black Ducks YouTube channel . The channel profiles atheists and other non-religious people from the Arab world .
 Online discourse within the LGBT community has also evolved and grown bolder, as can be seen in the case of the Ahwaa forum . Online discourse has evolved as a result of the rise in online discourse .
 Members use Ahwaa as a sounding board to discuss a range of sensitive subjects rarely broached in public . Members use it as a forum to discuss sensitive topics that are rarely discussed publicly .
 In another thread, a poster explained that he had lost all his friends when he came out to them .
 The post prompted a wave of sympathetic responses, as forum members comforted the man online . Forum members offered to befriend him online and comforted him .
 Such interactions build social cohesion within the LGBT community and help strip away stigmas . Such interactions help to strip away stigma, say LGBT activists . They also help to build a stronger community, say activists .
 Forum members debated the merits of revealing their sexual orientation to coworkers, friends, and family . In a long discussion ranging over dozens of posts, forum members debated whether to reveal their orientation to friends or family .
 In a separate thread, a girl explained that she lived with ""constant fear and guilt" because she kept her sexual identity hidden from her family .
 This is who you are, and if you parents cannot understand and would not understand, then you will just have to keep it to yourself . If you parents can't understand or don't like it, you will have to live with it, she says . This is not the first time
 Few comments better exemplify the role that online communities can play in destigmatizing marginalized identities . Online communities can help destigmatize marginalized identities, according to the comments .
 LGBT communities in Muslim countries are likely to trigger a backlash from conservative religious forces . LGBT and religion-critical communities are increasingly assertive .
 The backlash has already begun, sometimes violently, at both the state and sub-state level . Indeed, the backlash is already already under way at the sub-level level . It has already started, sometimes violent, at the state level .
 Even as Islamist groups have launched reporting campaigns to shut down atheist Facebook accounts, governments have arrested atheists who are vocal online .
 In 2015, Egyptian courts sentenced a 21-year-old student to three years in prison after he declared on Facebook that he was an atheist . The student was sentenced to 3 years in jail for three years after declaring he was atheist .
 Saudi Arabia has imprisoned blogger Raif Badawi since 2012 on charges of insulting Islam online . He has been occasionally dragged out of jail for a public lashing, occasionally dragged back to jail .
 Egyptian police have used catfishim — a tactic in which individuals use false personas to establish online relationships— to identify and arrest gay men . The tactic is a tactic used by Egyptian police to identify gay men online .
 Members of marginalized groups have been the victims of targeted sub-state violence . In the most extreme cases, members of these marginalized groups were the victims . The victims have been targeted by sub-states .
 Since 2013, Islamist militants in Bangladesh have carried out a series of assassinations targeting atheist bloggers . Some of the militants are linked to al-Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent in Bangladesh .
 In April 2016, a jihadist faction pledging allegiance to the Islamic State claimed responsibility for killing the editor of Bangladesh's only LGBT magazine . A jihadist faction pledged allegiance to ISIS claimed to have killed the editor .
 It's not entirely clear how the Internet-enabled rise of marginalized communities will reshape Muslim-majority societies . It's unclear how the rise of the LGBT or religioncritical ones will change Muslim societies .
 In the short term, the rise of social movements may provide a boon to jihadist groups . Jihadists often cast themselves as the only force capable of protecting the faith against Western and secular values .
 These marginalized groups may challenge religious conservatives' grip on power . But over the long term, these marginalized groups could challenge conservative groups .
 This could produce sweeping social and policy changes, perhaps, to what we have witnessed with respect to the issue of gay marriage in the U.S. This could be similar to what has happened in the United States, says author .
 It could generate massive social instability, akin to the tumult of the Arab Uprisings, and the failure to put countries like Libya back together . But it could also generate social instability like Libya's failed Arab Spring .
 Signs of the coming Islamic culture wars can already be discerned . Regardless of their ultimate outcome, however, signs of their eventual outcome can be seen in the past .
 ISIS imposed sweeping restrictions on personal freedoms in the northern province of Raqqa . ISIS imposed restrictions on people's freedoms in Raqqa province of Syria .
 Women had to wear the niqab, or full face veil, in public or face unspecified punishments in accordance with sharia or Islamic law . Among the restrictions was the requirement to wear a face veil .
 Nadia, 22, spoke in a dull monotone of her journey from life under the Islamic State to life in a Kurdish prison . Nadia is now serving a life sentence in a prison in Kurdish prison in northern Syria .
 A Sunni Arab from the Salahuddin Governorate in central Iraq, Nadia was married off to a local farmer in 2012 . Nadia—whose name has been changed to protect her identity— was married to a farmer in central Baghdad .
 Although their marriage was arranged, they got along at first, she says . She says she and her husband are now in a prison in Erbil .
 ISIS took over their village for two months in 2014 . The village was overrun by ISIS fighters in the summer of that year .
 Kurdistan Regional Government faces serious challenges as it seeks to identify security threats among thousands of Iraqis streaming across its borders from ISIS-held territory .
 Nadia said that her husband insisted they remain to care for their cattle . Nadia and her husband said they will remain in charge of the family's cattle .
 After Iraqi forces routed ISIS, village elders banished them and others who had not run away, accusing them of being ISIS sympathizers . Village elders returned and banished them, accusing others of not running away from ISIS .
 Her husband, unable to find other work, joined ISIS as a checkpoint guard in Mosul . The couple moved with their infant daughter to Mosul, and there, he joined ISIS .
 Nadia says her husband became increasingly ""brainwashed"" and guickly turned ""aggressive,"" beating her . Although he initially joined to support his family, said Nadia, he became increasingly "aggressive"
 When she said she would leave him, he threatened to either kill her or take away their daughter . He threatened to kill her if she left him or take their daughter away from him .
 ISIS pressured Nadia's husband to become a frontline fighter, but he refused . He was beaten and jailed by the group for two months after refusing to fight for ISIS . Nadia says her husband was beaten by ISIS for refusing to join the fight .
 The day after his release in November 2015, he fled to neighboring Turkey . He fled to Turkey the next day .
 ISIS enforcers tried to make Nadia reveal his whereabouts after ISIS discovered his escape . Nadia says ISIS tried to get Nadia to reveal where he is .
 Her in-laws feared for her life and persuaded her to let them smuggle her and her daughter into Turkey to join her husband . Her husband was killed in a car bomb attack in 2011 .
 She and her daughter reached Turkey after a weeks-long journey involving two sets of smugglers . They crossed first into Syria on the back of a truck in a cage hidden beneath bags of sand and soil .
 Terrified her daughter would cry, she doped her with cold medicine . Terrified she would cry. Terrified . She said she reluctantly doped herself with cold medication .
 When he discovered she was plotting to return to Irag with their daughter, "he threw me out of the apartment and closed the door in my face,"" refusing to let her take their daughter with her .
 Asayish, the security arm of the KRG, arrested her after finding incriminating photos on her phone . She was traveling in a bus when she was arrested . The KRG security arm found the photos on the bus .
 Another photo showed Nadia's husband sporting a flowing beard and posing with an assault rifle . Nadia and her husband were seen posing with guns in the photos .
 Nadia said she immediately told the Asayish agents that the photo was of her husband, that he had been an ISIS member . Nadia says she was fleeing him when she saw the photo .
 Nadia is charged with participation in a terrorist group, which carries a sentence of up to 15 years . Now in her 12th month of detention at the Women and Children's Reformatory in Erbil, Nadia has been held for 12 months .
 The toilet was broken, and the two tiny windows were located near the ceiling . The toilet is broken, but the windows are located in the ceiling.
 Nadia said she could not make phone calls or take family visits for four months . Nadia says she was too scared to call or take a visit from family members . She said she was unable to make a phone call or visit family members for four weeks .
 When we spoke in December, the KRG had still not provided her with a lawyer, and she said she had seen a judge only once . The KRG has not provided a lawyer for the woman, she said .
 Nadia was one of ten women detained on terrorism-related offenses at the Women and Children's Reformatory . Nadia is one of 10 women detained at the reformatory .
 Two of the women had been convicted for trying to commit suicide bombings . One of them was convicted in 2008, and another in 2008 . Two of them readily admitted this was the case .
 The other eight women claimed that their only crime was being related by marriage or blood to a member of ISIS or its precursor, al Qaeda in Irag . But the other eight claimed that they were related to ISIS or al Qaeda .
 Many of the eight women said they had not been provided with a lawyer, as reguired under Iragi law . The eight women say they were not provided with lawyers .
 They had spent anywhere from one to nine months in prison without charge or trial . They had been held without trial or charge .
 International law requires detainees be charged ""promptly,"" a period that should not exceed a few days or, at most, a few weeks . International law says detainees should be charged within a matter of weeks .
 Six of the women's children, ranging in age from ten months to eight years, were living inside the prison with them . Six children were also living inside with the women .
 Legal proceedings for terrorism-related cases tend to be more complex and take longer than those for common crimes, he says . Legal proceedings are more complex than those of common crimes .
 He said a court would provide her and all others accused with lawyers if they could not hire one . He said she and others accused would be provided with lawyers .
 An Erbil court dismissed a case against Bassema Darwish, a Yazidi mother of three who had been enslaved and raped by an ISIS emir . The case was dismissed on February 22 .
 KRG had accused Darwish of complicity in the killings of three KRG peshmerga by ISIS fighters in October 2014 . The KRG also accused the Iraqi government of being complicit in the deaths of three peshmmerga . ISIS fighters killed the three Kurdish peshmen by
 Darwish told the court interrogator had beaten her and threatened her with rape if she did not confess to a role in the killings . She said she was beaten and threatened with rape by Asayish interrogator if she didn't confess to killing .
 The women and children I met at the Erbil reformatory had frequent access to a large courtyard . The reformatory was set up in the Iraqi city of Erbil, Iraq .
 The mothers and children were crowded into a poorly ventilated cell with the other female prisoners . But much of the time they were in a cramped cell with other prisoners .
 Prison staff say the cell, housing 24 people, was built for half that number . Prison staff said the cell was only designed for 24 people . The prison cell is located in a cell in a single cell in the prison yard .
 One of the prisoners, Yasmine, had been a 16-year-old widow when KRG forces caught her trying to enter Erbil wearing a suicide vest in 2008 .
 Yasmine, who also did not want to disclose her real name, told me that al Qaeda in Iraq had recruited her by barraging her with messages and calls saying that U.S. forces had killed her husband . Yasmine said she needed to avenge her husband's death .
 Yasmine completed her seven-year prison term, but she remains in jail . Twenty months have passed since she completed her prison term . Yasmine is still serving a seven year prison term for her crimes .
 Among the women awaiting charge or trial, one said she was detained because her son had joined al Qaeda in Irag a decade earlier . Another said she had cut off contact with him since then because he had joined the extremist group .
 Another woman said that she was related to a prominent ISIS member but had never even spoken with the relative . She said she had seen him only once in her life, at a family gathering in 2002 .
 A third woman said that she and her husband, a former Iragi police officer, were detained as ISIS suspects because their home was the only one in their village that ISIS had not destroyed . She said that was because ISIS had taken over the house and kicked them out .
 Two women said ISIS had killed one or more of their family members . ISIS has killed one of them, according to two women .
 Three women, including Nadia, said they had left their husbands because the men joined ISIS . Nadia said their spouses had threatened and beaten them or taken their children away in retaliation .
 She is charged under the KRG law of 2006, which lapsed last July, potentially leaving her in a legal limbo . Many of the 1,500 other Iragis held as ISIS suspects are also held as suspects .
 As KRG authorities try to get to the bottom of cases like Nadia's, it's critical that they base their findings on credible evidence and resist assuming guilt by association . The KRG is trying to find out what happened to Nadia in her case .
 The challenge of keeping the region safe from groups such as ISIS is immense, but it does not absolve authorities of the responsibility to afford suspects the due process rights to which they are entitled .
 They should enforce a zero-tolerance policy toward forced confessions or other detainee abuse . The U.S. government should not tolerate forced confessions .
 Other members of the international coalition fighting ISIS should press the KRG to do so as well . Otherwise, they risk dirtying their own hands .
 Settling for anything less risks revictimizing women who have already suffered under ISIS . It fuels the ISIS narrative that the KRG and its allies are foes, not friends, of Iragi Arabs, says Ms. Ghitis .
 LETTA TAYLER is the Senior Terrorism and Counterterrorism Researcher at Human Rights Watch . Letta Taylor is a senior terrorism and counterterrorism researcher .
 The Two Sides of India's Prime Minister Kanchan Chandra are the two sides of the country's prime minister . The two sides include India and the United States .
 On March 19, a short man in saffron robes and a monk's shaven head was sworn in as chief minister of the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh . The short man was sworn into office in Uttar Pradesh on March 19 .
 UP is India's largest state, with a population larger than that of Russia . UP is the country's most populous state, and has a population of over 100,000 .
 Yogi Adityanath, as the saffron-robed monk is known, was Modi's hand-picked nominee to lead Uttar Pradesh's new government . He was chosen to lead the new government in Uttar Pradesh .
 The appointment of a religious leader as the chief of a state government is unprecedented in Indian politics . It's unprecedented in India's politics, appointment of religious leader is unprecedented .
 The BJP has often included members of the Hindu clergy in its mobilization campaigns . It has generally kept religious figures away from executive positions . The Hindu party has often ignored religious figures in its campaigns .
 Indian newspapers exploded with astonishment when the BJP announced Adityanath's appointment . The selection of the new state minister has been a major embarrassment for India .
 The elections in Uttar Pradesh were the first state contest since November, when the Modi government demonetized high-value Indian banknotes in an attempt to curb illicit transactions . The BJP's victory seemed to reflect a popular endorsement of Modi's reforms .
 Adityanath founded a Hindu youth group implicated in Hindu-Muslim riots in Gorakhpur . Has spoken out in support of U.S. President Donald Trump's ban on travelers from several Muslim-majority countries .
 In short, he represents the fringe of a movement that is itself extreme, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The mixed signals have thrown observers into a frenzied search for Modi's true political identity . Observers have been looking for a leader of India's future .
 When Modi ran for prime minister in 2014, some commentators thought that he was beginning to moderate his commitment to Hindu nationalism . Political scientists Lloyd and Susanne Rudolph have called the centrist eguilibrium "" of Indian politics .
 His speech reacting to the BJP's victory in Uttar Pradesh fed the same expectation . His speech was expected to be the same as that of his speech .
 Modi has always been both a reformer and a Hindu nationalist . This two-dimensional package is the essence of his appeal, he says . In fact, Modi has been both reformist and Hindu nationalist, he writes .
 From 2001 to 2014, as chief minister of the state of Gujarat, Modi became known for the so-called Gujarat model of economic growth . His Gujarat model involved cutting red tape, cracking down on corruption, and making land available to the private sector at concessional rates .
 Since he became prime minister in 2014, Modi has gone further, working not only to streamline but to transform the Indian economy . Since then, he has been working to stream streamline and transform the economy .
 The most ambitious of his plans is to make India's economy cashless . The resulting technology will address issues from corruption and clientelism to financial inclusion and social security .
 Modi's Gujarat model has been criticized for privileging economic growth at the expense of human development . Modi's policies as prime minister have been criticized by some for not creating enough jobs .
 Modi is committed to reform, and that this commitment is an essential part of his political identity . But what is certain is that Modi is . He is certain that he is committed .
 He spent his formative years in the service of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (National Patriotic Organization) or RSS . RSS is an umbrella group that presides over a network of Hindu nationalist affiliates and is BJP's parent organization .
 Advani launched the 1990 Ram Rath Yatra, a cross-country pilgrimage calling for the destruction of a mosgue in Ayodhya and its replacement with a Hindu temple . Advani arranged for the pilgrimage's kick-off in Gujarat .
 The next year, under his government's watch, the worst communal riots that India had seen in at least a decade, broke out in the state . The riots were the worst in India's history .
 This year's BJP campaign in Uttar Pradesh was as much about championing the rights of Hindus as it was about reform . The BJP campaign is as important as it is about rights of the Hindu as reform .
 That statement was widely interpreted as an appeal to Hindus under the guise of nondiscrimination . That statement has been interpreted as a plea for Hindus to be non-judged .
 The party has previously tended to vacillate between Hindu nationalism and economic reformism . It has previously chosen one or the other but not both at the same time .
 In 1991, the BJP almost doubled its vote share from 11 to 20 percent in the 1991 parliamentary elections, for example, after running on a Hindu nationalist platform . The BJP has been in power since then since 2002 .
 The BJP started to emphasize good governance and downplay religious identity . That was not enough to catapult the party to a winning position, however, so in the years that followed, the BJP started .
 Only in the 2014 elections did Modi's combination of reformism and Hindu nationalism help expand the BJP's vote share to 31 percent . Only in that election, the BJP gained 31 percent of the vote share .
 Modi is embedded in the two organizations in which he is embedded . What is true of voters is also true of the organizations he's embedded in, he says .
 Seen from the perspective, Adityanath's appointment makes perfect sense . Seen from a perspective, the appointment makes sense . The state of Uttar Pradesh is a state of India .
 Modi's message of development was combined with impeccable Hindu nationalist credentials . It combined with his message of . development and impeccable . nationalist credentials, he said .
 Modi is not the only leader to mix ethnic majoritarianism with economic reform . He is also the leader of India's first state-run state of India .
 Modi is not the only leader to mix ethnic majoritarianism with economic reform . Of course, Modi is also the leader of India's largest state .
 Trump sailed to power in the U.S. by combining anti-immigrant cultural policies with anti-globalization economic policies . Trump's anti-immigration policies combined with economic policies, he says .
 Marine Le Pen has become a viable presidential candidate by combining anti-immigrant policies with promises of protectionism and tax cuts . Le Pen's anti-immigration policies include promises of tax cuts and protectionist measures .
 In other ways, their leadership styles, the details of their positions, and the constituencies to which they appeal, differ . But in other ways they differ, these figures differ .
 The fact that the prime minister's reform policies are not especially nationalist or protectionist, has encouraged him to turn to guestions of pure identity to establish his credentials as a Hindu nationalist .
 Even when minorities benefit from Modi's reformist policies, his majoritarian positions threaten them by placing them in a position of perpetual insecurity . Minorities benefit from reform policies, but minorities are at risk of insecurity .
 A democracy that's not safe for some minorities is not for any majority, says Julian Zelizer . Democracy is fluid and the lines dividing minorities from majorities are fluid, he says . Democracy that's safe for minorities is safe for any minority, he adds .
 In the West, it is difficult to escape the pessimism that pervades current discussions of global affairs . The West is pessimistic about the future of the world .
 From Russia's invasion of Crimea to the rise of the Islamic State, the world appears to be tearing at the seams . From the never-ending crises of the European Union to the Syrian catastrophe, the crisis is on the rise in Syria .
 Democracy itself appears to be unraveling, helped along by resurgent authoritarianism, weakened liberal democratic values, rising populism, and rising populism . Meanwhile, democracy itself is unraveling—helped along by resurgence of authoritarianism .
 According to Freedom House, there are only a handful more electoral democracies in the world today than there were at the start of this century . Freedom House: Only a handful of electoral democracies are now more than they were before .
 Dozens of newer democracies in the developing world are struggling to put down roots . Many older democracies, including the U.S., are troubled .
 The theory that democratic transitions naturally move in a positive direction no longer holds water . The theory is that established democracies don't tumble backward is no longer valid, says Julian Zelizer .
 A number of politicians, journalists, and analysts are overstating or oversimplifying negative trends and overlooking positive developments, says a number of them .
 Donald Trump's rise and the mainstreaming of populism in many parts of Europe are seen as part of an all-embracing, global counterrevolution against liberal norms . They too easily cast U.S. President Donald Trump’s rise, the . Brexit vote, and the
 The state of democracy around the world is indeed very troubled, but it is not uniformly dire, especially outside the West . Although the state of democratic democracy is troubled, it does not appear to be as bad as the West, says David Cameron .
 Today's intensifying apprehension is infused with nostalgia for the 1990s and early 2000s as a period of strong global commitment to liberal norms . Today's anxiety is infused .
 This is not to deny that serious new challenges to democracy have arisen in recent years . The UK's democracy has been hit by a series of serious challenges in the past decade .
 The current shift away from a supposedly idyllic ""liberal moment"" in the immediate post-Cold War era is a matter of degree, not kind . But the current shift from the 'liberal moment' in the  post-cold war era is not the same kind .
 Those who despair the future of democracy tend to focus on a select set of highly visible negative developments . The Arab Spring and the rise of illiberal populism in Europe and the U.S. are examples of those who despair .
 Democracy Index scores for Asia and Africa show a modest improvement over the last decade . The Economist Intelligence Unit's Democracy Index is based on a recent study of the continent's democracy .
 Democracy has improved in places such as Burkina Faso, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, the Ivory Coast, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, and Ukraine .
 In Latin America, the illiberal populist wave in the early 2000s is receding . The illiberal populism wave in Latin America has been receding in recent years . In the U.S. President Barack Obama has been criticized for his policies .
 Colombia and Nepal have both brokered peace accords with rebel movements, ending decades of civil war . The two countries have seen record numbers commit to democratic institutions and norms .
 The scholars Roberto Foa and Yascha Mounk have usefully warned that ""democratic deconsolidation"" may be occurring in Western democracies as a result of declines in adherence to core democratic values .
 In Africa and Latin America, public support for core democratic values has remained high and steady over the last decade . Public support for democratic values in the region has remained strong in recent years .
 The Afrobarometer shows that over 70 percent of Africans reject nondemocratic forms of democracy . Over 70 per cent of Africans rejected nondemocracies, according to the survey .
 After the U.S. presidential election, some observers associated Trump with a number of very different actors who present widely divergent degrees of democratic threat . These include Russian President Vladimir Putin, Dutch politician Geert Wilders, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan,
 Not all political parties or persons considered populist harbor egually illiberal or authoritarian tendencies . But not all parties considered populist have authoritarian tendencies, say experts .
 All authoritarian trends are not necessarily rooted in populism . Nor are all current authoritarian trends necessarily rooted down to populism, says CNN.com .
 Some authoritarian leaders who are labeled as populist may use populist flourishes, such as casting themselves as ""men of the people,"" But they are at most skin-deep populists . They do not represent alternatives to traditional power who gain influence by mobilizing disadvantaged constituencies .
 Putin, for example, is often referred to by Western journalists as a populist leader . Putin is often compared to Barack Obama, who is seen as a popular leader .
 Vladimir Putin is a product of Russia's long-standing repressive state apparatus . Yet he is profoundly wary of popular mobilization . He is also wary of public mobilization .
 The recent talk of a ""global populist movement" sheds more heat than light on democracy's travails . The talk of an "populist movement" shed more light than light into democracy's troubles .
 populism has not made notable gains in Africa, the Middle East, or Latin America in recent years . After all, populism is not a major factor in Latin America and Africa . Populism has not been a major problem in recent decades .
 President Rodrigo Duterte is a very clear illiberal populist, as well as India's Modi, whose appeals to Hindu ""majoritarianism"" have a distinct populist tinge . Asia has a number of illiberal populists, including the Philippines' Rodrigo Duterte .
 The ""global populist wave"" narrative implies that the world is going through a time of dizzying and uncertain change . The world is undergoing dizzying, uncertain change, according to the narrative .
 The most common problem in countries struggling to make democracy work is the entrenchment of corrupt elites who block any substantial change . Corruption is the result of the gradual atrophy of democratic norms and institutions, says David Cameron .
 The tendency to interpret the rise and spread of protests as another sign of a populist epidemic is being misinterpreted . Further adding to the pessimistic outlook is the tendency to think the rise of protests is a sign of an epidemic of populism .
 As the thinking goes, protesters are angry at their politicians, and populism feeds on such anger . The thinking is that populism feeds such anger, and it feeds on it . As a result of this, populism is being fed up with the anger of the protesters .
 Sam Kim described the Korean protests against President Park Geun-hye as part of the populist wave that produced Trump's victory in 2016 . He said the protests were part of a populist wave .
 President Obama has sought to toss out corrupt leaders, not anoint populist demagogues . But what is striking about them is that they have mostly sought to oust corrupt leaders . Obama has been criticized for his lack of support for populist movements .
 South Korea's recent protests were about better governance and resulted in political parties from across the ideological spectrum coming together to impeach a corrupt president . The protests were held in a bid to better governance .
 The most significant protests in Guatemala's recent history led to the ouster of a corrupt president and the start of some serious institutional reforms . Protests in Guatemala were the largest protests in the country's history .
 Of course, populist leaders often turn to the streets when their backs are against the wall, says Julian Zelizer . "Populist leaders often turned to the street when they have a problem," he says .
 Erdogan relied on popular mobilization to help him retain power in Turkey . During the coup attempt in Turkey last July, Erdogan relied heavily on the support of the opposition .
 The wave of protests around the world is mostly about demands for government accountability . Yet on the whole, protests are mostly about government accountability, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Power holders in many countries are pushing hard against independent civil society, often trying to limit its scope . Power holders often try to limit the scope of civil society .
 Negative though this trend is, it is a sign of the wide spread of citizen empowerment as both an idea and an organizing principle . Citizen empowerment is both a good idea and a good organizing principle, says CNN.com .
 Authoritarian governments have become more audacious in geopolitical pursuits outside their borders . It is certainly true that various authoritarian governments are becoming audacious . But it is also true that they are becoming increasingly bolder in the world .
 This includes Russia's invasion of Ukraine, involvement in Syria, and political meddling in the U.S. and Europe . This includes political meddling by Russia and the United States and Europe, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Other examples include China's sharper edge in the South China Sea, Iran's heightened role in Irag, Syria, and Yemen . Saudi Arabia's military involvement in Yemen and Syria is another example .
 Greater assertiveness by authoritarian powers has many negative implications for the future of global democracy, says Julian Zelizer . Authoritarian powers should not be allowed to assert themselves, Zelizer says .
 This does not mean, however, that authoritarianism, as a type of political regime, is succeeding . This doesn't mean authoritarianism as a political regime is succeeding, it says .
 Most authoritarian regimes struggle with profound internal challenges and weaknesses, say experts . Most authoritarian governments struggle with internal challenges, experts say .
 The difficulties authoritarian systems have in delivering goods to their citizens often spur them to become more assertive outside their borders . In fact, authoritarian systems often struggle to deliver goods to citizens that often spur authoritarianism .
 Foreign adventurism can help authoritarian leaders distract their own people from their domestic failings, says Julian Zelizer . It can also be used to distract authoritarian leaders from domestic problems, he says .
 China has sustained its economic miracle, but corruption and slower economic growth have forced President Xi Jinping to nurture other sources of legitimacy . A tougher foreign policy is one result, as a result .
 In short, liberal democracy is facing greater crossborder challenges from authoritarian powers . The central threat is not authoritarianism's success as a political system, but rather instability that such regimes produce . Liberal democracy faces greater challenges from the authoritarian powers, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The overall state of democracy in the world is much less healthy than predicted during the early years of democracy's third wave . The world's democracy is less healthy now than predicted in the early 1980s, says Julian Zelizer .
 The tendency to view global developments through the lens of antidemocratic counterrevolution provides a distorted picture of the world's changing world .
 A more nuanced perspective might not dispel the gloom, but it may help prevent a lapse into disabling pessimism . The mistake of giving up on supporting democracy as part of Western foreign policy is not to give up on democracy .
 THOMAS CAROTHERS is Senior Vice President for Studies at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . He says the U.S. needs to work with the world's most powerful nations .
 RICHARD YOUNGS is a Senior Fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . He says the world's most powerful nations are at risk of a nuclear war .
 O'Reilly had gotten the facts completely reversed, and not the first time . Several months earlier, he had made the identical misstatement on air .
 Steven Remy's rigorously researched new book details the massacre of U.S. soldiers . Remy: American abuse of defenseless Nazis is the subject of a new book .
 Remy, an associate professor at Brooklyn College and CUNY's Graduate Center, is hardly the first historian to write about the Malmedy affair . Remy is a associate professor of Brooklyn College .
 The Malmedy Massacre convincingly corrects the record of U.S. malfeasance . Previous histories have largely accepted the myth of the United States . But whereas previous histories have been largely accepted, this history is different .
 Remy offers a timely study of the process of historical mythmaking . Remy offers an insight into how false and distorted accounts come to constitute their own durable reality .
 As a fighting force on the eastern front, the WaffenSS had left a long trail of atrocities that included the mass murder of Jews and Soviet POWs .
 The Waffen-SS sought to spread its trademark terror to the Western Front . Now deployed in Hitler's last desperate push to forestall defeat, the SS wanted to spread terror to Europe .
 Members of Peiper's combat group assembled the captured Americans on a snowy field . They proceeded to mow them down with machine gun fire . The captured Americans were killed in the attack .
 News of the massacre spread guickly, with Supreme Allied Commander Dwight D Eisenhower demanding that the SS perpetrators be brought to justice . It was the single largest atrocity against American soldiers in the European theater .
 It was one of hundreds of trials conducted by the Allies in occupied Germany . Hundreds of trials were held in Germany during the Second World War .
 The Nuremberg trial of 22 leading Nazi officials before the International Military Tribunal was the first international criminal court in history . Most famous among these remains the trial of . 22 leading . Nazi . officials .
 The United States tried over 1,500 Germans, including those responsible for the Malmedy massacre, for violations of the usages and customs of war . Dachau concentration camp was located on the site of the former concentration camp . The U.S. army also tried 1,
 Joachim Peiper and other defendants at trial in 1946 . Peiper's trial was the first of its kind in Germany .
 The Dachau trials typically featured German civilians accused of murdering downed American airmen . Lower-level SS men charged with crimes against American soldiers and persons interned in concentration camps liberated by U.S. forces .
 Nuremberg was staged under Allied military auspices, but the tribunal was largely drawn from the ranks of civilian life . The tribunal itself featured world-class legal talent largely drawn out of the ranks .
 The Dachau courts bore all the traits of standard army military commissions, with guilt determined by a panel of five senior military officers . Only one of the panel members was reguired to have any legal training .
 Military commissions have played a long role in U.S. legal history . Military commissions are often used in the United States' highest court .
 As early as 1780, George Washington convened a Board of General Officers to weigh charges of espionage against British Major John Andre . Andre was later executed by order of commanding general .
 As many as 6,000 trials were conducted by military commission during Civil War . During the Civil War, as many as six,000 were held by commission .
 President Andrew Johnson used one to try the conspirators in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln . He used it out of fear that a civilian jury in Washington, D.C. might have southern sympathies .
 In 1942, President Roosevelt convened a military commission to try a handful of Nazi saboteurs who had landed on domestic shores . Roosevelt convened the commission in 1942, little more than half a year after the U.S. entered the war in Europe .
 Military commissions were established in both the Philippines and Tokyo to try suspected Japanese war criminals . They were used in occupied Germany and the Philippines .
 President George W Bush created a military commission to prosecute suspects held in Guantanamo Bay . The commission was created to prosecute Guantanamo Bay detainees held in the US .
 Supreme Court ruled in landmark decision in Hamdan Rumsfeld case . Court declared original design violated both Uniform Code of Military Justice and Common Article of Three of Geneva Conventions .
 The Malmedy trial was officially recorded as United States vs. The Devil's Advocate . The trial was known as the United States and the Devil's advocate .
 74 members of combat group Peiper have been charged with the massacre of 84 American GIs at the Baugnez crossroads . Several hundred additional U.S. soldiers and Belgian civilians were also killed in the days that followed .
 Military commissions are designed for a narrow range of cases, when martial law has been declared or crimes committed are incident to acts of the battlefield .
 Evidence barred from civilian trials, such as hearsay, was admissible at Dachau . Evidence typically barred from military trials was also allowed to be heard .
 Convictions did not reguire unanimity—only a two-thirds majority of the panel of senior officers . Convictions were not unanimous conclusion concludingly receiving unanimous majority .
 The accused enjoyed much of the same rights accorded to United States soldiers facing court martial . All the same, conviction reguired proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt .
 The prosecution, led by an army lawyer named Burton Ellis, presented a strong case . The prosecution was led by army lawyer Burton Ellis .
 Several United States soldiers survived the Malmedy massacre, either by fleeing or by playing dead, and were able to testify at the trial . Several U.S. soldiers had survived the massacre .
 During the trial, the prosecution drew heavily on these highly incriminating statements . The prosecution used these statements as evidence in the trial .
 The defense, for its part, sought to challenge the court's jurisdiction, but to no avail . The defense sought to argue the jurisdiction of the court, but was unsuccessful .
 The accused claimed that the captured Americans had tried to flee, and thus were legitimate targets under the law of war . The accused also claimed that they had been legitimate targets .
 Some of the accused acknowledged that killings had taken place, but insisted they had not participated personally . Others said they were not involved in the killings .
 The defense called no medical witnesses to corroborate these claims . A handful claimed that they had been physically mistreated into confessing .
 Many defendants appealed to superior orders, which did not constitute a defense proper, but which could be considered in mitigation of punishment . The appeals were not considered a defense, but could be used as mitigation .
 Of the 74 members of Peiper's group, 43, including Peiper himself, were sentenced to death . The rest of the group received lengthy prison terms for their crimes .
 A map, translated into Finnish, shows Peiper's path through Baugnez, where the Malmedy massacre occured . SS-PANSSariarmeijan HYOKKAYS was the first Finnish combat group to carry out the massacre .
 No sooner had the convictions announced than the attacks on the trial began . But no sooner had been announced, attacks on trial began.
 These were spearheaded by Willis Everett, an Atlanta attorney who had led the Malmedy defense . Willis Everett led the defense of the Atlanta defense .
 The theory of common design, pioneered at Nuremberg, struck many observers as tantamount to collective punishment . Many observers thought the theory of collective design was a form of collective punishment.
 Some of the ruses used by interrogators to extract confessions might have pushed the envelope of legitimate legal strategies . And some of those ruses might have been legitimate, legal strategies, lawyers say .
 Earlier histories have portrayed Everett as a brave and lonely crusader, who, despite some less than savory gualities, labored tirelessly to expose a gross miscarriage of justice .
 In Remy's pages, Everett emerges as paranoid, anti-Semitic, and conspiracy-minded . Everett is anti-Semitism-minded and anti-semitic .
 Everett came to depict SS war criminals as victims of Jewish interrogators bent on vengeance . Everett, in a barrage of furious letters to U.S. War Crimes Branch officials and in petitions challenging the verdict, came to him .
 Everett's allegations of detainee abuse also resonated with politicians such as John Rankin, a prominent House member from Mississippi . Rankin was famous for his racial demagoguery and anti-Semitism .
 Once the Malmedy story became about United States abuse , it was but one small step to complete the inversion and turn the victims into the murderers at the Baugnez crossroads .
 A continent away in Landsberg prison, former members of combat group Peiper were serving time or awaiting execution . Everett's agitations came as a godsend .
 The convicted war criminals repudiated their earlier confessions, insisting that their statements had been extracted through mistreatment or worse . War criminals joined together in repudiating their earlier confession .
 Quaker National Council for Prevention of War picked up and repeated these stories, as did various newspapers and magazines . Back at home, the Quaker was a pacifist organization dedicated to American-German reconciliation .
 In occupied Germany, the allegations of abuse fueled public opposition to the U.S. war crimes trials . The allegations were made in occupied Germany . The trial is scheduled for September 5, 2015 .
 Germans followed the international trial at Nuremberg with polite indulgence, perhaps because they were afraid to register anything in the way of open dissent . Germans had followed the trial at the Nuremb trial with politeness .
 Public opinion turned guickly and fiercely against the Nuremberg successor trials and those staged in Dachau . Public opinion became increasingly critical of the trials .
 Allegations of detainee abuse tapped into deep reserves of antisemitism . Allegations were made against the Jewish community in Israel .
 Many Germans, like Everett himself, came to see United States war crimes trials as Jewish revenge rituals . Everett: Many Germans came to the U.S. as a result of the trials .
 The United States launched a series of independent investigations into the allegations . The Senate Arms Services Committee is chaired by Raymond Baldwin, a reliable Republican from Connecticut .
 Baldwin committee issues sober and carefully prepared report . Baldwin committee releases sober report after months of hearings .
 The claims of systematic mistreatment and torture lacked, it concluded, any basis in fact . The claims lacked any basis of fact, it said .
 Republican Senator William Langer of North Dakota likens the trials to Stalinist purges . Langer: The trials are reminiscent of the purges of Stalinist Stalinists . The trials have been held in the United States since 1989 .
 Today it seems inconceivable that members of Congress could hope to score political points by defending persons who had massacred Americans . Imagine a senator, outraged by the CIA's waterboarding, seeking the release of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed .
 Growing Cold War realities and large German-American constituencies in the Midwest made such grandstanding not just politically feasible but tactically shrewd, says historian .
 With the outbreak of war in Korea, the United States' need to secure Germany as a reliable military ally trumped any misgivings about the premature release of war criminals .
 Members of combat group Peiper were spared the gallows and even lengthy prison terms . Peiper members of the group were spared long prison terms for their crimes .
 Remy offers no explanation for why 74 men stood trial, but only 73 verdicts were announced . Remy: "I don't know why 73 men were found guilty of attempted murder, but why 73 were acquitted . Remy says he doesn't know what happened to 74 men on trial .
 Remy makes a curious mistake for a scholar who knows the case as intimately as Remy does . Remy: "It is a small but curious mistake. It is a good mistake for me to think about it"
 The Malmedy Massacre is a solid account of history that current events have contrived to make exceptionally relevant . All the same, the book is still relevant to current events today .
 What makes this story particularly poignant is that Remy is not really telling us anything new. Remy's story is not new, it's not new to us. Remy is telling us nothing new, he says, but he's telling us something new .
 As he makes clear, the record had already been corrected by the Baldwin committee report nearly 70 years ago . The report had already corrected the record in the Baldwin report .
 To those who subscribe to the pleasing shibboleth that the truth will always come out, Remy has delivered a disturbing counterexample . Remy's story is a disturbing example of the truth, he says .
 His on-air misstatements represented no more than an ironic confirmation of Remy's account . Remy is a former journalist who worked for CNN.com's Remy .
 When confronted with his mistake, O'Reilly tellingly issued no apology or correction . Instead, he simply modified his original claim, while still insisting that defenseless members of the SS had been murdered at the hands of their United States captors .
 Remy rightly observes that the creation and perpetuation of self-serving myths about the past remains one of the most powerful cultural and political forces in the modern world . Remy says the creation of self serving myths about past remains a powerful cultural force in modern times .
 His conclusion that myths harden hearts and impede dialog and reconciliation between individuals, communities, and entire nations is belied by the story he tells .
 At least in the case of relations between Germany and the U.S. these ""self-serving myths"" ultimately worked to advance rather than impede the politics of Cold War cooperation .
 It may be hoped that willful distortions of the historical record inevitably come back to haunt those who craft and peddle such lies, but history, alas, often tells a different story .
 LAWRENCE DOUGLAS is James J Grosfeld Professor of Law, Jurisprudence, and Social Thought at Amherst College . He is the James J. Grosfield Professor of Juris-prudence and Social Theory .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin attends a meeting at the Eastern Economic Forum in Vladivostok, Russia September 2017 . Alexander Baunov is accused of running a system of torture that has been described as a 'brutality' in Russia . Putin has been accused of using the system to
 In the first, they crashed a car loaded with gas canisters into a movie theater in Yekaterinburg on September 4 . In the second, the car was loaded with canisters and crashed into a theater in the first place .
 The attacks were motivated by the religious extremists' opposition to Matilda, an upcoming movie by director Alexei Uchitel . The protestors have deemed the movie blasphemous . The film is set to be released in cinemas across the country .
 The film tells the story of Czar Nicholas II's premarital love affair with ballerina Matilda Kschessinska . The film is based on the love affair of the Czar and his wife .
 The last czar and his family are saints in the Russian Orthodox Church . Scheduled for release in October, it has already enraged religious conservatives because of its release .
 Religious extremists threw Molotov cocktails at the director's studio in St. Louis, Missouri .
 President Vladimir Putin could have easily cracked down on this campaign . Natalya Poklonskaya instigated it through various media appearances and speeches in the Duma . She instigated the campaign in Crimea .
 The fact that he hasn't done so exposes a gaping paradox at the heart of his authoritarian rule . He has been accused of being authoritarian in the past, but not so far .
 In recent years, Putin has been happy to inculcate a conservative, nationalist ideology in Russia . Much of the Russian Orthodox Church has supported his policies .
 He has encouraged protestors, worshippers, and ordinary Russians to propagate this creed to demonstrate that this is a grassroots movement, not something imposed from the top down .
 In threatening the makers of an innocuous movie with violence and intimidating members of Russia's cultural elite, the conservative nationalist movement has demonstrated its ugly side . Putin seems unable to stop it, and Putin seems to be unable to .
 President Obama has emboldened the so-called patriotic part of the political establishment he's emboldened over the last few years . Doing so would enrage the 'patriotic' part of that establishment .
 Kremlin forced to deal not with extremist but with full-blown social phenomenon . With the new movie, however, the model has malfunctioned, and the Kremlin has to deal with the issue .
 The paradox of the Matilda controversy is that, if he so chose, Putin could halt Poklonskaya in her tracks . The paradox is that the Russian president could halt the trainee from Moscow .
 Kremlin allies and associates with whom he does not want to pick a fight . But once her grassroots initiative grew large enough for him to notice, it already had backing of some of his Kremlin allies .
 The cost of pacifying the antiMatilda campaign is now sufficiently high that it could mean alienating many of his most ardent supporters . The cost is now too high to pacify his supporters .
 A central problem of Russia's personality-based regime is that only Putin himself can stop something from happening with certainty . Putin himself cannot stop something with certainty with certainty, he says . Putin's personality is a central problem for Russia, he adds .
 Putin's word carries too little weight to stop a nationalist campaign that has already reached critical mass . The word of almost any other functionary, even when spoken on the Kremlin's behalf, carries little weight . Russia's nationalist campaign is already reaching critical mass, says Kremlin official .
 Poklonskaya herself has found a particular role in Russia's shifting ideological space . She has found herself in a special role in the country's changing ideological landscape .
 Hailing from Crimea, she was plucked directly from the Ukrainian political milieu by the Putin administration to serve as prosecutor for the region after it was forcibly annexed in 2014 . She is currently serving as a prosecutor for Crimea, Russia's most recently annexed Crimea .
 Poklonskaya asked the Russian general prosecutor's office to investigate Matilda and its director . She has found considerable support for her campaign in the Orthodox Church in Russia .
 Reining in Poklonskaya would mean guestioning the country's ideological direction, which Putin is not prepared to do, he says . Putin is prepared to take on the challenge, but is not willing to do it .
 Russian member of parliament and Crimea's former Chief Prosecutor Natalia Poklonskaya attends the opening session of the newly-elected State Duma in Moscow, October 2016 .
 Russia's conservative crusaders can now find public or unspoken support in circles they respect . For every public scolding received from figures they don't regard as authorities, they can find support in the circles they respected .
 The minister is a nobody, she was saying, and we can find our own authorities to contradict him . She said: "We can find ourselves ourselves to contradict the minister's views"
 The conservative zealots are also winning the blessing of friendly priests, including the ultraconservative Archpriest Dmitri Smirnov, who claimed that the film was created to mock Russian saints .
 It no longer matters who put them there; all that matters is that they're not being removed . It's important that they aren't being removed from the U.S. Senate .
 For these Russian conservatives, Poklonskaya's campaign is a means to prevent the country from sliding into pragmatism . For these conservatives, it's a means of preventing the country sliding into pragmaticism . The campaign is aimed at preventing Russia from sliding back into a conservative state .
 It is a warning shot at the regime that still considers reforms and returning to the club of Western powers to secure investment and economic growth .
 Poklonskaya is making the point that if a mere film generates such a backlash, apostasy over far more important issues could cost the regime dearly . The film is released in cinemas across the world for free .
 Putin's conservative nationalist ideology now serves as a reference point for ordinary Russians . Poklonskaya can embody this set of ideas just as well as he does, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 As this new ideology continues to evolve, a temporary, vague alliance is forming between Orthodox priests, security service operatives, businessmen, and government functionaries loyal to Putin's declared ideals . Putin's new ideology is evolving, and it's unclear how it will evolve .
 Many lower-and mid-level officials are starting to voice support for banning Matilda . Matilda's ban is expected to be lifted in the next few months .
 They cannot believe that this campaign could win such momentum without approval from the top, they say . And they say they cannot believe this could happen without approval .
 Supporters of a free Russia dream of a day when the Orthodox Church is separate from the state . They want to see elected officials unafraid to oppose Kremlin ministers .
 Among those who are taking advantage of this new freedom first are zealots who speak in a language of aggressive and intimidating conservatism . The latter is certainly happening .
 The party has elevated the Chinese ruler's ideological contributions to the same level as those of Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping, the only other CCP leaders whose ideas have been so canonized . The party also has elevated Mao's ideas to the highest level of ideological contributions in China .
 Xi Jinping has scored a major political victory at the party congress . This was only the first inkling that Xi had scored a big political victory in China .
 The real extent of his triumph became clear the next day, when party officials selected new members of the Politburo Standing Committee, China's top decision-making body . Party officials selected the new members for the PolitBuro Standing committee .
 Xi stacked the seven-member committee with loyalists, all of whom will be too old to stand a chance of taking his place at the next party congress, in 2022, in China .
 Xi's rule is now set to last for the next 15 years and perhaps beyond . As a result, Xi's leadership is now likely to last 15 years, perhaps beyond beyond .
 Xi will amend the party's charter and China's constitution to legitimize the extension of his power . Xi is expected to amend the charter and the constitution to extend his power in China .
 Xi must earn political capital to secure an extended term as China's leader . However powerful Xi appears to be, he now must earn the political capital . He must earn enough political capital for a longer term as leader .
 In practice, he will need to deliver on his promises to rebalance and sustain China's economic growth and to restructure its legal system . China's legal system must be restructured, he says .
 The body's five other members are all new, and four of them are allies of Xi . Four of the five new members of the body's new members are new members .
 Li Zhanshu forged a close friendship with Xi more than 30 years ago . He was Xi's chief of staff during his first term, which began in 2007 . He forged the friendship with the party's new number three .
 Zhao Leji will serve as China's new anticorruption tsar, acting as Xi's top enforcer . Zhao is a loyalist loyalist to Xi, who has been in charge of China's anti-corruption crackdown . Zhao will also be the country's top corruption tsar
 Wang Qishan played a key role in helping Xi purge his rivals and consolidate power during his first term . The former occupant of that office, Wang Qistan, played a pivotal role in consolidating power during that term .
 China watchers have identified Wang Huning and Han Zheng as members of the so-called Shanghai Gang, the elite faction affiliated with former President Jiang Zemin . Many China observers have identified two other new figures on the Standing Committee .
 Han is a competent, low-key technocrat who lacks an abiding loyalty to the Shanghai Gang . As for Han, he is a smart, competent technocrat . Han is not a loyalist to Shanghai Gang, but he lacks loyalty .
 When Xi was Shanghai's party chief from 2006 to 2007, Han was the city's mayor and Xi's right-hand man . Han was mayor of Shanghai during Xi's time as party chief, when Xi was mayor .
 The Standing Committee's seventh member is Wang Yang, a man with ties to the rival Youth League faction . Wang Yang is a member of the Youth League, a rival faction in China .
 He will become the head of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference . He will be head of an advisory body to the party . The move will be part of the party's advisory body .
 Xi also succeeded in filling the 25-person Politburo with allies . At least 11 of the 15 new members belong to Xi's faction . Xi's party has been accused of corruption in China's history .
 His decisions will be endorsed overwhelmingly by the Politburo and its Standing Committee, endowing them with extraordinary authority . His decisions are expected to be overwhelmingly endorsed by the party's Politbary and Standing Committee .
 Xi's allies in the Politburo, some of them relatively young, will be strong contenders for promotion to the Standing Committee at the 20th National Congress in 2022 . What is more is more than likely to be a strong contender for promotion for Standing Committee .
 The real resistance to Xi's ambitions will come from China's vast bureaucracy . Xi's ambition will be thwarted by the power of the state of China's bureaucracy .
 Xi ended the party's practice of formally designating a new leader at least five years ahead of the transfer of power . Xi's biggest political victory at the congress was to end the practice of naming a successor five years before the election .
 Deng picked Hu as Jiang's successor ten years before Hu took office . The tradition began in 1992, when Deng picked him as successor to Jiang's predecessor . Deng has been in office since 1992, and Hu is the current president of China .
 The party has informal term limits for its top leaders of two stints of five years each . This practice has reduced the risk of struggles over succession and has helped enforce the term limits .
 The party never codified these traditions in its charter, and an incumbent seeking to extend his rule would always have been able to end them with enough raw power to end it . But the party never wrote these traditions into its charter . The party's charter was passed away in 2008, but
 Xi is the only leader since Deng to have assumed that coveted title on his own . Xi was named the party's ""core leader" in the fall of 2016, making him the first leader to do that .
 Chinese security agents kidnapped Xiao Jianhua from his apartment in Hong Kong in January of this year . A few months later, in January, this year, the tycoon was kidnapped from his Four Seasons apartment in the Four Seasons .
 Xi ordered the arrest of Chongging party chief Sun Zhengcai on charges of corruption . In July, Xi made another move, ordering arrest of the Chonging party chief on corruption .
 Sun's fall was meaningful because of his association with Jiang's faction and because he was so young that he would have been a plausible successor to Xi had he remained untouched . Sun would have remained untouched if he had remained untouched in China .
 Hu did not get promoted to the Standing Committee, apparently making him ineligible to take Xi's place in 2022 . The 55-year-old Hu was not promoted to Standing Committee . But he is still eligible to take the post in 2022, according to reports .
 With so few options, Xi will have the perfect excuse to delay a decision about who should succeed him . Xi has a perfect excuse for delaying a decision on who will succeed him.
 His dominance of the Politburo and its Standing Committee will empower him to secure a third term in office at the next party congress in 2022 . He will be able to do just that, securing his third term as party leader .
 Xi would be able to hold on to power until at least 2032 . By securing two new five-year terms as head of both party and government, Xi could hold on until 2032.
 The biggest guestionions about China's new era surround Xi's agenda . Xi Jinping is expected to lead the country to a new era of rule by law .
 Few expect Xi to become a political reformer, given the crackdowns on civil society and Internet freedom during his first term . Few expect him to be a reformer .
 Optimists believe Xi's newfound supremacy will grant him a free hand to pursue other changes . Optimists say he will introduce pro-market economic reforms and restructuring the legal system .
 Little suggests that a new wave of economic reform is in the offing . In fact, little suggests that such reforms are in the way of reform .
 China's heavily indebted stateowned enterprises are a drag on the country's economy . But they still occupy a special place in Xi's vision of the future, he says .
 Chinese leaders' confidence in existing policies is another reason observers should temper their hopes for economic reform . China's leaders are confident in existing economic policies, which should be tempered with reform .
 Beijing has not yet paid a real price for sticking to its strategy of supporting growth with injections of credit . Despite warnings about unsustainable debt producing a financial meltdown, Beijing has yet to pay a price for its policy .
 Beijing will pursue deep changes when the economy is performing reasonably well, as it is today . Beijing's aggressive economic reforms have in the past all been prompted by shocks or crises . Beijing is unlikely to pursue deep reforms when it is performing well .
 Xi's political priority for Xi in the immediate future will be overhauling China's legal system . The state would use the legal system to maintain political, social, and economic control, he says . The legal system is aimed at realizing rule by law, not at establishing genuine rule of law
 Should this be the case, regression, not progress, will be the more likely outcome . If this is the case it will be more likely to be a repeat of the 2008-11 lockout .
 Party congress endorsed Xi's plan to overhaul the legal system by establishing a ""leading group on comprehensively governing the country according to law" Xi will head a body that he will head .
 Xi assigned his most trusted ally, Li Zhanshu, to chair the National People's Congress, the country's legislative body . Li is the leader of China's most powerful political party . Li will chair the committee, which would draft and pass the laws essential to Xi's vision .
 Both measures suggest that legal reform will soon receive a good deal of high-level attention . Both measures are likely to be taken up by the White House .
 Xi is a firm believer in China's tradition of rule by law . The new leading group's focus on ""comprehensive"" governance reflects that ambition . Xi is also a strong believer in the Chinese tradition of law .
 Xi passed a few major laws aimed at social control during his first term . He tightened China's cybersecurity practices and restricted foreign nongovernmental organizations .
 China could impose additional restrictions on domestic NGOs, introduce new laws on ideological education in colleges and universities, or rewrite criminal laws so that they become even more effective instruments in the suppression of domestic dissent . For instance, China could also impose new restrictions on NGOs .
 In the short term, Xi's plans will not encounter much overt resistance . Xi's plan will not be met with resistance in the short-term .
 His crackdown on dissent and civil society has been depressingly effective and has eliminated any significant threat to the regime's rule in the near future . His crackdown has been 'depressingingly effective'
 Xi's supremacy within the party is now so overwhelming that it is inconceivable that any of his colleagues will dare challenge him . Xi's 'supernancy' within party is so strong that it's inconceivable he will challenge him, according to Chinese state media .
 Numbering in the millions, the regime's lower and middle officials are selfinterested human beings . They care far more about increasing their own privilege and wealth than about promoting abstract ideological goals .
 As Xi has dismantled the sharing of power and spoils that characterized China's post-Tiananmen order, these bureaucrats' prospects for money and power have dimmed .
 No longer are there several elite cligues to join or multiple patrons to serve . Cligues are no longer required to join, but there are now several elite members .
 Every official must compete for favors from a regime dominated by a single faction . There are fewer paths to advancement than there were before Xi took power .
 Xi's anticorruption crackdown has eliminated lavish bribes and perks that underwrote bureaucrats' lifestyles for most of the past two decades . Worse still, Xi's anti-bribe crackdown also eliminated the lavish bribes . Xi's crackdown has also eliminated bureaucrats' perks .
 The bureaucrats' goal will be to make Xi appreciate their value and reward them appropriately . Perhaps by ending his crackdown on corruption and China's austerity drive, Xi will end austerity drive .
 The only way to accomplish this will be through bureaucratic subterfuge aimed at catching Xi's attention by slowing the regime's administrative machinery and stalling China's economic engine .
 However deep Xi's authority may be, it will erode guickly if the economy slows for more than a few years, and China's bureaucrats know it . However, Xi's power may erode if China's economy slows, and the bureaucrats know that .
 Xi Jinping, Hu Jintao, and Jiang Zemin met in Beijing in November 2012 . Xi Jinping and Hu Zemin are seen together for the first time in a decade .
 Xi would not be the first all-powerful Chinese leader to face a recalcitrant bureaucracy . Xi would also face the challenge of China's powerful bureaucracy .
 One of his motives for launching the Cultural Revolution was to use mass terror to discipline the bureaucracy and restore its revolutionary spirit, he says .
 Xi is no believer in mass movements, and he lacks the charisma of Mao, who could mobilize hundreds of millions of ordinary Chinese people into action . Xi is not a believer of mass movements and lacks charisma of the charismatic of Mao .
 He must instead seek to extend the reach of his power from the level of the Central Committee to China's provinces, cities, and counties, he says . China's power should be extended to provinces and cities .
 It will be a laborious and time-consuming process, involving, for instance, recruit and recruit promising apparatchiks at the local level . That will involve, for example, a major drive to vet and recruit potential apparatchesiks .
 As his base grows, it may sow the seeds of intraparty struggles . But as his base expands, it could also sow seeds of internal struggles .
 Xi's loyal followers will be more interested in building up their own power than in implementing Xi's agenda . Realizing that the next battle for political supremacy will be waged in ten to 15 years, when Xi approaches his own exit from power .
 In the years after Mao's death, Chinese leaders came to understand that concentrating power in the hands of a single figure could spell disaster for the party . In XI's hands, China's Communist Party leaders learned to avoid concentrating power on one figure .
 The survivors of the Cultural Revolution banded together in the 1980s to make sure that a Mao-like leader could never again rule China . That is why they banded up in the 80s to stop a Mao like leader from re-ruling China .
 They also helped the regime avoid making the kinds of dangerous mistakes that can follow from the consolidation of power in a single pair of hands . The regime also helped avoid making dangerous mistakes, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Now that the CCP has returned to strongman rule, its future will depend almost entirely on the guality of Xi's decisions . The future of the party will depend on the strength of Xi Jinping's decisions, he says .
 The last time the party had a leader with such unchecked power, the conseguences were calamitous, the last time they were in power, were calamities .
 Chinese leaders know what they are doing this time—and that the result will be different . One can only hope that Chinese leaders will know what to do .
 MINXIN PEI is the Tom and Margot Pritzker 72 Professor of Government at Claremont McKenna College . He is the author of China's Crony Capitalism .