 Quizzes with auto-grading, and real-time student data . Add highlights, virtual manipulatives, and more. Add highlights and virtual manipulations . Use the product to help students understand each other's interests .
 Students need to complete a list of activities to complete this week's list . The list includes activities for students to complete .
 Concise information in point form with stunning images and thought-provoking questions . Images and answers from the world's leading scientists .
 The video will introduce the time period and go over the key themes and events of the time . It will go over key themes, events and events in the time and space .
 Includes the tension between President John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev and the United States and the Soviet Union in Cuba . Includes tension between the U.S. and the Soviets in Cuba in the 1960s and 1960s .
 Integrate American History with reading texts to meet each reader's needs . Use this set to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 These are guided reading activities that are followed up with reading comprehension questions, vocabulary activities, and Free Response questions . Reading comprehension questions and vocabulary activities are included in the Free Response Questions .
 I actually began working more on reading and writing in my history classes before it became all the rage, and I will attest that I have seen improvements in my students' retention of the content I have used these with. I have also seen improvements .
 This product also has maps, quotes and pictures to aid in your students’ ability to learn about this intense 13-day confrontation in 1962 during the Cold War .
 Can include alternative assignment with current events comparing the crisis then to today . Can also include alternative assignments comparing the events in the past and present to present .
 NO PREP document-based questions activity will have your students thinking critically through document analysis . This brief, yet effective, NO PED activity will help students think critically about document analysis.
 Students will guess which of the solutions the U.S. ACTUALLY pursued during the crisis . Students will choose between three choices to guess which solution the United States actually pursued in the crisis.
 Students will examine the complex relationship between the U.S. and Cuba that led to this climatic point in history . This lesson will have students critically examine the relationship between Cuba and America .
 When Soviet missiles entered Cuba President Kennedy assembled his team to figure out how to handle the development . Kennedy assembled a team to deal with the development of Soviet missiles .
 Many called for an invasion of the island and pointed to the urgent need to do this before the missiles could be used . Many called on the government to take action against the island .
 Answer key is included as well as the Answer key . By purchasing this file, you agree not to distribute it to non-students .
 It is intended for classroom use only, but may be used for distance learning as well as distance learning . It is not made available outside of your students .