 Conventional wisdom tells us that the legislature’s influence was minor or even nonexistent . But the legislature's influence was in fact nonexistent, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Kennedy called in congressional leaders after he made the decision . It was only after he had made his decision that he called in Congress leaders . Kennedy calls in Congress to make his decision .
 President Kennedy’s secretary of state, Dean Rusk, recalled in his memoirs that, during a key meeting with prominent members of Congress, “no one present questioned whether Kennedy had constitutional authority to initiate a quarantine.” Rusk said .
 Presidentialists have come to see the crisis as evidence of the need for a strong, independent commander in chief . Congressionalists are bemoan the potentially dangerous precedent it created .
 Congress did not actively participate in decision-making during the acute crisis from Oct. to Oct. 1962 . In a narrow sense, it is correct that Congress didn't participate in the crisis .
 National Security Council was formed almost exclusively by the quickly formed Executive Committee . The committee omitted congressional representation in any form . It was formed by key Cabinet secretaries and foreign policy advisers .
 EXCOMM and the president had already decided on the appropriate course of action . A meeting was held with congressional leadership shortly before quarantine of the island was announced .
 A lack of congressional involvement in EXCOMM discussions as evidence of Congress’s lack of influence in the crisis seems to be strongly against the weight of the evidence . Nonetheless, interpreting a lack of . congressional involvement as evidence that Congress . has a role in the decision to step in
 Many decisions were taken with clear knowledge of congressional sentiment about the issue . The Cuba Resolution and the so-called Cuba Resolution figured prominently in the crisis . The resolution was passed by Congress .
 EXCOMM made decisions that were heavily influenced by its knowledge of Congress’s unambiguous sentiment expressed in the few weeks prior . EXCOMm made decisions based on the fact that Congress had expressed its support for the agency .
 Some scholars argue that congressional pressure contributed heavily to the crisis arising in the first place . Some scholars even argue that Congress contributed heavily .
 Soviet and Cuban leaders were well aware of congressional sentiment and took it into account in their own decision-making .
 Congress was not involved in deliberations, but this was because Congress’s position was already unambiguous to both the White House and United States adversaries immediately prior to the discovery of missiles . Congress's position—a virtually unanimous unanimous unanimous demand for strong action— was already clear to both White
 There was little need to consult with Congress during the crisis because its position was already crystal clear to all sides . In other words, there were little need for Congress to consult because of the crisis .
 Congress debated the issue of Cuba numerous times while suspecting the presence of such weapons . In the few weeks prior to the discovery of missiles on the island, Congress had discussed the issue .
 U.S. policy over the island was heavily debated in September and the beginning of October under the assumption that weapons would be soon arriving or possibly already in place .
 In these Cuba-related speeches, “blockade” was mentioned 72 times prior to Oct., the beginning of the “thirteen days” of acute crisis . Furthermore, in these speeches, "blockade" was mentioned more than 72 times .
 The idea of “quarantining” the island was discussed widely prior to missiles being discovered and prior to EXCOMM bringing up the idea . ExCOMM also discussed the idea of quarantining the island .
 Congressional pressure over Cuba was covered in the press and was widely recognized by both the White House and Soviet leaders . Congressional pressure was covered by the press, but it was widely accepted by the Soviet Union .
 Two months earlier, Republicans in Congress—led by Sen. Ted Kennedy—had passed a bill in the House of Representatives . The bill was passed by a Republican-led Congress in August 1962 .
 Republicans began drafting congressional resolutions stating such a firm position that the administration and its Democratic allies on the Hill felt it necessary to water down the proposals so as to not inadvertently escalate the situation . Republicans were drafting resolutions stating a firm stance .
 Members of Congress explicitly sought to pass something similar to the Formosa Resolution of 1955 or the Middle East Resolution of 1957 . Kennedy knew that Cuba’s leader, Fidel Castro, and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev were paranoid about an American invasion of the island .
 If Khrushchev’s reason for deploying missiles to the island was merely to deter an invasion, then an overly aggressive statement from the U.S. risked causing the very action that it sought to avoid .
 The White House was also involved in drafting of the Cuba Resolution . The resolution was passed by the White House .
 The concern that the United States would try to invade and overthrow Castro was a particularly sensitive issue in U.S.-Soviet relations at the time . The concern was particularly sensitive in the Soviet Union .
 A lot of people are making a big fuss because we are giving aid to Cuba, says President Obama . Obama says he will give what he needs for defense to Cuba .
 Udall responded that “the President has made his position on Cuba clear.” Udall said President Obama has “made his position clear” about Cuba .
 Rusk clarified that he did not know the administration’s position on a joint versus a concurrent resolution . Rusk said he was not sure if the administration would support a joint resolution .
 Many policymakers seemed to consider the Cuba Resolution as more or less equivalent to the other so-called area resolutions from the period . Many policymakers at the time, however, seemed to think the Cuba resolution was equivalent to other area resolutions .
 When passing the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution two years later, legislators referred to the Formosa, Middle East and Cuba resolutions collectively as precedents . Legislators referred to Formosa and Middle East resolutions collectively .
 Congress sought to repeal the Cuba Resolution along with the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in 1970 . The Cuba Resolution was included in the 1970s repeal of the other area resolutions . Congress also repealed the Cuba resolution in 1970s .
 International observers thought of the four ‘area resolutions’ as similar instruments . Likewise, international observers think of the "area resolutions" as similar to the four .
 The bill had originally been introduced as a not legally binding concurrent resolution in both houses . It was intentionally altered into a legally binding joint resolution before passage .
 The use of a joint resolution makes it possible to avoid constitutional arguments over the relative powers of the President and Congress respecting the use of American Armed Forces . It is important in the current instance that they not obscure ... the essential unity of purpose, not only of the Congress, but of the
 The contents of that resolution gives ground to draw a conclusion that the U.S. is ready to assume responsibility for unleashing thermonuclear war . The United States is evidently ready to . assume responsibility .
 We consider that if what is written in that resolution were actually carried out it would mean the beginning of war . "No country can agree with such interpretation of rights, with such arbitrariness," he says .
 In his memoirs, Khrushchev focused on the reaction in the press and Congress when he learned of the missile deployments . Khruschev's memoirs focused on his assessment of U.S. resolve in response to the missile deployment .
 The United States administration seemed to value the resolution once the crisis began . The U.S. administration, for its own part, seemed to have valued the resolution .
 Kennedy and his national security adviser specifically noted the authority given by the resolution from Congress . When planning for the possible use of sustained airstrikes against the island, Kennedy noted that authority .
 Kennedy would not have ordered an invasion of the island without substantial congressional support, it seems . It also seems that Kennedy would have had support for the invasion without congressional support .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to reach a final settlement of the crisis before war broke out . The meeting was one of the most dramatic meetings of the 1950s .
 This meeting holds evidence of the U.S. trying to use the unambiguously hawkish sentiment of Congress as a bargaining advantage . The meeting was seen as an opportunity to use Congress' hawkish stance as bargaining advantage.
 According to Khrushchev, Robert Kennedy stated, “You should take into account the particular features of our government system.” Robert Kennedy said, ‘You should ... consider the special features of the government system’
 Roseanne McManus argues that Congress's firm stance in the crisis helped convince the Soviets that Kennedy’s threat was no bluff . She argues that the firm stance helped convince them that the threat was not bluff .
 By seeing the Congress demand a tough response, Khrushchev and other Soviet decision-makers increased their estimation of U.S. resolve in the crisis .
 Congress may have not been represented in EXCOMM, but its actions strongly influenced the crisis . Congress may not have been represented, but it was influential in the decision .
 Congress had expressed itself clearly in the weeks prior to the discovery of missiles on the island . The White House had little uncertainty about the action it would demand once unmistakable evidence of offensive missiles was discovered .
 The Soviets, too, knew the pressure Kennedy faced from Congress and backed down . The Soviets backed down rather quickly once its plans were discovered .
 Many scholars have argued that the Cuban missile crisis illustrates the need for a strong presidentialist reading of the Constitution . But a better reading is that the crisis was an effective episode of crisis management between the political branches .
 Congress gave a clear mandate for the president to follow during the crisis . The White House more or less adhered to these preexisting congressional demands, says Julian Zelizer .
 Instead of being seen as evidence of Congress’s lack of ability to direct national security in an era of intercontinental ballistic missiles and nuclear weapons, the episode can be seen as a confirmation of the legislature's ability to speak clearly and effectively even in the most acute and dangerous of crises
 Patrick Hulme is a Ph.D. student in political science at UCSD . He focuses on congressional-executive relations in United States foreign policy, U.S.-China relations and international security .
 Steve Bannon’s Contempt Prosecution Revolves around his Attorney, Robert J Costello . The Whos, Whats and Hows are the Jan. 25th anniversary of Steve Bannon's resignation .