 With the recent breakthrough in the US-Cuba relations, the 44th President has made an indelible mark in the history of U.S. foreign policy . President Obama has made a mark in history of the United States .
 US-Cuba relations have been strained for over five decades in the backdrop of intense Cold War politics . U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for decades .
 The two neighbours in the Pacific have had close cultural and people-to-people ties . Due to differing stands taken by the governments on various international matters, there have never been diplomatic relations .
 Cuban diaspora in the U.S. welcome the new developments in US-Cuba relations . The new developments are seen as heralding a new era in the relations between the two nations .
 US-Cuba relations go back way before Fidel Castro came to power . U.S. relations with Cuba have been strained in the past .
 Spain relinquished sovereignty over Cuba after the war of 1898 . After Spain’s defeat by the United States and Cuban forces during the war, Cuba was relinquished to Spain .
 Following the war, United States forces occupied Cuba until 1902 . The U.S. allowed a new Cuban government to take full control of the state .
 The Americans gave independence to the Cubans, it was not without some conditions . Though the U.S. gave independence, the conditions were not without conditions .
 On May 27, 1902, USA and Cuba established diplomatic relations . The United States Legion in Havana was raised to Embassy status on February 10, 1923 . General Enoch H Crowder was appointed Ambassador .
 Fidel Castro and his supporters took over the Cuban government, by successfully overthrowing President General Fulgencio Batista . Fidel Castro's supporters took control of Cuba in 1959 .
 America, which had supported Castro by imposing an arms embargo on the Batista regime, recognized the new government at Havana . America had supported the Castro regime by imposing a arms embargo .
 Fidel Castro made a historically rare visit to Washington DC and met Vice President Richard Nixon in April 1959 . Fidel Castro met Richard Nixon at the White House in 1959 .
 By 1960s, Castro’s government had seized private land, nationalized hundreds of private companies and taxed American products so heavily that U.S. exports were halved in two years .
 Castro expanded trade with the Soviet Union instead . Decrying the “Yankee Imperialism” he expanded trade instead . Castro was born in Cuba .
 This invasion was a failed military invasion of Cuba planned by Central Intelligence Agency and supported/trained the Cuban exiles’ force called Brigade 2506 with the sole purpose of overthrowing the Fidel Castro government .
 The United States started distrusting Castro and was wary of his relationship with Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of Soviet Union . The U.S. became wary of Castro's relationship with the Soviet Union leader .
 In October 1962, a U.S. spy plane photographed nuclear missile sites being built by Soviet Union on the Cuban island . The sites were photographed by a United States spy plane in October 1962 .
 President Kennedy decided to place a naval blockade, or a ring of ships, around Cuba . President Kennedy placed the blockade around Cuba in 1961 .
 The leaders of the two superpower nations decided on a deal in which the Soviets would dismantle the weapon sites in exchange for a pledge from the U.S. not to invade Cuba . The deal was a deal between the United States and the Soviets .
 In a separate deal, the U.S. agreed to remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey . The deal remained a secret for more than twenty-five years .
 President Kennedy issued the permanent embargo on February 7, 1962 . Within few years the country, whose economy relied on the use of American products, became a shell of its former self . In 1966, under the Lyndon B Johnson administration, the United States Congress passed the Cuban Adjustment Act under
 Cuba faced severe economic sanctions from U.S. amidst high oil prices, and dealt with migratory problems . Throughout the 1970s and 1980s Cuba faced economic sanctions . Cuba also dealt with migration problems .
 The Latino diaspora, some from Cuba, has played a significant role in the Presidential win of Barack Obama, making this minority group a key concern for the administration .
 In April 2009, President Obama lifted restrictions on family travel and remittances to Cuba . The initial act of bonhomie was stalled due to the arrest of a USAID worker Alan Gross in Havana on grounds of spying for Washington .
 Cuban agent Rene Gonzalez, one of the five counterintelligence officials convicted for espionage in 2001, was freed on completing the sentence from a Florida jail . With the transfer of power to Raul Castro, Cuba embarked on a new political journey .
 Raul Castro’s government removed bureaucratic requirements for Cubans to obtain government permission to travel abroad in 2012 . The relationship warmed up further when Obama and Castro met for the first time at the Nelson Mandela Memorial Service in 2013 .
 Alan Gross was freed in exchange for the release of the remaining three of the five Cubans convicted . The Cuban government freed Alan Gross in 2014 . Alan Gross is one of five convicted Cubans held in Guantanamo Bay .
 The quantum leap in the relationship was a result of eighteen months of secret talks hosted largely by Canada . Canada hosted the talks in secret .
 The move was encouraged by the Pope, who hosted the final meeting at the Vatican . The Pope encouraged the move by the end of the meeting .
 President Obama spoke with Castro over telephone for more than 45 minutes, to finalize the agreement . Obama Administration removed Cuba from the list of states sponsoring international terrorism .
 All these developments have not been welcomed by all quarters in the U.S. system . But all these developments are not welcomed by some quarters .
 Jeb Bush and Marc Rubio attacked Obama for being ‘more interested in capitulating to adversaries than in confronting them”
 The secrecy surrounding these negotiations was necessary since domestically Obama would have had to contend with opposition to actively re-engaging with what is perceived as a corrupt dictatorship . The positive developments between United States and Cuba can also be credited to the absence of the original planner of the Communist nation, Fidel
 Raul Castro’s presence in the Cuban government has managed to bring modernity and a fresh set of reforms in the nation . His brother, Raul, is in charge of Cuban government . Raul's presence has brought modernity to Cuba .
 Travel In all 12 existing categories of authorized travel* will be authorized by general license, subject to appropriate conditions . Travel previously authorized by specific licence will now be authorized . Travel in all 12 categories of authorised travel**will be authorized under the same license .
 Individuals who meet the conditions laid out in the regulations will not need to apply for a license to travel to Cuba . This means that individuals who meet these conditions won't need to be granted a license . Cuba is the first country to allow citizens to visit the island nation since Cuba was founded
 Insurers will be authorized to provide coverage for global health, life or travel insurance policies for individuals ordinarily resident in a third country who travel to or within Cuba .
 U.S. travellers will be allowed to import up to $400 worth of goods acquired in Cuba for personal use .
 OFAC general licence will facilitate the establishment of commercial telecommunication facilities linking third countries and Cuba and in Cuba . OFAC will provide efficient and adequate telecommunications services between the two countries .
 Commercial sales as well as donations of the export and re-export of consumer communication devices that enable the flow of information to, from and among the Cuban peoples will be authorized under Commerce’s Consumer Communication Devices license exception . Personal computers, mobile phones, televisions, memory devices,
 US owned or controlled entities in third countries will be authorized to provide goods and services to an individual Cuban national located outside of Cuba . The transaction does not involve a commercial exportation of goods or services to or from Cuba .
 Certain micro financing projects for entrepreneurial and business training, as well as for private business and agricultural operations, will be authorized . Small Business Growth will be limited to certain micro-financing projects .
 The regulatory interpretation of “cash in advance’s” is being redefined as cash before shipment . Cash in advance is to allow expanded financing of authorized trade with Cuba .
 OFAC is adding a general license authorizing transactions with Cuban official missions and their employees in the U.S. OFAC will also authorize transactions with official missions in the United States . OFAC added the license to facilitate the reestablishment of diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 Consolidated shipments of gift parcels will be eligible for the same commerce license exception that authorizes individual gift parcels . The exception applies to individual gift parcel shipments .
 Commerce will set forth general policy of approval for applications to export or re-export items necessary for the environmental protection or enhancement of U.S. and international air and water quality or coastlines . Liberalizing License Application Review Policy .
 The decade-long political stalemate between the two nations has though come to an end, but the long historical disagreements on various matters has not disappeared . The present predicament is that of a high level political event .
 The United States motive of changing the Cuban regime is no more its goal, but that does not automatically result in the U.S. not worrying about its long held concerns in Cubae. democracy and human rights violation .
 The original points of friction very much exist between these two neighbours, but what has changed are the time and the viewpoint of the leaders . The original friction still exists between the two countries, but the time has changed .
 The Obama administration has acknowledged that their policy on Cuba has been the most outdated one . It has been more than two decades since the Cold War got over . Obama administration acknowledged that the policy has been outdated .
 The biggest knot in their relationship has been untied, but that doesn’t spare the leaders from confronting some age-old pinpricks . The couple has been married for more than 20 years .
 The strong political will and diplomatic competence shown by the leaders and administrations of both the countries is the reason for this new major development, says CNN.com.com .
 Easing of tensions with U.S. creates stability to handle economic, political and social transformation that the island nation needs in the 21st century . The island nation is disassembling institutions derived from the Soviet model adopted in 1976 and only partially reformed in 1992 .