 Soviet journalists need quick decision,” said poet to justify the newspaper’s blunder . ‘We [the Soviet journalists] need quick decisions,’ said the poet .
 This joke is mentioned in Lawrence J Vale, The Limits of Civil Defense in the USA, Switzerland, Britain and the Soviet Union . Lawrence Vale's book is published by Lawrence Vale in 175 .
 Interview with Evtushenko in the second DVD of the recent edition of I Am Cuba (dir. Vladimir Putin: "I am Cuba" Interview with him in second DVD .
 Izvestiya incident involved more than just the effect of quickly unfolding events . But the Izvestya incident was not the first of its kind, it was the second of a series of events .
 Izvestiya made a blunder on missile deployments was only the tip of the iceberg . As this article demonstrates, the blunder is not the end of the story . The blunder was only one of Izvestiy's blunders .
 Khrushchev’s letter to Kennedy dated that very day offered an exchange of “means you consider offensive” in Cuba against “analogous means” deployed by the United States in Turkey .
 Whether a “clear and present danger” of nuclear war really existed in October 1962 or was just “media hysteria” is still a matter of debate .
 Mobilization is understood here as a strategy oriented toward preparing individuals for the tasks they might be called on to fulªll in the future . Mobilization aims to prepare individuals for what they might need to be called upon to do in future .
 The mobilization is ubiquitous, using all means necessary, including oral and written propaganda, simulations, and drills through all the media, including cinema .
 Propaganda and mobilization were the core of the Soviet regime, from Vladimir Lenin to Mikhail Gorbachev . The magnitude of propaganda and mobilization varied greatly over time . Propaganda was the main source of the regime's success .
 Under Khrushchev, the “Thaw’s” meant not the ‘liberalization’ of the regime but the reinforcement of its contradictions . The “thaw” was not “liberalizing” the regime, it was reinforcing its contradictions
 "The latter reºected a conscious and explicit disagreement with the party dogma," says party leader John Boehner .
 Dissonances existed between the Komsomol leaders and the party line, the audience's reactions and the audience’s wishes . Those dissonances exist between the audience and the leaders of the Komomol .
 As the Izvestiya example demonstrates, dissonances also arose inside the same media, especially in periodicals . Periodicals sometimes featured contradictory texts in the same issue .
 Such incongruities can be seen as the absence of consonance, silent voices were also considered dissonances of a sort, particularly in the context of mobilization, which presupposed fusion of all the components of the propaganda machine .
 Komsomol leaders were aware of some of these dissonances, but failed to adapt their tactics to the Cuban crisis . The Soviet Union failed in Cuba to adapt its tactics to its own crisis, writes David Frum .
 As during the Stalinist period, youth mobilization was hindered by the contradictory signals sent to the public, whose consumption of these signals resulted in the sundry contradictions . Youth mobilization was hampered by the contradictions, as well as the contradictions of the public .
 To ferret out these dissonances and to understand their probable causes, it is not enough to study different voices during the crisis . It is not only to study the dissonances but to understand them, it also needs to understand the cause .
 The “Cuban lesson” ended on a positive note with the signature of the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963 . The Cuban nuclear test ban treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1961 .
 In this article I deªne Soviet youth as individuals approximately age 7 to 30; they were seen as malleable by the state and hence attracted particular attention . In the article, I describe Soviet youth in this article as individuals aged 7-30 .
 The fact that both the Oktyabryata and the Pioneers were part of the youth league under the Komsomol’s direct supervision is another reason not to differentiate between the three categories .
 Davies was among the ªrst historians to stress the necessity of studying the ‘consumption” of propaganda by Soviet citizens . Davies looked at the way they assimilated propaganda and made it their own .
 The Soviet leader said, “there was a risk of a confrontation over Berlin,” and the Soviet media prepared the population for that eventuality . The Soviet media was prepared for the eventuality, according to the Soviet leader .
 The study of those dissonant voices is particularly important today, more than 50 years after the Cuban missile crisis . The study is especially important today after 50 years .
 Reºecting a trend in Cold War historiography in which international relations has usually mattered more than domestic issues . United States policy has attracted the lion’s share of scholarly research . Soviet side of the story has usually been relegated to the margins .
 The social dimension of the Cold War on the Soviet side has often been ignored altogether, though some notable studies of this topic have begun to appear in recent years .
 What is more or less accepted today, drawn from myriad opinions during and after the crisis, is twofold. What is accepted today is the same as what is accepted in the world today .
 By “the spirit of the Thaw” I mean the possibility of publicly discussing the Stalinist past and, more broadly, the . possibility of expressing oneself with greater freedom. By ‘the spirit’ of the . Thaw, he says, he means the possibility
 The publication of One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich in 1962 was an important event in that transition . Denisovich's memoirs were published in 1962 . The book was published in the same year as the publication of the book .
 Khrushchev’s visit to the Manezhnaya painting exhibition in December 1962 and his meeting with the ‘creative intelligentsia’ in March 1963 were manifest attempts to curtail the liberalization of the arts in Russia .
 Khrushchev decided to import large quantities of grain from the West in 1963 and 1964 . A bad harvest in the face of a bad harvest led to the importation of grain .
 The traditional Cold War narrative from the Soviet side sees the Cuban missile crisis as Khrushchev’s “ultimate exercise in nuclear brinkmanship” after the second Berlin crisis, which set a precedent . The traditional narrative of the Cold War is that the Cuban crisis was Khrush
 At the same time, the impact of the crisis in the United States is well known, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Evtushenko was Fidel Castro’s personal friend . The poet was a close friend of the Castro family . Evsushenko's poetry was published in Russia in the 1980s .
 After the standoff of 1962, the ‘love affair’ with Cuba began to falter . The ‘freedom island’ came to be seen as a burden and a laughingstock .
 In many ways, the Cuban crisis alienated a large part of Soviet society from the CPSU’s message and dictates . The Cuban crisis was a major turning point in the Soviet Union's political strategy .
 This article assesses the impact of the Cuban missile crisis on Soviet youth, both Pioneers and Komsomol members, as a prime category for Soviet propaganda in the context of political mobilization .
 The evidence presented here relates only to a part of the mobilization campaign . It offers a glimpse into the reactions of geographically and sociologically heterogeneous Soviet youth . The evidence is only a glimpse of the reaction of Soviet youth.
 According to Aksyutin, 38. percent and 52. percent of the persons polled in 1998 and 1999 felt the world had been on the brink of a new world war . According to the poll, the world was on the verge of war in 1998-1999 .
 Aksyutin’s book is invaluable for the study of public opinion under Khrushchev . The poll is difªcult to interpret because it does not, among other things, distinguish between generations .
 For a testimony of the “love affair” with Cuba, see Raleigh, Soviet Baby Boomers, 150. For a more detailed look at Raleigh see Raleigh.com .
 According to Mervyn J Bain, “Soviet support for the Cuban revolution continued and expanded” in the 1970s . Bain: “The Soviet Union continued to support the revolution in the 70s .
 Soviet society had to remain mobilized for defense of the country against ‘imperialists’ who were preparing a new war . All the country’s resources were to be marshaled for the construction of Communism, he says .
 Iosif Stalin’s embalmed corpse was removed from the Red Square mausoleum . His name was excised from the 1961 document, like something belonging to the past . Stalin's name was also excised .
 The ‘class struggle’ between societies was to continue, and the Soviet Union would aim 16 . The “class struggle to continue” between societies would continue, says Soviet Union .
 Lavrentii Beria’s address to Moscow Soviet on 6 November 1951 in commemoration of the anniversary of the October Revolution, published in all major national newspapers . For an example of such rhetoric, see Lavrenti Beria's address to the Moscow Soviet .
 As the war in Korea was raging on, Beria announced that “hese are the facts, comrades.” Beria said that ‘hese were the facts .”
 Building ‘Communism’ was the ultimate justiªcation for all the sacriªces Soviet society was making to attain that goal . Khrushchev had been talking about the idea of Communism since the early 1930s .
 The failure of the U.S.-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in April 1961 convinced Soviet leaders that Kennedy was a weak president easily inºuenced by hardliners .
 Khrushchev anticipated a severe reaction after the construction of the Berlin Wall . He expected another determined attempt to overthrow Castro . The Soviet leader was bombarded with State Security intelligence reports .
 On 7 August 1961, he publicly demanded that surveillance of the USSR’s western borders be stepped up . He called for more surveillance of Russia's western borders to increase .
 Young generations were seen as key for the success of the plans, just as they were for the campaign of the ‘Virgin Lands conquest” launched in 1954 . Young generations will be key to success of those plans .
 Absolute dedication to work, ideological awareness, and physical .ness were among the prime elements of this program .
 See Kuznetsov, “Materials for the Report on Preparation of Youth for Military Service,” 10 June 1963, in Rossiiskii Gosudarstvennyi Arkhiv Sotsial’no-Politicheskoi Istorii
 After Castro proclaimed his devotion to Marxism-Leninism, Cuba became a perfect destination for such an exercise . Cuba is a perfect place for such a visit to the Communist Party .
 Khrushchev, Stroitel’stvo kommunizma v SSSR i razvitie sel’skogo khozyaistva, 7 vols. Khrushchevsky, 7.5, published in Moscow .
 A Nation’s Constructors and Constructed (London: Routledge, 1994), 122. A Nation's Constructors & Constructed, 122.
 The tensions surrounding the crisis were quickly succeeded by a détente . The tensions around the 1950s and '60s were quickly followed by a peace agreement .
 On 5 August, representatives of the Soviet Union, the United States, and the United Kingdom convened in Moscow to sign the LTBT . The LTBT was signed amid speculation about a new summit in 1964 .
 On 7 November, the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, Soviet Defense 28. 28. November 28 .
 See also Internal note , 8 September 1962, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 489, L 128 . See also internal note .
 The Cuban missile crisis induced many people to advocate further development of nuclear weapons . A similar reaction could be observed in the United States, where many people advocated further development and nuclear tests .
 According to the directive, the “security interests” of the Soviet Union made it necessary for the armed forces to remain on constant alert in order to strike a fatal blow in case of an attack . The directive was issued in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The military became more involved in state decision-making and in the youth mobilization campaign . The military has become more involved with state decision making and in youth mobilization .
 Soviet Civil Defense Forces transferred from Ministry of Internal Affairs to Ministry of Defense in 1961 . U.S. moved previously independent Ofªce of Civil Defense under command of the United States Department of Defense .
 Soon thereafter, the Soviet military indirectly beneªted from Kennedy’s assassination . The Soviet military directly benefited from the assassination of Kennedy .
 Americans looked for a scapegoat and found it in the Soviet Union . Facing a national drama and frustrated by the murder of the principal suspect, Lee Harvey Oswald, Americans look for scapegoat .
 Oswald had been a defector to the USSR and had married a Russian woman . Oswald's wife was also a Russian, and he had married her .
 He was the leader of an activist group, the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . He supported the new Communist regime in Cuba .
 Anti-Soviet feelings in the United States increased, and this, in turn, fueled anti-Americanism in the Soviet media . The Soviet media presented Kennedy as a victim of a “right-wing” conspiracy, with Oswald being a mere tool .
 Anti-Americanism in the USSR, as in other countries, was a complex phenomenon rooted in the Tsarist past and reinforced by Cold War antagonism affecting political, social, and cultural issues . Anti-U.S. anti-Americanistism in USSR was rooted in Tsarist
 By “antiAmericanism” I mean the public images and discourses that denigrated U.S. foreign policy and American culture and values . By ‘antiAmericanist’ I . mean the . images and . discourses denigrated United States foreign policy, U
 On the surge of anti-Americanism in the USSR, see Dobrynin, Sugubo doveritel’no, 96, 96 . On the rise in anti-U.S. anti-Semitism in the Soviet Union: "Anti-Semitism, anti-
 The Komsomol used the crisis to instill fear of more ominous things to come . Contrary to a general perception of the Cuban missile crisis as a “lesson” for the superpowers, the Komsomsol, like the military, instilled fear of the
 The United States government prepares its citizens for the inevitability of thermonuclear war with the Soviet Union . The U.S. government prepares citizens for thermonnuclear war with Russia .
 As recent events in the Caribbean have shown, American imperialists and their partners from the aggressive blocs continue to build up tensions on the international scene and push the world to the brink of nuclear war .
 Komsomol agitators constantly reminded their audiences of the threat from the U.S. During meetings and conferences organized to “reinforce the military and patriotic education of youth,” agitator said .
 Military preparedness was the key to counter a threat that could come from anywhere, including space . Military officials say space threats could be coming from anywhere .
 Komsomol speaker quoted prominent Soviet ofªcials who supported military-ideological imperatives of the youth league .
 Defense Minister Malinovskii mocked Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s declaration that “the United States has the nuclear capacity to destroy the Soviet Union without risking a counterstrike”
 When discussing the possibility of nuclear war, Komsomol ideologues invoked Clausewitzian idea of war as an “instrument of policy,” adapting it to new circumstances . Clausewitz’s idea was adapted to adapt war to a new situation, the K
 The Soviet ideologues misinterpreted McNamara’s “assured destruction” theory calling for reinforcement capacities . McNamara's “No cities” speech of 9 June 1962 at Ann Arbor . The U.S. fears of a Soviet military buildup mirrored the U
 A consensus among Komsomol ofªcials prevailed before, during, and after the Cuban missile crisis . At the center of the Cuban crisis was the Soviet Union .
 The league continued in its role as the primary educator of youth, detractor of imperialism, and agent of solidarity with Cuba . It continued to be a detractor .
 The Komsomol made sure the leaders of the CPSU knew the party line was understood and correctly followed . The party line is understood and properly followed .
 For today’s Pioneers, the most important mission is to build Communism and live under Communism in the near future . The editor of the Kazakh children's magazine Druzhnye rebyata declared, in a December 1962 report, for today's Pioneers,. for today�
 The inculcation of a worldview, of Communist values, of a deep understanding of our society’s needs is the goal of our work . Thus the inculcation of a . worldview is the fundamental goal of . our work, the Communist Party says .
 Communist ethics are the most fair and the noblest in the world, says the Communist journal . In publications, the journal has made it clear that the Communist ethics is most fair . In . publications, our journal has shown that the . Communist . ethics are most fair, the most
 Many children reportedly transferred their savings to a ‘Peace Fund’ 23 September 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 141v, Ll., 44. The fund was set up in 1963 .
 paraphrasing Sun Tzu was common in Soviet ofªcial discourse, a fact noted by U.S. military experts . As with Clausewitz, paraphrase was common .
 The summer 1962 issue of the journal Sovetskii pogranichnik (Soviet Border Guard) warned young people about the “dark plans of American imperialists” who had committed “enormous amounts of money on espionage” as a prelude to
 Soviet society was prepared for such a war, looking to the military to lend a helping hand . Soviet society had to be prepared for the war .
 In the summer, many children also took part in ‘war games,’ which sometimes involved hundreds of participants . The games were often held in the summer .
 Sovetskii pogranichnik, 31 July 1962, 3, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 34, L 27, in Gaspaspi .
 Performers “from the periphery” of the Soviet empire were apparently especially prone to this sin . Performers from the periphery of the empire were especially prone, the author says .
 A March 1963 radio broadcast from Khabarovsk described United States military bases in the Paciªc was a verbatim repetition of an article that had appeared in the Far East Military District periodical Suvorovskii natisk . Another radio broadcast, this time of
 Apparently, the broadcast unashamedly used The Americans, a travelogue published in 1960 by CPSU favorite and Stalin Prize winner Nikolai Mikhailov .
 Secondary school textbooks dealing with post-1945 world history were saturated with wording from Pravda. Pravdda.com .
 Although the extent of this “copy-pasting’s” is not always clear, the phenomenon should not be underestimated, says CNN.com .
 It certainly had a dangerous sideeffect for coverage of the Cuban crisis . The Cuban crisis was particularly acute in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Plagiarism, coupled with the secrecy surrounding the event, resulted in inertia . The event was held in secrecy .
 Komsomol activists continued to cultivate empathy and anti-U.S. sentiment along the old patterns . Unable and possibly unwilling to adapt their message to the radically new situation .
 Even Pioner’skaya pravda publications appeared dissonant with the new imperatives . The new Russian state of power is now in full swing .
 The Cuban missile crisis was an event without precedent, but it got lost in the paper’s traditional anti-American rhetoric . The Cuban crisis was the first time the U.S. had seen a crisis without precedent .
 Two boys lost their father in the Bay of Pigs operation . A fictional Cuban child told an imaginary Cuban child that the bay 54 had been captured . The story was told in the magazine's 19 October issue .
 The United States in Soviet and Russian History Textbooks” in Victoria I Zhuravleva and Ivan I Kurilla, eds., Rossia i SShA na stranitsakh uchebnikov: Opyt vzaimnykh representatsyi .
 The publications made no mention of the very real possibility of a new world war . Instead, they focused on the fact that the world was at risk of another war .
 Conspicuously absent was the “barbarians’” willingness to go to war with the Soviet Union . The ‘barbarian’s’ willingness to fight was absent .
 This also meant that Soviet and Cuban youth solidarity during the crisis was given priority over world peace . This also means that Soviet-Cuban youth solidarity was prioritised by Soviet and Cubans during the war .
 The press often used the old pattern of comparing the two systems, United States and Soviet . The press also often used to compare the two countries .
 Such depictions were deemed “low in ideological and political content” even by Komsomol inspectors . Such depictions are deemed ‘low-in ideological and politically content’ even by inspectors .
 Despite the criticism, such manifestations of inertia, or “formalism” in the agents’ parlance, were still accepted, sometimes even stimulated after the crisis . Despite criticism, the criticism was still accepted and sometimes stimulated .
 Radio, television, cinema, oral propaganda, art, and even tourism were to become part of this major propaganda effort .
 “formalism” was impeding the party message in a relatively mild fashion . “paciªst” dissonance was much more of an obstacle to the Komsomol 58. Party message .
 See also, “Our Globe,” Pioner’skaya pravda, 9 October 1962, 2; and ‘Our Globe’, 12 October 1962 . The Globe was published in 1962 .
 Manichaean comparisons between the ‘good’ world of Communism and the “bad” world of capitalism appeared before the war in the context of industrialization . They became a prime staple of Stalin’s Cold War propaganda . The comparisons between capitalism and Communism became
 Report on Pioner issues 10 and 11 , 27 January 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op. Op., D 1091, Ll. 51. Report on the role of Pioners .
 Frequently, media coverage of the Cuban missile crisis negated the idea of a ‘holy war’ with statements that thermonuclear war had to be avoided at all costs .
 Youth activists remained cautious, insisting that to speak of any “real change” was still premature for the journal . Even though the situation from the Komsomol’s perspective “improved” somewhat in 1963, the journal remained cautious .
 Komsomol ideologues also found traces of “paciªsm” in depictions of the United States, which were often too fuzzy to make the Americans seem threatening and culpable .
 Pioner attempted to run a controversial story called “A Man without a Motherland” based on a letter from a Bashkir, Mukhametsharif Makhmutov .
 Drafted into the Red Army in 1942, he had been captured by the Germans, later freed by the Americans, and carried across the ocean . He had been drafted into the Soviet Union in 1942 and was later drafted back to Russia .
 Komsomol censors were unimpressed, particularly by the seven years he spent outside the Soviet Union . The former Soviet prisoner of war had quietly spent outside of Soviet Union, not the United States involvement in his liberation .
 To them, the man’s story had too many “blank spots” to be used without caution, they said . The man's story was too many "blank spots" to use without caution .
 In the case of Makhmutov’s story, Komsomol ideologues could censor the text before its publication, on other occasions they had to accept a fait accompli . The story was published by the Communist Party of Soviet Russia .
 Noch’ bez miloserdiya (A Night without Mercy) is a motion picture adapted from a 1958 novel by the German science-fiction writer Kurt Sandner . The film was directed by Stalin Prize recipient Alexander Fainzimmer .
 Despite being produced in 1961, it was not premiered until 17 March 1962 . It was not actually released until 22 October 1962, the day before the Cuban missile crisis hit the Soviet press .
 The critic declared that the release of such a “paciªst” feature was a mistake . It was during a crisis that warranted a much more demonizing representation of the enemy, he said .
 Another deadly threat to Komsomol ideologues, perhaps even more than inertia and “paciªsm,” was silence . Another threat to those ideologists was silence, says P.E. G.I. Gentry .
 The reasons for these “sounds of silence” are difªcult to determine, especially if one excludes lack of available information as the main reason for the silence . Each agent was probably acting at the behest of his or her institution or for personal motives .
 Soviet youth periodicals might have been reluctant to sacriªce their entertainment value to fulªll the regime’s ideological objectives . For instance, Soviet youth . periodicals were reluctant to use their entertainment . value to justify the regime's objectives .
 In 1962, there was almost no trace of the Cold War in Murzilka . For instance, in 1962 there were almost no traces of Cold War . In 1963, there were no signs of a Cold War between Russia and Ukraine .
 Theses of the speech at the sixth plenum of the Soviet Committee of the Union of the Cinema Workers, 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 1135, L 58 .
 The Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs was particularly annoyed about the resolution of the crisis . The Soviet Foreign Ministry was annoyed with the resolution .
 MID’s new Diplomatic Dictionary, as well as the ofªcial course on Soviet diplomatic history, allotted less than a page to the crisis . Midland's new Dictionary of Diplomatic Diplomatic History allotted just a page .
 Judging from Gromyko’s ambivalent position on the question, this was rather predictable . Judging from his ambivalent stance on the issue, this is rather predictable.
 Silence was a way to avoid explaining sensitive issues to the audience . Silence was also the best way to erase Soviet humiliation from popular memory . Silence is a way of avoiding explaining sensitive matters to the public .
 The strategy, however, stirred up unwanted reactions from the youth, as did other dissonances . The strategy was intended to be a strategy for the youth .
 Several 1963 issues of this publication featured a story by Vitalii Korzhikov about Soviet merchant sailors visiting Cuba . The story was featured in several issues of the 1963 issue .
 Note on Druzhnye rebyata, 1 February 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 1126, L 136, in GASPI's Op. F 1 . Op. D 112 6: 1: F 1: Op. 1126:
 There is no evidence that Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko opposed the Cuban operation . On the one hand, there was no evidence he opposed the operation .
 He does not mention Khrushchev’s name when recalling the conclusion of the crisis . On the other hand, he doesn't mention the former Soviet leader's name .
 Defending against all odds the ofªcial “missiles for protection only” line while eschewing praise of Khrushchev’s “wise policy” ‪nds its reºection .
 See for example the editorial “Narod i partiya—ediny,” Ogoniok, 12 February 1956, 2.2 .
 The unity of "workers and the party" existed during Stalin’s time, but disappeared after 1947 . Although slogans about the unity of ‘workers and party’ existed during the Stalin era, they disappeared .
 The slogan was in a way typical of the de-Stalinization process, as ‘the party’ now replaced the traditional presence of Stalin . ‘The party” now replaced Stalin’s traditional presence in the Soviet Union .
 Komsomol activists were supposed to elicit the same reaction of anger from youth . Activists were meant to elicit a similar reaction from youth, but they were arrested .
 A typical report, written in early 1963, reads, When Cuba was once again threatened, Soviet people and our youth stood up in solidarity with the Cuban people . A typical Soviet report, from early 1963 to early 1964, says, 'Our youth stood in solidarity' with Cuba .
 During those tragic days, Cuba became especially close to every Soviet citizen . The Cuban government was particularly close to Soviet citizens .
 Thousands of men and women across the country gathered in demonstrations and rallies in support of the Cuban republic . Thousands of people gathered in Cuba to celebrate the Cuban revolution .
 Soviet youth swore to remain entirely on the side of the Cuban people and the Cuban revolutionary government . It covered with shame the adventurism of American imperialists. Soviet youth swindled out of the United States .
 The effect of the mobilization effort on the young builders of Communism was apparent . The effect was apparent in the young workers of Communism .
 Similar resolutions to “counter the imperialists’ plot” came from the builders of the hydroelectric power plant at Uch-Kurgansk . Similar resolutions were made by the builders at the hydro power plant .
 Even as the working youth were taking public oaths, the younger audience expressed their feelings in written form . The working youth took to the streets to express their feelings .
 December 1962 article on Cuban children published by Druzhnye rebyata reportedly stirred a “ºow of responses” from young readers . The article was published in December 1962 . It was reportedly published in the same month as a book about Cuban children .
 Material for reports, 1 February 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 1008, L 49, is published on 1 February 2013 .
 Internal note, January–December 1962, “Report on a phone conversation,” 26 October 1962, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 1070, Ll.7–248.7 .
 From a structural point of view, the reactions appear sincere but are lacking in genuine motivation . The reactions are sincere but lacking genuine motivation, says CNN.com editor .
 CPSU and its representatives were invested with ‘divine’ functions through a complex ensemble of rituals, such as mass celebrations on Red Square . The CPSU was invested with 'divine' functions through complex ensemble rituals, like the mass celebrations .
 Letter-writing to authorities was a ritual less codiªed than an oath . Its purposes varied from expressions of allegiance and praise to requests for personal favors, denunciations .
 For the party organs, these actions were instruments of social control that would both measure the degree of allegiance to the system and facilitate the emergence of the ‘New Man” through the uniªcation of various cultures .
 Even if such letters were genuine, they were not representative of the entire Soviet youth of the 1960s . The letters were sent to Soviet youth in 1960s and '60s .
 Only a minority took up the pen and wrote to the press, and many of those who did were motivated more by a desire to escape ‘boredom’ and reach out to Cuban exotics .
 Not all Komsomol members were factory workers or kolkhozniki . Not all members of the Communist Party were factory factory workers .
 Some belonged to the intelligentsia and strove for cultural and intellec78.78. Some of the world's most famous people were intellectuals and intellectuals .
 For children's public letter-writing in a Cold War context, see Andrei Kozovoi, “Pour ou contre l’Amérique.” For children’s public letter writing in the Cold War, see ‘Pour Ou
 The practice of oath-taking, despite its evident lack of possible improvisation, remains a fascinating subject . Catriona Kelly only scratches the surface in her “Defending Children’s Rights” 723.
 Even if Western travelogues must be used with caution, they are nevertheless a precious source on Soviet attitudes of that time . Travelogues are still a valuable source of Soviet attitudes .
 On Soviet youth mistaking Africans for Cubans, see the memoir of a student from Ghana who lived in Moscow in 1960 and 1961, William Anti-Taylor, Moscow Diary, 105 .
 Semi-deviant meshchane were more interested in Western clothing and music than in reading Komsomolskaya pravda .
 Even the different categories of “deviances” had been created by the authorities themselves in order to enforce social control . The existence of categories such as meshchane and hooligans underscores the broad spectrum of attitudes toward politics among youth .
 On this issue, concrete evidence is still scarce and scattered, which makes generalizations problematic . "Concrete evidence still scarce, but it's still hard to generalize," he says .
 The historian must become an interpreter of silences in Soviet society, says historian . As is often the case with the study of public opinion in a Soviet context, the historian must be an interpreter .
 The effect of the Cuban missile crisis campaign was nowhere near as strong as Druzhnye rebyata’s editor suggested . For example, judging from the letters received by the Komsomol in 1962, the effects of the crisis campaign were not strong enough .
 According to summary reports, not a single one of the 17,000 total letters received made any mention of Cuba .
 Of almost 13,000 letters received that year, only 11 percent were from volunteers eager to enroll in new building projects or asking to be sent abroad, including to Cuba .
 More than 19,000 letters were received by Komsomol’skaya pravda from January to March . The survey is far more than the total received by the Pioner'skaya Pravda for the same year .
 Report on the Activities of the VLKSM General Department for 1963, 19 February 1964, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 124, Ll.–8. Report on activities of the . Department for the . 1963, in . the . Report on . the Activities
 Young servicemen were supposed to be particularly aware of the risk of war . Being on the front line, young servicemen should be particularly conscious of the risks, he says .
 During the crisis, they were even put on a stand-by regime in large cities such as Moscow and Leningrad . They were put on stand-bys regime during the crisis .
 Some servicemen had no idea why they were being mobilized, either because they were largely uneducated or because of Central Asia and did not know Russian well . But it is likely that some servicemen didn't know why they would be mobilized .
 Only 37. percent of the conscripts had a full secondary education, according to reports . Every soldier failed to complete his eight mandatory grades .
 An increasing number of enlisted youngsters came from the southeastern periphery of the Soviet Union, notably the Caucasus and Central Asia .
 Conditions of life in the northern regions were hardly conducive to the conscripts’ “combat readiness” and motivation, instructors say . Conditions in northern regions are hardly conducive for the conscriptions, they say .
 One of these, from a private to his parents, describes a drill but does not mention the general context of mobilization . That is, that is, the risk of war . The risks of war are real and real .
 The young soldier was forced to run with a machine gun, wearing a gas mask and bearing a heavy load on his back . He was wearing a mask and wearing a heavy burden of burden .
 The youth had a heart condition, which his commanders apparently ignored, so health issues were more important to him than the risk of a U.S. attack . The youth's heart condition was ignored, according to his commanders .
 Pravda published order given by Defense Minister Malinovskii concerning ‘reinforcement of military preparedness,’ and cancellation of leave for certain categories of servicemen in 1962 .
 In his memoirs, Khrushchev acknowledges having “mobilized the armed forces to the best of their capacity” But he claims “from the bottom of heart,” that it was only a “propaganda trick” intended for the “American
 Low literacy levels were an old problem for the largely peasant and multiethnic Soviet army . The army was largely a largely peasant army with a large number of ethnic minorities .
 He does not mention one key reason for the army literacy campaign; namely, ideological indoctrination . However, he does mention that he does not .
 Among the KGB Border Troops from the Caucasus region, the risk of war was seen as possible . The only reason some wanted war to begin is so that they "could surrender to the enemy" or “escape to Turkey”
 Border Troops were not new to desertion, says Border Troop commander . Personal issues over collective ones, manifestations of defeatist feelings, and the desire for desertion not new, he says .
 More revealing in the testimonies is the absence of words that could be interpreted as traces of a “war scare” or traces of the fear of thermonuclear war . The testimonies are at least partly representative .
 The soldiers' main cultural reference was the Great Patriotic War, which had had a profound impact on Soviet society . The soldiers’ main reference is to the war’s impact on society, the author says .
 The youth of 1962 were often fatherless, and the war had had had a profound psychological and physical impact on their kith and kin . The youth had had to be left fatherless .
 Letter from Private S Grachan, 15 December 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 141, L 14 . Private S. Grachans wrote a letter to the author of the book, which was published in 1963 .
 Note to the VLKSM Central Committee by the Chief of the Political Department of KGB Border Troops, 4 March 1963, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 141, Ll–21. Note to be sent by the chief of the political Department of Political Department
 According to military literature, these factors contributed to the absenteeism and desertion during World War II . See ibid., 231. The reasons for desertion in the war were cited as factors .
 To Chuikov, his wartime role at Stalingrad earned him lasting respect . The bomb shelters were a heavy burden for the economy, he says . Chuikrov: "Bomb shelters were an economic burden"
 International relations concerned them less than domestic issues in which they had a greater stake, they could exercise greater inºuence . International relations were less important to the U.S. than domestic relations .
 This compartmentalization of internal and external issues was reinforced by the climate of secrecy surrounding civil defense measures . Civil defense measures are often compartmentalized by the secrecy surrounding their actions .
 In the United States, public debates pertaining to the possibility of surviving nuclear war and the respective utility of urban dispersal and bomb shelters had been under way since the 1950s . In the Soviet Union, such debates were strictly censored .
 The same shroud of secrecy hung over the construction of fallout shelters, in contrast to the publicity the program received under President Johnson in the U.S.
 The cinema is even more helpful in understanding this lack of awareness . The film is a great example of how cinema cinema is more important than cinema cinema .
 The ªlms about the Great Patriotic War were not yet as numerous as they became under Leonid Brezhnev . They were contributing to the ‘cultural dialogue’ and inºuencing imaginations .
 Chuikov’s article was reissued as a pamphlet, 8 May 1962, in RGASPI, F 1, Op., D 19, Ll. 16 . Chuikkov’t article was published in the same place in 1962, RGAS PI, in F
 Soviet viewers had to wait until 1986 for their own cinematic version of a thermonuclear apocalypse . Letters of a Dead Man was released 24 years after the release of Stanley Kubrick’s Dr. Stanley Kubrick's Dr. Dr. Kubrick .
 The absence of “nuclear ªlms” was a missing voice in the chorus of mobilization . It meant that no ‘images’ were available to support the Komsomol argument on the probability of a U.S. nuclear attack .
 To assess the social impact of the October 1962 campaign, one should also consider the capacity of propaganda to sustain its effect after the crisis, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In November 1962, Pioner’skaya pravda celebrated the ‘anniversary’ of the crisis by reminding its young readers how close the world had come to thermonuclear war .
 Domestically, the economic situation had considerably deteriorated, with bread shortages gripping even Moscow . Bread shortages gripping Moscow .
 After the Sino-Soviet split, the risk of war seemed mainly to be from China, at least in the near term . Internationally, after the split, China seemed to be the biggest threat .
 The closest example of a similar Soviet ªlm prior to Lopushanskii’s movie is Molchanie Doktora Ivensa (dir. M.M. Ivens) The next example of such a similar movie is M. Dok
 This was the ªrst item about Cuba to have appeared since late October 1962 . This article was the first to feature on Cuba since October 1962. It was published in late October .
 Fifty-two percent of the group polled in 1999 said they had suffered from food supply problems in 1963 . Fifty-six percent of those polled said they suffered food shortages in the same period .
 Such surveys were becoming more frequent in the Soviet Union as sociology was progressively rehabilitated . The survey was conducted in the early 1980s .
 Komsomolskaya pravda had even taken the initiative to create an ‘Institute of Public Opinion’ in May 1960 . Komsomsomolka pravd had even created a ‘institute of public opinion’
 The main objective of these surveys was not to study youth as an independent social group but to improve propaganda efªciency . However, the main objective was to improve the effectiveness of the survey of youth .
 67 agitators embarked on a two-week trip around 62 regions and republics to give lectures to almost 100,000 people . Cuba was no longer (assuming it ever had been) at the center of popular attention .
 This can be interpreted as adherence to the ofªcial version of events, which described the Cuban missile crisis as one in a series of American encroachments on Cuban independence . This is the U.S. government's view of the missile crisis .
 Kennedy's promise not to invade Cuba was mentioned in ofªcial propaganda as Khrushchev’s achievement . But then, one wonders why these people didn’t believe Kennedy’�s promise to not invade Cuba .
 Cuba was eligible to sign the treaty and declined to sign it . Cuba's signature was not all that meaningful, but the lack of its signature was significant .
 Soviet authorities tried to keep Novocherkassk massacre secret . Rumors quickly began to spread, fueled in part by foreign radio broadcasts .
 As a Pravda correspondent to Cuba, he published several poems about the island that were widely read . He also published poems about Cuba .
 See, for example, “The Cuban Mother,” about a widow who lost her son in battle against “people from beyond the seas .” published in Pravda, 14 October 1962, 4.4 .
 This misconception probably originated from rumors, a direct consequence of the secrecy surrounding the deployment of Soviet missiles on the island . This misconception was probably a result of rumors, according to the author .
 Soviet youth perceived the United States not as an enemy but as an object of great interest . Another rumor that cast Cuba in a less-than-positive light held that bread shortages were directly related to grain shipments to Cuba in exchange for its sugar .
 Youth's preoccupation with the U.S. was of a different quality . Older generations remembered the wartime alliance and hoped for peaceful coexistence . But the youth’s preoccupations with the United States was of different quality.
 They were more interested in the American way of life and how it compared with their own . They were interested in how American life was compared to their own.
 According to reports, this was particularly the case in the provinces . According to the reports, the provinces were particularly affected .
 After all, they were the ones who had encouraged such comparative perspectives—before, during, and after the Cuban missile 106 . After all of them, they had encouraged similar perspectives .
 Rumors had been carefully studied by the Soviet secret police since the 1920s to ferret out “negative tendencies” among the populace and to take suitable “prophylactic” measures .
 CPSU agitators knew about the broadcasts not only from listening to the radios themselves but also from seeing KGB digests . CPSU knew about broadcasts from the radio themselves and from KGB digestes .
 Kennedy’s murder undoubtedly increased ambivalent feelings in the Soviet Union toward the U.S. The murder further weakened the message the Komsomol wanted to convey about the Cuban missile crisis . The Soviet Union was ambivalent toward the United States .
 Children were saddened by the loss of a ‪gure who looked like their ‪Gure’s ‘ideal’ leader . Children certainly asked questions, and young adults were saddened .
 “mourning” on such a scale for a foreign leader had not happened in the USSR since Franklin Roosevelt’s death in April 1945 . According to several eyewitness accounts, “Mourning’ on . such a . scale for foreign leader hadn’t happened
 In November 1964 the Soviet-Cuban production Ya—Kuba was released on the Soviet big screen . Many Soviet citizens came to believed that Kennedy’s assassination must have resulted from a conspiracy .
 Mikhail Kalatozov, renowned in the West for The Cranes Are Flying, worked again with master photographer Sergei Urusevskii . The director and photographer worked again for the film .
 Unimpressed, hardline ideologues panned it for its seductive depiction of the 110-year-old . Hardline ideologists panned the film for being seductive .
 The ªlm was initially intended as an ode to the revolutionary spirit of 1959 and an echo of 1917 . It was originally intended to be a tribute to the revolution of 1959 .
 It was intended to boost Soviet-Cuban friendship from its low point . It was also meant an accolade to the Castro regime . The Castro regime was meant to boost the friendship .
 The romantic depiction of the Cuban Revolution was already outdated, and its silence on the Cuban missile crisis was striking . Yet when I Am Cuba came out, its romantic depiction . The movie's silence on Cuba missile crisis is striking .
 I Am Cuba was a cinematographic tour de force, yet it was full of simplistic and painfully familiar images of the American enemy . The film was a cinema-stunning tour-de-force, but it was a painfully familiar image of the U.S.
 Pretending to offer a “truthful’s version of history, the ªlm failed to address post-revolutionary events . Pretending . to offer ‘truthful history,’m failed . to address . post-Revolutionary events. Pretending
 Neither did they praise the ability of Soviet cinematographers to compete with their U.S. counterparts . Neither did the Soviets praise their ability to compete .
 The ªlm targeted a mass audience, yet it was shot in black and white and used a special ªm, privileging images over dialogue and thus bearing the hallmarks of an auteur . The film is set in black, white, and was shot by a
 The ambiguities of I Am Cuba reºected the . ªlmmakers’ (and the Soviet public’s) dissonant or ambivalent attitudes toward the Cuban revolution and the U.S. The . .
 The film was panned not only by ideologues but also by cinemagoers . It was ranked among the worst dozen ªlms of the year according to a survey conducted by the ‘artsy’ cinema journal .
 The ªlm premiered on 26 October 1964 in Havana and 2 November in Moscow, possibly to mark the anniversary of the crisis . The film is set to be released in Moscow on 2 November 2014 .
 Evtushenko admits that the creators did not want to depict “current politics” because they wanted to present the rebellion against Batista’s regime . He says they wanted the only indisputable thing to present is the rebellion .
 The Cubans criticized the ªlm’s stereotypical representation of their country . Cubans criticize the stereotypical representation . The film was released in October .
 The combination of secrecy and improvisation from above with inertia and inertia and the desire for personal gain from below trivialized the crisis in their eyes . Members of the younger generation were proud of their country’s achievements in various spheres (including world peace)
 Oktyabryata and Pionery might have felt sorry for their Cuban peers, but they had no reason to be afraid for their own safety .
 They didn't understand why there could have been a global war, and why it might have happened at that particular time . They did not understand why it could have happened .
 Rumors of war had been circulating for almost as far back as they could remember . After all, rumors of war were circulating for as long as long back as possible .
 The students later asked their teachers to explain the situation, but they most likely had to seek truthful information themselves .
 By the 1970s, the crisis had become a veritable ‘blank spot’ in Soviet history . The crisis was a "blank spot" in the Soviet Union’s history .
 Recent school graduates, university students, young workers, and military servicemen were more preoccupied with their own problems and often saw the world through their parents’ eyes . Some history textbooks continued to present the ofªcial version of events, whereas others remained silent .
 Those who passively accepted the ofªcial line, or were too “busy with other stuff,” generally displayed a low level of understanding of the issues involved in the crisis .
 They ignored basic features of nuclear warfare and took for granted what the CPSU, the military, and the Komsomol told them . Even though they could recite what ‘imperialism’ was, they could not understand what it was .
 Young people perceived the eventuality of a nuclear war through the lens of the Great Patriotic War . In fact, there was no real dialogue between the Komsomol and young people, who saw the possibility of nuclear war as a result of the war's impact .
 The absence of visual representation of the new, much more destructive kind of war did not help matters either . The lack of visual representations of the war in Iraq and Syria did not .
 As early as 1963, memory of the ‘October days’ faded away, and two radical metamorphoses confused things further . The “October Days’s” have faded away as a result of two radical changes .
 The onetime Soviet ally Mao Zedong became the USSR’s main enemy, and the once-menacing foe, Kennedy, became a friend . The once-managing foe, once-enemies- foe Kennedy, now a friend of the USSR .
 Castro came to be seen as the culprit 114 years ago . Castro was accused of being the president of Cuba . Castro is seen as a leader of the Cuban revolution .
 It was presented as one of the reasons for Khrushchev’s downfall in October 1964 . The opposition used it as an argument used by the opposition for his removal .
 Brezhnev and the Soviet propaganda machine better understood the beneªts of consonance in the implementation of foreign policy propaganda . The public campaign for détente and the instrumentalization of Nixon’s visit to Moscow in 1972 aptly demonstrated .
 Aksyutin's account of popular reaction to Khrushchev’s dismissal, Khrushchevskaya “ottepel’, is 583 . Only one person mentions the Cuban operation in a positive light .
 Khrushchev ‘juggled with people’s lives’ during the crisis in 1964 . Aleksandr Shelepin was one of the speakers at the CPSU Presidium meeting in October 1964 .
 The anonymous reviewers for this journal convinced me to focus on Soviet youth . Anonymous reviewers convinced me that Soviet youth was a Soviet youth.