 Khrushchev opened the door for future negotiations with the U.S. about nuclear weapons . In addition to informing the United States of his decision to dismantle the weapons in Cuba, he also opened up the door to future negotiations about nuclear arms .
 Khrushchev led the Soviet Union into negotiations the following year with the United States . The Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was the result of the test ban treaty .
 Chairman Khrushchev informed Prime Minister Castro that the missiles would be removed from his country . He asked him to not provoke American pilots that would continue reconnaissance flights until the missiles were removed .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy's political careers were marked by tense moments in October of 1962 . Few Americans would disagree that these tense days in 1962 represented the best diplomatic moments of their careers .
 President Kennedy responded to Chairman Khrushchev's radio message as the telegram had not yet arrived . After assembling the members of Ex-Comm, President Kennedy met with the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev's promise to remove the missiles in Cuba was the day's biggest victory . The importance of the discussion about disarmament cannot be overlooked .
 U.N. Secretary General U. Thant welcomes proposal agreed upon by U.S. and Soviet Union . The proposal was welcomed by United Nations Secretary General Thant .
 The UN would be responsible for supervising the removal of the missiles in Cuba .
 A large responsibility that fell to U Thant was negotiating with Castro who felt the Soviets were being weak in their removal of the missiles . Castro felt the Soviet Union was weak in removing missiles .
 Castro invited U Thant to Cuba to discuss how the process and supervision of the missile removal would occur . Castro invited him to Cuba and he felt the opportunity would allow him to discuss with Castro how it would happen .
 Castro sent letters to Khrushchev and U Thant outlining his many objections to the agreement . In response to news that Khrushchechev had acquiesced, Castro wrote letters . Castro was angered by the agreement, which he described as a "humanitarian"
 Castro appears to be concerned about the U.S. violating Cuban airspace . This appeared to be a major concern of Castro's Cuban government .
 Secretary Rusk delivered the message of Khrushchev and the agreement between the two super powers to the Organization of American States . Rusk was the secretary of secretary of state at the time .
 It was essential that the Latin American countries understand that the quarantine would remain in place until the United Nations could confirm that the missiles had been dismantled and removed from Cuba . The quarantine will remain until the U.N. can confirm the missiles have been dismantled .
 President Kennedy warned the members of Ex-Comm to refrain from celebration . President Kennedy also warned the troops to stay away from celebrating .
 After meeting with Ex-Comm Sunday morning and early afternoon, Kennedy did not take time away from the oval office .
 Day Twelve October 27, 1962, is the closest the world has ever been to nuclear war . Day 12 October 27 is the anniversary of the first nuclear strike .
 The United States had before it had two conflicting messages from Chairman Khrushchev, each proposing different ends . The U.S. had to accept the message, which led to a compromise .
 The U.S. learned that a U-2 pilot had been shot down while on a reconnaissance mission over Cuba . Yet, despite the conflicting messages, the moment of greatest danger came when the United States learned that .
 Khrushchev's second letter, received Saturday morning, did not mention his previous letter . Instead, he referenced the United States' missiles in Turkey . The letter was sent Saturday morning .
 Khrushchev's proposal in the second letter was an exchange of sorts-United States missiles in Turkey removed in exchange for the dismantling of missiles in Cuba . The proposal was part of an exchange between the two countries .
 This proposal, like that in the first, asked the U.S. to promise not to attack or invade Cuba, is similar to the first . This proposal would have asked the United States not to invade Cuba .
 The letter said the Soviet Union would also promise not to invade or attack the United States missile sites in Turkey . However, unlike the first letter, the second said the U.S. missile sites would not be attacked by the Soviets . The letter also said the Soviets would not invade or
 President Kennedy and the members of Ex-Comm were baffled by the change of tone in the second letter and the divergence from the proposal presented in the first letter . President Kennedy was not pleased with the changes in tone of the letter .
 Major Rudolph Anderson Jr. was shot down over Cuba by one of the missile sites . Anderson was conducting a routine surveillance flight over the sites .
 First, the U.S. would have to respond to the downed American pilot, and second, any action on their part might result in a Soviet invasion of Turkey .
 Both the shooting down of the pilot and Khrushchev's second letter were now dangerously intertwined . Both the shoot-down of the plane and the letter of the second letter had been written by Khrushchevitch .
 I personally believe that this is almost certain to lead to an invasion of the U.S. It will almost certainly lead to the invasion of Iraq, says author .
 Robert McNamara: Unless you get a cease-fire around the world, you won't be able to do so . McNamara says that's the second proposition .
 The third proposition is that we do this, and leave those missiles in Turkey, the Soviet Union may, and I think probably will, attack the Turkish missiles . The U.S. may also attack those missiles, says CNN's John Sutter .
 President Kennedy was well aware of the threat to American pilots who would be conducting reconnaissance flights in Cuba . President Kennedy knew about the threat of the missile sites .
 This was, without question, the worst case scenario and the timing came at the worst possible moment of the crisis. This was without question . This was the worst scenario scenario, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Major Anderson was killed by a mechanical failure or pilot error . He insisted that no response occur until the Air Force could determine that there was not a mechanical error or a pilot error that caused Major Anderson's death .
 Khrushchev's reaction to the U.S. gave the United States the added hours needed to secure a deal with him . This reaction, rather than listening to the Joint Chiefs voiced by his Joint Chiefs, gave the US an added hours .
 Had Kennedy reacted differently, the course of human history might have been radically different . Kennedy's reaction to Kennedy's actions might have saved his life .
 The State Department submitted a draft of a letter responding to Chairman Khrushchev's second letter . The State Dept. submitted the draft of the letter to the Soviet Union .
 Bobby Kennedy suggested that they could go forward ignoring the second letter and responding to the first . Bobby Kennedy then suggested, and President Kennedy agreed, to ignore the letter .
 Letter from President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev October 27, 1962 . I have read your letter of October 26th with great care and welcome the statement of your desire to seek a prompt solution .
 All weapons systems in Cuba capable of offensive use to be rendered inoperable, under effective United Nations arrangements . The first things that needs to be done, however, is for work to cease on offensive missile bases in Cuba .
 If you give your representatives similar instructions, there is no reason why we should not be able to complete these arrangements and announce them to the world within a couple of days . We will be in contact with your representatives in the coming days .
 Bobby Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin to express his concern that the threat was worsening . The fate of the world hinged on Nikita Khrushchev's response .
 President Kennedy and the members of Ex-Comm went to bed on night of the 27th not knowing what the world would look like the next day . President Kennedy was assassinated in September 1968 .
 While the quarantine was holding, there was a suspicion that the Soviets would test the line . The quarantine is holding, but there is still a fear that it will be tested .
 Chairman Khrushchev wrote a lengthy letter to the U.S. Friday morning . The letter was a lengthy, disjointed and emotionally charged letter from the Chairman of Soviet Union .
 The letter offered a proposal to dismantle the missiles in Cuba in exchange for a promise from the U.S. that neither it nor its allies would invade Cuba . The letter was delivered to the United States embassy in Moscow and then sent via telegram to the State Department .
 Khrushchev would then offer 2 proposals, the first being that the U.S. agree to, like the Soviets, the proposal from Secretary General U. Thant . The first proposal would be that the United States agree to the proposal, the second was that the Soviets agree to
 This, of course, was the position of Khrushchev and the Soviet government, not of Castro and the Cuban government . This is the position, not that of Castro or Castro, according to CNN.com .
 Letter from Prime Minister Castro to Chairman Khrushchev October 26, 1962 . "Consider an attack to be almost imminent -within the next 24 to 72 hours"
 Fidel Castro Castro and Khrushchev disagreed on how to proceed . Castro Castro was the leader of the Soviet Union in the early 1960s .
 If the U.S. did invade Cuba, Cuba would respond and that response would be both unpredictable and deadly . The Soviets and the United States were clear to the Soviets that if they invaded Cuba, it would be deadly .
 Ex-Comm worked to have Khrushchev's letter translated and then a response mapped out . Secretary General reached out to Castro, Castro .
 President Kennedy remained the leader of the free world and had to attend to other world issues including an ongoing dispute between India and China .
 The recording begins with Kennedy's meeting with Indian Ambassador Nehru and concludes with the Ex-Comm meeting . Kennedy's first meeting with Nehru was with the Indian ambassador .
 The proposal was neither accepted nor rejected by the United States, hoping to keep control of the situation in American hands . However, the U.S. did not accept nor reject the proposal .
 The United States sent Ambassador Adlai Stevenson to the meeting of the Security Council to present the evidence . Simultaneously, the United States also presented the evidence to the council .
 Mr Stevenson: I want to say to you, Mr Zorin, that I do not have your talent for obfuscation, for distortion, for confusing language, and for doubletalk . Mr Stevenson says he does not have the talent for "doubletalk"
 I was defensive because we didn't have the evidence to prove our assertions, that your Government had installed long-range missiles in Cuba . But if I understood what you said, you said that my position had changed, you . said that . But today I was . defensive because today I
 President Obama says the U.N. has changed its stance on Syria . He says it has changed because of the pressures of world opinion and the majority of the United Nations .
 We came in here today to indicate our willingness to discuss Mr U Thant’s proposals, and that is the only change that has taken place,’ says Mr Thant .
 You—the Soviet Union has created this new danger, not the United States. You, the Soviet Union, has created a new danger not the U.S. The United States, the president says .
 Mr Gromyko was blandly denying to the President that the USSR was placing such weapons on sites in the new world . And you ask with a fine show of indignation why the President did not tell him about our evidence, he says .
 "Perhaps it would be instructive to the world to see how a Soviet official -- how far he would go in perfidy," he said . "We were assembling the evidence, and perhaps it would ... perhaps ... instructive"
 A year ago, the Soviet Union broke the nuclear test moratorium . Perhaps we wanted to know if this country faced another example of nuclear deceit like that one a year ago .
 Foreign Minister David Cameron asked why his government deceived us about Cuba's nuclear build-up in Cuba . Cameron: "Let me ask you why your Government...deliberately, cynically deceived us"
 Mr Zorin, the other day, I remind you that you didn't deny the existence of these weapons. And, finally, Mr ZOrin, I . reminded you that the other . day, he said, "You didn’t deny the . existence of the
 CNN.com's John Sutter asks: "If I heard you correctly, you now say that they do not exist, or that we haven’t proved they exist, with another fine flood of rhetorical scorn"
 This exchange would go down as Adlai Stevenson's finest diplomatic moment . Stevenson's diplomatic moment would be one of his finest moments in history .
 He advocated the removal of Soviet missiles in Turkey and Italy in addition to their naval base at Guantanamo Bay for their removal . He would, for many years after, take considerable criticism for his position earlier in the crisis .
 Adlai's time in politics was coming to an end . He was not lost on that he was ending his political career . He said: "I'm not going to be a politician forever."
 He earned the respect of the members of Ex-Comm with his performance at the U.N.
 Stevenson and his Soviet counterpart met in Moscow at the end of the Cold War . Stevenson's visit to the Soviet Union was one of his most famous moments .
 Prime Minister Castro was critical of Zorin's performance . Castro was one of the critical voices of the prime minister . Castro has been critical of the performance .
 Stevenson made a spectacular presentation to the U.N. Security Council . He showed aerial photographs of the strategic missile bases .
 The Soviet ambassador denied the evidence, denied that the proof was authentic . The evidence was denied by the Soviet ambassador .
 Khrushchev got himself all tangles up in mediocre argument that stemmed, ultimately, from vacillations and public mishandling of the issue . He didn't attack, didn't denounce, and didn't explain the powerful reasons that Cuba a small country under constant threats both explicit and implicit
 He made the mistake of rejecting the real debate, which should have been over the sovereignty of Cuba, its right to defend itself, to protect itself . Cuba's sovereignty should be the subject of the debate, he says .
 The United States knew that work was going forward on readying the missiles in Cuba . Meanwhile, the U.S. knew that the missiles were being readied in Cuba, a source said .
 Daily U-2 flyovers were bringing up-to-date images of missile sites . Daily flyovers brought up to the White House up to date images of the sites .
 Film from the day before the Security Council meeting showed construction was continuing . Film shows construction being completed on the site .
 By this time, the United States had quite a fleet of ships in the Caribbean maintaining the quarantine .
 There were no fewer than two cruisers, twenty-five destroyers, several carriers and submarines, and numerous support ships . There were also several carriers, submarines and other ships .
 The Bucharest, a Soviet tanker, was allowed to proceed through the quarantine line . It was the first time the Bucharest had been allowed through the quarantine line .
 Bucharest was the first tanker to reach the line with the intent to continue . The Bucharest is the first ship to arrive at the line in Romania .
 It was decided that a ship of its kind would not be able to hold missiles below deck and as such posed no threat to continuing the mission on the island . The ship was decided not to hold any missiles below decks . It is decided that such a ship would not pose a threat to
 Kennedy approved adding missile fuel to the list of items that would not be allowed to proceed through quarantine . Missile fuel was added to the quarantine list that night, Kennedy approved .
 With success in convincing the world community that missiles were being installed in Cuba by the Soviets, the U.S. sought success . The United States still sought success in persuading the Soviet Union that it was in the best interest of the world for their missiles to be dismantled .
 Soviets were going in the opposite direction as they worked to make their missiles operational . Unfortunately, the Soviets were working to make them operational .
 The text of Kennedy's message to Stevenson is found in the essay ""Adlai's Integrity and Credibility Were Impressive National Resources"" by Carl McGowan .
 The quarantine went into effect in the Caribbean when the quarantine was put in place . I highly recommend you watch it--it's available online--to understand what was going on .
 President Kennedy received word from Chairman Khrushchev via an unconventional message broadcast by the Soviet news agency and a telegram responding to Kennedy's message of October 23rd . Kennedy signed the quarantine order the day before .
 Khrushchev wanted to ensure President Kennedy that the Soviet government would do everything in their power to prevent any sort of standoff from occuring in the Caribbean . The Soviet government wanted to prevent a standoff with President Kennedy .
 He did not shy away from stating his disgust with the course of the United States and the illegitimacy of the Organization of American States' vote for the quarantine .
 Letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy October 24, 1962 . Letter from President Kennedy to President Khrushchevich .
 CNN.com: "The question in this case is no way one of quarantine, but rather of far more serious things, and you yourself understand this. But ... I'm sure you understand this."
 U.S. has lost its former isolation with the advent of modern types of armament . Unfortunately, such folly can bring grave suffering to peoples if all countries, and to no lesser degree to the American people .
 The Soviet Government cannot instruct the captains of sea vessels bound for Cuba to observe the orders of American naval forces blockading that Island . Therefore, the Soviet Government can't instruct the . captains of ships bound for . Cuba to obey the . orders of U.S. naval forces blocking that
 The Soviets did not respect the decision of the Organization of American States, an organization they were not a part of . Cuba boycotted when the decision was made, but the following day they would have to accept the United Nations Security Council .
 The Russian ships were proceeding, they were nearing the five-hundred-mile barrier, and we either had to intercept them or . announce we were withdrawing . The Russians were proceeding . They were nearly a hundred miles from the border .
 Kennedy met with the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . He met again with congressional leadership to update them on the quarantine .
 While diplomatic rhetoric continued, the quarantine went into effect . The quarantine went in effect on Monday .
 As the quarantine went into effect, eighteen cargo ships were headed toward the American ships maintaining the quarantine .
 The previous night, Bobby Kennedy met with the Ambassador Dobrynin about whether or not the captains of oncoming ships had been made aware of the quarantine and been given orders to cooperate . Bobby Kennedy: "The captain of the ships should have been aware of this quarantine"
 Bobby Kennedy was unsuccessful in determining of the ship captains had any idea what was going on . Bobby Kennedy failed to determine if any ship captains knew what had been going on at the time .
 Ex-Comm members sat on the edge of their seats awaiting the first two ships to reach the quarantine line . The U.S. increased their state of readiness to DEFCON 2 .
 The Soviet ships nearest Cuba had apparently stopped or altered their course . The ships closest to Cuba were apparently stopping or altering their course.
 Ex-Comm: Soviets were rapidly nearing completion of the missiles in Cuba . Soviets were closing in on the missile bases in Cuba in the early 1950s .
 There are still many ships heading for the quarantine line that might need to be boarded . Also many ships that might also need boarding are still at risk .
 The following day the United States would get the opportunity to take their case to the courtroom of world opinion . The U.S. would be taking their case for the first time in the courtroom .
 The following day Ambassador Stevenson would make one of the most important speeches of his career before the United Nations Security Council . Ambassador Stevenson made a speech before the U.N. Security Council at the end of the day .
 Day Eight Tuesday, October 23, 1962, brought the first direct communication between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev as well as a response from Prime Minister Fidel Castro . Day Eight was the first day of the war in the United States .
 Chairman Khruschev's message, by means of a State Department telegram, came at approximately 11m. Khruskovsky's message was sent by the State Department . Khrusovsky was the first Soviet Union leader to send a telegram to Moscow .
 Letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy October 23, 1962 . Letter from President Kennedy to President Khrushchen .
 The United States has taken the path of grossly violating the United Nations Charter, the U.N. Charter . The U.S. has openly violated international norms of freedom of navigation on the high seas, the author says .
 The viewpoint of the Soviet Government with regard to your statement of October 22 is set forth in a Statement of the . Soviet Government, which is being . transmitted to you through your Ambassador at Moscow .
 Khrushchev did admit that there were missiles on the island of Cuba . He said the missiles were merely for Cuba's protection from an eventual invasion by the United States .
 The audio of those meetings are available in parts here, here, and here . The audio is available for download .
 President Kennedy wrote to Chairman Khrushchev from President Kennedy October 23,1962 .
 Secretary Rusk secured the overwhelming vote of the Organization of American States in favor of the quarantine measures . Sincerely, JFK secretary Rusk writes .
 Ambassador Stevenson calls for an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council . Ambassador Stevenson also calls for a U.N. Security Council meeting on the situation .
 The Security Council would reconvene on Thursday the 25th, a date forever associated with Adlai Stevenson's finest moment . The council will meet again on Thursday, 25th .
 The correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev and statements of Stevenson and Zorin would not be the only rhetoric of the day . The correspondence and statements were made in the letters to Kennedy and his Soviet Union .
 Prime Minister Castro's response to the previous evening's address by President Kennedy was less measured than that of Chairman Khrushchev .
 Castro's interview was defensive of both their current position with the missiles in their country and their relationship with the United States since their revolution . Referring to the U.S. as both imperialists and warmongers, Castro said .
 Castro's comment, though inflammatory, would be of less importance throughout the crisis than those of the Soviet government . Castro's comments would be more important to the Soviets during the crisis .
 The U.S. now looks ahead to the hour the quarantine would go into effect . With the support of our allies and the Organization of American States, the United States now looked ahead .
 The administration would take their case to their allies, their diplomats, members of congress and, most importantly, the U.S. people .
 The address to the nation was scheduled for seven o'clock Monday evening . The White House had much to do .
 Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson briefed President de Gualle and NATO on the missiles and the blockade . Former Secretary-of-State Achesons briefed the president and NATO .
 Ambassador David Bruce briefed Prime Minister Macmillan . Ambassador Bruce briefed the Prime Minister on the issue .
 Ambassador Walter C Dowling briefed Chancellor Adenauer . U.S. ambassador to West Germany briefed Adenauer on West Germany .
 The U.S. Information Agency went to work on a plan to deliver the message to the people of Cuba . And the United States Information Agency has a plan .
 The task of notifying an elite group of men fell to the president himself . The task was not done by President Obama .
 President Kennedy would personally notify the three former presidents--Hoover, Truman and Eisenhower--of the existence of the missiles as well as the military blockade that would be put in place . Kennedy would notify the former presidents of Vietnam and Eisenhower of the missile threat .
 If this thing is such a serious thing, here on our flank, that we're going to be uneasy and we know what thing is happening now, all right, you've got to use something . If this is such an issue, we'll be uneasy. We know what it is
 Eisenhower's inclinations are the exact opposite of those of Kennedy's Joint Chiefs . Perhaps the most interesting aspect of this exchange is how Eisenhower's . inclinations . are the . exact opposite those of the Joint Chiefs of Kennedy .
 Dean Rusk, Bobby Kennedy and Arthur Schlesinger met to go over the draft of the U.N. Security Council speech . Ambassador Stevenson will present the draft to the United Nations Security Council on Thursday .
 The team was constantly looking a step ahead, plotting each step carefully . The team is constantly planning each step ahead of each other .
 There continued to be a sense of disbelief among members of Ex-Comm that the Soviets had so deliberately and stealthily placed the missiles in Cuba .
 There was nothing routine about the situation the U.S. government faced, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Preparations were underway in the Oval Office for the evening's speech . Removal of furniture was necessary to make way for the cameras .
 Press Secretary Pierre Salinger waited until noon Monday to request airtime on each of the networks for President Kennedy's speech . Arrangements had to be made for the White House staff, including some members of Ex-Comm, to sleep in a bomb shelter .
 An hour later, cabinet members were assembled to be briefed on the situation in Cuba and the plan .
 Up until now, only Secretaries McNamara, Rusk and Dillon and Attorney General Kennedy knew of crisis .
 Rusk served as a buffer between Kennedy and congressional leaders who did not feel a blockade was a strong enough response to the situation at hand . Rusk was the secretary of secretary of state at the time .
 At six o'clock, the United States ambassador to the Soviet Union, Foy Kohler, delivered a message to Chairman Khrushchev informing him of the speech and blockade . At six a.m. ET, the U.S. ambassador to Soviet Union delivered the message to
 Dean Rusk was tasked with delivering a similar message to Soviet Ambassador Dobyrnin . Kohler's action coincided with the delivery of the message .
 At seven o'clock, Kennedy went on air to deliver his speech to the American people and the world community . At seven a.m. ET, Kennedy delivered his speech on air .
 President Kennedy's speech was as much a message to the American people as it was a conversation with Chairman Khrushchev and hard line Soviets . President Kennedy was speaking to the U.S. people as much as he was talking to the Soviet Union .
 President Bush warned of "the greatest danger to our country in history" without creating a national panic, despair, or a cry for either surrender or war . Bush: "It fully informed the American people and the world of what appeared to be the greatest danger"
 Fidel Castro met with former Venezuelan Vice President Elias Jaua today . Castro is believed to have met with the former vice president of Venezuela .
 In recent years there have been various rumors about Castro being gravely ill, possibly dead or having suffered a stroke . The rumors have ranged from him being dead or possibly having a stroke or having a heart attack .
 The Cuban Revolution tore many families apart and continues to impact the Cuban-American community . The Cuban revolution tore many Cuban-Americans apart .
 Once President Kennedy settled on a blockade of Cuba, there was a great deal of work to be done . President Kennedy's blockade was the beginning of his administration .
 The majority of what needed to be done rested on the shoulders of Kennedy's speechwriters, particularly Ted Sorensen . McNamara's notes from 10/21/62 .
 Sorensen was on his fourth draft of the speech Kennedy would give on national television the following evening . By 11 a.m. the speech would be Kennedy's first on television .
 In addition to the speech, a letter to Chairman Khrushchev was being penned to notify him of the U.S. action prior to the televised speech .
 The White House began tailoring a resolution for the United Nations Security Council meeting . The resolution is expected to be discussed by the U.N. Security Council .
 The statement Ambassador Stevenson would give in that meeting was being written by Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. The statement would be written by Ambassador Stevenson himself . Ambassador Stevenson's statement was being prepared for the meeting .
 Kennedy's Sunday schedule included meetings with National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara . Bobby Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy was briefed by Admiral George Anderson of the Joint Chiefs on the specifics of the blockade .
 Sunday presented the added obstacle of dealing with a now suspicious press . Sunday also presented the . added obstacle to dealing with the added . problem .
 State Department Public Affairs Bureau got word that columnists were about to run a story about the U.S. invasion of Cuba . The State Department got word of the story .
 Chicago Sun-Times had information on military preparations that signaled to them that the U.S. was in fact preparing for an invasion .
 The movement of troops, planes, and ships to Florida and the Caribbean meant that our cherished hours of secrecy were numbered . The unavailability of high officials, summoning of Congressional leaders, the summoning of congressional leaders, and the cancellation of the Presidential and Vice Presidential campaign trips were among the reasons
 One newspaper obtained the story Sunday evening and agreed at the personal request of the President not to print it . One newspaper agreed to not print it Sunday evening .
 Press Secretary Pierre Salinger, Special Counsel Ted Sorensen, and Special Assistant Ken O'Donnell attributed to the quote . Those dealing on the front line of keeping the press from revealing what was actually happened included Press Secretary .
 It was generally agreed upon that the press had to remain in the dark about the ongoing discussions and that the focus of Ex-Comm had to be on the logistics of the blockade .
 While what the U.S. would be undertaking was strategically a blockade of Cuba, it became apparent that calling it a blockade was problematic . The United States would be doing so strategically, the blockade became problematic .
 Instead of a blockade, the administration would refer to the action as a quarantine of Cuba . It was decided that instead of blockade, it would be called a quarantine . The administration would use the term quarantine to refer to Cuba .
 It was also decided that the blockade would not keep all ships and materials from reaching Cuba . The blockade would also not be able to stop the flow of food and medicine .
 The language of the various speeches and letters being prepared was only one facet of the preparations for Monday night's address . It is only one aspect of the language being prepared for the address .
 Press Secretary Pierre Salinger was finally told of the situation in Cuba and asked to make arrangements with the networks for the Monday night televised speech .
 The White House wanted to prevent speculation and the possibility of the Soviets ratcheting up the timeline of making the missiles operational, the White House said .
 Dean Acheson, former Secretary of State, had been participating in Ex-Comm meetings at Kennedy's request . Kennedy was asked to speak to French President de Gualle of France .
 It would take every minute between the blockade decision and the Monday night speech to notify all necessary parties . The blockade decision is expected to take until the end of the day .
 Preliminary arrangements with the Organization of American States and United Nations are also being plotted . Preliminary plans with the OAS and U.N. have also been made .
 Monday would be both diplomatically sensitive and logistically demanding . Monday is the first time the U.S. government has been involved in a major international crisis .
 Ex-Comm met most of Friday afternoon and again Friday night at the State Department . The group met at least once a day at the White House .
 Kennedy landed at O'Hare International in Chicago after a few campaign stops in the Midwest . Kennedy landed in Chicago on Friday night .
 Though Kennedy was keeping his campaign appearances, the Cuba issue was never far from his thoughts . Kennedy was running for the presidency in 1964 .
 On the trip with Kennedy in Chicago was White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger . Salinger was on the trip to Chicago .
 The press secretary had not been informed of the discovery of offensive weapons in Cuba .
 It was, as many later said, a way of keeping Salinger from having to inform the press . It was a way to keep him out of having to tell the press, many said .
 Salinger took many questions from the press on the campaign trip to Cuba . Salinger's lack of information on Cuba prevented him from answering them .
 Salinger finally approached Kennedy's special assistant Kenny O'Donnell and asked what was happening . Salinger eventually approached Kennedy to ask if he was still in the hospital .
 President Kennedy developed a respiratory infection and would be returning to the White House . Saturday morning, O'Donnell's warning came to fruition and the press was told that President Kennedy would be back .
 Salinger spoke with President Kennedy as they developed the language to give to the press about the cold . Salinger worked with Kennedy to come up with the language .
 Kennedy received a phone call from Bobby informing him that Ex-Comm was ready to meet with him to present their recommendations . What had really happened was Kennedy receiving a call from . Bobby Kennedy .
 On Kennedy's return to D.C., the nation's military was put on alert . The nation was on alert when Kennedy returned to Washington . Kennedy's trip was the first time the nation had been to the U.S. military has ever been to Washington, DC .
 Secretary McNamara was making arrangements for the naval blockade . Tactical air squadrons were prepared for the blockade . The blockade was planned for the first time since the war .
 Ex-Comm was convened upon Kennedy's return to the White House Saturday afternoon . Kennedy was in the midst of a crisis in the wake of his return to Washington .
 Kennedy, Vice President Johnson and United Nations Ambassador Stevenson all returned to Washington for this meeting . Kennedy, VP Johnson and U.N. Ambassador Stevenson attended the meeting in Washington .
 In the meeting, the positions for air strike and blockade were both laid before Kennedy . The positions were laid before him .
 McNamara, Sorensen and Bobby Kennedy remained supportive of a blockade . The blockade was a major source of support for the blockade .
 "I could not accept the idea that the U.S. would rain bombs on Cuba, killing thousands and thousands of civilians in a surprise attack," he says . Most importantly, like others, he says, he couldn't accept that the United States would kill thousands .
 One additional approach was mentioned in the Saturday meeting of Ex-Comm, a particularly courageous suggestion . The proposal was discussed in a meeting of ex-Comm .
 Ambassador Adlai Stevenson, who had promoted diplomacy from the get-go, had stated his objection to the air strike . Ambassador Stevenson had said his objection was to the strike .
 He suggested that the U.S. make a deal with the Soviet Union that would essentially end with the missiles in Cuba removed in exchange for the United States removing their missiles in Turkey and Italy . The deal would end up removing the missiles from Cuba and Italy in exchange .
 Stevenson also included in his recommendation that the United States surrender their base at Guantanamo to the Cubans . Stevenson also recommended that the U.S. surrender their Guantanamo base to Cuba .
 When the meeting had concluded, President Kennedy had made the decision to go forward with the blockade . President Kennedy decided to go ahead with the decision .
 Monday night would give the administration time to approach congressional leaders, allies and diplomats about the missiles and plan of action . Though he was inclined to seek television time to address the nation Sunday night .
 This would give Kennedy's speechwriters time to complete the draft Sorensen had already started for the televised address . The speechwriters would then have time to prepare the speech .
 President abruptly returned from the campaign and as Rusk cancelled a speech . A sense of excitement and anticipation began to flood Washington late Saturday night .
 That night at Jim Rowe's dance there was a great speculation as to what was up . That night there was great speculation about what happened .
 The next 48 hours would frame the administration's plan and how that plan would be presented to the American people and the world community . The White House is expected to unveil the plan in the next 48 .
 Salinger would not be brought into the loop until Sunday morning in a 9m. meeting with McGeorge Bundy in the Situation Room . Salinger will be brought in the loop in the morning meeting with Bundy .
 Salinger sat in meetings with Kennedy advisors from that point forward . Salinger then sat in on many meetings with many Kennedy advisors . He sat in many meetings in the Kennedy administration .
 Tara A Rowe is an independent historian, a native Idahoan, an avid reader, a lifelong fan of baseball, and a Democrat . She is also a lifelong supporter of baseball .