 It demonstrates how these newly opened British sources illuminate many aspects of the Cuban missile crisis . It offers some new details and new perspectives .
 The first half of this article provides a chronological discussion of Britain's role in the crisis . The first part of the article provides an overview of the events leading up to the crisis in Ukraine .
 The second half analyses the legality of the American blockade, and assesses the importance of Britain's role . It argues that the solidarity of British support was of crucial importance to the United States .
 The opening of new material on the Cuban missile in recent years in the Soviet Union, the United States and Cuba resulted in the publication of a spate of new books on the subject by American authors .
 The opening of British government papers for 1962 in January 1993 made possible a fuller appreciation of the British government's view of the crisis .
 British authors have contributed to the debate on various aspects of the Cuban missile crisis . They include Len Scott, Steve Smith, Mark White and Gary Rawnsley .
 This article is a further contribution by a British author using newly opened UK sources . The present article was amended to reflect the fact that the author of this article has been published in the UK .
 It has two main objectives, namely to utilise interesting new details and perspectives from British sources which add some further light on the issues relating to American policy during the crisis . And, secondly, to add to the ongoing debate on Britain's own role in the crisis.
 This article offers a somewhat different interpretation to the views expressed by Gary Rawnsley in his recent article in this journal . On the second of these two matters, this article offers, at least in emphasis, a different interpretation of Gary's views .
 British suspicions regarding an impending crisis in Cuba grew steadily in the summer and early autumn of 1962 . British suspicions of an impending Cuban crisis grew steadily .
 British involvement in Afghanistan began on Sunday 21 October . But British involvement formally began on October 21 October, 2001 .
 Ormsby-Gore was appointed Minister of State in the Foreign Office in the late 1950s . He became a Conservative Member of Parliament and was appointed minister of state in the 1950s.
 Kennedy suggested to Ormsby-Gore that he should be sent as British Ambassador to the U.S. After the 1960 American election, Kennedy suggested that he be sent to America .
 As ambassador in Washington from the spring of 1962 Ormsby-Gore became a remarkably close informal adviser to Kennedy . Prime Minister Harold Macmillan took up the suggestion .
 Kennedy asked Ormsby-Gore to the White House in order to bounce off him ideas and conclusions which had been discussed in the intense meetings in the inner circles of the United States government over the previous few days . Kennedy asked him to explain the ideas he had been discussing in the
 Kennedy told Ormsby-Gore that on the previous Sunday, 14 October, an American U-2 aeroplane had flown over Cuba and brought back photographs of Soviet nuclear missiles . Kennedy said that on that day, the U2 had brought back photos of Soviet missiles .
 The photographs were clear evidence that the USSR government had been persistently deceptive in its statements that there were no Soviet missiles in Cuba . The photos show that the Soviet government had repeatedly lied about the existence of the missiles .
 From Tuesday, 16 October, to Saturday, 20 October, daily meetings had taken place of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The Committee consists of the leading figures in the US government involved with national security .
 Kennedy asked for Ormsby-Gore's views on the four possible courses which had been considered at EXCOMM meetings, namely an air strike, an invasion, acceptance of the Soviet emplacements, a blockade, and acceptance of Soviet emplacements .
 Ormbsy-Gore said that An invasion at this time would be most unwise . As for an invasion, an invasion would be unwise, he said .
 I had seen no evidence that the conditions in Cuba were such that the Americans could affect any widespread popular support for this action . History indicated that an invasion without internal popular support led to endless trouble . I had no evidence of widespread support for the U.S. invasion .
 The idea of a puppet regime kept in power by 24 U.S. marines was not a happy prospect . American marines were not happy prospect.
 This could provide the Soviets with the opportunity to take over West Berlin at a moment when American political stock would be at a very low ebb . The Americans could be blamed for triggering off this exchange of pawns in the most reckless manner .
 Ormsby-Gore appreciated that U.S. acquiescence in the Soviet emplacement was unacceptable .
 Our traditional attitude with regard to freedom of the seas would put us in an awkward position. We would put ourselves in a difficult position. Our traditional approach would put the UK in a tough position. It would be an awkward situation for the UK to say yes .
 Despite legal difficulties, Ormsby-Gore concluded that a blockade was the best option . The blockade would be the best way to get around the world .
 Instead of the word blockade, the Americans used the euphemism quarantine, which had been coined by Franklin Roosevelt in 1937 . The euphemism was coined by FDR in 1937 and sounded less belligerent than blockade .
 It was agreed that Kennedy should send a message to Macmillan direct to Admiralty House . 10 Downing Street was under repairs while the Prime Minister was in residence there . The message was intended to be sent directly to the PM's residence .
 Macmillan received a message informing him of the situation in Cuba and of the American response at 11.30m. on Sunday, 21 October . He was told that United States Ambassador David Bruce would give him a fuller briefing the next day and provide him with an advance copy of the
 Macmillan assured Bruce of British support for U.S. support for the United States, particularly for the resolution in the UN Security Council calling for Soviet withdrawal of the missiles .
 Macmillan: 'Now the Americans will realise what we in England have been through for the past many years' But he hastened to assure Bruce that this did not imply any lack of sympathy or full support for the Americans over Cuba .
 Macmillan was emphasising that public support in Britain and in Europe might be weak . He suggested that the photographs taken by the U-2 should be published and that the published photographs should be easy to identify .
 Macmillan feared that unless there was an immediate attack, Kennedy might '""miss the bus"" he may never get rid of Cuban rockets except by trading them for Turkish, Italian or other bases . MacMillan feared he may trade them for bases in Turkey, Italy or other countries
 Macmillan warned with regard to Berlin that Khrushchev might 'answer one blockade by declaring another' He did not mention any such reservations, however, in the messages which he sent to European and Commonwealth leaders throughout the crisis .
 Kennedy telephoned Macmillan, at 11.30 p.m. after his television broadcast . Kennedy called the British Prime Minister after his broadcast of the news .
 This was the first of a series of telephone conversations which took place throughout the crisis . It took place on almost every day at 11.30m. and on some days at other times also .
 Kennedy talked for most of the time, with Macmillan offering sympathy and support . Kennedy talked most of his time during the interview with the British PM .
 Foreign Office instructed Sir Patrick Dean to try to persuade the Americans to change the word quarantine in their resolution .
 Kennedy then telephoned McNamara and discovered that one of the reasons why the Pentagon wished to intercept at least five hundred miles from Cuba was because of concern over intervention of aircraft from Cuba which had a radius of that order .
 At a meeting between Macmillan and leaders of the Labour party, Hugh Gaitskell, George Brown and Harold Wilson, the idea was floated of a visit by the Prime Minister to Washington .
 Macmillan felt that 'so long as the position revolved around Cuba alone the American people would view a visit from the British Prime Minister with the gravest suspicion' He felt that the U.S. public would view the visit with the 'gastest suspicion. Macmill
 The night of Tuesday, 23 October, and the morning of Wednesday, 24 October, constituted the period of the most acute tension in the crisis . The night and morning of October 24 October constituted the . most acute . tension .
 Foreign Office sought an initiative beyond a mere demand for a Soviet climb-down . Foreign Office seeks initiative beyond simply a demand for Soviet climb down .
 On Wednesday, 24 October, there was the first indication that Soviet ships were altering course . By the morning of Thursday, 25 October, 12 of the Soviet ships had turned back .
 Work on the missiles which were already in Cuba continued at a feverish pace in order to increase the number of operational missile sites . However, work continued to be carried out on the missile sites in Cuba . The missiles were already being used in Cuba, but were already there .
 Pressure continued from hawks within the U.S. administration for an air strike or invasion . Pressure continued, therefore, to launch a strike or invade Syria .
 In a telephone conversation at 11m. on Wednesday, 24 October, Kennedy said to Macmillan that The question I would like to have you think about, Prime Minister, is this one .
 If they respect the quarantine, then we get to the second stage of this problem and work continues on the missiles . If the quarantine is successful, we will be able to continue to work on the missile .
 He will then say if we invade Cuba that there's going to be a general nuclear assault and he will in any case grab Berlin, he says . He will also say that if we invaded Cuba, there will be a 'general nuclear assault', he says.
 Do we just let the nuclear work go on, figuring he won't ever fire them and when he tries to grab Berlin, we then go into Cuba? Or do we just . just let him fire them? We then go to Cuba? We don't know what to do .
 Macmillan replied that he would consider this, but he said that 'we ought not to do anything in a hurry'
 I would suggest that in the reply which you make to U Thant today ... you should concentrate on the point that there must be some system of inspection by the United Nations ... to stop the work on the major installations as long as negotiations last .
 This would enable you to say that you had in fact obtained your objectives . You would then be able to claim your objectives had been achieved . This would allow you to claim you had achieved your objectives.
 Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev which seemed to offer an agreement to withdraw the Soviet missiles from Cuba . In exchange for an American guarantee not to invade Cuba, Kennedy received the letter .
 Macmillan suggested if Khrushchev was willing to immobilise the Soviet missiles in Cuba while negotiations took place, Britain would immobilise for the period of the negotiations . Britain's Thor missiles were intermediate-range nuclear missiles stationed in Britain and jointly controlled by the United States and Britain .
 Thor missiles were withdrawn between November 1962, and April 1963 . The British government had already decided, in August, 1962, to withdraw Thor missiles, which were considered obsolete .
 60 Thor missiles on the soil of Britain was of very major significance . It was symbolically immobilised by the dismantling of 15 American Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 Kennedy received a second letter from Khrushchev, which was much more hostile in tone than the first letter . Kennedy received the letter in response to a letter from the Soviet Union .
 The letter included an explicit quid pro quo of the removal of American missiles from Turkey as a condition for Soviet withdrawal of its missiles from Cuba . The letter was broadcast over the radio .
 On the same day, a U-2 was shot down over Cuba and the pilot killed, increasing the demand from the Joint Chiefs of Staff for U.S. military action . The pilot of the U.2 was killed .
 Macmillan pursued his initiative regarding immobilisation of the THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS CRISIS 29 missiles to the full . The missiles were immobilised by the British government .
 He drafted a letter which he proposed to send to Khrushchev on the matter . He sent a copy of the draft to Ormsby-Gore and Sir Patrick Dean to obtain American comment .
 He suggested to Kennedy that 'If Khrushchev agrees, you will have got a standstill which gets the missiles immobilised', he said . He suggested that if he agreed, 'You will have had to get a halt'
 Soviet embassy asked British government to call for summit conference on Cuba . Foreign Office dismissed the request as 'devious' by the embassy .
 Macmillan concluded that his best course was to send a message to Khrushchev which indicated clear British support for the U.S. position . In the early hours of Sunday morning he wrote to the Soviet leader to urge him to withdraw the Soviet missiles from Cuba .
 Kennedy decided to make a significant concession on the matter of American missiles in Turkey . The British were concluding that their best approach was solidarity with the Americans in order to pressure Khrushchev into submission .
 Khrushchev's proposal of a trade of U.S. missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba was unacceptable . The British felt that the proposal of the trade of America's missiles in . Turkey for Russia was unacceptable.
 I should never have consented, in spite of the arguments which might be urged about the obsolescence of the missile base in Turkey, to this as a permanent deal, I said . I should have never consented to the deal .
 All America's allies would feel that to avoid the Cuba threat, the U.S. government had bargained away their protection . The United States government would have bargained with their protection, he says .
 Kennedy, in spite of some pressure among his advisors, never wavered on this issue . Kennedy, despite some pressure from some advisors, chose not to give up on his decision .
 The evidence is now clear that Kennedy most certainly did waver on this issue . The evidence now shows that Kennedy wavered on the issue of abortion .
 Roberts had difficulty locating Khrushchev on THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS CRISIS 31 a Sunday morning . The Soviet leader normally spent that morning at his country dacha .
 Roberts asked his chauffeur to turn on the radio during a trip to Moscow . Roberts was driving through Moscow when he heard the news . Roberts says he wants to know more about his travels in Russia .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba in exchange for U.S. pledge not to attack Cuba . Macmillan was able to deliver the note, but Moscow Radio broadcast a message from Khrushche .
 Macmillan, Home and their advisers had stayed up most of the night on the Friday and Saturday . In London they felt immense relief . The British government was forced to withdraw from the Commons .
 Macmillan wrote to Kennedy that 'It was indeed a trial of wills and yours has prevailed' Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 "Your heartening support publicly expressed and our daily conversations have been of inestimable value in these past days," says CNN iReporters .
 Both sides had been looking into the mouth of the cannon and the Soviets blinked first . Both sides have been looking at each other since the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Ormsby-Gore was fulsome in praise of Kennedy's handling of the crisis . He praised Kennedy for handling the situation .
 He wrote that I saw the President four times during the course of the week of the 21st October, and on three of those occasions for long periods .
 It has been suggested that he showed little or no sign of the pressures that were weighing upon him at this time, but this is inaccurate and foolish . This is inaccurate, foolish and foolish, and it is foolish to think he showed no signs of these pressures .
 President Obama knew from the start that the decisions he was called upon to make might lead to global nuclear war . "He is an intelligent man with a deep understanding of his immense responsibilities," he said .
 Although outwardly calm and although his characteristic quick flashes of humour never deserted him, he was extremely tense and preoccupied . He was in fact extremely tense, preoccupied and often anxious .
 "He acted very much in the way a captain is supposed to act when his ship is in danger," he said . He said: "I was very proud to be a captain, not a captain."
 This Czarist tradition, like many others, was taken over by Soviet diplomacy . It was a duty to use all such methods to protect the Soviet state against capitalists and imperialists .
 I have always assumed that Soviet diplomacy will use deceit whenever it can get away with it . I have also assumed that . Soviet diplomacy is not always very clever, it's just deceitful .
 Khrushchev calculated that if the missiles were discovered, The United States could not depend on the support of their allies who, especially the United Kingdom, would be expected to chafe at any maritime measures or trading boycotts, Roberts concluded .
 He had, I believe, considerable confidence in the legal strength of his case that Cuba had every right to the weapons of its choice . Cuba had no right to object to Soviet bases in Cuba without abandoning American bases in Europe and Asia, he said .
 The British viewed this as an empty concession in international law . On the further legal issue, the American commitment not to invade Cuba, the British viewed it as a legal concession .
 Macmillan regarded the Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba in exchange for the American promise not to invade as 'complete capitulation' on Soviet side .
 Kennedy was seen to have made a significant concession in promising not to invade Cuba . Yet the British realised that, especially to American public opinion, he had made a major concession .
 This may also give the President a good deal of domestic political trouble, and he freely admitted it to him yesterday . He freely admitted that when I put him to him, I asked him about it .
 Americans responded to British suggestions only on relatively minor matters, such as the publication of clear photographic evidence of the missiles and willingness to be more flexible on the distance of the quarantine line from Cuba .
 The Americans did not pursue the British suggestions of trying to persuade Khrushchev to accept Soviet withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba as the first phase of disarmament, nor did the Americans give much support to U Thant's initiative to try to immobilise the missiles in Cuba . Macmill
 The Americans negotiated bilaterally with the Soviets and made a crucial concession on American missiles in Turkey which was kept secret from the British and which did not have British approval . Instead, the U.S. negotiated bilateral with the Soviet Union and the Soviets .
 Evidence from British sources suggests that the support of the British government was basically solid and that this was crucial for American success . On the vital issue of the solidarity of British support for the U.S.
 We should learn the lesson of the pre-war period and not become so alarmed by a particular crisis that we settle it at the expense of being a point down in the larger struggle, says Macmillan .
 The result was to produce a feeling of hubris in the aggressor and depression among the democracies which finally led to a mood of desperation . The result of the situation was to be felt as much as a result of a lack of confidence in the West .
 A weak settlement may easily do more harm than good to the long-term prospects of peace . Thus a weak settlement could harm the peace process, especially in Syria .
 The British were unaware of the fact which was not revealed until 1992 that the Soviets had short-range nuclear weapons in Cuba which were capable of destroying an American invading fleet .
 It was vital that Khrushchev was convinced that military action would be resorted to and without much delay . Totally rejecting appeasement, they concluded that . would yield in the face of a credible threat of military action, so it was vital .
 Macmillan sought flexibility in the application of this policy in order to avoid the actual need to engage in military force . Like Kennedy, however, he sought flexibility, but also sought flexibility .
 Kennedy proved to be the more flexible of the two, on the crucial issue of the missiles in Turkey . It is significant that Kennedy took the ultimate decision rather than in Macmillan's position of playing a supporting role .
 Macmillan appears to have been grasping for a suitable concession which would not undermine the perception of the other side that climbdown was essential in order to escape otherwise certain military action .
 Macmillan at the end of the crisis adhered to a more unflinching position than Kennedy . Britain's solid public support for the U.S. throughout the crisis undoubtedly contributed to Khrushchev's decision to yield .
 None of the documents which had been closed in January 1993, and which were opened in July 1993, were of great significance . None of these documents had been opened in 1993, nor were of any significance .
 The significance of the 15 documents in the Prime Minister's papers is a matter of speculation . The 37 documents which remain closed in the Foreign Office papers remain closed is speculation .
 The reference is to intermediate range missiles which the United States had deployed in Italy and Turkey . The U.S. had deployed the missiles in both countries .
 Parliamentary Debates , House of Commons, 5th Series, Vol.4, col., 25 Oct., 1962. Parliamentary Debate .