 It came about after the United States discovered that the Soviet Union was building missile bases in Cuba, which is very close to America . The U.S. discovered the bases were being built by the Soviets .
 President Kennedy forced to react to stop the threat of missile attack . President Kennedy was forced to . react to . stop the . threat of . missile attack. President Kennedy .
 Kennedy had to tread carefully because any overzealous assaults could have led to a Soviet attack from the fully functional Cuban bases . During the Cold War, relationships between the Soviet Union and the United States were strained .
 It was for this reason that on October 22 1962 America and most of the world held its breath . The U.S. and the world were holding its breath for the first time in 1962 .
 If he invaded, the Soviet Union would fire their missiles; starting World War III and probably causing human extinction . If he invades, he would probably start World War II and probably end up starting the war .
 One option for Kennedy was a missile attack on the bases themselves . Neither wanted to start the war but it was very hard for one to back down without a promise .
 This possibility was later dismissed because missiles could be launched from Cuba before the American ones hit, thereby starting World War III and destroying both nations . The possibility of a U.S. missile launch from Cuba from Cuba was dismissed because of the possibility .
 Soviet strategic arsenal would provide a real deterrent to a potential U.S. attack against the Soviet Union or Cuba . The U.N. would be able to use the U.K. nuclear weapons to deter Soviet attacks .
 The fate of millions literally hinged upon the ability of two men, President John F Kennedy ... 6 pages 93 May/2003 3.8.8 .
 Kennedy ordered a quarantine put on Cuba and a naval blockade to be implemented . He announced the discovery of the missiles to the public . Kennedy ordered the quarantine put in Cuba .
 The United States was already involved in an arms war with Russia at the time . This caused the Americans to become very scared as the U.S. was already in a war with the Russian state .
 The U.S. had a chance to enter Cuba with the blockade still withstanding and eliminate Castro once and for all . The United States had an opportunity to enter the Cuba .
 U.S. House of Un-American Activities Committee came to Hollywood to expose communist influence .