 As will be demonstrated, their reaction was one of strong support for the government’s decisions, in spite of the high risks involved and the harsh ongoing domestic struggle for civil rights . The reaction will be shown to be one of the strong support of the government .
 Evidence of support will include examples of personal reactions by prominent black leaders and intellectuals . Evidence of this support will be shown in the book .
 An episode of segregation which occurred during the crisis will be used to show how in those days of emergency their struggle for equality persisted . Also, an episode of segregating episodes will also be used .
 Interconnections between domestic civil rights and foreign policy issues will be highlighted . The interconnections will be shown between the two sides of the world .
 In 2012 he received a research grant from the John F Kennedy Institute for North American Studies of the Freie Universitảt, Berlin .
 The reaction to the crisis of U.S. African American communities is one example . The reaction of the crisis in the United States has been one of the worst .
 Even the book by Alice George, the only one focused on public reactions to the crisis, overlooked this point . Alice George's book, "Alice George," overlooks this point.
 Over the last twenty years, a comprehensive literature has developed on the mutual influence and dynamic between domestic issues related to civil rights and U.S. foreign policy . This is a study of the relationship between civil rights issues and foreign policy issues .
 Recent studies have analysed the negative effects of racial issues on the international image of the US . They include the keen interest of several leading race reformers in global affairs . and the political attitudes and military contributions offered by African Americans during major events of the Cold War, such as the Vietnam War
 This article seeks to provide an initial assessment of this aspect, by considering the reactions of the general public, the press, and prominent African Americans . It also seeks to assess the reaction of the public and the press .
 It will be argued that their response was one of strong and solid support for President John F Kennedy’s policy . There were a few voices of dissent, but there was a few voice of dissent .
 On the growing involvement of African Americans in international affairs and the ways this intertwined with their domestic struggle for freedom, see Brenda Gayle Plummer, In Search of Power . On the issue of African American involvement in the world, see the book In Search Of Power .
 On a consequent aspect of this growing influence of race on U.S. foreign policy, i.e. i.E. is a growing influence on race on foreign policy . i.T.A. Howard says it's a sign that race is becoming more influential in foreign
 JFK’s new, stronger approach to Africa, see Philip Muehlenbeck, Betting on the Africans . JFK's new approach to the continent is a stronger approach, he says .
 JFK’s political use of Africa in the 1960 campaign was to appeal to black voters without committing too much on civil rights issues that risked alienating him pivotal Southern whites votes . The latter stresses JFK's political use . of Africa .
 Cold War 51 support on foreign policy matters, however, did not halt the domestic battle for civil rights . Racial discrimination continued unabated in the Cold War era .
 Domestic and international aspects intertwined, confirming the existence of interconnections as highlighted by recent historiography . On the contrary, domestic and international parts intertwined .
 Reactions are consistent with stands taken by African Americans in past moments of international crises . Reactions were also consistent with stand taken by black Americans in previous moments of crisis .
 The response that ensued was coherent with the ongoing domestic struggle, historical precedents, and the general American public reaction to the Cuban situation . Thus, the response was coherent .
 At 10 percent of the U.S. population, they represented a numerically relevant sector of society . At 10.1 percent, they were represented by 10.2 percent of Americans .
 The civil rights movement was campaigning vigorously to grant equality to black Americans . It was gaining momentum .
 Strong opposition to change and persistent daily discriminations continued, creating a situation of lacerating conflict . While achievements were progressively being reached, .6 strong opposition . continued to be opposed to change .
 In late September 1962, on the eve of the Cuban missile crisis, one key event in the civil rights movement took place in Oxford, Mississippi .
 The State’s main university refused to enrol African American student James Meredith, despite the fact that he met all admission requirements . Meredith was the first African American to attend the University of Mississippi .
 Mississippi Governor, Ross Barnett, was determined to maintain ‘Ole Miss’ as a whites-only athenaeum .
 The President and his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, responded by sending in more than 10,000 troops to ensure Meredith’s admission . Meredith was admitted to the U.S. by President Kennedy .
 After a night of chaos, Meredith was physically escorted onto the campus amongst the violent demonstrations of segregationist students and local citizens . Meredith was escorted into the campus during the violent demonstration .
 It is to this episode that Robert Kennedy ironically referred in his comment when he was first briefed on the discovery of nuclear missiles in Cuba . Kennedy ironically refers to the episode .
 The timing and quality of the support it offered to the civil rights cause was more controversial . However, the timing and the quality of that support was more controversially controversial .
 President Kennedy’s support was relatively belated, provided only when circumstances made it impossible for it to be postponed further, after going through more lukewarm phases . According to most historians, President Kennedy's support for the Vietnam War was only belated . The Vietnam War went through
 The understanding that the government was not doing enough on the issue was common among African American observers and leaders of the movement . Clearly, the understanding that . the government . was not . doing enough .
 The impression at the time was that Washington was not proceeding with enough readiness and conviction, while oppression continued . " oppression continued and became more intolerable with each day," the author says .
 In those days many Americans considered the beginning of a nuclear war possible at any moment . However, in those days, many Americans thought the start of nuclear war could be possible .
 Panic buying started, with many stockpiling food and water in the basements of their homes, in case of a Soviet nuclear attack . Many people stockpiled food, water and food in their basements in the case of an attack .
 A survey reported that one American out of three had discussed with their family what to do in case of war . Only one in twenty had considered leaving their homes, according to the survey .
 Ex-Comm tapes appear to contain no evidence of African American issues being discussed in those days of crisis . Priority was obviously being given to decision making, rather than to analyse segments of popular reactions .
 Activists started sending 'thousands of pens to the White House' to remind Kennedy of his promise . After the first year of his administration passed with no such order signed .
 Fear that the end of the world was nigh was widely felt during that week . In short, the intense fear was felt widely .
 Kennedy announced the decision on October 22, 1962, was met with broad support in U.S. public opinion . In spite of this, Kennedy's decision, the decision was met by broad support among Americans .
 A special Gallup survey carried out nationally just hours after the President’s televised speech showed that, among those who listened to it, 84% approved of his decision, 12% refused to express an opinion, and only 4% disapproved of it .
 "This cohesion was even more impressive in light of the risks these kinds of decisions involved," says CNN.com senior correspondent .
 20% of Americans believed that the quarantine would lead to a World War III . Yet, among the thousands of messages that U.S. citizens sent to the White House, the ratio was 1 against to 22 in favour .
 Given the situation of strong racial contrast, this could not be taken for granted, he says . The situation of race is not a matter of concern, he adds .
 Black people also found themselves facing the fact that their lives were being put at serious risk by an entirely white leadership . Besides, black people also faced the . fact that . their lives . were put at risk by the . white leadership, says CNN's Roland Martin .
 In such an extreme scenario African Americans could have vented their frustration towards the government . Given this deficit of representation, African Americans should have been more represented .
 We'll take care of the front, Joe, but from the back, he’ll never know what hit him. We’ve taken care of him, Joe. He’s got a lot of respect for his family, Joe says .
 At the core of his remarks on the crisis, as his papers show, there was a view that the recent U.S. actions against Cuba were simply another act of racism from a racist country, worthy of the Ku Klux Klan .
 Evidence shows that the African American communities expressed as much, if not more, support for the President's policy towards Cuba as the rest of American society . The President's Cuba policy has been criticized by some in the past .
 Relevant accounts of this emerge from the black press, which had also played an important role in shaping awareness of the civil rights issue . The black press had also helped shape awareness of this issue .
 The new manager of Hotel Teresa, we learn from the article, had a different attitude . Hotel Teresa's new manager had different attitude.
 In this manner, King seemed to adopt a cautious approach, supportive, while unwilling to take a clear position on the risky path Kennedy had taken . King seems to be unwilling to give a clear statement on Kennedy's risky path .
 This appears more telling in light of his clear condemnation of Kennedy’s actions in 1961 with regard to the attempted Bay of Pigs invasion . This appears even more telling .
 The public declarations on the missile crisis that King released, while it was still in course, were in fact brief and without hints of dissent . King released a brief and brief statement of support for the U.S. during the crisis .
 The absence of criticism was not caused by any attempt at courting the administrations, as confirmed by his previous condemnation of the Bay of Pigs invasion and his later protest of Vietnam War .
 He was convinced that the government did not deserve to be openly criticised in this case . Apparently, he was simply convinced that . He was also convinced that he did not .
 This comment was also quoted later by Robert Williams in his newsletter, with the word 'military' put in capital letters, in criticism of King’s supposed non-violent attitude .
 These are relevant and lucid words, all the more so in light of the fact that they went against the prevailing trend of triumphant lessons being drawn from the outcome of the crisis . Clearly, these are relevant, lucid words .
 According to some views, the Soviets ended up backing down unconditionally as soon as the U.S. raised their voice, making clear they meant business . According to those views, those views of the Soviets had ended up backed down .
 An international treaty on nuclear tests was effectively signed a few months later, and détente was the path the two superpowers chose in 1963 . Moreover, he appeared to have been a good prophet .
 Martin Luther King’s college teacher, Benjamin Mays, a Baptist minister in Atlanta, intervened with an editorial entitled ‘I support the President’30 Lester Granger, another leading figure in the civil rights movement, had more doubts, but patriotism and prayer were felt to somewhat
 Philip Randolph was one of the most influential activists of the civil rights movement . Randolph was a leading civil rights activist in the 1960s and '60s .
 His papers show that on October 23 he sent a telegram to Kennedy, ‘in the name of the officers and members of the Negro American Labor Council’ over which he presided, to express appreciation . The telegram was sent to Kennedy to express his appreciation .
 Such explicit parallel between domestic and foreign crises strongly expressed the feeling among African Americans . African Americans are concerned about the situation in the U.S.
 Whether this was ‘shrewd or foolhardy remains to be seen; meanwhile the country gangs up behind him whether we want to or not . Meanwhile the country is up in support of him whether it is wanted or not, whether it wants to .
 Further evidence of public support emerged from the black press, in articles such as ‘President Had To Do It’ or local surveys carried out by The Pittsburgh Courier or the Chicago Defender .
 Such support was clearly emerging in different parts of the country, also extended to student circles, usually more inclined to protest .
 While the question may seem surreal today, in 1962 it was a real consideration . In 1962, the question was still being considered as a serious consideration .
 Civil Defense activities in New Orleans (a public bureau which had recently contained a 'Negro Division) announced there would be no racial discrimination in public nuclear shelters .
 Some African Americans tried to escape to safer places . Just as other Americans, some African Americans, did . Just like other Americans .
 The renowned African American lawyer moved her whole family from Albany, Georgia, to a nearby countryside farm . She feared that the United States bases near that city might become a target .
 Fear transcended the racial divisions of American society, so too did the sense of pride in a nation that had survived the crisis . In the same way that fear transcended racial divisions, so did the pride in the nation that survived .
 It proudly depicts the role played by the African American pilot Thomas Hennagan in providing photographs of the missile sites in construction with his ‘unarmed sorties in enemy territory’ carried out .
 The Chicago Defender advised its readers to indulge in 'neither bluster nor braggadocio' in the aftermath of the crisis .
 This article went along the same line of thought as the above-mentioned article by King. King.
 Hennagan would later be awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross, the nation’s second highest decoration for combat, as another black magazine, ‘Negro Digest’, would later proudly note .
 He was famous in the Twenties as part of the ‘Harlem renaissance’ cultural movement . He was writing a regular column set around a fictional character he had invented named Simple .
 Simple was an ordinary guy from Harlem from Harlem with whom the narrator discussed the various issues of the day, usually about racial matters . Simple was a regular Harlem resident with whom he discussed various issues with .
 No more segregation at Ole Miss then – Oxford would be gone – stone wiped out . Oxford would have been wiped out, but no more segregation would be possible .
 Langston Hughes was at the time an established voice of African Americans in literature . One of their greatest icons in sports was Jackie Robinson, who broke the color barrier .
 In 1959, he had also begun a syndicated column on sport and social issues, as he became increasingly interested in politics . In 1959 he had started a column on social issues as well as sport .
 In the 1960 presidential campaign, he endorsed Nixon instead of Kennedy . In 1960, he had endorsed Nixon .
 There were also voices of dissent among African Americans in the U.S. African Americans .
 George S Schuyler was known for his strongly conservative views . He was a journalist and satirical writer, known as a satirist and satirist .
 He was able to bring together twenty different organisations (such as the anti-nuclear group SANE) and assemble more than ten thousand people in front of the UN headquarters .
 Rustin organised 'America's largest open air demonstration for peace up to that time' Rustin’s initiative is not surprising, considering his long involvement in pacifist movements . His leading role in organising this important demonstration, when seen together with his later role in the March on Washington
 Political awareness and commitment of black activists often concerned both spheres, often with no contradictions between their approach to the civil rights problems and their other personal political stands .
 Harlem Anti-Colonial Committee claims Cuba is suffering a neo-colonial aggression on behalf of ‘US business interests’ in Cuba . Harlem group says US business interests want to regain profits and ‘to restore Jim Crow practices’
 The Harlemite protesters were denied an audience with U.S. officials at the United Nations . They used a little political blackmail that proved effective .
 Initially, delegates were told that delegates were ‘too busy’ to meet with them . Initially, they had been told they were 'too busy' to meet up with them at the time .
 A History of the World Nuclear Disarmament Movement, 1954 – 1970 , 259. A history of the world nuclear disarmament movement, 1954-1970, is published in the book World War II .
 This is clear proof of the fact that avoiding international embarrassment on race matters carried top priority within U.S. mission to U.N. mission .
 James Baldwin, one of the most acclaimed African American intellectuals of the last century, was a voice of dissent during the crisis . Baldwin's work was published in The Washington Post, Washington, DC.
 His views on the civil rights struggle contained elements of both Martin Luther King and Malcolm X, although he never explicitly renounced non-violence . His views were similar to those of both King and X, but not explicitly renouncing nonviolence .
 This was different from the statements of most of the other prominent black figures who had spoken on the crisis . Clearly, this was different than the statements made by other prominent figures who have spoken .
 Baldwin’s dissent originated from an internationalist, socio-cultural perspective . Reasons underlying opinions may differ even among dissenters, as one can see comparing for instance Schuyler's conjectures of electoral tricks in domestic politics with Baldwin's dissent .
 The same internationalist perspective was also at the core of Angela Davis’s dissent . Angela Davis was a member of the Democratic Party in the 1960s .
 ‘Baldwin Connects Race Relations in United States to International Affairs’, Crimson, October 26 1962 . ‘I’m going to have an ‘extreme reaction’ to the question,’ Baldwin wrote .
 King stressed the need for a ‘moral offensive’, whereas Malcolm X assumed a more militant posture . King stressed that the 'moral offensive' was needed .
 Another relevant example of radical dissent is to be found at Merritt College, West Oakland, California . The college is located in West Oakland .
 Bobby Seale, 26, walked over and asked a question from the hundreds of listeners . Seale is a 26-year-old man who has been in the news for more than a decade .
 Newton replied to him that ‘he was wrong to support the government and the civil rights organizations’, using arguments he had heard by Malcolm X and the AfroAmerican Association . Newton replied that he was right to support government and civil rights groups .
 Malcolm X, Malcolm X Speaks; Selected Speeches and Statements, 183 . Malcolm X: Malcolm X was able to convince 57 Malcolm X to give up .
 A slightly different account of this episode can be found in Bobby Seale's "A Lonely Rage" Bobby's account of the episode is found in his book A Lonely Rage .
 The radical side appeared relatively mute on the situation . Apart from these cases, however, the radical side appears relatively mute .
 The performer and civil right activist was in London at the time, struggling with health problems . The 94-year-old intellectual and founder of NAACP was living in Ghana by then, and in that month of October had been visiting Communist China with his wife .
 The group's silence may well explain their silence . It may also explain their distance from the United States and the Kennedy administration .
 More generally speaking, three other factors may help explain the relative silence of radical voices on the crisis .
 Raising criticisms against the government in such an atmosphere of national emergency and patriotic upsurge presented high risks of being labelled as an anti-American, if not a traitor . Raising criticism in such a national emergency presented high risk of being labeled anti-America .
 Such a label would then remain, and damage one’s position in subsequent stands on domestic issues, he said . Such a statement would then damage one's position in future stands on such issues, such as the issue of the state of the U.S.
 A naval blockade was a firm reaction, but also hinted at possible negotiations and peaceful resolution . Secondly, a naval blockade hints at a peaceful resolution, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A sudden air-strike or invasion would surely have prompted radical voices to speak out . This too may have encouraged waiting a few days before expressing protests, it says .
 Rosenberg, How Far the Promised Land, is at the core of Rosenberg's book . Rosenberg: "The crisis itself ended so quickly that its 63-year-old crisis ended quickly" Rosenberg: 'How far the Promise Land'
 Du Bois and the Afro-American Response to the Cold War, 1944 – 1963, was published in 1963 . He has written a book about the American response to the cold war in the world .
 Many thanks to Anne L Moore, special collections librarian, for her kind help . Many thanks for helping the author of this article .
 This, however, is not surprising, considering that the radical movements would only come to prominence later in the sixties . The radical movements only came to prominence in the 1960s .
 Support for the President on the crisis did not imply that the civil rights movement simply abandoned their campaign . Yet, widespread support for the president did not mean that the movement had abandoned its campaign .
 Mayors of some major cities met with a resounding no for putting equality issues aside for the time being . The request by mayors of major cities for campaigners to put these issues of equality aside was met with no .
 After all, the crisis had not stopped the episodes of segregation either . After all the segregation in the U.S. has not stopped segregation .
 On October 26, a New Orleans newspaper published a story flatly declaring that Jack O’Dell was a ‘Communist who has infiltrated to the top administrative post in the Rev. Jack O'Dell’s office .
 O’Dell identified as a ‘concealed member’ of the party’s national committee . He had been ‘carrying out his Communist party assignments’ in civil-rights work, it said .
 The article stated that a crypto-communist had infiltrated the top72 of the civil rights organisation led by King, and had thus, over a number of years, influenced King’s work . In other words, the article said that a . crypto-Communist had . infiltrated
 Such allegations were clearly dangerous, as they risked 69 Jet, November 8 1962, 15 .
 Chicago mayor had recalled that in the days of Theodore Roosevelt, white and black troops had fought together for the independence of Cuba . White and black forces fought together in Cuba . Chicago mayor recalls that in days of Roosevelt, black troops fought together .
 Similar instances were also filtered from officials in the White House, concerned that episodes might cause international embarrassment to the United States .
 A search through the papers of the NAACP did not reveal evidence of these matters having been discussed . The NAACP is a non-profit organization .
 In the America of those days, any hint of proximity to communism amounted to a burden capable of destroying anyone’s public credibility . In the U.S. of the days, anyone hinting out of touch with communism would be a burden .
 King knew this all too well; and, after talking privately with O’Dell on November 1, decided to prepare a statement of defence . King knew that he had a chance to defend himself .
 FBI agents planted unsigned New Orleans article, along with virtually identical ones in four other newspapers . Relying ‘on the discreet collaboration of trusted press contacts’, Taylor Branch says, FBI agents had planted the article .
 Hoover shrewdly seized his chance to give both orders during the week when the whole country was huddling in fear of extinction by Soviet missiles . Hoover seized the chance to order both orders . Hoover took advantage of the time when the country was at risk of extinction .
 The missile crisis inspired and justified emergency measures such as the newspaper attacks on King for employing O’Dell . King was attacked by the newspaper for using O'Dell in the crisis .
 The case occurred in Tampa – in those days a stage of massive military preparations for a possible invasion of Cuba . The case was reported by the Chicago Defender .
 Commander Barney L Johnson of MacDill Field denied any discrimination in the assignment of personnel . However, interviews with Negro servicemen refuted this statement . Commander Johnson said there was no discrimination .
 The discovery of ‘mimeographed copies of hotel and motel accommodations divided into ‘white’ and ‘colored’ categories’ within the premises of that military base had provided further evidence for the intention of military authorities to keep troops segregated .
 The St. Louis Globe-Democrat, New Orleans TimesPicayune and Long Island Star-Journal are among the top Louisiana newspapers .
 For confirmation that the FBI was behind this, see also Schlesinger, Jr., Robert Kennedy and His Times, 355; and Thomas, Robert Kennedy, 251 .
 On the FBI use of the King – O’Dell connection, also see Gerald Horne, Black Revolutionary . On the King-Dell affair, see Gerald . Horne's Black Revolutionary.
 William Patterson and the Globalization of the African American Freedom Struggle , 184. William Patterson . William Patterson is the author of the book, "The African American Struggle"
 A year later, Hoover would also manage to obtain from Robert Kennedy the notorious wiretap authorisation, installing bugs inside King’s apartment . Hoover also managed to get from Kennedy to install bugs inside his apartment .
 "The harder we fight and win, the more we prove to the nations of Africa and Asia that Democracy works," says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "We need to prove that democracy works"
 He proposed 77 ‘Halt Segregation of Troops Called for Cuba’, Chicago Defender, November 3, 1962, 1.1 .
 The report did not mention that the NACCP intervention had succeeded in bringing that case of segregation to a halt . What the report didn't mention, however, was that the case had been brought to an end .
 War has always been used as a pretext to postpone action on the issue of African Americans rights, he said . With a clear reference to Cuba, he observed that wars had been used in fact always been .
 "In the days ahead, we are going to need all the friends and allies we can get," says President Obama . "We will need allies and allies to get," he says .
 If we can’t see that it is moral and decent to treat the Negro as a human being, we had better get ready to realize that we shall have to do so as a matter of selfpreservation .
 ‘Democracy is being challenged today from within America too’, Bates said . The United States will ‘have to do something about the 80 ‘Quarantine on Segregated States Urged’
 The two battles – domestic and foreign – proceeded together, he explained . "The two battles ... proceeded together," he said. "They proceeded together"
 The USIA had provided the reports to his brother earlier that month . Perhaps in these important remarks he had also been inspired by the reports that had been provided to him by the U.S.
 These analyses covered the international reactions to the Ole Miss crisis, clearly showing how ‘racial prejudice mars American image’ was clearly shown .
 We must accelerate our efforts to banish religious prejudice, racial discrimination and any intolerance which denies to any American the rights guaranteed to them by the Declaration of Independence and Constitution .
 Robert Williams’s radio remarks provide a clear example of how differently those events may have been considered by blacks, in light of the ongoing discriminations . Robert Williams's radio remarks show how differently these events might have been viewed by blacks .
 African Americans (both common people and activists) supported the move . But on the whole, the attitude of African Americans was one of clear support .
 One explanation seems to lie in the so-called ‘rally around the flag’ effect .
 This, as known, can be described as the instinctive coming together of United States public opinion towards their government in moments of international crisis, overriding domestic differences . U.S. public opinion at times of crisis overrides domestic differences, the author says .
 ‘Daisy Bates Praises Kennedy’s Cuba Stand’, Chicago Defender, November 3 1962, 1 . The case was the result of a Supreme Court ruling in 1962 .
 Such a statement of support was featured as the headline on the newspaper’s front page . It featured as an image of support for the British Prime Minister .
 Cold War History 69 is the extreme nature of the delicate internal and external situation . Cold War history 69 is based on Cold War tensions in the Cold War .
 The country was on the brink of nuclear war with Russia, and in the midst of agonising internal disputes within its borders . It was also in the throes of a war between Russia and the West .
 The very expression ‘rally around’ was used in the editorials of both the Baltimore and Harlem black newspapers . It is no coincidence that the very expression was used .
 It is worth noting that this ‘rally around’ effect appears not to have been borne out of logic, instruction, or sacrifice, but was in fact a largely instinctive reaction . It is not the first time that the 'rally' effect appears to have borne out
 President Kennedy was on the whole perceived as a friend of their cause by the African Americans . Kennedy was criticized for his initial cautiousness in supporting the civil rights movement .
 This, one hastens to point out, was perhaps more than the case for African American public opinion, rather than civil rights leaders . This, perhaps more of the case, is perhaps more likely to be for public opinion than civil leaders .
 Kennedy’s political commitment to the southern Democrats, and his reluctance to act boldly on civil rights . The latter tended to be much more leery of Kennedy's commitment to southern Democrats .
 In 1960, 80% of black American votes had been cast in favour of Kennedy, and were crucial for his election . However, it is worth noting that in the presidential elections of 1960, it was also crucial for Kennedy .
 Had the exact same policy been announced by a different leader who was perceived as being less supportive of their cause, it is probable that they may have felt greater concern about the decision .
 It is difficult, however, to imagine that these greater doubts would have resulted in a radical opposition to the government .
 Such a stand would have required too many other concurring factors, among which a strong difference in the general Cold War mentality, which clearly was not yet in sight at the time . The U.S. was not ready to take a stand in the Cold War .
 African Americans have usually supported their nation in moments of international crisis . On the contrary, looking at previous cases in twentieth century history, one finds that African Americans support their nation .
 It may be worth recalling their decision to ‘close ranks’ with white fellow citizens during the First World War,94 the ‘Double-V’ campaign launched in World War II,95 or the support given to the Korean War, even though discriminations persisted .
 In contrast to the concession of a temporary truce in 1918, both World War II97 and the Korean War98 had seen blacks’ patriotism matched with a clear commitment to continue the domestic struggle for equality . In contrast, the concession was seen as a compromise .
 By 1962, by 1962, African Americans were already used to fighting a two-front war . African Americans had to fight two fronts .
 The reciprocal influences existing between the domestic sphere of the civil rights struggle and the international sphere of U.S. foreign policy are also worth highlighting .
 Foreign policy was seen to influence domestic issues, says Mary Dudziak99 . The damage on the international image of the country of persistent racial discrimination made it impossible for the leaderships to postpone serious commitment to addressing these issues .
 Commitment to resolution of domestic issues was seen to have a positive influence on foreign policy . On the other hand, commitment to resolving domestic issues seen to be seen as a positive factor .
 DuBois, writing on the July 1918 issue of the association’s magazine, invited his black compatriots not to hesitate . DuBis invited his fellow Americans to not hesitate .
 The NAACP sent Thurgood Marshall to Korea in 1951 to investigate racism in the Army . This commitment prompted the NAACP to send the lawyer to Korea to investigate .
 A final aspect that seems important to emphasize is the fact that, in these reactions by African Americans, we have seen how the support for Kennedy’s stand was often accompanied by the expression of a strong wish for peace .
 In this sense, the attitude of African Americans perfectly reflected the general attitude of national public opinion . "African Americans" reflected the nation's attitude of public opinion, the author says .
 It was a clear mirror of a nation that was ready to risk nuclear war, while praying hard that it was still possible to preserve peace . The nation was ready for war, but praying hard for peace .
 Members of such communities were able to keep the two matters separate, not allowing the rage they felt for the ongoing racial discriminations they suffered to influence their judgment on foreign policy decisions .
 Brinkmanship is not as awesome for the American Negro as it is for his fair-faced brother . The American Negro is not great enough to be an American, but he is good enough .
 Scholars who are in a position to access the archives of those African countries may verify if the evidence matches Schlesinger’s causal link . Scholars are able to access archives of African countries .
 A Global Perspective is an anthology of essays highlighting how race was a transnational factor in the Cold War . Race and race were both influencing, and influenced by, that confrontation .
 No matter who is responsible for his lowly status, his destiny and his survival are inexorably tied to that of his country . The fate of a man who is held by his country will be tied to his country, regardless of his status .
 From this same editorial, there also emerges the same sense of clarity and ‘wisdom’ referred to above .
 Late in October, the world teetered upon the brink of disaster . Three billion people helplessly awaited obliteration . The world was on the verge of disaster.
 Few of history’s 16 now dead civilizations had an opportunity to step back from oblivion or were given a second chance . Few, if any of history's 16 dead civilizations, had a chance to be given a chance .