 Things either are what they appear to be; or they neither are, nor appear to, or they are not, and yet appear, to be . Or they are, and do not appear to . be; . or they do not . appear, or not, to appear, and
 Both sides could emerge from the crisis claiming victory, but there is little doubt as to who the real winners and losers were . Epictetus1 Epictet .
 The evidence suggests that few objective criteria are actually used in such evaluations . Few objective criteria may be used in evaluations such as medical evaluations .
 Specific terms of crisis settlements can prove to be less important than a range of factors that do not conform to traditional rational actor assumptions . Indeed, examination of the specific terms of . crisis settlements is less important . than examination of specific terms .
 This analysis has significant implications for policymakers who have to deal with the aftermath of a crisis . It also has implications for the wider public and media, if governments are to be held accountable for their foreign policy .
 This paper examines the role of perceptions in evaluating the outcomes of crises . In contrast, this paper examines how perceptions affect the outcome of crises.
 It is not so much perception and misperception in international politics which concerns us, it concerns us . We are concerned about perception of international politics, rather than international politics .
 There are significant political, social and security implications contingent upon who it is that people think have won . These perceptions matter a great deal because of how people think they have won, says CNN.com .
 Policymakers are especially concerned with perceptions of their success because they must deal with the international and domestic political aftermath of crises . Policymakers must also be concerned about perceptions of success in dealing with crises .
 Leaders often care about international issues to a large degree because of the conclusions that other states will draw about them, regardless of whether these conclusions are well founded . Leaders care about issues because they care about them because they are concerned about their own country's future .
 A politician's political survival may also depend on having been perceived to win, whether or not they did, in fact, achieve significant tangible gains . A politician’s political survival depends on having to be perceived to have won, rather than having achieved tangible gains, says David Cameron .
 For the public and the media, perceptions are also important, since they can exert pressure on policy and ultimately determine the outcome of elections . The public and media, as well as the public, is also important in influencing policy and perceptions .
 A sophisticated understanding of the basis for their, and our, evaluations would produce more accurate criteria with which to hold policymakers accountable, says the author .
 Crisis crises are characA terized by the perception of an increased probability of war, the existence of a threat to basic values, and an awareness of the finite time which exists to resolve matters . Michael Brecher and Jonathan Wilkenfeld say crises are more likely to be charac
 Such settlements produce judgments about which side won and which side lost, or whether the result was a draw . Such settlements have no bearing on whether or not the result is a draw or a loss .
 The terms of the agreement which settled each of these crises would appear to be an appropriate criterion with which to establish victory and defeat . Initially, of course, the terms of . the agreement settled each . of each crisis would seem to be a . appropriate criterion .
 Analysis would be based on a balance sheet of tangible gains and losses, which might include territory, other material exchanges, and future military and diplomatic commitments, as well as their resultant effects .
 First, one could consider the relationship between these material 4.5 years ago . Second, a possible link between the material and the content of these material .
 Information from the SETTLEMENT TERMS is used to evaluate the winner and the loser on the basis of material gains and losses . The results are based on the results of the experiment .
 Actors may prioritize certain outcomes over others, and may have multiple aims of varying importance . Actors can prioritize certain goals over others in order to achieve their objectives .
 Both of these sets of criteria (material changes, and the satisfaction of the aims of participants) need to be separately considered . The aim of the project is to be satisfied with material changes and satisfaction of its aims .
 A situation where the decisionmakers of a country had achieved their principal aims in the crisis, yet emerged with substantial material losses, could only be described as an ambiguous victory . The situation is described as 'an ambiguous victory'
 Achieving substantial material gains, but failing to realize one’s primary aims would only, at best, represent an unclear result . Similarly, achieving significant material gains would only represent an uncertain result . Successful success would only be possible, but it would be difficult to achieve,
 Often, however, material gains and satisfaction of aims converge to provide the same conclusions about which side has won and lost . Material gains are the principal issues at stake, since it is these material changes which tend to be the principal issue at stake .
 Using Framework 1, for example, Hitler could be said to have won at Munich in 1938 because he was given the Sudetenland, which represented a clear material gain compared to the pre-crisis position .
 It should be noted that this type of analysis is complicated by what an objective observer might expect participants to gain .
 A neutral balance sheet does not account for the fact that some players may enter the game with prior advantages and therefore might reasonably expect some gains . Some players might expect to gain some gains, such as a player with prior advantage .
 When states are concerned only about absolute gains, then both sides could win in terms of achieving positive benefits, or both lose . Both sides could both win and lose if they achieve positive benefits or incurring costs .
 States are sometimes more concerned about whether the balance of gains or losses puts them into an advantageous or disadvantageous position vis-à-vis the opponent . States, however, are often more concerned with whether the overall balance puts them in an advantageous position . States are concerned about the
 A range of alternative factors can outweigh a Framework 1 balance sheet approach, leading to interpretations that bear surprisingly little relation to the original terms of the deal . This concern is compounded if incremental advantages can be translated into further exploitation of the disadvantaged state .
 Hitler’s material gains at Munich in 1938 led to a variety of contrasting assessments and reassessments of who had won and lost .
 The notion that war had been averted as a result of a negotiated agreement led British prime minister Neville Chamberlain to declare the settlement a diplomatic coup . The settlement produced 6.6 million people, including 6 million British troops .
 Absolute gains are the total value of the gains to oneself, without regard to the opponent . Absolute gains can be achieved without regard for the opponent, say the author of the book .
 Relative gains are comparative gains, or lesser losses, made over and above the opponent . Relative gains is relative gains made over or above an opponent, relative gains . Relative gain is relative gain over or over an opponent's gain over and over the opponent's gains .
 Within a few weeks, criticism mounted that Germany had been strengthened and would soon make additional demands . Critics said Germany had strengthened and that it would make more demands .
 Hitler in 1945 looked back on the settlement as a defeat for Germany and suggested that he should have made war in 1938, when German military advantage was arguably at its greatest . In 1945, Hitler in contrast, looked back at the settlement and called it a defeat of Germany .
 Munich has been widely seen as a reverse for the non-fascist states since 1945 . Despite this, it is commonly utilized as categorical evidence that dictators should never be appeased . Munich is widely considered as a symbol of fascism and fascism .
 The victor of the 1923 FrancoGerman Ruhr Crisis would appear to be ambiguous . Similarly, using a Framework 1 analysis, the victor in the 1923 crisis appears to have been ambiguous .
 The French withdrew from the Ruhr representing the accomplishment of a clear German aim . The French ultimately withdrew .
 The Dawes Plan led to renewed payments of reparations to France . On the other hand, German finance had been temporarily ruined . New German government led by Gustav Stesemann called off passive resistance against French occupation .
 The Ruhr Crisis settlement became widely seen as a French defeat, bowing to the pressure of Britain and the U.S. Despite an apparently ambiguous result, the settlement was seen as an ambiguous result .
 These examples serve to show that the evaluation of victory and defeat can depend on who the observer was, and when and where they evaluated the settlement, the particular chronology of events, and how it was reported to them .
 In addition, though initially ambiguous, one particular view tended to become solidified over the long-term . In addition to the ambiguity of the view, the view tends to be solidified .
 As observers, we often cannot help but see such settlements through a series of subconscious lenses . We may believe ourselves to be judging the outcome fairly and objectively . But as observers we can't help to see these settlements through our subconscious lenses.
 Framework 2 follows formation of perceptions in chronological order . The three sets of influences in Framework 2 follow the formation of the perceptions in order .
 Prior biases exist before the crisis begins, and may derive from national culture, world-view, bureaucratic or organizational position, or individual belief . Prior biases may be based on national culture or world-views .
 These biases represent the lenses through which information about the crisis is received and distorted . These biases are the biases of people who view the crisis differently .
 Governments and other groups are trying to shape observer’s perceptions of victory and defeat during and after the crisis, says author . perception manipulation represents the deliberate attempts by governments to influence and shape observer's perceptions .
 Focusing on one case allows the level of detail required to adequately demonstrate the role of multiple biases in evaluating success . Focusing in one case can demonstrate the importance of using multiple biases to evaluate success .
 CUBAN MISSILE crisis has probably received more scholarly attention than any other comparable crisis . Crisis has probably been the focus of most of the world's attention .
 The Soviet missile installations in Cuba were discovered on 15 October 1962 . The missile installations were discovered in Cuba in 1962 . Soviet missiles were found in Cuba .
 By deploying missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev had broken an earlier promise, as well as several official agreements, that he would not do so . By launching missiles, he had broken several earlier agreements, including a promise to never do so, officials say .
 An executive committee was quickly assembled in Washington to deal with the crisis .
 On Monday 22 October, Kennedy publicly announced the discovery of the missiles in Cuba and Washington’s imposition of a quarantine on shipments to the island .
 Khrushchev announced that he had ordered the weapons dismantled and returned to the 11.5-storey . After a period of major tension, the crisis ended on 28 October . The weapons were returned to 11.6 storeys .
 In secret talks between Robert Kennedy and Anatoly Dobrynin, the U.S. asserted that American Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be gone within five months . In addition, in secret talks, the United States asserted that . American Jupiter missile missiles in . Turkey would have been gone within
 U.S. was convinced that it had emerged victorious from the crisis, with its prestige considerably enhanced . One is struck by the extent to . which contemporaries on all sides were convinced that the United States had emerged victorially .
 Many important Russians came to perceive Khrushchev as having lost the crisis, and partly as a result, his political career came to a rapid end . Many of the key figures in the Soviet Union lost their support in the aftermath of the crisis .
 "Not having any other way out, we had to accept every demand and condition 14. Not having any way out of the situation," she said . "I'm not going to be able to go back and forth," she added .
 The Economist, 2 February 2002, 41, 41; Reeves, A Question of Character, 388. Reeves, 388, is Reeves' author of The Economist .
 Fidel Castro was outraged by the deal, feeling that he had been treated as a vassal by the Soviets . Fidel Castro felt that the deal was unfair and that the Soviets treated him as a paratrooper .
 In the years since 1962, these same perceptions of the victor and the defeated have endured . In 1962, the United States became the world's first state of independent republic .
 The ships were turned back and the Soviet regime was humbled in the eyes of 20,000 Soviet soldiers .
 Kennedy was ultimately as willing to compromise as Khrushchev, authors argue . Richard Lebow and Janice Stein argue that Kennedy was as willing a compromise man .
 There were a handful of critics of U.S. policy at the time of the crisis in 1962 .
 From the left wing came suggestions that JFK had gambled with mankind’s future . JFK had gambling with mankind's future .
 From the right wing, Nixon argued that the administration had been too lenient . Nixon later argued that he had been wronged by the administration .
 On several occasions, Khrushchev attempted to portray himself as the victor . The former Soviet Union leader attempted to depict himself as a victor in the war .
 Cuba remains a beacon of MarxistLeninist ideas in the Western Hemisphere . Cuba is a beacon for Marxist Leninists in the West .
 Richard Ned Lebow finds that in addition to the traditional interpretation which “views Cuba as a notable American victory with long-term 29-year-lasting 29.5% of Cuba’s population, the U.S. has been at odds with Cuba for decades .
 Framework 1, the settlement terms themselves, can explain the perceptions of victory and defeat in 1962 . Here, we test the extent to which Framework 1 and the terms themselves can explain what happened .
 First, we can examine the alterations in the relative security position of the superpowers . We can also examine the alarm in relation to the security situation of the United States .
 This allows us to ascertain the material gains and losses which were effectively traded in the final settlement . The settlement was settled in a settlement of £1.5million .
 Second, we can identify how these security alterations related to the aims of participants . We can also identify how the security changes related to participants' aims of participating .
 This will confirm whether the material gains were genuine goals of each side that, as a result of the settlement, they were able to achieve, or whether they were incidental by-products .
 Following a settlement, politicians tend to claim that any material gains made represented the achievement of primary aims, and any potential gains which were not made had always been secondary objectives . Politicians tend to say that any gains made in the settlement were achieved by primary aims .
 Comparing different numbers of material gains and aims achieved in a complex crisis settlement presents a major hurdle, since the value of each may vary considerably . Comparing various material gains or aims to achieve is also a big hurdle .
 These criteria, and the relationship between them, are inherently subjective . These criteria are therefore inherently subjective, and therefore subjective .
 This fact makes our study more difficult, but it also reinforces the main argument that subjective perceptions or misperceptions shape evaluations of victory rather than an objective reading of the settlement terms . The study was published in the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health .
 With this in mind, we try to offer a judicious summary of material gains and aims based on the evidence .
 Framework 1 does not support the widespread perceptions of a major U.S. victory, nor a major Soviet defeat . The following suggests that Framework 1 suggests that this suggests that .
 Kennedy achieved the removal of the Cuban missiles, which would have had a shorter flight time, and possibly greater accuracy, to targets in the south and east of the U.S. The missiles were removed .
 The overall strategic effect of their deployment has been questioned, however, for two reasons . The overall effect of the deployment of the troops has not been questioned .
 First, because a number of nuclear weapons were already available for launch from Soviet soil, and from Soviet long-range bombers and submarines . Second, because of the fact that a nuclear weapon was already available from Russia .
 It was understood to be only a matter of time before the Soviets developed a comprehensive arsenal of ICBMs in the Soviet Union . Second, because it was understood it was only a few months before it was developed, it was believed to be a few years before it became a major threat
 McNamara saw little point in risking war over nuclear threat that the U.S. would soon face in any case . McNamara: "The United States will soon face a nuclear threat" McNamara says .
 Khrushchev accepted that the Soviet Union would never again place nuclear missiles in Cuba . Nevertheless, the Cuban missiles were removed from Cuba .
 Kennedy made clear than the pledge did not ban covert action, or an economic blockade . Kennedy said that the pledge was not a ban on covert action or a blockade . The pledge was made by President Kennedy in 1964 .
 In February 1963 Castro told the Soviets that as a result of the Cuban Missile 39, 39 Cuban missiles were launched . Castro said in February 1963 that the Cuban missile 39 was launched in Cuba . Castro told Soviets that the missile 39 missiles would be used as a weapon .
 The Soviet Union repeatedly demanded that America did not attack Cuba in the months before the crisis, for example on 11 September 1962 . The U.S. attacked Cuba in 1962, but the Soviet Union did not intervene .
 If Kennedy were reelected, there would not be another invasion until at least 1969 . Overall, the menu of U.S. options for Cuban policy had become more constrained .
 The United States had also agreed to the removal of strategic missiles from Turkey . The U.S. had agreed to remove the strategic missiles .
 The significance of the Turkish missiles has been criticized because they were widely seen as obsolete within the U.S. administration . They were due to be replaced in the near future . The significance was criticized because the missiles were widely considered obsolete .
 The missiles, however, appeared far from obsolete in the eyes of the Turks, other NATO allies, and especially the Soviet Union . The missiles were launched in the 1980s and '90s .
 Kennedy was well aware that Turkey was averse to losing the missiles . Yet they would now have to be removed whatever the Turks thought about the matter .
 The concern for U.S. credibility with respect to its allies explains why this part of the Cuban settlement remained secret .
 The United States appears to have sharply altered its policy toward Cuba . The U.S. would appear to have changed its policy on Cuba .
 After sponsoring an invasion in 1961, planning a new one, they had never accepted the validity of the communist regime . They had now made a public non-invasion pledge .
 If the astronaut were aware of the deal to remove missiles in Turkey as well, that would add to his surprise . If the deal was made, it would be a surprise .
 It is not that the astronaut’s evaluation would be fairer than that of another . Rather it is that his view, based solely on material changes, might well be strikingly different from that of contemporaries .
 A balance sheet approach based on material changes resulting from the settlement terms cannot, it seems, justify the view that the United States won a major victory in 1962 . The U.S. won the case, however, in 1962, according to the judge .
 Both sides sought goals beyond simply peace, and peace, in order to achieve any meaningful victory . Peace was necessary to achieve a meaningful victory, but peace was not enough .
 Recent literature emphasizes the American focus on credibility, and a range of Soviet motives . This includes defending against a United States attack on Cuba, strategic parity, facilitating détente and bargaining for gains in Europe .
 Missiles in Cuba would offer a qualified increase in Soviet strategic power and make more problematic any American first strike . Missiles would offer an increase in Russia's strategic power .
 Evidence is that Khrushchev was after something more than just installation of missiles in Cuba . However, the evidence is that he wanted to install missiles in the country . The evidence is clear that this was not the only case .
 Bruce Kuklick argues that the Cuban missiles were a gamble to resolve the U.S.-Soviet diplomatic deadlock over Germany . Bruce says the missiles were intended to resolve a political deadlock between the two countries .
 Khrushchev’s missile move may well have been a gamble to extract the maximum possible gains from the U.S. The move may be a gamble, but it may have been to extract maximum possible gain from the United States .
 Khrushchev was increasingly fearful that events were getting out of control, and it became one of his aims simply to defuse the crisis . In addition, as the crisis escalated, he was also fearful of events being out of the control .
 The view that the defense of Cuba was an important reason for installation of the missiles is 47.5% . The view is that the missile system was designed to protect the country from attack .
 Lebow, Between Peace and War, 82; Allison and Zelikow, Essence of Decision, 81 . Allison, Zelickow, Zelikowski, and Lebow also wrote books about peace and war .
 Khrushchev made the proposal on 27 October 1962, without having heard a response from the Friday letter . The Turkish missile proposal was made public in October 1962 . The proposal was announced in 1962 without having a response to the letter .
 Khrushchev saw Cuba as a potential model for Third World revolution . Cuba was strategically crucial for communist advancement in Latin America . The Cuban government was overthrown by the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy’s core political aim in the crisis was to remove the missiles from Cuba . This aim was successfully achieved and Kennedy's political aim was removing missiles from the country .
 The political status of Cuba was considered to be a significant criterion for evaluating success in wider Latin American policy, and indeed in the global struggle against communism . Cuba's political status was considered a significant factor for evaluating the success of Latin American policies .
 Kennedy described the ultimate objective of U.S. policy as “the overthrow of the Castro regime” Kennedy sought throughout his time in office to find an acceptable way to change the regime, he said .
 U.S. decisionmakers tended to perceive Soviet aims in the crisis as being a rectification 52.5% of Soviet aims were rectified . 52.6% of the Soviet Union's aims were to rectify the situation, 52.7% of Americans thought to be rect
 The intention of defending Cuba also explains the deployment of tactical nuclear weapons to the island .
 Freedman, Kennedy’s Wars, 225; Fursenko and Naftali, One Hell of a Gamble, 355 . Freedman: Kennedy's Wars is the result of Kennedy's war with the Soviets .
 The Office of National Estimates published its view of the Soviet build up on Cuba on 19 September . On 19 September the ONA published its views of the build up .
 JFK was personally reluctant to support a second invasion of Cuba . JFK told Cuban exiles he would not back a revolt against Castro with troops .
 detailed plans existed for such a contingency and important figures were in favor of direct military action . Nevertheless, detailed plans were in place for such an attack .
 On 3 October Congress passed a joint resolution sanctioning the use of force against Cuba if this was required . Congress passed the resolution on 3 October . The resolution was passed by the U.S. Congress .
 In 1989, McNamara argued that there had been no intention to invade Cuba . But he admitted that the evidence at the time pointed strongly toward such an invasion .
 In 1963 the U.S. renewed its secret campaign to assassinate Castro, and Kennedy sometimes talked tough, but U.K. policy in regard to Cuba was subsequently much more cautious . The United States authorized a ransom payment of $53m in food and medicines to Cuba .
 There was considerable skepticism within the U.S. administration over the worth of the Turkish missiles .
 The U.S. agreed to the terms for their removal on the strict condition they remained secret, both within the inner ExComm and the Kremlin . A public trade would have been considered by elements in the White House (not to mention the Department of Defense, Turkey and other NATO 60
 Kennedy also told Soviet foreign minister Andrei Gromyko that there would not be a second invasion . Kennedy offered to give additional assurances to Khrushchev .
 President Obama prefers air strikes to a missile swap or a missile exchange . Obama says he prefers the option of air strikes .
 Rusk recalled later that Kennedy would have been receptive to a UN brokered public missile trade, but this never became necessary . Rusk said Kennedy would be receptive to the UN trade but this was never necessary .
 In terms of aims, the U.S. achieved its core objective of removing the missiles, while narrowing its room for maneuver in the pursuance of its wider Latin American policy . The United States achieved its goal of removing missiles, but narrowed its room to maneuver .
 The Soviet leader would later claim that the preservation of Cuba only cost the equivalent of the round-trip expenses for the missiles and troops .
 Khrushchev did not originally intend such a quick entry and exit, he says . This is true up to a point, but it is true, he adds . The former Soviet Union leader says he did not intend to leave the country in a hurry .
 Examining the material changes to the security environment suggests an even more ambiguous outcome . Examining security changes suggests an ambiguous outcome. Examining a security breach would be even more difficult to do .
 A “before” and “after” snapshot of the crisis reveals a neutral settlement . A neutral settlement or even changes favorable for the Soviets could be possible .
 Framework 2 approach incorporates the role of prior perceptions, crisis evolution and the deliberate manipulation of opinion . We argue that a more convincing answer is offered by a framework 2 approach, which incorporates prior perceptions .
 Observers, including the media, politicians, and the public, may have prior biases in perceptions of their leaders or of foreign nations . Prejudic bias can lead to systematic prejudice in the interpretation of crises .
 The Chinese, for example, perceived the Cuban missile agreement from a viewpoint heavily influenced by the developing Sino-Soviet split . The Chinese tended to show particular sensitivity toward evidence that the Soviets were selling out to capitalist states .
 The Soviets refused to back Chinese attempts to force a favorable resolution of the Taiwan issue . The Chinese strongly opposed the notion of peaceful coexistence with capitalism .
 Khrushchev’s actions in 1962 led to a new low in relations between the two countries . In this context, Mao Zedong interpreted the removal of the missiles as validation of China's anti-Soviet stance . The removal of missiles led to an end of relations between China and
 Castro and the Cuban regime also approached the crisis with a set of prior biases which predisposed them to a critical view of the settlement . Castro and his regime also had prior biases, according to the author .
 James Blight and Philip Brenner’s detailed research on the history of Cuba's relations with the two superpowers highlights the role of cultural differences .
 The ‘Operational Code’ Belief System,” in Psychological Models in International Politics, ed. ed. “The ‘operational code’ belief system’ is a belief system,’s author says .
 This stemmed, amongst other things, from rifts with the military over drastic defense cuts in 1960, and rapid rises in food prices in 1960 .
 All of these facts predisposed many important Soviets toward a critical reaction to the 1962 settlement . Many important Soviets were critical of the settlement . The settlement was a success story for the Soviets .
 Not all viewpoints, however, were predisposed to see Khrushchev as defeated . Not all of the world's most pessimistic view of the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 It's not clear whether observers within the U.S. held systematic biases that may have predisposed them to interpret events as an American victory .
 Among non-aligned nations, the missile withdrawal was initially popular . Many later became critical of why the Soviets had apparently yielded so quickly .
 All the major European leaders backed a firm stance and were deeply skeptical of any missile trade at the expense of European security . European leaders are deeply skeptical that any trade deal will be beneficial to the region .
 Adenauer regarded the Russian missiles in Cuba as a major challenge to 73-year-old . Adenauer, for example, regarded the Cuban missiles as major challenges to 73 .
 Cubans would never fully trust the Soviets again for the security of their island . This cut went very deep; the Cuban government would never trust the Russians again .
 This was the first psychological scar left in Cuban memory by the missile crisis . The missile crisis left a psychological scar in Cuban history .
 European vulnerability did increase caution about a U.S. invasion of Cuba or extensive air strikes to remove the missiles . European vulnerability increased caution about an American invasion or air strikes .
 Europeans tended to see avoidance of general war as overwhelmingly the most important result of the crisis . Europeans were less likely to perceive one superpower as the decisive victor and another as defeated . The avoidance of war was the most significant factor in avoiding general war, according to experts .
 Perceived Soviet restraint arguably proved beneficial to future European-Soviet relations . Indeed, perceived Soviet restraint proved helpful to future relations .
 Perceptions of victory and defeat are also dependent upon what we have termed the “crisis evolution” The ‘crisis evolve’ represents the particular way in which crisis events and the subsequent settlement unfold, and the resulting impact on the framing of the crisis . The crisis
 The importance of framing effects is well established theoretically, and has acquired growing support from empirical research . Framing effects are important for framing effects, and are well established theoretical theory .
 Crisis evolution can influence the framing of a settlement in a wide number of ways . Crisis evolution is a key part of the story of a crisis in the U.S. history .
 The crisis evolution in reality only happens in one particular way, it is helpful for understanding its effects to consider alternative frames . Counterfactual crisis evolution would be encouraged or generated by a counterfactual scenario .
 Crises tend to be simplified by observers into basic types, for example, a negotiated settlement model, or a stand-off model in which one actor blinks first .
 The negotiated settlement model predisposes observers to see outcomes as a draw, while the stand-off model sees whoever it is that backs down first as the defeated party . These simplifications are important because they don't necessarily reflect the actual settlement terms of the dispute .
 The material settlement could be similar in both cases . The only variable that changes is the particular crisis evolution by which the deal comes about .
 In the case of Cuba, the crisis became widely visualized as a stand-off, in which one superpower would ultimately back down . In the Cuban crisis, the situation was seen as a standoff between the two superpowers .
 As Soviet ships sailed toward the United States naval blockade, one side apparently had to yield or there would be war . U.S. naval blockade of Soviet ships began in June 1941 .
 On 23 October orders finally went out from Moscow to Soviet ships to change course, and fourteen eventually turned back . After a period of extreme tension, on 23 October, the Soviet ships were ordered to turn back . In total, 14 of the ships turned back, and Russia ordered them to
 Historians, for example, have tended to frame the crisis in these stand-off terms . Historians have also framed the crisis as stand-offs .
 According to Lebow and Stein, most Americans believe that the Cuban crisis ended because the Soviets retreated . The authors say most Americans think that the Soviet Union retreated from Cuba .
 It became very difficult to divorce this mental picture of the crisis as a stand-off, with the Soviets blinking first, from the actual terms of the deal, carefully negotiated behind closed doors in Washington and Moscow .
 In a counterfactual, one can imagine the Cuban crisis having been settled with the exact same terms, but by negotiated agreement at an international conference . The Cuban crisis was settled at a conference at the end of the 1990s .
 Had JFK and Khrushchev flown to Geneva to hammer out the very same deal, it would have been a balanced agreement . In contrast to the dramatic apparent retreat by the Soviets, the Soviets appeared to retreat .
 Observers would then have been much more likely to emerge from 1962 thinking back on the same terms as a negotiated draw rather than as an American victory .
 Evaluations of crisis settlements require a before and after comparison to identify what has been gained or lost, and by whom, over the relevant period . Evaluations need a before-and-after comparison .
 A UN sponsored negotiation remained a very real possibility given the involvement of SecretaryGeneral U Thant in the crisis . Despite this, a UN sponsored negotiations remained a possibility .
 When this is compared to a second time point, Cuba without missiles, one naturally inclines toward perceiving a U.S. victory . The United States is expected to win the Cuban vote .
 Khrushchev gambled aggressively and won a concession in return for a promise never again to place missiles in Cuba . This latter comparison would suggest, instead, that . Instead, it would suggest a concession was made to the Soviets in return .
 The Soviets moved missiles in and then out of Cuba, but not before extracting something in return . The Soviets were able to move missiles into Cuba in order to extract something from Cuba .
 Decisions about which date represents the first comparative time point are crucial .
 Counter-factual shows that a different crisis evolution would very likely have produced different comparative time-points with which to evaluate victory . Once again, a counter-factorial shows that .
 In reality, the U.S. discovered the plan to place missiles in Cuba by revealing the existence of missile bases already in an advanced state of readiness on the island .
 U.S. finds offensive missiles on Russian ships sailing westwards across the Atlantic . There is no evidence that any weapons had already reached Cuba .
 The likely U.S. response would have been a quarantine against these ships . Kennedy would have refused to offer concessions in return for ships turning around .
 In reality, the missile’s removal appeared to be a gain, with the first point of reference including missile sites already being constructed in Cuba . The missile was removed from Cuba .
 In the first case, concessions may be an acceptable means of achieving a successful outcome . In the second case, a return to the status quo demands that the ships turn around without any quid pro quo . The first case may be acceptable, but the other case is not .
 The decision to make October 1962 the first reference point of the crisis resulted from the timing of the missile’s discovery, thus being due to the crisis evolution . In part, the decision was due to timing of discovery of missile in 1962 .
 The timing of the missile removal was part of a deliberate strategy to frame the crisis in such a way that the removal of the missiles would appear to be a major gain . This perception, however, also reflected part of the U.S. administration to exploit the timing of events in order
 This introduces the final type of bias influencing perceptions, which we consider in the following section . We also consider the influence of bias in the perception of a person in the media .
 This can be demonstrated by comparing public and private pronouncements, such as those made by the government . This can also be shown by comparing private and public pronouncements made by politicians .
 Secret tapes reveal that during the crisis itself, Kennedy was comparatively dovish and cautious . Secret tapes of ExComm meetings reveal that he was comparatively cautious and cautious in the aftermath .
 Kennedy and his political associates nurtured the image of a cool president under pressure, strong but gracious . Kennedy was determined to take whatever action was necessary to remove the missiles from Cuba . Kennedy: "I'm not a president who wants to keep the missiles in Cuba"
 JFK’s image was in part protected by labeling Adlai Stevenson as the appeaser within the United States administration . JFK's image was part of the campaign to protect his image from the public .
 Two of President Kennedy's journalist friends wrote an article in the Saturday Evening Post that claimed that Adlai Stevenson had sought to appease the Soviets, that he “wanted a Munich,” involving a deal over Turkish missiles, which the president rejected .
 Kennedy deliberately gave policymaking responsibility to bipartisan officials to engender the strong support he would need for his choice of a risky showdown with Khrushchev . Kennedy deliberately chose to give policymaking responsibilities to officials in order to get the support he needed .
 Kennedy’s adroit if not fully conscious manipulation of group dynamics helped create that political backing . Kennedy's adroit or conscious manipulation helped to create that backing, he says .
 Allowing the ExCom to debate the pros and cons of the major action-oriented options encouraged them to believe that they were instrumental in making policy, as indeed to a certain extent they were .
 The group solidarity that developed in the course of these proceedings helped to transform individuals with different political outlooks and bureaucratic loyalties into staunch supporters of the blockade and the other initiatives that accompanied it .
 The united front they presented impressed other government officials and congressmen . It helped to widen the scope of support for the president, Obama said .
 Adlai Stevenson did much to generate worldwide support for the United States with his theatrical performance in the United Nations Security Council on 25 October 1962 .
 The importance of the non-invasion pledge was minimized by describing it as a mere gesture to allow Khrushchev to save face among his own constituencies . It was described as an attempt to protect the Soviet Union from invasion invasion .
 Kennedy was able to make the non-invasion pledge a politically acceptable means to realize Soviet withdrawal . Framed in this way, Kennedy made the pledge politically acceptable to realize withdrawal .
 In another context, the same actions could easily have been branded as appeasement . In the past, the actions could have been seen as a move to appease the West .
 Public may have assimilated a way of seeing the crisis that was fed to them . Consciously or not, the public may have accepted the crisis they were fed to .
 The media largely accepted the notion that during the crisis, the administration had the right to control information . The media also accepted the idea that the White House could control the flow of information .
 Once JFK announced a national emergency, there was virtually unanimous press compliance, and an acceptance at face value of the administration line .
 One clear example of perception manipulation was the secrecy attached to the Turkish missile agreement . The secrecy attached was also a part of the deal, according to the agreement .
 The deal was reached privately in a conversation between Robert Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy: Deal was reached in a private conversation with the ambassador . The deal is reached privately .
 Khrushchev stuck to his promise despite the obvious propaganda value to him if the arrangement became widely known .
 Khrushchev’s motives in keeping it secret were apparently to avoid Cuban anger at a superpower deal behind 91.1.2 billion dollars .
 Kennedy often used the tactic of combining a major concession with a hard line ultimatum to give the impression of firm leadership . Kennedy regularly used to end his demand for inspections of missile sites in Cuba .
 Havana’s back is back, and also to boost Kennedy's chances of staying in power . Kennedy was trying to boost Soviet relations with the U.S.
 Robert Kennedy and John F Kennedy both benefited politically from this secrecy . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . He died at the age of 65 .
 Ironically, the Turkish government offered profuse thanks for the U.S. refusal to do a cozy superpower deal . Ironically, Turkey thanked the United States for refusing to do such a deal .
 Many leaders, and followers, are at least tempted to use behavior in an international crisis to bolster their domestic positions against critics and competitors .
 Kennedy tapes reveal that he favored military action at the start of the crisis and then changed his mind later . However, the Kennedy tapes show that he favors military action . The tapes also reveal that the JFK tapes reveal he favored the use of military force .
 When actors retreat, they can utilize a range of strategies to mitigate the possibility that the adversary will perceive the retreat as indicating a lack of resolve . Robert Jervis suggests that when actors retreat they can use a variety of strategies . The retreat may be perceived as a sign of a lack
 These include explaining retreat as the result of special circumstances or as being the first move with an expectation of reciprocation from the other side . Downplaying the importance of the issue is one example .
 Framework 1 focused on material gains, and their correspondence to the aims of participants, as criteria for evaluations . Framework 1 aimed at material gains and correspondence to participants' aims, and that they were met with criteria .
 Framework 2 examined the role of prior biases, the evolution of the crisis and the deliberate manipulation of opinion . Framework 2 looked at prior biases and the particular evolution of opinion in the crisis . Framework 1 examined prior biases of the media and the public's view of the situation .
 Framework 2, however, was more effective in explaining the almost unanimous perception of United States victory in 1962 . Framework 2 is more effective than Framework 2 .
 Even if one had no knowledge of the Turkish missile deal, there was a strong case to be made that the Soviets had achieved real gains . The deal was made by the Soviets in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Both leaders would apparently have been willing to offer more if pressed, suggesting that neither felt himself to be in a commanding position .
 We have aimed to show why these prestige gains emerged, what processes were at work to shape how they emerged, as well as their fundamental subjectivity and ambiguity . We also aim to show how processes at work were shaped by the prestige gains of the past .
 We have sought to demonstrate how with alternative prior biases, crisis evolutions or manipulation, there could have been radically different perceptions of victory, and radically different subsequent gains in prestige . We have tried to demonstrate that with alternative . prior prior biases and crisis . evolutions could have radically different .
 When the crisis began, the cards were already stacked against Khrushchev, says historian . The cards were stacked against the former Soviet leader, he says .
 Any apparent retreat would be pounced upon by critics in China, the Soviet Union and Cuba as a dramatic failure . The U.S. has been in touch with Cuba for decades .
 The timing of the discovery of the missiles meant that their removal would appear to be a significant loss . The discovery was made in the early hours of the day .
 The American quarantine strategy created the image of a stand-off, in which it would be difficult to avoid at least a symbolic retreat without fighting a war in the U.S.
 Khrushchev was dealing with a U.S. administration skilled at managing opinion both within and within the 102-year-old line .
 William C Wohlforth, “The Stability of a Unipolar World,” International Security 24, no. 24, is published on October 24, 2009 .
 If Khrushchev had known all this and still sought to avoid losing, he should have invested his energy not in the details of the settlement terms, but in shaping the way in which the settlement came about, he says . The image of a negotiated balanced agreement so spectacularly failed to
 A meaningful definition of victory in international crises must include the longer-term consequences for participating states and policy-makers . The U.S. should focus on the long-term impact of the crisis, rather than the short-term, it says .
 If a particular perception of victory and defeat becomes sufficiently widespread it can prove to be self-fulfilling, even if it bears limited relation to the original terms of the deal . Crucially, if a perception of defeat and victory is sufficiently widespread, it may prove to have a positive
 Beliefs about a U.S. victory after 1962, however unrelated to the agreement that had been reached, subsequently influenced international behavior such that a United States victory became the reality . The United States won't have a victory in 1962 .
 The balance sheet began to acquire a whole array of negative payoffs for the Soviet Union that came to be associated with the crisis . The Soviet Union's balance sheet became more than a trillion dollars in debt .
 Khrushchev was removed from office, the Chinese-Soviet split was exacerbated, and Castro’s relations with the Soviet Union were temporarily jeopardized .
 These negative effects produced a very real Soviet defeat, closing the gap, post-hoc, between perception and reality . In the interests of untangling the complex web of perceptions, a number of interactions can be identified .
 We can briefly illustrate some examples, although the list is not exhaustive . The list is by no means exhaustive .
 Prior biases, crisis evolution and deliberate manipulation are more likely to shape perceptions of the relative satisfaction 104.5% of people are satisfied .
 Because they won, however, none of these criticisms surfaced significantly . Because of the win, they didn't hear any of the criticisms .
 Failure tends to engender a cascade of repercussions which reinforce the perception of defeat, but with victory, however marginal, near misses are forgotten or translated into memory as courageous leadership decisions, reinforcing a major triumph . Failure tend to reinforce a negative image of failure, but success is perceived as a
 In general, whilst material gains may be subject to various errors of assessment, observers should nevertheless make broadly similar evaluations of tangible factors such as territorial alterations and future diplomatic commitments .
 The relative satisfaction of aims, on the other hand, is much more likely to remain highly ambiguous, being inherently open to interpretation . Relative satisfaction of a goal is highly likely to be highly ambiguous and open-ended .
 In-groups tend to perceive out-groups as having devious intentions . Robert Jervis noted that in-group tend to see out-group members as devious .
 Prior biases may lead opponents to systematically perceive the aims of their adversary as more threatening than they really are . Thus, in assessing the satisfaction of aims, opponents may see their opponents' aims more threatening .
 In addition, the deliberate manipulation of opinion is also more likely to target aims rather than material changes . Material gains are often self-evident, while material gains are self-ident .
 Complex interactions also occur between the three elements of Framework 2 . Framework 2 can also be used to interact with other elements of the Framework 2.
 Prior biases increase or decrease the sensitivity of observers toward certain framing effects provided by the crisis evolution or deliberate manipulation . For example, prior biases increase the sensitivity or decrease of observers .
 This interaction is evident with the Chinese sensitivity toward the Soviets blinking first . The Chinese sensitivity to the Soviets is evident in this interaction .
 The particular way in which a crisis plays itself out shapes the time-frame within which actors can manipulate opinion, as well as the nature of that manipulation . Similarly, the time frame within a crisis can shape the way an actor manipulates opinion .
 Kennedy could frame the crisis solely in terms of the missiles, in part because of the fact that the missile sites were discovered in Cuba under partial construction .
 By ensuring that relevant information is absent from the public domain, actors can compound or utilize pre-existing prejudices and alter conceptions of which actions would be appropriate . What is striking is the extent to which aims and material gains from crises can be obscured by biased perceptions .
 Perceived victory in international crises is likely to have a major impact on political survival . This is of most immediate concern for policymakers, says Andrew Hammond .
 The ability to manipulate opinion suggests a capacity to draw victory from the jaws of defeat, writes Andrew Hammond . He says it is possible to win a political victory from a military defeat .
 In game theory, incomplete information radically alters expected behavior in games even if there are no other differences . incomplete information can alter expected behavior even if other differences are unrelated to the game .
 It was the most significant victory the U.S. Army ever achieved over the Viet Cong in Vietnam . Had it been realized, it could have led to a decisive defeat of the enemy, it would have been possible .
 The Tet offensive came as a surprise and was in the end a Viet Cong victory . From a political point of view, however, the Tet offensive was a political victory .
 The blurred relationship between settlement terms and perceptions of those terms could produce a number of dangers, including an unpredicted collapse in political support, says David Cameron .
 North Korea and the development of nuclear weapons can matter for policymakers today . Framework 2 effects can matter in the case of North Korea, author says . North Korea's nuclear weapons development can matter today, he says .
 The U.S. is likely to make great efforts to avoid any security guarantees to North Korea being seen as a major concession or a reward for blackmail . On this latter point, the United States, for example, will likely try to avoid a deal that could be seen as being seen
 Tactics will probably include framing of guarantees in multilateral terms, as the collective will of America’s regional partners, and appeals to historical precedent . Tactics will likely include a framing of the guarantees as a multilateral .
 In comparison to these framing effects, the actual terms of whatever deal is reached with North Korea may be surprisingly unimportant . In comparison, the terms of the deal may be surprising unimportant, CNN says .
 There is disagreement in the U.S. over the 1994 deal between Bill Clinton and North Korea . The Yongbyon nuclear site was closed in exchange for two light water reactors and fuel supplies .
 Some Republicans have argued that this was a successful attempt by the North Koreans to blackmail Washington . Some Republicans say this was an attempt to blackmail the White House .
 The Yom Kippur War in 1973 can also be seen as a political victory for the Egyptians, despite a military defeat by Israel in the final Sinai campaign . The Egyptian government won the war in 1973, but Israel was defeated in Sinai .
 Biased perceptions of victory and defeat matter for policymakers . The recalled history of crises can have remarkably potent effects in shaping subsequent foreign policy . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis crisis in Iraq and Syria .
 Observers generally believe themselves to be making judgments about settlements using fair criteria, such as the relationship between the settlement terms and the national interest . They believe they are making judgements on whether or not they are fair .
 If these biases are substantially influenced by the biases described in this paper, one can expect a considerable degree of misperception to occur, with potentially serious political consequences . Yet, if these judgments are substantially . influenced by these biases, they could have serious consequences for political leaders .
 It may be difficult to avoid the influence of prior biases and crisis evolution, says CNN.com.com .
 The deliberate manipulation of perception by governments requires critical thinking at precisely the time that the media and public opinion tend to rally around their leaders . More problematic still, the deliberate manipulation by governments must be critical thinking, the author says .
 Historians evaluating victory and defeat in retrospect are most resistant to the influence of framing effects . Historians have a natural tendency toward revision of established viewpoints, historian says .
 Historians approach the past with their own set of biases which may influence perceptions of victory and defeat . Historians, including the present authors, have biases in their view of history .
 Where one side reaps clear material gains, or accepts a substantial material loss, victory and defeat are unlikely to be significantly clouded by prior biases, crisis evolution or propaganda .
 People not only assimilate incoming information to their pre-existing beliefs . But they do not know they are doing so, they do so, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 They incorrectly attribute their interpretations of events to the events themselves . They do not realize that their beliefs and expectations play a dominant role in events .
 They become too confident because they see many events as providing independent confirmation of their beliefs . They therefore become confident, they see them as independent confirmation . Events would be seen differently by someone who started with different ideas, he says .
 Ambiguous or even discrepanciesant information is ignored, misperceived, or reinterpreted . Biases in perception are also likely to occur within policy domains where the public has minimal direct information flow, or where the press is under tight control .
 Even modern western societies, however, continue to be prone to framing effects . Even modern Western societies, they are prone to frame effects .
 Wolfsfeld examined the role of media generated framing of the U.S. decision to intervene in Bosnia in 1993 . He examined the media's role in the United States' intervention in Bosnia .
 After a major media focus on Serb atrocities, Wolfsfeld found that Americans perceived a very one-sided conflict in the Balkans .
 It is unclear to what extent the Cuban case is exceptional . For example, it is unclear how much of the Cuba case is .
 Framework 2.2 may also be added to Framework 2 . There may be additional influences which ought to be added .
 Future research could explore how these effects explain variance in perceptions of rather than in international crises . There is, therefore, a range of possible future research avenues that could explore this .
 Framework 2 criteria may also be useful for understanding the evaluation of settlements that follow wars as well as settlements that avoid them . The criteria are also useful for evaluating settlements that come after wars .