 U-2 reconnaissance flight snapped a series of damning photographs of offensive Soviet nuclear missile sites being installed on the island of Cuba, some 90 miles from Florida . 50 years ago yesterday, an American U.2 flight snapped the images .
 At any point during those 13 days in October 1962, events could have careened wildly out of control . Events could have taken place during that time .
 If just one round of ammunition had been fired in anger, it could have rapidly escalated into the unthinkable . If news of this aggression had leaked out, the situation could have quickly escalated .
 In fact, we only learned in the last ten years how dangerously close we came to such a scenario . We only learned ten years ago how close we were .
 In 2002, it was revealed that the warship USS Beale dropped depth charges near a Soviet submarine . The Beale was participating in President Kennedy's ""quarantine"" of Cuba .
 The Soviet captain ordered the torpedo combat-readied in response to the Beale's depth charges . It turns out, the sub carried a nuclear warhead . The Beale was the first to carry a nuclear weapon .
 Savitsky failed to attain a mandatory consensus among his top commanders to fire the nuclear torpedo, the sub had no choice but to surface . Fortunately, the submarine was running low on air, and because of the submarine's lack of air, it was able to surface safely . Savits
 The consequences of such attacks would've led to the end of the existence as we know it . The consequences would've been the end to the existence of the world's existence .
 My Dad was a sergeant in the Army at the time and was deployed with a MASH unit to Miami as part of a potential invasion force . He was deployed to Miami in the 1980s as a possible invasion force against Miami .
 The Kennedys created a new form of SovietU.S. diplomacy -a new language -that was both tough, face-saving and pacifistic . By applying valuable lessons from the lessons from World War I, and virtually on the fly, the EXCOMM task force was
 With the blockade, the Kennedys signaled to Moscow that it was being tough on the installation of nuclear weapons . But that it also wanted to avoid a war . The blockade is a mandatory posture so as to not seem weak in the eyes of the American people .
 If Khrushchev had even the slightest brain in his head, and he did, he would interpret the actions accordingly and respond with similar care and caution . The United States opted not to retaliate against Cuba for shooting down Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 flight .
 Khrushchev, like the Kennedys, was aware of the same potential for an unstoppable chain reaction . Deal was reached and the Soviet missiles were removed from the Soviet Union .
 It can't be overstated how close we came to the most terrifying military conflict in history . The U.S. came close to being in the midst of a terrifying military war .
 It can't be overstated how it was prevented by leaders who were thoughtful, rational, reasonable, cool under pressure . Leaders who are not easily bullied by intense internal and external pressure are key to preventing it .
 Richard Nixon had been president at the time . Richard Nixon was president of the United States from 1968 to 1972 . Nixon was elected to the White House in 1972 .
 It's very likely that Nixon would have capitulated and accepted the advice of the Joint Chiefs, which would have included a more hawkish General Lyman Lemnitzer as chairman . We can never know for sure, but considering that Nixon was more bellicose than Kennedy, it's
 In 2012, there are several flashpoints in the Middle East, and, once again, nuclear weapons are centerpieces . Once again, there is a nuclear weapons issue in the news .
 Russia is a player in each of the players in each, and not on our side of the line . Not only that, Russia is also a player on each of these players, but also a key figure in the World Cup .
 As events in Syria and Iran heat up, we're faced with a choice between President Obama and President Obama . Obama's coolness, discipline, wonky intelligence and rationality under pressure is well known .
 Mitt Romney's lack of personal conviction or firm posture leaves him vulnerable to the motives of radical foreign policy actors, including many of the same neoconservative advisers who surrounded George W Bush for eight years . And, on the other hand, there's Mitt Romney whose lack of conviction or posture leaves
 President Obama has shown many of the same leadership qualities required to make similar choices as Kennedy EXCOMM team made exactly 50 years ago . President Obama and his team, including Hillary Clinton and Leon Panetta, have shown the same qualities needed to make such choices .
 "It's clear that he's susceptible to personal whimsy and erratic, unpredictable behavior," he said .
 Imagine for a moment how these men would've comported our affairs during those 13 days in October and seriously decide for yourself . Consider how they would've behaved during that time .