 This addendum consists of 13 pages . NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 JUNE 2019 HISTORY P1 ADDENDUM *JHISTE3* This addenda consists of . 13 pages.
 I send you this message in an hour of alarm, fraught with danger for the peace of the whole world . I send it to you in a 'hour of alarm' for the sake of the world .
 "It is a secret to no one that the armed bands invading this country were trained, equipped and armed in the United States of America," says President Obama . Obama: "It's not a secret" that armed bands were trained in the U.S.
 The planes which are bombing Cuban cities belong to the United States of America, the bombs they are dropping are being supplied by the American Government . As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, there should be no mistake about our position, says Soviet leader .
 For months there has been evident and growing resistance to the Castro dictatorship . For months, the Castro regime has been under siege from the streets .
 Where people are denied the right of choice (the ability to choose a different form of government besides communism), recourse to such struggle is the only means of achieving their liberties . Free peoples in all parts of the world do not accept the claim of the historical inevitability of the communist revolution .
 What your government believes is its own business; what it does in the world is the world’s business . The world is your business, the government says. What you think is your own business. What the government does is its very own business .
 The great revolution in the history of man, past, present and future, is the revolution of those determined to be free, says the author of the book .
 The United States had already surrounded the Soviet Union with its own bomber bases and missiles . The U.S. already had its own base bases and missile missiles .
 We knew that American missiles were aimed against us in Turkey and Italy, say nothing of West Germany . We knew U.S. missiles aimed at Turkey, Italy, Italy and West Germany, he says .
 It was during my visit to Bulgaria that I had the idea of installing missiles with nuclear warheads in Cuba without letting the U.S. find out they were there until it was too late to do anything about them . The idea was to install missiles with nukes in Cuba .
 Everyone agreed that America would not leave Cuba alone unless we did something . The Cuban government agreed that the U.S. would not be leaving Cuba alone if it left Cuba alone . President Obama said that the United States would not abandon Cuba unless it was done .
 The Americans had surrounded our country with military bases and threatened us with nuclear weapons and now they would learn just what it feels like to have enemy missiles pointing at you . We'd be doing nothing more than giving them their own medicine .
 This extract is taken from an interview by David Deutschmann with Jorge Risquet, a member of the Cuban government . The interview was part of an interview with Jorge .
 Risquet is being questioned about the Cuban involvement in the Angolan Civil War . He was being questioned by the Cuban government about the war in Angola .
 It is said that the Cuban presence in Angola had expansionist aims . Cuba was acting as a puppet of the Soviet Union, it has been claimed .
 "It would make no sense for us, a small country, to think about expanding to Angola," says President Obama . Angola is a major source of oil wealth in the region, says Obama .
 "When our presence is no longer needed, we will withdraw. Proof of that is that when our presence no longer is needed, it will withdraw," he says .
 Only thing taken from Angola has been the remains of our soldiers who died there. As for material interests, the only thing we have taken is the remains from our soldiers, says PM .
 Angola's riches are for the people of Angola to use for their development, says the president . Those riches should be used to provide a pleasant life for those heroic people we love so much, he says .
 The decision was made in response to a request for aid from Agostinho Neto . It was a sovereign decision made by the Portuguese government . The decision is a sovereign response to the request for help from the government .
 There was a communication with the Soviet Union, after our troops were on their way. There was also a communication between the two countries, says the British Prime Minister .
 We asked for and received extensive collaboration from the Soviet Union . The film was shot by Soviet troops in the early 1980s .
 It stands on the side of people fighting racism and colonialism, and it supports the cause of their independence, says CNN.com.com . It stands against racism and colonialism .
 We're brothers and sisters of the people of Africa and we're ready to fight on their behalf. We’re ready to . fight on . behalf of Africa. We're not afraid of Africa, we’ve got to fight for Africa, they say .
 Yankee imperialism, without scruples of any kind, launched South African mercenary troops in an attempt to crush Angola’s independence and is now outraged by our help to Angola, our support for Africa .
 President Kaunda of Zambia described the Soviet and the Cuban intervention in Angola . Zambia's president described the situation in Angola as 'annexplastic'
 An independent black African country is not coming into existence on South African borders . Yes, because here you haven’t got an independent black . African country . South Africa is not yet an independent African country, says CNN.com .
 You have a Cuban force of thousands – estimated at this stage between 10 and 13 thousand – taking part in a civil war in Southern Africa . If that was the end of it, one could have shrugged one’s shoulders and said, okay, they will go back tomorrow, they
 Nobody can tell you at this stage that they are going home, once they have put the MPLA in the saddle . But knowing the communists, knowing the Cubans, there is no guarantee that they will go home, it is said .
 I think it must be accepted that they are here to stay, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela says they will try to subvert Angola and other Southern African countries . Mandela: "I think it is accepted that just as much as they subverted or at least, as much . as much
 World domination has always been and to this very day, is still the aim of the communists . World domination is still an aim for the communists, writes David Frum .
 If they can control the southern tip of Africa, they have a tremendous advantage in any conventional war . Apart from raw materials that they can get from Angola and other Southern African countries, they will control the Cape sea route which is the lifeline of Europe .
 This is an extract of a speech by Huey Newton on the 2nd May, 1967 . The speech was made in the wake of the Second World War II .
 Blacks should arm themselves for self-protection, says Blacks boss . He explains the reasons why Blacks need to arm themselves to protect themselves . Blacks should also arm themselves, he says .
 At the same time that the U.S. government is waging a racist war of genocide in Vietnam, the concentration camps in which Japanese Americans were interned during World War II are being renovated and expanded . The camps are being expanded in response to the war of Vietnam .
 Since America has historically reserved the most barbaric treatment for non-white people, we are forced to conclude that these concentration camps are being prepared for black people who are determined to gain freedom by any means necessary .
 Black people have begged, prayed, petitioned, demonstrated, and everything else to get the racist power structure of America to right the wrongs which have historically been perpetrated against black people . Black people are begging, prayed and petitioned for justice .
 "All of these efforts have been answered by more repression, deceit and hypocrisy," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says .
 As the aggression of the racist American government escalates in Vietnam, the police agencies of America escalate the repression of black people throughout the ghettoes of America .
 A people who have suffered so much for so long at the hands of a racist society, must draw the line somewhere . A people . must draw a line somewhere, must have to draw it somewhere, says the British PM .
 "We believe that the black communities of America must rise up as one man to halt the progression of a trend that leads inevitably to their total destruction," the group says .
 With Martin Luther King's death, by June, "by June, my party was jumping by leaps and bounds," says King . King's party was "jumping by leaps by leaps of bounds" with his death .
 We started working coalitions with other organisations at the beginning of 1968 . We started those coalitions in the early 1960s .
 Students for a Democratic Society, all the anti-war movement people; numerous other organisations. Students for the Democratic Society . Anti-war activists. Anti-War movement people .
 In late 1968, we had a working coalition with the Poor People’s March through Rev. Rev. Jesse Jackson . Rev. Jackson: "In late 1968 we had to work together in a coalition of people from all over the world"
 American and Indian Movement; Young Puerto Rican Brothers, Young Lords, the Young Lords – we coalesced with everybody, you see. American and . Indian Movement . We coalesce with everybody. American, Indian Movement, Young . Lords, Puerto Rican brothers .
 Breakfast for Children Program spreading across the country, getting a lot of media play . Preventative Medical Health Care Clinics, the doctors, the medics – I mean, this is authentic medicine, preventative medical health care clinics, people donating their time .
 When you find out what it is, you'll get back in the alley, you’ll get out of the way. Because when you find it, you will get back to the alley. You’re getting back into the alley . When you get to know what it
 "You bleed for white people, but when it comes to seeing your own churches being bombed and little black girls murdered, you haven’t got any blood," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 You bleed when the white man says bleed; you bite when the man says bite; and you bark when you say bark . You bite when you bite, bark when the  man says bark. You bark when  says bark, and you bleed when  say bleed .
 If it is wrong to be violent defending black women, black children and black babies and black men, then it's wrong for America to draft us and make us violent abroad in defence of her . If it was wrong to defend black women and black children, it's not wrong for the
 If it is right for America to draft us and teach us how to be violent in defence of her, then it's right for you and me to do whatever is necessary to defend our own people right here in this country . And if it is . right for us to do . whatever
 So I cite these various revolutions, brothers and sisters, to show you that you don’t have a peaceful revolution, he says . "Brother and sister, brothers, sisters, ... ... You don't have peaceful revolution," he adds .
 "The only kind of revolution that is non-violent is the Negro revolution," says President Obama . "The Negro revolution" is a non-violence, Obama says .
 "The only revolution in which the goal is loving your enemy is the Negro revolution," says President Obama . "The Negro revolution" is the only revolution to love your enemy, he says .
 It's the only revolution in which the goal is a desegregated lunch counter, theatre, park, and public toilet . You can sit down next to white folks – on the toilet . The only revolution is that you can sit next to a white person on a public toilet,