 President Kennedy's worst fears of an increasing Soviet military presence just 100 miles away from the American coast . The intelligence represented by this map was supplied by U-2 spy planes . The map was presented by the U.2 intelligence supplied by President Kennedy .
 A two-page key paperclipped to the upper right corner, headed ""MRBM-IRBM Status of Cuban Missiles," dated October 27, 1962, summarizes the Soviet military buildup, listing sites, launchers and missiles .
 McNamara described pressure from Joint Chiefs of Staff to order attack on Soviet targets in Cuba . President Kennedy was under pressure to attack Soviet targets, McNamara said .
 McNamara said the president pored over this map before deciding to delay the attack . McNamara: "I'm not going to let it happen. I'm going to do it" McNamara says .
 The map shows the position of every Soviet missile, bomber and fighter jet and nuclear storage facility in Cuba as of noon on Saturday, October 27, 1962 .
 October 27 was the day the crisis came within hours, even minutes, of triggering a war between the U.S. and Soviet Union . The crisis occurred October 27, when the crisis was within hours or minutes of war .
 A Soviet anti-air missile shot down a U-2 spy plane on a photo reconnaissance mission over Cuba . The plane was shot down by an anti-Soviet missile in the early hours of that morning .
 Cuba claims Fidel Castro himself pushed the button to fire the missile . Fidel Castro is believed to have been behind the launch of the missile in Cuba .
 Two U.S. destroyers dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine . Later that afternoon, two destroyers attacked a Soviet sub .
 At last minute, Soviet captain surfaced his submarine, the other option being to launch missiles against the United States mainland . At last moment, the submarine surfaced . The other option was to launch his missiles against U.S. mainland .
 When the sun set that evening, McNamara wondered if he'd be alive to see the following Saturday's sunset . McNamara: "I'm not sure if I'll be alive again to see that sunset"
 Joint Chiefs of Staff pushed for air strike against Soviet missile sites and other targets . Joint Chiefs pushed for an air strike on Soviet missile targets .
 Map shows the nine Soviet targets the U.S. would have bombed if Kennedy had given the order . The map was created by President Kennedy in 1963 .
 President Kennedy, Attorney General Robert Kennedy and Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin hammered out a deal . But overnight, everything changed . Khrushchev's letter to President Kennedy was used to secure the deal .
 The Soviets agreed to withdraw their missiles and other offensive weapons in return for the U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The Soviets withdrew their missiles in exchange for the United States pledging not to invasion Cuba .
 The United States secretly promised to remove obsolete missiles from Turkey . The U.S. secretly promised the United States to remove the missiles .
 The nine targets on the map became the weapons the United States forced out of Cuba . The U.S. was forced to withdraw from Cuba in 1994 .
 This amazing map dates to the penultimate day of the crisis, October 27th, when an American pilot was shot down over Cuba . The map dates back to the day that the pilot was killed .
 Had Kennedy given the order to attack, this map shows the nine Soviet targets that U.S. fighters would have bombed .
 Deal was brokered between Kennedy and Khrushchev in which the Soviets would dismantle their missiles and installations in Cuba . In exchange for removal of missiles from Turkey and a pledge to never invade Cuba, the U.S. removed missiles .
 Bidder acknowledges the thorough reading and understanding of all of these Conditions of Sale, all descriptions of items in the Catalog, and all matters incorporated herein by reference .
 Announcements and corrections from the podium at live auctions and those made through the Conditions of Sale appearing on the Internet at RRauction.com .
 The rights granted to Bidder under these Conditions of Sale are personal and may not be assigned or transferred to any other person or entity . If Bidder is an agent, the agency must be disclosed in writing to RR Auction prior to the time of sale .
 Bidder may not transfer, assign, or otherwise convey these Conditions of Sale or any of the rights herein . Such purported transfer, assignment, or conveyance shall be null and void . Bidder will not be able to convey these conditions of Sale .
 RR Auction in its sole and unlimited discretion, at any time prior to, during, or even after the close of the Auction. Such determination may be made by RR Auction .
 RR Auction reserves the right to exclude any person from the Auction . Bidders who have not established credit with RR Auction must furnish satisfactory credit information well in advance of the Auction.
 Bidders who are not members of RRAuction.com should pre-register before the close of the Auction to allow adequate time to contact references . The auction will take place in New York City, New Jersey, on November 28 .
 Bidders who have not previously established credit or who wish to bid in excess of their established credit history may be required to provide their social security number, or the last four digits thereof . RR Auction's credit check may be performed prior to the acceptance of a bid . Bids are
 Delivery will not be made unless and until full payment has been received by RR Auction, i.e., check or wired funds have fully cleared . For payment other than by cash, delivery will be made by cash . RR Auction will not accept payment by check or wire transfer .
 Payment in full is due within thirteen calendar days of the Auction or within twelve calendar days after the invoice date, whichever is later . Unless otherwise agreed in writing, signed by RR Auction, payment is due in full .
 All purchases delivered to Massachusetts are subject to applicable Massachusetts sales tax unless the purchaser possesses a sales tax exemption number . Purchasing in Massachusetts is subject to a state sales tax .
 In any purchase or sale, the value of the item is determined by the price . In any sale or purchase, the price of the items is determined .
 A Bidder should make certain to bid on the correct lot and that the bid is the maximum that the Bidder is willing and able to pay . The bid should be the maximum amount that the bidder is willing to pay for the lot .
 Bidders who examine lots in person prior to the sale assume all responsibility for any damage they cause in so doing . Re-offering could damage the momentum of the sale .
 RR Auction shall have sole discretion in determining the value of the damage caused, which shall be promptly paid by the prospective Bidder . Title to any lot remains with Consignor, any secured party of the consignor or assignee, until the lot is paid for in full by
 RR Auction reserves the right to require payment in full before delivering any lot to the successful Bidder . It is the Bidder's responsibility and obligation to have the lots fully insured while in their possession .
 Bidder assumes any and all RISK OF LOSS once the lot is in Bidder's possession . RR Auction or its assigns have the right to offset any sums due, or found to be due by RR Auction .
 Bidder further grants RR Auction a purchase money security interest in such sums or items to the extent applicable, and agrees to execute such documents as may be reasonably necessary to grant RR Auction such security interest . Bidder also agrees that RR Auction should not be allowed to execute documents as necessary .
 RR Auction and its assigns shall be a secured party with respect to items bought by Bidder and in the possession of RR Auction, to the extent of the maximum indebtedness, plus all accrued expenses, until the indebtedness is paid .
 Written bids should be entered on the standard printed bid sheet . Bids should be received at RR Auction's place of business at least twenty-four hours before auction start .
 RR Auction is not responsible for executing mail bids or facsimile bids received on or after the day the first lot is sold . Bids on an item must raise the current high bid by at least 10% or as specified on a per-Auction basis .
 RR Auction reserves the right to accept or decline any bid . In a live sale, bids on an item can change at the discretion of RR Auction .
 Bids must be for an entire lot and each lot constitutes a separate sale . Bids are required for each lot and the sale is a private sale .
 Live auction lots will be sold in their numbered sequence unless RR Auction directs otherwise . Live auction lot will be auctioned at auction in New York City .
 It is unlawful and illegal for Bidders to collude, pool, or agree with another Bidder to pay less than the fair value for lot . It is illegal and illegal to pool or agree to pay under the fair price for lot.
 For live auctions, RR Auction will have final discretion in the event that any dispute should arise between Bidders . RR Auction has final discretion on the outcome of a live auction .
 RR Auction will determine the successful Bidder, cancel the sale, or re-offer and resell the lot or lots in dispute . RR Auction is a private auctioneer and auctioneer who will auction the lots .
 RR Auction will have final discretion to resolve any disputes arising after the sale and in online auctions . RR Auction is responsible for the sale of the auction house and auction house .
 RR Auction reserves the right to impose from the date of sale a late charge of 1.5% per month of the total purchase price if payment is not made in accordance with the conditions set forth herein .
 All property must be removed from RR Auction's premises by the Bidder at his\u002Fher expense not later than thirty business days following its sale . If it is not so removed, RR Auction may send the purchased property to a public warehouse .
 RR Auction reserves the right to void an invoice if payment in full is not received within thirteen calendar days of the Auction or within twelve calendar days after the invoice date . RR Auction has the option of voiding an invoice .
 In cases of nonpayment, RR Auction's election to void a sale does not relieve the Bidder from their obligation to pay RR Auction its fees on the lot and any other damages .
 Clients with pre-arranged credit status may receive immediate credit for payments via e-Check, personal or corporate checks . Bidder shall pay maximum statutory processing fee set by applicable state law .
 RR Auction refers any invoice to an attorney for collection, the Bidder agrees to pay attorney's fees, court costs, and other collection costs incurred by RR Auction . If Bidder attempts to pay via check and the financial institution denies the transfer from Bidder's bank account, or the
 RR Auction shall have a lien against the merchandise purchased by the Bidder to secure payment of the Auction invoice . If RR Auction assigns collection to its house counsel, such attorney's time expended on the matter shall be compensated at a rate comparable to the hourly rate of independent attorneys .
 RR Auction is further granted a lien and the right to retain possession of any other property of the Bidder then held by RR Auction or its affiliates to secure payment of any Auction invoice or any other amounts due to RR Auction . RR Auction also granted right to keep possession of the property
 RR Auction shall have all the rights of a secured creditor, including but not limited to the right of sale . With respect to these lien rights, RR Auction has all the right to sale . RR Auction will not be able to sell the property .
 If a Bidder owes RR Auction or its affiliates on any account, RR Auction and its affiliates shall have the right to offset such unpaid account by any credit balance due Bidder . RR Auction is liable for shipping and handling .
 RR Auction is unable to combine purchases from other auctions or affiliates into one package for shipping purposes . RR Auction cannot combine purchases of other auctions and affiliates with one package . RR auctioneers can't combine purchases with other auctioneers .
 Lots won will be shipped in a commercially reasonable time after payment in good funds for the merchandise and the shipping fees is received or credit extended . Lots won can be shipped after payment is made and shipping fee is received .
 RR Auction shall use the correct harmonized code for the lot . Declaration value shall be the item' hammer price . RR Auction will use the right harmonized codes for each lot .
 Domestic Bidders on lots designated for third-party shipment must designate the common carrier, accept risk of loss, and prepay shipping costs . Title shall not pass to the successful Bidder until all invoices are paid in full .
 RR Auction reserves the right to withdraw any lot before or at the time of the Auction . It is the responsibility of the Bidder to provide adequate insurance coverage for the items once they have been delivered .
 RR Auction will not be liable to any Bidder in the event of such withdrawal or postponement under any circumstances . RR Auction is not liable for any loss of interest in the sale of the auction .
 RR Auction has the right in its absolute discretion to reject any bid in the event of dispute between Bidders or to continue the bidding or to reoffer and resell the lot in question . RR Auction can also decide the successful Bidder in the . event of a dispute between .
 RR Auction's record of final sale shall be conclusive . In the event of a dispute after the sale, RR Auction will be conclusive.
 RR Auction may reject any bid if it is below the reserve of the lot or article or that an advance is insufficient . RR Auction also may reject a bid if the amount or article is under reserve .
 Lots may be subject to a reserve which is the confidential minimum price below which the lot will not be sold . No lots may be divided for the purpose of sale .
 Bidding by telephone, facsimile, online, or absentee bidding are offered solely as a convenience and permitted subject to advance arrangements, availability, and RR Auction's approval . RR Auction may, from time to time, bid on items that it does not own .
 RR Auction will not be held liable for the failure to execute bids or for errors relating to any transmission or execution thereof . Neither RR Auction nor its agents or employees will be held responsible for any failure of bids .
 The original defaulting Bidder will be liable for the payment of any deficiency in the purchase price and all costs and expenses associated there with, including warehousing, sales-related expenses, reasonable attorney fees and court costs, commissions, incidental damages and other charges .
 In the event that such Bidder is the successful Bidder on more than one lot and pays less than the purchase price for the total lots purchased, RR Auction shall apply the payment received to such lot or lots that RR Auction, in its sole discretion, deems appropriate .
 Lots to which the payment shall be applied will be in descending order from the highest purchase price to the lowest . If RR Auction does not exercise such discretion, lots will be applied in order from highest purchase to lowest .
 RR Auction does not provide any warranties to Bidders . RR Auction shall have the benefit of all rights of a secured party under the Uniform Commercial Code as adopted by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts .
 Neither RR Auction nor the Consignor makes any representation or warranty, expressed or implied, as to merchantability or fitness for intended use, condition of the property .
 Neither RR Auction nor the Consignor makes any representation or warranty, expressed or implied, as to whether the Bidder acquires rights in copyright or other intellectual property . RR Auction and the consignor do not make any representations or warranty .
 RR Auction does not make any representation or warranty as to title . All descriptions, photographs, illustrations, and terminology used in the Catalog represent a good faith effort made by RR Auction to fairly represent the lots and property offered for sale .
 Bidder acknowledges that he or she shall not rely on them in determining whether or not to bid or for what price . They are not representations or warranties and Bidder agrees to not rely upon them in deciding whether to bid .
 RR Auction's AC certification is only as to its attribution to the person or entity described or to the lot's usage and only as explicitly stated therein . RR Auction does not offer any other warranties, express or implied, including those pursuant to the Uniform Commercial Code .
 Bidder may not transfer, assign, or otherwise convey the Certification of Authenticity, and such purported transfer, assignment, or conveyance shall be null and void . Such purported transfer of such an item is not permitted .
 RR Auction complies with all Federal and State rules and regulations relating to the purchasing, registration and shipping of firearms . Certification of Authenticity is valid from date of the Auction in which Bidder was awarded the lot until five years after the Auction Date, without exception .
 Bidder is required to provide appropriate documents and the payment of associated fees, if any . Bidder must also provide documents and pay associated fees if any. Bidder will be provided with appropriate documents, if necessary .
 RR Auction liability is limited to the amount actually paid for the property by Bidder . Bidder is responsible for providing a shipping address suitable for the receipt of a firearm .
 Bidder accepts the benefit of the Consignor's warranty of title and any other representations and warranties made by the consignor for the Bidder's benefit . The Bidder hereby accepts the benefits of the title .
 All responsibility and liability of RR Auction with respect to said lot or property shall automatically terminate . Upon such disclosure and assignment, all responsibility and . liability, if . any, if any, of RR auction with respect . to said lots or property, shall automatically terminated .
 The remedy is as to the Consignor only . RR Auction shall be entitled to retain the premiums and other amounts paid to RR Auction .
 The rights and remedies provided herein are for the original Bidder only . If Bidder wishes to challenge the AC within the period of the Certification of Authenticity, Bidder must present written evidence that the lot is not authentic as determined by a known expert .
 If there is any discrepancy between the description in the Catalog and the AC, then the description of the AC shall control . If there are any discrepancy in the description, the description will control .
 RR Auction assumes no and disclaims all responsibility and liability for acts or omissions in such packing or shipping by RR Auction or other packers and carriers, whether or not recommended by RR auctioneers .
 RR Auction assumes no and disclaims all responsibility and liability for damage to frames, glass or other breakable items . RR Auction assume no responsibility and disclaimers all responsibility for damage .
 These Conditions of Sale constitute the entire agreement between the parties together with the terms and conditions contained in the Registration Form .
 They may not be amended, modified or superseded except in a signed writing executed by all parties . They are not amend, modified, superseded .
 This provision is intended as a full, complete and absolute release of any claims after one year of such acts or omissions .
 RR Auction may enforce its rights pursuant to these Conditions of Sale in the courts of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts rather than in an Arbitration for items that in the aggregate exceed $10,000 . This right shall relate to the individual item
 The Estimate Prices are based upon various factors including prices recently paid at auction for comparable property, condition, rarity, quality, history and provenance .
 Estimate Prices are prepared well in advance of the sale and subject to revision . Estimate prices are . prepared well before the sale .
 All property to be auctioned is usually on view for several days prior to the sale . The auction house is usually auctioned off at auction .
 The fall of RR Auction's hammer indicates the final bid . Placing arbitrary bids on lots with prior maximum bids may result in these lots being sold for less than 10% above the under Bidder's .
 RR Auction has the right to sell certain unsold items after the close of the Auction . RR Auction will auction the items at the end of the auction . RR auctioneer will auction items at auction in the future .
 Timed Auction:\n\nBidder may open, monitor, and\u002For raise bids at any time before the close of a lot through www.rrauction.com .
 RR Auction offers a callback service the day of the Auction . Bidder is responsible for supplying a correct telephone number where Bidder can be reached until the Auction closes . RR Auction will offer a call-in service to the Bidder .
 RR Auction will make reasonable efforts to ensure that Bidders who request a callback are contacted if outbid . Auctioneer may also execute a bid on behalf of the consignor to protect the reserve .
 Under no circumstances will the auctioneer place any bid on behalf of the consignor above the reserve . The auctioneer will not place a bid for the sale of the auctioned items . Auctioneers will auction the items at auctioneer's discretion .
 Bidders intending to bid via the Internet must visit www.RRauction.com and register accordingly at least one full day prior to the actual auction . The auctioneer will not specifically identify bids placed on behalf of the consignor .
 If Bidder is the only Bidder on a lot at 6 pm EST\u002FEDT, that lot is awarded to Bidder . Bidder must be Bidder to win a lot in a lot that is Bidder.
 All lots WITHOUT an opening bid at 6 pm EST\u002FEDT will remain OPEN to ALL Bidders until 7 pm EST . Bids will remain open to all bidders . All lots will be opened until they receive their first bid .
 These lots will close immediately upon receipt of a bid or at 7 pm EST\u002FEDT, whichever comes first . Lots will close at 7pm EST on July 1 or 7pm on July 4 .
 Live Auction:\n\nBidder may open, monitor, and\u002For raise bids at any time before the close of a lot through www.rrauction.com.
 RR Auction will make reasonable efforts to ensure that Bidders who request a callback are contacted if outbid . RR Auction does not guarantee this service and it is merely a courtesy and not an enforceable right .
 RR Auction is not responsible or liable for any problems, delays, or any other issues or problems resulting out of use of the Internet generally or specifically . Property is auctioned in consecutive numerical order, as it appears in the catalog .
 Auctioneer will accept bids from those present in the salesroom or absentee bidders participating by telephone, internet or by written bid left with RR Auction in advance of the auction .
 The auctioneer may also execute a bid on behalf of the consignor to protect the reserve . Auctioneer may enter a bid in response to salesroom, telephone or absentee bids .
 RR Auction is not responsible or liable for any problems, delays, or any other issues or problems resulting out of use of the Internet generally or specifically, including but not limited to transmission, execution or processing of bids . RR Auction will not be responsible for any issues, delays or other issues
 RR Auction treats any third-party site bids as floor or telephone bids . RR auctioneers treat any third party site bids on the floor or phone bids . The auctioneer will auction the auctioneer's auction of auctioned items .
 Floor bids and telephone bids are always considered first over third party sites bids . Floor bids are considered earlier than telephone bids, and floor bids are also considered .
 RR Auction reserves the right to charge Bidder the applicable Buyer's Premium and Consignor a Seller's Commission . Acceptance of these Terms and Conditions qualifies Bidder as a client who has consented to be contacted by RR Auction in the future .
 In conformity with regulations promulgated by regulatory agencies, participation by the Bidder is affirmative consent to being contacted at the phone number shown in his application . This consent shall remain in effect until it is revoked in writing .
 RR Auction presents properties in a number of collectible fields, and as such, specific venues have promulgated supplemental Terms and Conditions . RR Auction will auction properties in the following days .
 Be sure to submit your maximum bid amount before the live auction begins . The auction will take place in New York, New Jersey .
 Your bid stays at the lowest minimum amount required to keep you in the lead, and increases only if another bidder places a competing bid . Your chances of winning are "when you bid during the live auction"
 "Download our 5-star mobile app for "You will be taken to the bidding console where the live auction is taking place."
 "Mobile alerts also notify you when your item is coming up for auction so you never miss an important bid." "Retract’s to start the retraction process. Retract your item and select 'Retract' and select ‘retract” and ‘Ret
 All item to be packaged and\u002 for shipped shall have a value declared .
 Value Coverage for each item declared is available if the CUSTOMER agrees to pay for value coverage based on TrustNLS applicable rates and terms .
 TrustNLS's maximum liability for loss or damage for the item shall be $50.00. In the absence of a declared value premium payment, TrustNls's maximum liability for the item is $50,000 .
 "Customer releases TrustNLS from any liability in excess of $50.00 in the absence of a declared value"
 TrustNLS will then have an additional 14 business days to deliver the shipment before the CUSTOMER may claim that the shipment, or any part thereof, is lost . TrustnLS has 14 days until the shipment is delivered before it can be claimed that any part of the shipment
 If TrustNLS, makes a total loss payment, or pays the insured amount as shown on the valued inventory for a damaged item, they have the right to salvage the damaged article . Trust NLS can salvage the items if they are damaged or not paid .
 TrustNLS reserves the right to inspect and verify all reported damages and to require substantiation of any claimed amounts or value of items .
 Liability is one way only from the Ship From to the Ship To named in this agreement . Liability of the agreement is limited to the parties involved in the agreement. Liability only applies to the ship from the ship that is named .
 There is no liability after the consignee accepts by opening or signing for the shipment, refuses the shipment or the shipment is returned as undeliverable."
 TrustNLS is not liable for freight cost, carton and packaging material costs, CUSTOMer packaging costs or late delivery . TrustNls is not . liable for . freight cost .
 TrustNLS is not liable for any damage, whether direct, indirect, consequential, incidental, special, depreciated, or loss of special value which may arise from any force majeure event .
 "This limitation shall apply to and include, but not be limited to damages, loss of profit, or a loss of income"
 Under no circumstances will any claim be considered if received after 90 days from the date of delivery .
 In the event of any litigation arising from this USAR, the prevailing party will be entitled to recover its costs and reasonable attorney's fees from the non-prevailing party .
 "This contract will be interpreted in accordance with the laws of the state or province of TrustNLS."
 Additional charges may apply based on actual size, weight, size, packaging complexity, pick-up and delivery location conditions .
 "TrustNLS is not liable for additional items collected on the pickup or any undisclosed items not listed in the agreement." TrustNLS will not be liable for any additional items .
 TrustNLS may at their sole discretion, open and inspect any shipment and its contents at any time . The trustNLS reserves the right to refuse any goods .
 TrustNLS will not package, ship, or deliver prohibited items . Trust will not deliver prohibited goods .
 Payment is due prior to the shipment leaving the location where it is packaged . Payment should be made prior to shipment leaving a location .
 If payment is not received within 5 days of notification of final charges, storage charges will apply . Storage charges will be applied .
 CUSTOMER is responsible for confirming origin and destination addresses and contact information . The following information will be used to contact the person responsible for the delivery .
 If an address correction must be made by the carrier, the CUSTOMER agrees to pay for such service rather than have the shipment returned .
 Any and all liability hereunder is limited to the insured value stated on the USAR and\u002For documented on the accepted Estimate .
 For any item not packed by TrustNLS, the item can be covered for disappearance only, it's not covered for damage . The item can't be packed by trustNLS .
 TrustNLS is not liable for internal damages to electronic or computer components without signs of visible damage to packaging materials and casings . Trust not liable to liability for damage to electronic components without visible damage .
 "Data files are not covered under any circumstance for erasure, corruption, or disappearance."
 If some items are made up of several individual components that comprise the working unit or finished goods as a whole, the total value for the unit must be listed for each separate component or any claim will be settled under terms of this agreement."
 TrustNLS is unable to check to secure the parts of the artwork inside the case . For artwork\u002Fdisplay “items in case” TrustNls is unable . to secure parts of artwork inside case .
 TrustNLS is only able to provide value coverage for any damage to the outside of the case and is unable to provide coverage for items inside the case .
 TrustNLS is not liable for loss or damage for manufacturing defects and for inherent vice items without signs of visible damage to packaging materials and containers . Trust NLS will not be liable for losses or damage .
 TrustNLS is not responsible for loss or damage to perishable or temperature controlled items to the extent the loss results from exposure to heat or cold or the perishable nature of the product .
 In the event of cancellation of a job, a minimum $50.00 cancellation fee shall apply . A minimum of $50,000 will be paid to cover the cost of the job .
 Additional charges will apply if items have been picked up, packaged, shipped, or returned . Additional charges apply if the item have been returned or picked up or packaged .
 "Cancellations must be submitted in writing ." "NewLine" is a new line .
 TrustNLS is not liable for item to be in working condition or to perform tests of working condition unless specifically stated as part of the services offered."
 Items lost or damaged that make up of a pair or set are limited to a pro-rata amount payment based on the value of each item . Items lost, damaged are limited only to a certain amount .
 This insurance is provided by the Company automatically unless Customer notifies the Company in writing at the time of placing its order for services that it elects to not have the Company insure its shipment . The Company shall bear no responsibility for damage or loss to Customer’s shipment except in the
 The Company shall bear no responsibility for damage or loss to a frame or frame or frames altered in transit .
 Signed and inscribed on the first free end page in blue ballpoint, with the words "To Sy" and "John F Kennedy"
 "Fine Autographs and Artifacts feat. Maude Shaw" will be auctioned at auction at auction in New York City .
 "Fine Autographs and Artifacts feat. A" "Richard Nixon" is being auctioned at auction in New York .
 On the same date of this signature, Arthur issued an executive order acceding to"","",""startPrice"":200,""title"":""Fine Autographs and Artifacts feat. feat. Chester A Arthur"",""isCatalogOnly"":true,""isLive
 "George Bush was paid a very modest fee f" "Barbara and Barbara and I were paid a little bit of attention," Bush said .
 Signed and inscribed on an opening page in blue ballpoint, with the words "Dear Hillary, T" and "StartPrice""":200,""title"":""George Bush"",""isCatalogOnly"":true,""isLiveAuction"":false,""
 Signed in blue ballpoint on a laid in bookplate that has "StartPrice":200,""title"":""George Bush"",""isCatalogOnly"":true,""isLiveAuction"":false""isTimedAuction":false,""IsTim
 "Fine Autographs and Artifacts feat. Fra" "George Bush" auctioned for $200 . "CatalogOnly" is true, "LiveAuction" is live, "Timed" is not live .
 "Fine Autographs and Artifacts feat. Edna Pryn—With lov"",""startPrice"":200,""title"   "George and Barbara Bush"  """ isCatalogOnly":true,""isLiveAuction"":false,""
 Signed and inscribed on the first free end page in blue felt tip, signed and inscribed in the middle .
 In fine condition, with creases to t"","",""startPrice"":200,""title"":""George W Bush"",""isCatalogOnly"":true,""isLiveAuction"":false,""IsLive auction":false,"is
 "41: A Portrait of My Father, signed" "George W Bush" "Fine Autographs and Artifacts feat. Decision Points, signed and inscribed on the title page in black felt tip; 41: The Bush Administration, signed by George W. Bush, signed in black
 "Fine Autographs and Artifacts feat. Jimmy Carter" is being auctioned at auction . "Jimmy Carter" will sell for $200 .
 The President Builds a House, signed and inscribed on the half-title page in black felt tip,    signed and inscribed in the . half the title page . The President build a house in Georgia .
 "Letter from Senator John F Kennedy dated November 3, 1960" "Charleston Estate Auctions" is auctioned in Charleston, South Carolina .
 The letter is dated one month before he left the Senate in December 1960 .
 John F Kennedy and Ted Kennedy-Large lot of campaign buttons, lapel tabs, bumper stickers and posters . A lot of the campaign buttons and bumper stickers from the Kennedy brothers .
 "John F Kennedy Jr. See photos for condition of condition and details" "See photos for details"
 The map is marked \""Secret\" in the lower left and upper right corners of the map . It is marked with the word "Secret" in the upper left and lower right corners .
 Map shows the position of every Soviet missile, bomber and fighter jet and nuclear storage facility in Cuba as of noon on Saturday, October 27, 1962 . McNamara said the president pored over this map before deciding to delay the attack .
 Cuba claims Fidel Castro himself pushed the button to fire the missile . Two U.S. destroyers dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine that afternoon .
 President Kennedy, Attorney General Robert Kennedy and Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin hammered out a deal . The deal was based on a letter from Nikita Khrushchev to President Kennedy .
 RR Auction prides itself on selling historic material, thoroughly examined by in-house experts and third-party authenticators, to ensure the highest standards of authenticity . RR Auction is an internationally known and frequently featured in all media outlets .