 In addition to berating the Soviets in private, in public he made an effort to elevate Cuba to a player in the settlement negotiations . In public, he tried to elevate the Cuban government to a major player in negotiations .
 Radio Havana broadcast Castro’s own conditions which he said the U.S. must meet in order to validate a non-invasion pledge . Shortly after that pledge was announced, Castro said the United States must meet those conditions .
 The Cuban government announced a cessation of all commercial and economic pressure against Cuba . They were followed by a cease-fire of economic and diplomatic pressure against the country .
 An end to all “subversive activities” carried out against the Castro regime from the territory of the United States and other “accomplice territories” cessation of “pirate attacks” on Cuba . United States aircraft and ships entering Cuban airspace and naval space
 U.S. policymakers came to refer to them as Castro’s Five Points . The Five Points were known as Castro's Five Points in Cuba . They were later referred to by the United States .
 Castro’s Five Points, which he put up in November, indeed as early as late October, were unacceptable from our point of view . Castro's Five Points were unacceptable, he says . Castro: “I’m not going to back Castro. He’ll
 We would abandon economic pressures, that we would abandon overflights, and give up Guantánamo . The principle ones being that we . abandon economic pressure, that . we would give up Guantanamo Bay .
 "Our inability and unwillingness to even discuss those five points was another element in these discussions," says the president . "We're not willing to discuss that five points," he says .
 Kennedy had drafted veteran fixer John McCloy to lead the U.S. effort in partnership with United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union Adlai Stevenson .
 Neither side saw it beneficial to complicate negotiations further by giving Castro a seat at the table . Neither side wanted to complicate the negotiations further .
 For another, the demands were never ones that the United States could ever agree to or even publicly acknowledge . For one reason, the U.S. never agreed to or publicly acknowledge the demands .
 Castro repeatedly restated his five conditions, including directly to Acting Secretary General of the United Nations U.N. U. Thant . Castro's five conditions have been repeated in the ensuing weeks .
 Soviet officials tried to add them to the discussions. And from time to time, Soviet officials wanted them to be included .
 The conciliatory tone convinced Castro to greet Mikoyan personally when he arrived . Castro was impressed by the tone of the meeting .
 Mikoyan tried again when he returned from Havana over three weeks later . He returned to Havana three weeks after returning from Havana .