 The political positions adopted by both sides nearly prevented a resolution, but at the last moment, a compromise was found and nuclear war averted . At the end of the war, nuclear war was averted by a compromise .
 Putting ballistic missiles equipped with nuclear weapons into Cuba salved the insecurities of two men . Putting ballistic missile equipped with nukes into Cuba would have been a relief .
 Kennedy had claimed that the U.S. lagged behind the Soviet Union in nuclear capabilities when he campaigned for the presidency . Nikita Khrushchev knew otherwise .
 By the summer of 1962, Khrushchev also was certain that the Americans knew the same thing . The U.S. knew the Soviets knew what it was, and the Russians knew it .
 U.S. missiles located in Turkey could strike almost anywhere in the Soviet Union . Soviet missiles could reach Europe, but American missiles could hit almost anywhere .
 Khrushchev feared that the imbalance would tempt the U.S. to launch a first strike . He feared that it could tempt the United States to strike .
 President Kennedy made little effort to conceal his continued desire to see Castro deposed . President Kennedy had already withstood the Bay of Pigs Invasion in 1961 .
 Cuban intelligence had uncovered documents dating to April 1962 that described a plan to invade Cuba and overthrow Castro . Operation Mongoose, which ironically was scheduled for October 1962, was scheduled to take place .
 Khrushchev proposed that the Soviet Union should install missiles in Cuba aimed at the U.S. Castro agreed with Khrushchev . Khrushchchev suggested that the missiles should be aimed at Cuba .
 By August, increased shipping activity between the Soviet Union and Cuba had come to the attention of U.S. intelligence .
 CIA director: Soviets intended to install medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . John McCone, director of the CIA, told Kennedy that, in his opinion, the Soviets planned to install missiles . Kennedy: "I believe the Soviets are going to try to intimidate us"
 On August 29, a U-2 spy plane on reconnaissance over Cuba brought back evidence that surface-to-air missiles had been installed at locations in Cuba . The U.S. says the missiles were installed in Cuba by the Cuban government .
 The installation indicated Cuba’s strong desire to defend those locations . While not themselves offensive weapons, their installation indicated a strong desire for defense .
 Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin advised Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, who was one of President Kennedy's closest advisors, that the installations were entirely defensive in nature . The installations were located in Fort Worth, Texas, Texas .
 Continued reports of Soviet missiles in Cuba prompted the decision to send another U-2 to take a closer look on October 9 . Continued reports prompted the U.S. to send a U.2 to Cuba .
 Six larger missiles, 60 to 65 feet in length, were identified . The photographic evidence was analyzed and the SAMs were analyzed .
 It was clear to analysts on the 15th that those missiles were likely to have nuclear capability, they say . Analysts say it's clear that the missiles are likely to be capable of nuclear capability .
 Kennedy was informed of the situation during his breakfast on the 16th . Kennedy was told about the situation on the morning of the day .
 Hand-picked group of 12 men would advise Kennedy throughout the unfolding crisis . Kennedy's handpicked group would advise him throughout the crisis .
 They included Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara, CIA Director John McCone, Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, National Counsel Ted Sorenson .
 He did not want the Soviets to know how much he knew and he also didn't want to panic the American public . "He did not . want to . panic the U.S. public."
 Kennedy maintained his announced schedule of public appearances for the next four days .
 On the 17th, the president flew to Connecticut in support of Abraham Ribicoff's bid for a U.S. Senate seat . The president also traveled to Connecticut to support the candidate for the seat .
 On the same day, another U-2 flight revealed the existence of intermediate-range ballistic missiles . The missiles would be able to strike nearly anywhere in the continental U.S. The U.N. says they could strike anywhere in America .
 The missiles were not directly brought into the discussions by either side of the debate .
 Gromyko again denied that the Soviet Union was doing anything in Cuba except assisting in that country's defense . The Soviet Union denied that it was assisting in Cuba's defense in Cuba .
 Kennedy re-read his statement from September 4, in which he had said that offensive weapons in Cuba would not be tolerated . Kennedy: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I don't think it's OK"
 EX-COMM recommended blockade of Cuba rather than launch a military strike . Kennedy received a recommendation from EXCOMM to blockade Cuba that night .
 Kennedy continued to appear in public as though nothing was happening . Kennedy's death was the first known assassination of the Kennedy family .
 On the 19th, he flew to the Midwest for a series of campaign appearances . The campaign trail is scheduled to take place in the coming weeks .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff wanted to exercise the military option, but consensus couldn't be reached . Joint Chiefs wanted exercise military option but couldn't reach consensus . Joint chiefs of Staff: "Consensus couldn't come to a consensus"
 Robert told the president that he must return to Washington for a final decision . On the following day, Robert told President Obama that he had to return to D.C. for a decision .
 It was announced that he was suffering from an ""upper respiratory infection,"" and flew back . He was diagnosed with an upper respiratory infection and flew home .
 Kennedy favored limited action in the form of a blockade and military action that might become unstoppable . Kennedy favored the blockade, which he said might be unstoppable .
 On Sunday, October 21, Kennedy decided to address the nation the following day and tell them of his decision . Kennedy made the announcement to the nation on October 21 . Kennedy: "I'm sorry for what I've done, I'm not going to do it."
 Under international law, a blockade is an act of war, while a quarantine is less clear cut . A quarantine is not a quarantine under international law . A blockade is a war act, but quarantine is a quarantine .
 Kennedy requested that they publish nothing provocative in the delicate situation that prevailed . Kennedy asked the press not to publish anything provocative in a delicate situation .
 On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy addressed the nation on television . President Kennedy spoke to the nation at 9 p.m. ET on October 22 .
 During his 17-minute speech, he explained evidence of the Soviet missile buildup . He declared a quarantine against weapons deliveries to Cuba, and issued blunt warnings to the Soviet Union .
 Not knowing how the Soviets would react, he had already placed American military forces on high alert .
 20 SAC bombers were airborne, equipped with nuclear bombs . Missiles had been readied for launch within minutes . 20 bombers were armed with nuclear weapons .
 Khrushchev responded with a letter to Kennedy, denying again that the weapons were anything but defensive . Kennedy warned the U.S. of possible catastrophic consequences if they continued along their announced path . The letter was sent to Kennedy .
 The Organization of American States unanimously approved the quarantine of Cuba . The quarantine was approved by the OAS . Cuba is the only country to quarantine Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy met privately with Ambassador Dobrynin and complained bitterly that he had lied to him about the missiles . Robert Kennedy complained bitterly about the missile tests . Ambassador Dobynin had lied about missiles .
 Dobrynin stated that to the best of his knowledge, the missiles were entirely defensive . The missiles were designed to protect the Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Dobrynin cabled Moscow with a report of the meeting after the meeting . After the meeting, Dobryn in Moscow cabled a report to Moscow .
 Dobrynin was forced to use Western Union, which sent a messenger by bicycle to pick up the wire . Western Union sent a bike messenger by bike to collect the wire, which was sent by bicycle .
 The United States Navy began enforcing the quarantine with 56 warships, including eight aircraft carriers, at 10m. on October 24 . The U.S. Navy began to enforce the quarantine on October 25 .
 At 10:25m., EX-COMM was informed that Soviet ships had turned away from the quarantine line . At 10-25m. Soviet ships turn away from quarantine line. Ex-commissioner: At 10.25m, ex-Commitm was informed .
 The missiles already in Cuba constituted an ongoing threat . While that averted an immediate confrontation, the missiles still in Cuba remained a threat .
 SAC headquarters put its forces around the world on the highest level of alert ever . SAC HQ in Washington DC put forces on highest alert ever after 9/11 attacks .
 Communications were sent uncoded, so that the Soviets would have no misconceptions regarding America’s intent . The U.S. sent communications to the Soviet Union in order to avoid misunderstanding .
 Khrushchev's letter described the U.S. position as an ultimatum to which the Soviets would not submit . That evening, another letter from Khrushvic arrived, which described the American position as a . ultimumumum . The letter was sent by Khrush
 Kennedy instructed United Nations Ambassador Adlai E Stevenson to confront Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin about the missiles . On the 25th, Kennedy instructed U.N. Ambassador Adr. Stevenson to speak to Soviet ambassador Valeran Zorina .
 Stevenson showed him reconnaissance photos that clearly showed the launch sites . Stevenson said the launch site was a launch site for the first time . Stevenson was impressed with the photos .
 At that point, well-known columnist Walter Lippman published an appeal for a face-saving compromise . At that time, the White House was under pressure to compromise with Congress .
 Many people thought Kennedy was sending up a ""trial balloon" through Lippman, but he was actually acting on his own . Kennedy was acting alone .
 CIA director McCone informed the group that Soviet missiles in Cuba were operational . Ex-COMM meeting was the first time the Soviets had operational Soviet missiles were operational in Cuba .
 On the 26th, the United States Navy boarded the Lebanese freighter Marcula .
 It found only paper products and permitted the ship to continue to Cuba . The ship was allowed to continue its journey to Cuba after it was found to be empty .
 A Soviet ship, not suspected of carrying weapons, was also allowed through . The Soviet ship was not suspected to be carrying weapons .
 U.S. and the Soviets proposed a deal to pull missiles from Cuba in exchange for a pledge not to invade Cuba . The letter was signed by President Kennedy in 1961 . The Soviets proposed the deal in return for a U.N. pledge to not invade Cuba.
 Later that evening, Robert Kennedy again visited Dobrynin at the Soviet Embassy . Robert Kennedy's visit was the first time he had been to the embassy in Moscow .
 The question of missiles in Turkey was raised and Kennedy suggested that a trade might be possible . Kennedy suggested a trade may be possible between the two countries .
 Saturday, October 26, was extremely tense as events brought the two countries closer to war than they had before . The two countries are now closer to each other than before .
 A U-2 plane on a routine flight in Alaska got lost and strayed into Soviet airspace . The plane was flying over Alaska when it got lost in the Soviet Union airspace .
 The Soviets responded by sending a fighter group to intercept the U-2 and American fighters were sent in response . The Soviets also sent a group of fighters to intercept U.2 fighters .
 The U-2 was able to leave Soviet airspace without the fighter groups making contact with each other . Fortunately, the U.2 left Soviet airspace .
 The orders came from a local commander without approval from Moscow . That was considered by the U.S. to be evidence that the Soviets were escalating the conflict . The orders had come from a commander without Moscow approval .
 Khrushchev sent another letter, demanding that the U.S. pull out of Turkey in return for the Soviets pulling out of Cuba . The letter also demanded that the United States withdraw its missiles from Turkey in exchange for the Soviet pull out .
 The Jupiter missiles in Turkey were not well regarded by U.S. military strategists . They represented less of a strategic position than the Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s letter had been broadcast to avoid delays in communications . However, in order to avoid delay in communications, the letter was broadcast . The letter was made public to avoid any delay in communication .
 By making their demands public, the Soviets were making it difficult for the Americans to accept the proposal . By making it public, they made it harder for the U.S. to accept their proposal .
 Robert Kennedy proposed that the U.S. simply ignore the second letter and respond to the first . Robert Kennedy: "At that critical juncture, the United States simply ignored the first letter and responded to the second."
 At 8:05m., President Kennedy announced that he agreed to what he understood Khrushchev's position to be, and that if the Soviets would agree to withdraw their missiles, the U.S. would end the quarantine and promise not to invade Cuba . At 8.05m
 Khrushchev met with his advisors and decided he was not prepared to start a war . He decided not to start war with the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 The message was received at 9m. on Sunday, October 28, effectively ending the crisis . It is the first time the crisis has been declared over .
 Ex-COMM members were not convinced that this was anything but a Soviet delay . However, not all members of EXCOMM were convinced that it was anything more than a delay .
 Air Force General Curtis Lemay, chief of staff, argued that the U.S. should attack Cuba on the following day anyway . The majority disagreed, but the majority disagreed .
 The Jupiter missiles positioned in Turkey would be withdrawn in a few months . The decision would not be tied to the agreement about Cuba, officials said .
 The question of Soviet bombers stationed in Cuba had not been specifically addressed, but the United States used Khrushchev's promise to remove all ""weapons which you describe as offensive"" to argue for their removal .
 A new ‹“hot line” was later installed so that in the future the White House and the Kremlin could talk directly . Also, to solve the communication delays between the two countries, a new ¹‹”hot line was installed .
 On November 20, the Soviet Union began the process of dismantling the bombers and shipping them back . The Soviet Union has begun the process to dismantle the bombers .