 Students will learn about the history of the peace movement peace movement during the and some of the activities conducted . The Peace Movement AIM OVERVIEW to consider the influence of the .
 Students will examine the success Cuban missile crisis . and failure of the peace movement . Students will consider how it could improve its message for the future .
 Students will take part in a time capsule activity . LESSON OUTCOMES looking to the future through peace .
 Peace, reconciliation, mutually . Individual and pair work assured destruction , time capsule . Individual work assured . Destruction assured .
 In columns on the board they have one minute each to write as many activities and things that the peace movement could do to continue to promote peace . The peace movement is a movement that promotes peace in peace .
 This is a race, with the winning group writing the most words in the time given . The winning group must write the most of the time in order to win the race .
 Students pick one activity each – each group must allocate different activities to its group members . Students pick a different activity each . Students must choose one activity per group .
 Students write a plan, or a piece of prose, a comic, a cartoon, or an image to demonstrate their method to promote peace . Each student writes a plan or a proposal to demonstrate peace .
 Give some answers in advance of the peace symbols activity . Assign one activity per student, and the skill that they have to develop eg drawing, writing to create the activity . Conduct an anonymous vote .
 Students make their own peace symbols with annotations to add to the time capsule . Create a test for students’ future self that they could complete on the opening of a time capsule.
 Take part in a whole school time capsule event, bury the time capsule in the school grounds and reopen in 5 years’ time . Invite a local celebrity, or politician to take part in the event . Watch a film about the peace movement and discuss key aspects of the film .
 The United States bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki heralded a new, nuclear age . The UK and the Soviet Union quickly followed the USA’s lead in developing nuclear weapons .
 Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament was launched with a massive public meeting in London in 1958 . In 1958, building on the work of earlier peace movements, it was launched .
 CND called for Britain to disarm its nuclear weapons, regardless of the actions of other states . CND calls for Britain's nuclear weapons to be dismantled .
 It also backed multilateral disarmament, urging the UK to lead the way . It also urged others to do the same towards the eventual global abolition of nuclear weapons .
 The campaign and its goals gained prominence in the late 1950s and early 1960s . International negotiations on reducing the numbers of nuclear weapons in the world made little progress .
 Antinuclear campaigners took to the streets in annual marches between London and Aldermaston, which to this day is the location of the manufacture of the UK's nuclear weapons .
 By October 1962 fears of a nuclear war reached their peak as the US discovered Soviet missiles being based in Cuba, a mere 90 miles from Florida . The US already had missiles capable of reaching the Soviet Union based in Europe .
 During the crisis, communications between the Kremlin and the White House took hours to reach their recipients . The Kremlin and White House were unable to reach each other during the crisis .
 The Soviet Union and the USA established a ‘hotline’ that would reduce the chances of a nuclear war being started accidentally, allowing direct communication between the superpowers . As a consequence, the Soviet Union established a 'hotline' to reduce the chance of nuclear war starting accidentally
 The next year a ban on nuclear testing in the atmosphere was agreed between the US, Soviet Union and Britain . The ban was agreed in the wake of the Cold War .
 International tension relaxed as the immediate threat of nuclear war faded away . International tensions relaxed as a result of the nuclear threat .
 Britain became home to US-made nuclear-carrying Polaris missiles, and protests were ongoing . The build up of nuclear weapons continued .
 By 1979, the threat of nuclear war was again heightened and the peace movement in Britain grew . Plans were put in place to station United States cruise missiles on UK soil and across Europe .
 At this time, the Soviet Union had also placed missiles in Eastern Europe . The Soviet Union also had placed missile missiles in eastern Europe .
 This era saw some of the most iconic anti-nuclear demonstrations . Massive demonstrations in London as well as the development of peace camps at missile bases . Women’s peace camp established at Greenham common in 1981 .
 With the end of the Cold War in 1989, there was a significant reduction in global tension . treaties were signed and cruise missiles were removed from Europe . Cruise missiles were also removed from the continent .
 Hopes were high for the abolition of nuclear weapons after the Cold War . But there have been major bilateral reductions between the U.S. and Russia .
 The new century has also seen a wave of wars in the Middle East, expansion of NATO and US-led 'War on Terror' against which the UK peace movement has been active .
 CND has continued its role as a mobiliser of mass public opinion in 2003 . CND co-organised the largest ever march in UK history – against the war on Iraq – and continues with its campaign to scrap Trident .
 Time Capsule is a method of storing artefacts and information that could be of use to future generations in analysing the social, cultural, political, technological and economic situations of those who buried the capsule .
 They are often laid in the ground or in the corner stones of buildings with the intention that they will be retrieved and opened at a future date . They often are laid there with the intent of retrieving and opening at a later date .
 It contained photographs and letters describing Detroit life at the time and predicting what the future held for the city . It contained photos and letters of Detroit life .
 During the Cold War many time capsules in the Soviet Union contained messages for a future communist society . Soviet system of government was seen as a step on the path to a stateless, classless society with full, democratic workers' control .
 One capsule contained a message to the socialist world of 2024 from a Komsomol (Communist Youth) unit in Kamchatka, in the Soviet Union from 1979 . The capsule was discovered in 2012 buried beneath a statue of Lenin .
 In 2013 environment workers working on the demolition of a nuclear reactor in Washington, USA, discovered a small, make-shift time capsule constructed from a coffee tin .
 The capsule contains newspaper clippings and a small note signed by those that put it together . The capsule was placed in 1955 at the site in 1955 .
 Former Belgian minister suggested it be used as a rallying emblem in World War Two . It became commonly used after the former Belgian minister of Justice suggested it was used in Belgium .
 In 1960s America it came to be used by the peace movement to represent peace . It is used in Japan frequently as a gesture and greeting of peace .
 The dove and the olive branch are often attributed to the story of Noah’s ark . The dove is believed to be the symbol of the ark, Noah's ark.
 Noah sent a dove to look for land, one day it came back with an olive branch . Noah sent the dove to find land, Noah sent it back with a message: 'Noah' Noah. Noah sent him to find a new home, Noah.
 A dove has come to represent peace and is used throughout the peace movement . A dove symbolizes peace and has been used in peace movements .
 The colours come from other flags for the nuclear disarmament movement and also from a flag made by the artist Picasso who included a dove .
 The PACE sign is often confused with the flag for the Lesbian, Bisexual, Gay and Transgender movement . The rainbow colours are different to the rainbow colours .
 In Japan there is a legend that tells that everyone who makes 1000 origami cranes will be granted a wish . In Japan, there is an origami legend that says that each origami crane makes 1000 wishes .
 The lines represent the semaphore letters of N and D for Nuclear Disarmament . The lines are the letters of the letters for nuclear disarmament .
 The broken rifle traces its roots to the 1900s and was adopted by War Resisters International as their symbol . War Resister International adopted the broken rifle as a symbol of their struggle .
 In 1933 the Women’s Co-operative Guild started distributing White Poppies .
 In 1934 the Peace Pledge Union made wreaths of the white poppy as an alternative to the red poppy as a pledge to peace that war must not happen again . The white poppy is a way to remember victims of war without glorifying militarism .
 Images from the peace movement 1982: No to U.S. Cruise weapons at Greenham Common . 2003: Led by Ken Livingstone and Jesse Jackson, the largest ever demonstration in the UK: Don’t Attack Iraq 2012: CND banner drop at ‘A Future that