 The Cuban missile crisis brought the world to the brink of nuclear disaster 50 years ago . The crisis was the height of the Soviet Union's nuclear weapons program .
 In October 1962, a U.S. spy plane caught the Soviet Union trying to sneak nuclear-tipped missiles into Cuba, 90 miles off the United States' coast . The Soviet Union was caught 90 miles from the coast .
 President Obama imposed a naval blockade on further shipments of armaments to Cuba . After a week of secret deliberations, he announced the discovery to the world .
 The blockade prevented additional materiel from coming in but did nothing to stop the Soviets from operationalizing the missiles already there . The blockade did not stop them from operating missiles already .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev stood "eyeball to eyeball,"" neither side backed down . A tense second week followed during which Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchchev stood . Neither side was backing down .
 Secret tapes reveal the deliberations of the National Security Council's ad hoc Executive Committee . Secret tapes were made by President Kennedy in the early 1950s . ExComm members debated what they knew could lead to nuclear Armageddon .
 Khrushchev accepted a final U.S. offer pledging not to invade Cuba in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles . At the last minute, the crisis was resolved without war, as the United States offered to withdraw missiles .
 Every president since Kennedy has tried to learn from what happened in that confrontation . Every president has learned from the lessons learned from Kennedy's experience .
 The lessons of the crisis for current policy have never been greater . Ironically, half a century later, with the Soviet Union itself only a distant memory, the lessons are never greater . The Soviet Union is now a long-isolated state of the world .
 U.S. policymakers understand what to do and what not to do about Iran, North Korea, China, China . Today, it can help them understand what they need to do -and what not - about Iran .
 Events are moving, seemingly inexorably, toward a showdown in Iran . The U.S. president will be forced to choose between ordering a military attack and acquiescing to a nuclear-armed Iran .
 The sweetener was kept so secret that even most members of the ExComm deliberating with Kennedy on the final evening were unaware that during the dinner break, the president had sent his brother Bobby to deliver this message to the Soviet ambassador .
 Looking at the choice between acquiescence and air strikes today, both are unattractive . The choice between air strikes and acquiescence is "unattractive," writes Andrew Hammond .
 An Iranian bomb could trigger a cascade of proliferation, making more likely a devastating conflict in one of the world's most economically and strategically critical regions . The region is economically important and strategically important .
 A preventive air strike could delay Iran's nuclear progress at identified sites, but could not erase the knowledge and skills ingrained in many Iranian heads . A preventive strike could also erase Iran's knowledge of its nuclear progress .
 The best hope is a combination of constraints on Iran's nuclear activities that would lengthen the fuse on the development of a bomb, transparency measures that would maximize the likelihood of discovering any cheating, threats of a regime-changing attack should the agreement be violated, and a pledge not to attack
 Such a combination would keep Iran as far away from a bomb as possible for as long as possible . Iran has a long history of trying to avoid a nuclear bomb .
 The Israeli factor makes the Iranian nuclear situation an even more complex challenge for U.S. policymakers than the Cuban missile crisis was . The Iranian nuclear crisis is a bigger challenge for American policymakers than it was for Cuban leaders .
 Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro sought to become the third Cuban prime minister . Had he succeeded, the crisis would have become significantly more dangerous, he says .
 The White House recognized that the Cubans could become a wild card, it cut them out of the game . But precisely because the White House knew that they could become the wild card they cut them from the game, it did so .
 Kennedy informed the Kremlin that it would be held accountable for any attack against the United States emanating from Cuba, however it started . Kennedy told the Kremlin it would not be responsible for any attacks against the U.S.
 The threat of an Israeli air strike strengthens the U.S. President Barack Obama's hand in squeezing Iran to make concessions . Israel has threatened a strike on Iran in the past .
 The possibility that Israel might carry out a unilateral air strike without U.S. approval must make Washington nervous . But it makes the crisis much harder to manage, since it makes it harder to deal with .
 If domestic situation in Israel reduces the likelihood of independent Israeli attack, U.S. policymakers will not be unhappy . The domestic situation will reduce the chances of an independent Israel attack .
 Presented with intelligence showing Soviet missiles in Cuba, Kennedy confronted the Soviet Union publicly . Kennedy demanded their withdrawal, recognizing that a confrontation risked war .
 U.S. presidents have spoken loudly but carried a small stick when responding to North Korea's provocations over the years . President Barack Obama has been criticized by North Korea for his comments on North Korea .
 In confronting Khrushchev, Kennedy ordered actions that he knew would increase the risk of nuclear war . This is one reason the Cuban crisis was not repeated whereas the North Korean ones have been, repeatedly, repeated .
 He raised the United States nuclear alert status to DEFCON 2, aware that this would loosen control over the country's nuclear weapons and increase the likelihood that actions by other individuals could trigger a cascade .
 NATO aircraft with Turkish pilots loaded active nuclear bombs and advanced to an alert status in which individual pilots could have chosen to take off, fly to Moscow, and drop a bomb . For example, individual pilots in NATO aircraft could have flown to Moscow and dropped bomb .
 Kennedy thought it was necessary to increase the risks of war in the short run in order to decrease them over the longer term . Kennedy: "I thought it necessary to ... increase the risk of war"
 He was thinking not only about Cuba but also about the next confrontation, which would most likely come over West Berlin . West Berlin, a free enclave inside the East German puppet state, is free .
 Success in Cuba would embolden Khrushchev to resolve the Berlin situation on his own terms, forcing Kennedy to choose between accepting Soviet domination of the city and using nuclear weapons to try to save it .
 U.S. and South Korean policymakers have shied away from such risks in the past three decades . They are deterred by North Korea's threat to destroy Seoul in a second Korean war . North Korea has threatened to destroy South Korea in a war .
 North Korean leaders have taken advantage of this fear to develop an effective strategy for blackmail . North Korea has developed a strategy to blackmail Kim Jong Jong-Un .
 A third party, usually China, steps in to propose that ""all sides"" step back and cool down . After tensions have risen, a third party usually steps in .
 South Korea or Japan or the U.S. make side payments to North Korea, leading to a resumption of talks . Soon thereafter, side payments are made by South Korea, Japan, the United States or South Korea .
 Pyongyang agrees to accept still more payments in return for promises to abandon its nuclear program . North Korea agreed to accept more in exchange for promise to abandon nuke program . Pyongyang agreed to the latest installment in a series of negotiations with the North .
 Washington and Seoul vow never to be duped again . Some months after that, North Korea violates the agreement, Washington and South Korea express shock . Washington, Seoul express shock, and they vow never again .
 If the worst consequence of this charade were simply the frustration of being bested by one of the poorest, most isolated states on earth, then the repeated Korean crises would be a sideshow . North Korea is the most isolated state in the world, isolated and impoverished .
 North Korea sold Syria a plutonium-producing reactor that, had Israel not destroyed it, would have produced enough plutonium for Syria's first nuclear bomb . North Korea then proceeded to sell Syria a reactor that would have made enough plutonium to bomb Syria .
 Washington's response was to ignore the incident and resume talks three weeks later . Washington responded to the incident by ignoring it and continuing talks .
 One lesson of the Cuban missile crisis is that if you are not prepared to risk war, even nuclear war, an adroit adversary can get you to back down in successive confrontations . If you're not prepared for war, you may back down, even if you're willing to risk
 If you do have redlines that would lead to war if crossed, then you have to communicate them credibly to your adversary . Or risk having your threats dismissed or risk being dismissed .
 North Korea's sale of a nuclear bomb to terrorists who then used it against an American target would trigger a devastating American retaliation . American retaliation would be devastating if North Korea sold a weapon to terrorists .
 A similar dynamic may have emerged in the U.S. economic relationship with China . The United States and China's economic relationship has been strained .
 The response from the political and economic establishment has been a nearly unanimous rejection of such statements as reckless rhetoric that risks a catastrophic trade war . The response to such statements has been rejected by the political, economic establishment .
 Economics and security are separate realms, but lessons learned in one can be carried over into the other . Economics is separate from security, but can be applied to security, the author says .
 The defining geopolitical challenge of the next half century will be managing the relationship between the U.S. and China as a ruling superpower and a rising one . China is a rising and dominant power in the Middle East .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy judged that Khrushchev's adventurism violated what Kennedy called the ""rules of the precarious status quo"" in relations between two nuclear superpowers . Kennedy judged the adventurist's adventuraism violated the rules of the status quo .
 The resolution of the standoff in Cuba helped restore and reinforce the rules of the Cold War . These rules had evolved during previous crises, and they were restored and reinforced by the resolution .
 The U.S. and China will have to develop their own rules of the road in order to escape Thucydides' trap . The United States and China have to have their own own rules to escape the trap .
 These will need to accommodate both parties' core interests, threading a path between conflict and appeasement . Both parties need to find a way to accommodate their core interests .
 Overreacting to perceived threats would be a mistake, but so would ignoring or papering over unacceptable misbehavior in the hope that it will not recur, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 China launched a series of missiles over Taiwan in 1996, prompting the U.S. to send two aircraft carrier battle groups into harm's way . In 1996, after some steps by Taipei that Beijing considered provocative, the United States sent two aircraft carriers to Taiwan .
 The eventual result was a clearer understanding of both sides' redlines on the Taiwan issue and a calmer region . It was a better understanding of the redlines and the result of a better resolution .
 China's continued economic rise and new status are reflected in expanded military capabilities and a more robust foreign posture . The relationship may need additional such clarifying moments in order to manage a precarious transition .
 A final lesson the crisis teaches has to do not with policy but with process . Googletag.push is an example of how the company handled the crisis .
 Unless the commander in chief has sufficient time and privacy to understand a situation, examine the evidence, explore various options, and reflect before choosing among them, poor decisions are likely . President Barack Obama has a long history of making poor decisions .
 McGeorge Bundy, his national security adviser, thought it would be a week at most . Bundy: "I'm not sure how long I'll be here, but I'm sure I'm going to be here" Bundy: Bundy's national security advisers thought Bundy would be gone for a
 Obama learned this painfully during his first year in office, when he found the administration's deliberations over its Afghanistan policy playing out in public, removing much of his flexibility to select or even consider unconventional options .
 President Obama has demanded a new national security decision-making process led by a national security adviser . This experience led him to demand a new process of national security decisions .
 One of the fruits of the revised approach was a much more tightly controlled flow of information, made possible by an unprecedented narrowing of the inner decision-making circle . The changes were made in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis .
 The story of bin Laden's whereabouts was kept secret for five months until the raid on his compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, was revealed after the raid . This allowed discussions over how to handle the discovery to play out slowly .
 It has been said that history does not repeat itself, but it does sometimes rhyme . History does rhyme, but rhyme. It has a history of rhyming words .
 Five decades later, the Cuban missile crisis stands as a guide for how to defuse conflicts, manage great-power relationships and make sound decisions about foreign policy in general . The crisis was a pivotal moment in the history of the Cold War but also a guide to how to deal with great
 Googletag.push { googletig.display; }); . . ( ) ( ) ) . ( ( )) ) is a Google search for information .
 Stay tuned to the latest from Foreign Affairs. Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline.com .