 On Saturday, Oct. 1962, President John F Kennedy entered the Oval Room in the family living quarters of the White House . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 He joined 12 of his closest advisers, whom he had called to help him wrestle with the most important decision of his brief presidency . The decision was perhaps even the most critical judgment in the country's modern history .
 Fifty years ago this month, the United States and the Soviet Union faced off over a threatening hot spot in the Cold War . The U.S. and the Soviets faced off on a Cold War hot spot 50 years ago .
 The deployment represents a serious escalation in the continuing confrontation between the two countries and their respective allies . The deployment represented a serious escalator in the ongoing confrontation .
 Most experts have considered the episode to be America’s closest brush with nuclear war . Other experts have been less dramatic, but most have considered it to be the episode .
 Various memoirs and other accounts, as well as a number of films, have chronicled the tense, 13-day standoff .
 Few people are aware of the precautions Kennedy and his advisers took to safeguard government officials in the event the crisis provoked a catastrophe .
 Few appreciate the parallel crisis that arose among government leaders and their families . Tensions doubled the anxieties of the men who toiled day and night to prevent war .
 From the start of the crisis, Kennedy met regularly with a select group of advisers – the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, the ExComm – to discuss possible responses to the Soviet missile installations in Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff urged aggressive military strikes against Soviet Union . Options ranged from diplomatic initiatives to aggressive military action . Joint Chiefs said those actions might lead to all-out war with the Soviets .
 International norms held a blockade to be an act of war, so the group chose a less hostile term, one that did not require a congressional declaration of war . International norms hold a blockade of a country's borders to be a war .
 The United States Navy would stop ships en route to Cuba and search their cargo for offensive weapons . Regardless, the U.S. Navy would find offensive weapons in their cargo .
 Kennedy hoped that a measured first step might allow Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev an opportunity to back away from the brink . Kennedy hopes that the first step may allow Khrushchchev to back from brink .
 Kennedy’s staff summoned his top advisors to the executive mansion for the decisive meeting . Kennedy's staff agreed that the president should be allowed to speak to his advisors .
 One of those present, Edward A McDermott, was the head of the Office of Emergency Planning . The position now held by the director of FEMA, FEMA .
 His main responsibility was to protect the American public in the event of a natural catastrophe or, worse, a manmade holocaust, he said .
 McDermott had been Iowa's coordinator for Kennedy’s 1960 campaign . An innovative and detail-oriented lawyer from Dubuque, Iowa, McDermott worked for Kennedy in 1960 .
 This would be his first involvement in the ongoing international crisis, but he knew it involved the discovery of aggressive and potentially hostile activity by the Soviet Union in Cuba . The Soviet Union was found to be conducting aggressive activity by Cuba .
 After everyone spoke, the president stepped out onto the Truman Balcony to think alone . The president took a break from the White House to spend some time alone .
 Kennedy remained alone on the balcony for a few moments, until his brother Robert, the attorney general, and presidential aide Theodore C Sorensen joined him .
 McDermott began to prepare non-military parts of the government for nuclear war in the event the situation spun out of control .
 The president and hundreds of key officials were evacuated to safe sites outside the Washington area . He and his staff initiated secret “continuity of government” procedures, which enabled evacuation .
 McDermott started to think of his family’s welfare if war were to start . Just as others around him, McDermott thought about his family's welfare .
 The country faced a crisis with the Soviet Union over its installation of nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union had installed nuclear-army missiles in the country .
 Aides prepared a speech for Kennedy to deliver to the nation Monday night . Kennedy's speech will be delivered at 9 p.m. ET on Monday .
 Others drafted an ultimatum to Khrushchev, demanding the missiles’ removal . Others drafted a letter demanding the missile's removal .
 The president met with his full Cabinet and then briefed congressional leaders for the first time . The president also met with the president's full Cabinet .
 On the same day, Kennedy spoke to the American public on television at 7m. Kennedy spoke on the same time as the president .
 Naola McDermott, then just 38, shuddered at the immense leap her family had made from small-town Iowa to the center of a possible world war . McDermott was just 38 when the war broke out in 1941 .
 The Navy implemented the quarantine on Day Nine, Wednesday, Oct. 10, at 10m. The quarantine began at 10pm .
 Strategic Air Command declared Defense Condition 2, the brink of war . In preparation for a possible aggressive Soviet response, the Strategic Air command declared the move . The move was a response to an aggressive response from the Soviet Union .
 To Kennedy’s great relief, the Soviets ships en route to Cuba either stopped or turned around . Kennedy's great relief was that the ships turned around or stopped .
 Khrushchev sent a strident letter to Kennedy late on Oct. 1962 . The letter was more edgy than his initial response to Kennedy’s speech and the private ultimatum .
 McDermott had dinner at home for the first time since the previous Friday . McDermott was back at home at the end of the week .
 He told Naola about the scheme to relocate key government leaders, including himself . Naola: "It's a good thing to say yes, but it's not a good idea"
 “Joe Chambers’s house in Rockville, Md., about six miles from our home,” she recalled . Joe Chambers was a friend of Joe Chambers, she said . “I’m not sure what happened to Joe Chambers. Joe Chambers”
 Chambers was McDermott’s deputy, a Marine who had won the Medal of Honor in World War II and had a bomb shelter in his basement . Chambers was the son of a Marine, who won the medal of Honor . Chambers is McDermott's deputy .
 McDermott’s activity reached a fevered pitch on Day 10 . McDermott's activity at the center of the controversy .
 His staff notified Vice President Lyndon Johnson and congressional leaders of specific contingency plans, such as where they would meet helicopters that would fly them to safety .
 The relocation facilities would not accommodate their families, he said . Regrettably, he told them, they would not be able to relocate their families .
 Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren briefed on evacuation procedures . McDermott briefed him on the justices’ evacuation procedures. Chief Justice Warren was briefed on the evacuation procedures by McDermott .
 Warren told McDermott that they wouldn't go without their families . Warren said that he spoke for the other eight justices, who said they would .
 McDermott gave the continuity of government packet to Kennedy aides Kenneth P O’Donnell and David F Powers, both worried about the fate of their families . Secretary of State Dean Rusk had a similar response .
 Hugh Sidey, who covered the White House for Time magazine, reacted similarly . Sidey: "I don't think it's a good thing to say that the president is in trouble"
 Assigned to a media pool scheduled to accompany an evacuated president, he withdrew . He withdrew and said he could not leave his wife and three small children behind . The president was scheduled to be accompanied by the media .
 Kennedy's aides told Sidey that he had no plans to leave, Sidey says . Another of Kennedy’s aides told the president, according to Sidey, that he was not going to leave .
 The backlash over the fate of families grew to the point that McDermott and the president’s naval aide, Cm. Cmdr. McDermott, was forced to step down .
 Families of senior officials should rendezvous at the Fort Reno Reservoir in upper northwest Washington, D.C. If Kennedy ordered an evacuation, families should meet at the reservoir .
 The American Embassy in Moscow transmitted another letter from Khrushchev . Meanwhile, the U.S. Embassy in Russia received another letter . The letter was signed by the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 Khrushchev promised to remove the missiles if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba . Kennedy’s election-year grandstanding was part of a cynical aside . Kennedy said the missiles would be removed if the United States did not invade .
 An informal communication from a Soviet intelligence officer in Washington to ABC TV reporter John Scali made the same offer . The offer was made in an informal communication .
 U.S. Army and Marine units prepared for invasion, just in case . Nevertheless, United States Army and . Marine units were prepared for an invasion .
 Naola McDermott shopped for groceries that day and recalled running into a friend . McDermott was shopping for groceries at the time of the incident .
 The following morning, Oct. 31, on what should have been a day of eased tensions, events quickly turned sour . The next morning, October 31, was the first anniversary of the U.S. Embassy Day .
 Khrushchev demanded that the U.S. withdraw its Jupiter medium-range missiles in Turkey in exchange for the dismantling of Soviet weapons in Cuba . A second letter in as many days demanded that U.K. withdraws its Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Thursday .
 A Soviet SA-2 surface-to-air missile brought down an American U-2 reconnaissance aircraft over Banes in eastern Cuba . The pilot perished after being hit by the missile .
 Joint Chiefs urged an airstrike on Cuba on Monday, followed the next day with a ground force invasion . Joint Chiefs reacted aggressively, urging an airstrike and ground force action .
 In “Thirteen Days,” Robert Kennedy’s account of the crisis, he wrote that his brother urged caution . Robert Kennedy: "Thirteen days" is a cautionary tale .
 Kennedy sent a carefully worded reply to Khrushchev late in the day that hinted at a Jupiter withdrawal . Kennedy's reply hints at withdrawal .
 The president then ordered all potential attacks on Cuba be delayed until Tuesday . The president still authorized the call-up of Air Force Reserves needed for a Cuban invasion .
 The roller-coaster that took Kennedy’s team from despair to hope seemed headed down into another abyss . Kennedy's team was on the verge of another abyss, but it was still hopeful .
 Ed McDermott came home after nightfall, showered and changed clothes, and went back to his office . McDermott: "I'm not going to be angry. I'm not angry" McDermott says .
 She kept busy with the kids but dreaded ‘the phone call’ from her husband . ‘The phone call is the phone call,’ she said .
 Khrushchev, with Kennedy’s sweetened offer, sent his capitulation to the White House on Day 13 . Kennedy was concerned by U.S. preparations for a Cuban invasion . Khrushchchev was worried about the observable United States .
 The Soviets agreed to withdraw missiles and warheads under United Nations observation . The U.N. observation was part of the agreement to withdraw the missiles . The Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from the Soviet Union .
 It was not until years later that they told their children about the extraordinary crisis that both their country and family faced during those fateful 13 days .
 Bohn is a former director of the White House Situation Room . Bohn: "I don't think it's a good idea to be optimistic about the future"
 Obergefell was central to the Court’s landmark ruling on gay marriage . The Supreme Court's decision to uphold same-sex marriage was a landmark decision .
 Created with Sketch. Now he's terrified . Now he’s terrified .
 May 03, 2022 2:25 PM Take Us With You . Real-time updates and all local stories you want right in the palm of your hand .