 We are flying to Miami en route to Havana for a conference, with Fidel Castro, on the Cuban missile crisis . We will meet in Havana to discuss missile crisis in Cuba .
 This is the fifth conference in a series that began in 1987, in Hawk’s Cay, Florida, as an all-American affair . Kennedy administration veterans were asked questions about the crisis by political scientists and historians .
 Cubans complained that everyone called it the Cuban missile crisis but no one ever asked them . Then they complained that no one asked them about the crisis . Then Cubans said they were never asked about it .
 The third meeting, held in Moscow in 1989, included Cubans . A fourth meeting was held in Antigua last year . The Cubans then proposed a fifth meeting in Havana in Havana .
 Castro had his own CIA; and Cuba’s clandestine war in the early 1960s against other Latin American states was an essential part of the story . Where the Americans and the Soviets had divulged internal debates and declassified relevant documents, the Cubans had gone on about the in
 The Kennedy administration had seen the future of Latin America as essentially a contest between the Castro way and the Betancourt way . Kennedy administration: "The Castro way" was the way of the future in Latin America .
 Robert McNamara and I both have forebodings and agreed last weekend that if the conference degenerates into a propaganda barrage by Castro and his team, we will walk out . McNamara: "Robert McNamara, Robert McFarlane and others agree to walk out. If the conference
 After much waiting, a crowded plane takes off on the forty-minute flight to Havana . The plane is now headed to Havana, Cuba .
 I first visited Havana in 1950, for a meeting of the Inter-American Association for Democracy and Freedom . I met Betancourt and other democratic leaders like José Figueres of Costa Rica, Juan Bosch of the Dominican Republic, Eduardo Frei and Salvador Allende of Chile
 I next visited Havana thirty-five years later—in May 1985 and again in October, this time on human rights missions . Robert White, a former ambassador to El Salvador, and a champion of Latin American democracy, visited Havana .
 Human rights are obviously not on the agenda of the impending conference, and the primary purpose of the present trip is to clarify the historical record of the supreme crisis of the nuclear age .
 Wayne Smith, Wayne Smith and Robert Pastor, McNamara’s son-in-law, are concerned to see what we can of the human rights situation . That situation has recently been growing worse .
 María Elena Cruz Varela was forced to swallow a moving declaration of principles she had written for the small human rights group Criterio Alternativo . On November 19, the poet was brutally treated by government demonstrators . She had written a moving statement of principles for a human rights
 Some in the exile community fear that she has been given psychotropic drugs in preparation for a public appearance at a Havana trial . She was subsequently sentenced to two years in prison, and some in exile fear she has taken drugs to prepare for the trial .
 Yndamaro Restano, head of the Movimiento Armonía, was arrested on December 20 . Restano is a member of the social democratic group, which was arrested last month .
 All these people and their organizations call for political freedom and peaceful reform . All these groups call for peaceful reform.
 Carlos Aldana, the leading ideologue on the Politburo, delivered a vicious attack on the human rights movement . All are opposed to violence .
 With such wretched events in mind, we ride from the airport into Havana . The Cuban capital is Havana .
 Returning after half a dozen years, I am struck by the silence of the streets . Returning after a decade of years, he is struck by a silence of streets .
 The oil shortage has left very few private automobiles and not many buses on the road . The shortage of oil has left many private cars and buses out of the market .
 Chinese bicycles are imported from China to the U.S. The bikes are popular in China .
 Castro is engaged in an extensive effort to convert Cuba into a nation of bicycle riders . Castro is also trying to make Cuba more cycling-friendly .
 We are installed in official guest houses in El Lagito, a pretty estate with rolling green lawns and a placid pond populated by pink water lilies and three brilliant orange flamingos .
 The Russian group, which includes the sons of Nikita Khrushchev and Anastas Mikoyan, is housed in a neighboring villa . The group is housed there in neighboring villas .
 In the afternoon we all—Americans and Russians, drive through the empty streets for a ceremony of welcome around a missile standing in a historical park by the sea . The SS-4 missile is standing in an historical park .
 The “Conferencia Tripartita Sobre La Crisis de Octobre de 1962” opens at 3 PM in the Palace of Conferences in Rome . The ‘Tripartita’ will take place at 3 p.m. on October 31 .
 Castro arrives promptly, looking extremely fit in well-tailored fatigues . Castro arrives at the end of the day in a well-laid military uniform .
 No one had reminded him, he disarmingly but unconvincingly says, that the conference was beginning today, so he has not had time to read all the documents . He disarmingly says he hasn't had time since the conference began .
 He will therefore defer his major presentation, he says, until he has done his homework . He says he will defer his presentation until he does his homework before he gives up .
 He assures us that he has no animosity toward anyone, adversaries or allies . The president assured us that there was no animosity between him and anyone .
 The opening statement masterfully distributes blame for “misinformation, miscalculation, and misjudgment” among all three countries . It is probably the shortest Castro speech on record .
 To avoid future crises, potential adversaries must try to understand how others will interpret their actions . The U.S. should be aware of how others might interpret its actions, experts say .
 With the cold war now over, the U.S. no longer has security concerns about Cuba, he says . With the Cold War over, he concludes, the United States no longer fears about Cuba .
 General Anatoly Gribkov provides authoritative account of Soviet military deployment in Cuba . He was in Cuba during the Cuban crisis .
 The Soviet force had nuclear warheads —and not only for strategic but for tactical missiles . This last statement startles, and appalls, the Americans present .
 The Soviet force, Gribkov says, had six tactical missile launchers with nine nuclear warheads . Field commanders had authority to use tactical nuclear weapons against an American invasion, he says .
 I had earlier believed that we had overestimated the dangers of the crisis . Khrushchev, well aware of U.S. overall nuclear superiority, would never have risked war, he says .
 Admiral Dennison had rejected request for U.S. troops to be equipped with nuclear weapons . But Soviet forces, we are now told, were ready to fire tactical nuclear missiles at an invading force .
 The son of the first Soviet ambassador to Washington was a special assistant to Khrushchev during the crisis . He was a former student at Sidwell Friends School and Swarthmore .
 In October Khrushchev told Troyanovsky that the missiles were now going in and would likely cause a storm . In October, Troyanovsky said the missiles would be likely causing a storm in the region .
 Troyanovsky recounts the reaction at the Kremlin when Kennedy announced the discovery of the missiles . Troyanov recalls the reaction of the Kremlin at the time of the discovery .
 Vasily Kuznetsov proposed that Khrushchev respond by bringing further pressure on Berlin . Vasily Krushchev responded by bringing more pressure from Berlin . Kuznnetsov: "Khrrushchev responded by bringing pressure to Berlin"
 The grimmest day, Troyanovsky recalls, was Saturday October 27, when word arrived that an American U2 had been shot down over Cuba . The letter from Castro appeared to call for a preemptive nuclear strike against the United States .
 Aleksandr Alekseev, who had been Soviet ambassador to Cuba in 1962, remembers his shock when Khrushchev told him of the decision to send missiles .
 Cuban leader says solidarity with other Latin American countries is their best protection . Castro will not agree, he says, because the Cubans regard solidarity with Latin America as their best .
 He told Alekseev that, after the midterm American election in November, “I will travel to Cuba and tell the world about the operation.” He said he plans to return to Cuba after the American election .
 When we had an opinion, we offered it, but we thought they knew better than we did. When we asked it, we thought it was a joke . We thought it would be a joke, but it wasn't .
 Castro smiles and adds with an affable nod to the Americans, “Today I would put it differently.” Castro smiles . Castro smiles, adds with a nod to Americans, "Today I . would put that differently."
 It would have required elaborate legal reasoning to justify recourse to the Rio Treaty of 1947 and its provisions against extra-continental threats to the Americas . Friday, January 10.
 We discuss the grimmest day of the crisis, the shooting down of the U2 . We also discuss the shooting of the plane that crashed in 2010 .
 General Gribkov says that the order to shoot had not come from Moscow . Moscow had rejected requests from the commanders in Cuba for authority to fire at the U2s . Moscow rejected requests for authority from Cuban commanders .
 The Soviet units were under Soviet command; the Cuban units under Cuban command . The Soviet and Cuban units were commanded by the Soviet Union . The Cuban units commanded by Soviet command .
 General says the U2 was shot down by a Soviet battery on an order from the Soviet commander in the field . The U2, with their long, white, tapering fingers, are in constant motion as he talks .
 It is still a mystery, he observes, what led the Soviets to shoot down the U2 . The U2 was shot down by the Soviets in 1986 .
 The Soviet command decided out of comradely solidarity to go after the U2s, he says . His interpretation is that when the Cubans started firing against low-level American over-flights, the Soviets decided to go .
 "I don’t know whether he thought that we had brought it down directly or that our example had led the Soviets to do it," he says . "I'm not sure if he thought it was a good thing to do," he adds .
 Khrushchev also was confused about “my letter’s” letter, Castro says . Castro: Krushchev read the letter as recommending a preventive nuclear strike .
 Castro: "I knew Nikita well and was sure he was extremely anxious about the situation" Castro says the letter was written by Nikita Castro . Castro says he was sure Nikita was anxious .
 My aim was to encourage him, to strengthen his position from a moral viewpoint. I was trying to strengthen my position, I said . I hope he will be able to do so again, he said .
 I remembered how Stalin had refused to believe that the Nazis were planning to attack in 1941 . Stalin refused to think that he would be attacked by the Nazis in 1941, he said . He said: 'I remember how Stalin's refusal to believe he was going to attack'
 I was convinced that an invasion of Cuba would lead on to nuclear war against the Soviet Union . I was also convinced that a Cuban invasion would lead to a nuclear war with the USSR .
 My recommendation for a preventive strike was not in case of an American air attack, but in case invasion and occupation . My recommendation was not to be carried out by American air attacks but by invading and occupation, he said .
 By the time it arrived Khrushchev and Kennedy were already moving toward a solution . Kennedy and Nixon were already working toward the solution .
 General Fabian Escalante recites a litany of the awful things that the CIA had done or contemplated in its notorious Operation Mongoose . The hit-and-run raids, the sabotage teams, the attempts to contaminate the sugar crop and to burn down mills, the rumors
 During the luncheon interval we consider what to do if the Cubans won’t go beyond their Antigua fulminations about the sins of the CIA . We discuss walking out—and do so loudly enough for microphones to pick up this up .
 After lunch Castro joins the argument. We want the Cubans to understand that they face a choice as to whether or not they wish the conference to succeed .
 He is on the attack, but, as he goes on, he seems somewhat responsive to the aims of the conference . He is attacked, but seems to be responding to aims of conference, despite attack .
 Cuba, Castro insists, was not exporting revolution; it was supporting revolution . Castro insists that Cuba was supporting the revolution, often against governments that were trying to destroy it .
 "If those countries become destabilized, we are not going to promote the destabilization," he says . But, “if those countries . become destabilizing, we will not go to promote that,” he adds .
 "We are not going to take advantage of the objective conditions to promote anything," says Daley . Daley: "We will not go to try and promote anything. We will not use this as a way of promoting anything"
 There are no beggars in Cuba, no poverty, no starvation, no racial discrimination, no discrimination against women, no prostitution . There is no prostitution, there is no racism, there are no racism or poverty in Cuba .
 McNamara says Castro was determined to get such views on the record before the conference went any further . McNamara: Castro's statement that Cuba has abandoned the support of the revolution is welcome .
 He was a man with new ideas, some brilliant, like the Alliance for Progress, like a policy with a content, with a social direction . He was also a man of new ideas like a .
 Kennedy could have been the president who would have rectified U.S. policy toward Cuba . With his authority consolidated after the October crisis, Kennedy would have been able to make changes .
 Castro tells the story of the visit from the French journalist Jean Daniel . Daniel carried a message from Kennedy raising the possibility of normalizing relations . Castro: Kennedy's visit was a good sign for normalization of relations .
 He had the constitutional authority to stop it, but not the moral and political authority, he says . He says he had the moral, political authority to end it .
 I won’t talk about sabotage, assassination ; but he wanted to end the Cuban Revolution . I won't talk about assassination, assassination . He wanted to stop the revolution, he said .
 "If it had been just a matter of our own defense, we would not have accepted the missiles," he said . "We would not accept the missiles. If it had just been just the matter of defence, we wouldn't have accepted it," he added .
 The presence of Soviet missiles would damage our image in Latin America by turning Cuba into a Soviet military base, says President Obama .
 "If it would strengthen the entire socialist camp and improve the global balance of power, we felt we had to go along," he says . But, if it was to strengthen the socialist camp, he says, it would be good for the world .
 Had we known then what we know now about the balance of power, we would have realized that the emplacement changed intermediate range missiles into strategic weapons, the author says .
 In the light of what we know today, this must have been the real Soviet motive, not the defense of Cuba . The real motive was not to defend Cuba, but to defend it .
 If I had known the real ratio, I would have advised Nikita to be prudent . Nikita would have been prudent, he says .
 A Soviet military pact would have sufficed, a declaration that aggression against Cuba would be aggression against the Soviet Union would have been enough . A declaration of aggression would have made it clear that aggression would be against Russia .
 The secrecy of the operation was both a political and a practical disadvantage for us, we say . The secrecy was both political and practical disadvantage to us, the government says . We are happy to clarify that the operation is not illegal .
 One reason why Khrushchev wanted secrecy was that he did not wish to affect the elections . One reason is that he wanted secrecy to avoid affecting the elections.
 Soviet decision to withdraw missiles was "no consultation, no notification," he says . "There was no consultation," he adds .
 When the news arrived, we realized that Cuba was, in the end, only a bargaining chip . We realized that, when the news came, it was only a negotiating chip . Cuba was only the end of the deal .
 Had we known that Khrushchev was preparing to withdraw the missiles, we would not have been opposed, says the British Prime Minister . We would have opposed the move, he says .
 His readiness to trade his missiles in Cuba for the American missiles in Turkey proves that the Cuban defense of Cuba was subordinate to the defense of the Soviet Union . The U.S. President's willingness to trade missiles for Turkish missiles proves that he is willing to do so .
 Khrushchev began by offering him missiles on the ground that they would protect Cuba . The missiles would be used to protect Cuba from Soviet Union invasion of Cuba, he says .
 When Cuban missiles were traded for Turkish missiles, Castro and Khrushchev exchanged positions . Castro and Kim Jong-Hrushchev traded Cuban missiles with Turkish missiles . Castro-Khrrushchev trade missiles for Cuban missiles .
 Khrushchev was now acting to strengthen the socialist camp . Castro resented the deal because it had nothing to do with the defense of Cuba . Castro now resents the deal, as it was not a defense deal .
 "The most important thing is to affirm the rights of national sovereignty," says President Obama . "Most important thing to affirm is the right to sovereignty," he says .
 In the evening we go to a reception at the opulent presidential palace, with green trees and ferns planted on patches of ground among marble floors and large abstract paintings on the walls .
 Fidel turns his back on the Russians, except for the sons of Khrushchev and Mikoyan . While we drink frozen daiquiris and cluster around an elaborate buffet, Fidel holds court .
 Christopher Columbus will be celebrated on the quincentennial of Christopher Columbus . Christopher Columbus came to the Americas in 17th century . Columbus was the first European explorer to reach the Americas .
 When I had met Raúl Castro in 1985, he seemed gloomy and withdrawn . But tonight he was unexpectedly friendly and engaged in animated conversation with McNamara .
 He says he would like to show McNamara McNamara the training film they use to teach Cuban draftees how to repel an American invasion .
 Khrushchev and Mikoyan's sons accept sons' sons' friendship with each other . He accepts the sons of Khrushchevitch and Moyoyan . The two men meet at the Ministry of Defense .
 Photos of a dozen Soviet marshals surround a large photograph of Lenin . Then he takes us to what he calls ‘the hall of the Russian generals,” where photographs of Soviet Marshals surround Lenin . The hall of Russian generals is filled with photos of Soviet generals .
 Visitors can watch a version of the film prepared for visitors, in which the narration is in English . Then the film, in English, is shown in a version for visitors .
 The theme is the arming and mobilization of all Cubans for protracted war . The theme of this article is arming and mobilizing Cubans to fight for the country's future .
 We see a network of tunnels, laboriously built over eight years to the length of two hundred kilometers . The tunnels were built over 8 years and are now the longest of the tunnel network in the world .
 Hemingway’s house on top of a hill about fifteen miles from Havana is now a museum . This morning we go to Finca Vigía , Hemingways’ house in Havana, Cuba .
 We see it all through open windows; visitors are not permitted to enter the house . Visitors are not allowed to enter . We see all through windows .
 McNamara repeats his hope that differences between Cuba and the U.S. can be handled through normal diplomatic channels . McNamara: "In a world fundamentally changed by the end of the cold war, differences between the two countries can be dealt through diplomatic channels"
 "I believe that the right to live a productive life is fundamental to all other rights," she says . She says she is committed to a 'productive life' in order to make a living .
 "I say with absolute sincerity that I have learned a great deal at this meeting. As for the conference, “I have ... learned a lot," he said .
 The Americans agree that Castro has been more candid and illuminating than some of us expected . Castro has more than fulfilled the assurance that he would contribute to historical knowledge, the author says .
 "We feel more strongly strongly than ever the need to bring up the question of human rights," says Amnesty International . We have said little about current issues, however, but we have become aware of developments that will likely intensify the crackdown .
 At the end of December, three exiles fresh from Miami were caught landing on Cuban shores with guns and explosives . Three exiles from Miami landed with guns, explosives and explosives in Cuba .
 A few days later, according to the Cuban government, people trying to flee Cuba by boat killed three young policemen . Three young policemen were about to arrest them when they were killed . The Cuban government says the deaths occurred during a boat trip .
 Raúl Castro threatened to bring back the Revolutionary Tribunal notorious for its summary execution of Batistianos after the revolution of 1959 . Castro was speaking at the funeral of the policemen at the time .
 Wayne Smith saw Elizardo Sánchez this morning and told him that I hoped to call on him this evening . Wayne Smith said he hopes to call him this afternoon . The former Spanish president is in the midst of a political crisis .
 At lunch the head of the Cuban delegation told Smith that his visit had been most imprudent . There was great popular indignation against Sánchez and there might have been trouble .
 After adjournment, the three delegations hold a press conference . Evidently an “act of repudiation” by the Rapid Response Brigades is scheduled .
 Fidel vanishes, but he has invited McNamara and me to meet privately with him afterward . Fidel invites McNamara to meet with him after he vanishes .
 The press conference opens with a long wrangle over the no-invasion guarantee that Kennedy offered shortly after the resolution of the missile crisis . Kennedy offered the guarantee shortly after that .
 Kennedy's offer was conditioned on Castro's acceptance of UN inspection to assure the removal of the missiles . Kennedy’s offer, however, was conditional on Castro accepting UN inspection of the missile removal .
 Since Castro rejected UN inspection, the guarantee never went into effect . Henry Kissinger proclaimed a unilateral guarantee in 1970 . Kissinger proclaimed the unilateral guarantee .
 The Cubans insist that there was a moral if not legal guarantee from 1963 on . The Cuban government insists there was no legal guarantee of the guarantee .
 The whole argument is pointless because no American administration has planned to invade Cuba, says McNamara . McNamara again expresses his hope for normalization of relations with Cuba .
 A Cuban responds that Cuba is all for rapprochement; the problem is the lack of “political will” in the U.S. in Cuba, he says . A Cuban says the problem will be a lack of political will .
 I am against the embargo; I am for the restoration of diplomatic relations . I'm against an embargo, I'm for restoring diplomatic relations. I'm not only against embargo, but I want to restore diplomatic relations with Russia . I am not against embargo. I am ... against embargo;
 The U.S. should not subject Cuba to more severe human rights tests than other countries, writes Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Cuba should not be subject to more harsh tests than those applied to other countries .
 Diplomatic recognition does not imply moral approval of a country’s internal arrangements . But speaking practically, there is strong opposition to normalizing relations. I subscribe to the traditional doctrine .
 Cuba does not observe civilized standards with regard to political and intellectual and artistic freedom, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Cuba is not a model for Cuba, he says .
 "Every time a human rights activist is arrested or harassed, it strengthens the opposition to normalization," says Amnesty International . Human rights activists are arrested and harassed every time they are arrested .
 Carlos Lechuga worked with William Attwood in exploring rapprochement with Cuba . It would greatly facilitate the task of those who favor a more generous and honorable course with regard to human rights .
 Lechuga is a seemingly urbane fellow, and I am surprised by the crudity of his response to the question . He said: 'I am surprised that I was surprised by his response. I am not surprised by it'
 I supposed that after my remarks Castro might cancel my invitation to the private meeting . I supposed he might cancel his invitation to a private meeting with Castro . Castro may cancel the invitation .
 Fidel Castro, flanked by Carlos Aldana, José Antonio Arbesu, chief of the Cuban Interest Section in Washington, and two other Cubans, greets us .
 He talks about his only meeting with Hemingway when, during the spring of 1960, in his second year as premier, he won a marlin fishing contest . He says he won the prize and Hemingwy presented the prize .
 A wonder drug called PPG has been devised in Cuba’s biotechnology laboratories . PPG is a wonder drug that has been developed in Cuba's biotechnology labs .
 Castro says PPG lowers cholesterol, lowers blood pressure, relieves circulatory troubles, improves memory, and accounts for his apparently unlimited energy . Cuba's oil supply in 1992 will be one third of what it was in 1989, Castro says .
 He emphasizes self-reliance as the means by which Cuba will overcome its troubles . Cuba has been plagued by a series of problems since the start of the Cuban revolution in 1959 .
 “If we don’t meet our test, then we will blow up”—said a broad smile. “We will blow-up,” he said .
 I observe that it is surely essential to distinguish between non-violent and violent dissent . I observed that it was surely essential that it would be necessary to distinguish .
 It is a great error to equate human rights activists with terrorists from Alpha 66 . Human rights activists should not be equated with terrorists, says John Defterios .
 "The human rights groups are in contradiction with the basic interests of the country," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: Human rights groups in "contradicts" the country's interests .
 "Because they prepare the way for the terrorists, they are in effect partners of the terrorists," says President Obama . "They prepare [the way] for terrorists," he says .
 "You have slandered our country. After all,” he continues, gesturing toward me, he says . “After all,," he says, “you have slanded our country," he adds .
 President Obama's hard line exacts severe political costs in Europe as well as in the U.S. But we haven't arrested you!”—again the laugh .
 I urge him to help the friends of Cuba abroad by being more tolerant of dissenters at home . He urges him to be more tolerant at home. He urges the Cuban government to be tolerant .
 He says coldly, “I will take your views under consideration,” cutting off that part of the conversation . We part amicably after a couple of hours .
 Pastor tells Castro that he and I plan to call on Elizardo Sánchez later in the evening . Pastor says he and Castro plan to meet later in evening with S.E. Pastor says that he plans to meet with Elizardos S. Sánchéz
 Elizardo Sánchez’s tidy, high-ceilinged house is on a quiet street in the suburban La Playa section of Havana .
 His wife and children are living in Miami, where they are subjected to harassment by right-wing Cubans of the Cuban American National Foundation . The foundation is a group of Cuban Americans .
 Elizardo Sánchez and Senator Edward Kennedy signed by Ted. Ted. Kennedy . Ted. Edward Kennedy died in 1968 in a car crash in New York City, New Jersey . Ted Kennedy was killed in the car crash .
 He is a sturdy, quiet man in his forties, with a round face and closely cropped black hair . He is also a round, quiet, round face with closely cropped hair .
 He recalls the night of November 22, 1991, when the mob broke into the house and terrified his mother . The mob broke in to the house in 1991, terrifying his mother, who was terrified .
 This house, he tells us, has been raided by the police more often than any other house in Cuba . This house has a history of being raided by police raids, he says .
 He says he admires the Revolution’s achievements in health, education, and housing, but emphasizes that the time has come for political freedom . He also says that the Revolution's achievements in education and housing have been achieved .
 He wants a country where many ideas can live side by side, where groups from right to left can have a part in the nation's political life . He wants to see a nation where ideas and ideas live side-by-side, he says .
 He detects pluralist tendencies among young people and says many small groups like his are scattered around the island . He is modest man and makes no great claims for his own group .
 A relaxation of tensions, including a loosening of the embargo, would be of the greatest help, he says . He goes on to say that a relaxation of tension, including loosening the embargo would be the greatest .
 Elizardo Sánchez's house was surrounded, besieged, and battered by a Rapid Response Brigade . They think I am a Communist, he ruefully says, and Castro thinks I am an agent of the CIA .
 María Elena Cruz Varela was serving her sentence “under very adverse conditions,” Sánchez said . Yndamaro Restano and Sebastian Arcos are “not being treated badly”
 She is being held in a small cell with three other women who are dangerous common criminals . She is in a cell with other dangerous criminals, including dangerous criminals .
 Latin American leaders call for the end of Cuba’s isolation and its read-mission to the Organization of American States . Democratic leaders in Latin America call for Castro to undertake reforms . They also call for an end to Cuba's isolation .
 Caribbean states, including Barbados and Trinidad, also advocate an end to the embargo . Caribbean states also advocate end to embargo .
 The encouragement of foreign private investment may be special significance, even though largely confined so far to tourist facilities . Foreign private investment has been limited to tourist sites in the UK .
 Such subversion of socialism by capitalism would seem much in the U.S. interest . The United States would be interested in such a subverted socialism .
 If the melancholy and desperation one found in the Soviet Union and in Eastern Europe in the 1980s are present in Cuba, we did not sense it . Our opportunities for observation were limited, but we didn't get the impression of a country on the brink of explosion, he says .
 Perhaps a million Cubans --10 percent of the population -- have fled the country . Perhaps a quarter of Cubans have been forced to flee their homeland .
 Castro’s strength is ultimately rooted not in his doctrinaire socialism but in his passionate nationalism . The police are ever ready to suppress public protest and dissidence. Castro's strength is rooted in his passion for nationalism .
 Memories of the disparities between rich and poor under Batista linger, at least among the older generation .
 60 percent of Cuban population was born after Fidel came to power . Young people resent belt-tightening and censorship and envy the consumer society ninety miles away . They want freedom of speech and freedom to move in and out of Cuba .
 Its self-aggrandizing chairman, Jorge Mas Canosa, claims the support of the Bush administration . Canosa is said to see himself as president of a post-Castro Cuba and has already sponsored a constitution .
 Many Cubans regard the alternative offered by the Cuban American National Foundation as worse . Dread of the return of the Miami exiles represented by the foundation is a major source of Castro’s strength .
 The Bush administration's supposed support of the foundation, Betancourt says, leads dissidents within Cuba to “perceive Mr Castro’s removal as more threatening to their interests than his staying in power”
 The Cuban American National Foundation is not the only alternative to Castro . It is in the U.S. interest to encourage the internal solution, the author says .
 Cubans for Independence and Democracy espouses social democracy and is led by Huber Matos, who was with Castro in the Sierra Maestra . After he showed signs of independence, he spent twenty years under horrible conditions in Castro’s jails .
 The Democratic Platform Coalition was founded by Carlos Alberto Montaner in 1991 . The coalition supports human rights activists inside Cuba .
 Liberal Cuban exiles recognize that the succession to Castro will have to come from within Cuba, not out of Miami . A Republican administration haunted by an exaggerated fear of its own right wing is not likely to recast its policy toward Cuba, especially in an election year .
 Alpha 66 and other right-wing outfits trained in Miami by Cuban exiles trained in the environs of Miami . It lies within the United States government’s power to stop the paramilitary raids undertaken in violation of the neutrality laws .
 Castro has the power to stop the persecution of dissenters, to carry out reforms in the economy, and to move toward political and cultural freedom . Whether Castro is ready to seek rapprochement is not clear, but it lies within Castro's power .
 He remains a tyrant and a bully capable of gloating over one-time comrades he has sent to prison, yet also a leader capable of humor, charm, and limitless energy .
 Maurice Halperin Castro’s Cuba: An Exchange . More by Arthur Schlesinger Jr.
 The Turning Point is Arthur Schlesinger Jr. The Making of a Mess . The Making Of a Mess is a series of books by Arthur Schleinger Jr., a former New York mayor .
 Fidel Castro, the Missile Crisis and the Collapse of Communism, is forthcoming from Farrar, Straus and Giroux . Fidel Castro is the author of a new book, "Fidel Castro"
 Oleg Troyanovsky, however, said that he had never heard this before; and the delegation of authority to use tactical nuclear weapons is unknown in other Soviet theaters .
 If Gribkov is right, Khrushchev did not know of, or at least did not appreciate the implications of, the arrangement . He says he was in Cuba at the time and having no reason to dissemble, presumably he is right .
 The statement in the memoirs is apparently a mistranslation of the original text . The statement was apparently mistranslated .
 Castro: Historically, the United States has been committed to the Latin American oligarchy . Historically, Castro continued, he said, the U.S. has committed to Latin America's oligarchy.
 The Cuban government said that the two men murdered the policemen while they and seven others were trying to seize a boat at an East Havana dock . Sergeant Pérez Quintosa survived long enough to identify his attackers .
 Elizardo Sánchez authorized Ramon Cernuda of the Cuban Commission on Human Rights and National Reconciliation in Miami to use the Declaration of Good Will as a basis for opposition to the Torricelli bill . Ramon Cernuda used the Declaration of