 His task was to obtain prior acceptance of the conditions under which the ICRC was prepared to lend its good offices to the U.N. and the parties involved in the Cuban missile crisis .
 This article deals with the unusual role the ICRC was ready to play in that crisis . It sheds new light on how it came to be engaged in these highly political matters . ICRC: The ICRC's role in the crisis was unusual and unusual .
 New American, Soviet and Cuban sources that have become known since 1990 reveal events surrounding the planned ICRC intervention in the missile crisis .
 Further sources of information about the ICRC’s role in the crisis have come to light and been collected by the National Security Archive . Since the publication of this material, further sources have been collected .
 The material emerged about the Cuban missile crisis from Russian archives was partly translated and published by the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington .
 New material and conferences have led to a broad re-evaluation of what happened in late October and early November 1962 in the 1 Chadwyck-Healey Inc. Inc. in the Soviet-Cuban crisis .
 Proceedings of the rial was researched by the author of this article Moscow Conference on the Cuban Missile during a stay in the United States in 1996 .
 Of the numerous publications on the Cuban crisis since the end of the Cold War, I shall mention only a few . The Cuban crisis has been the subject of numerous publications, including numerous books on the crisis .
 Beschloss’ bookThe Crisis Years is probably the best account of the missile crisis based on this new body of information . The Crisis Years will be published on Thursday at 9 p.m. ET .
 John Lewis Gaddis’ latest work, which he has reassessed the real moments of danger during it. Equally important is John Lewis’ new work, ‘Reassessing’ his latest work .
 Little has been written about the ICRC’s role in the Cuban missile crisis so far .
 The former UN Secretary-General, U Thant, deals with it at length in his memoirs but lacks precision with regard to some important facts . The former secretary-general's memoirs are published in France .
 The ICRC itself summarized Rüegger’s mission in two of its own publications .
 Two days earlier, two U-2 aircraft had flown over the Caribbean island and taken pictures that proved the existence of Soviet MRBMs in Cuba and the buildup of twenty-four SAM sites on the island . The U.2 aircraft flew over Cuba and photographed the presence of MRB
 In the first ExComm meeting on 16 October, a consensus was soon reached that all means had to be used to remove the Soviet missiles from Cuba . All means had been agreed to remove all Soviet missiles .
 The following discussions within the ExComm centred on the question of the requisite initial response and military preparations . The ExComm also discussed the issue of initial response to the situation .
 President Kennedy imposed a naval blockade on the further delivery of all offensive military equipment to Cuba . He also insisted on the withdrawal of Soviet missiles already in Cuba from the Soviet Union .
 The risk of a nuclear escalation seemed much too high and Kennedy therefore opted for a politically more cautious solution . The risk was too high for Kennedy to take the risk of escalation .
 On the evening of Monday 22 October, he announced his decision to the nation and the world . The decision was made on the night of October 22 .
 Operation ANADYR,14 as the secret deployment of the Soviet missiles in Cuba that led to the showdown with the U.S. in October 1962 was code-named . It proved to be the most dangerous moment during the Cold War .
 The two superpowers were face to face in a dispute over nuclear weapons . They were face-to-face in a row over a nuclear weapon dispute .
 The U.S. naval quarantine of Cuba was accompanied by a series of military and diplomatic moves and countermoves which were not all authorized by the political leadership of the two main opponents . Had either Kennedy or his Soviet counterpart Nikita Khrushchev reacted too sharply, the crisis would
 Remarkably enough, Khrushchev panicked and stepped back after a week of taut confrontation . Remarkly enough, he stepped back from a week-long confrontation .
 It is widely agreed today that there were three main reasons for his decision to leave the country . It was widely agreed that there was three reasons for the decision .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev felt the need to preserve the Cuban revolution and deter a possible U.S. invasion . First, after a failed attempt by Cuban exiles supported by US intelligence to invade Cuba in the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, both felt the
 The stationing of the missiles in Cuba was a means of closing the ‘missile gap” with the United States . The Soviet point of view was to close the “missile gaps’ with the U.S. and, in one move, redressing the
 Khrushchev saw it as a tempting possibility for a quid pro quo to expose the U.S. to a direct threat comparable to that faced by the Soviet Union . Thirdly, though to a lesser degree, he also saw a possible quid-proposal . Khrush
 Khrushchev's fears were just as much as the desire to recreate the strategic balance . But the information now available from Soviet participants in the oral history conferences on the missile crisis has made it clear that these fears .
 Khrushchev said he developed the idea of deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba during a visit to Bulgaria in May 1962 . He said he was thinking about the United States missiles in Turkey on the other side of the Black Sea .
 In actual fact, he seems to have planned and discussed the whole operation with two of his closest political advisers,Anastas I Mikoyan and Andrei Gromyko, in the weeks before and after he visited Bulgaria .
 In September and October the missiles were secretly shipped to Cuba and installed with the assistance of Soviet specialists . Castro was sceptical at first but gave his assent to the deployment .
 Khrushchev’s plan was to announce his ‘deterrent’ to Kennedy only after the November mid-term elections in the U.S. in the United States. The American President was then to be confronted with the fait accompli of nuclear missiles in
 The Last Testament, translated and agreed for the sake of re-establishing the balance between East and West . edited by Strobe Talbott, Little, Brown, edited by
 He ordered his vessels to challenge the quarantine line and to speed up work on the sites in Cuba . He also ordered his ships to challenge a quarantine line .
 Washington is trying to change from a bargaining strategy to one of not losing control over events . Washington was now trying to . change from . negotiating strategy to not lose control of events, Washington says .
 This was due mainly to Kennedy’s realization that the risk of an escalation to the nuclear level should be avoided under any circumstances . Kennedy realized that the risks of escalation to nuclear level were avoided .
 U Thant discussed the possibility of launching a second appeal . Under Secretary of State George Ball discussed the issue with one of his main advisers, George Ball .
 On 25 October, the Secretary-General sent a second message urging the Soviet leader to stop his vessels for a limited time in order to discuss the terms of a possible agreement which could settle the problem peacefully .
 To make it look like an impartial third-party initiative, he 21 Fursenko/Naftali, op. cit. , 247. To make the initiative look like a third party initiative, the initiative was made to look impartial, he says .
 As late as 26 October Khrushchev, misled by erroneous intelligence reports that a U.S. invasion of Cuba was imminent, accepted U Thant’s standstill-proposal . U. Thant was worried that Kennedy was ready to go over the brink .
 Kremlin leader seeking a way out of the crisis without losing face . Kremlin leader, it was now clear, was seeking to avoid losing face without losing it .
 When the two superpowers accepted U Thant’s standstill proposal, time was gained for negotiations under the auspices of the Secretary-General and the military front line at sea was given a breather .
 The ICRC made its first entry in the drama of the Cuban missile crisis . At that point the ICRC was in the midst of the crisis .
 President of the International Red Cross was asked to convey to us informally the Committee’s readiness to help the Secretary-General in any way in its power, should the need arise .
 Zorin, U.S. government prepared to suspend blockade for two to three weeks . Proviso would be taken to guarantee ships arriving in Cuba were not supplying weapons .
 U Thant mentioned the possibility of establishing a particular procedure for maritime traffic, or for particular ports of call in Cuba; in this connection, United Nations delegates from neutral countries, selected by agreement, or representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross . Khrushchev’s letter
 Fundamental had leaked out through KGB channels earlier Principles of the International Red Cross and that day . Fundamental was released by the Red Cross .
 Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, Handbook of the it clear that this informal démarche was never authorized by the Kremlin . New information, however, has made . it clear . that this was International Red Cross, Red Crescent never authorized . The Kremlin never authorized the DRC .
 Documents clearly indicate that it was the Secretary-General who came up with the proposal to consider the ICRC's help .
 Khrushchev ordered inspections to make inspections look like a humanitarian operation . Speculation by Western journalists at the time was false, says Russian politician . The inspections were made to look like humanitarian inspections, he says .
 Radio Moscow broadcast a new message from the Soviet Chairman of the Soviet Union . Khrushchev's telegram of 26 October was broadcast by Radio Moscow .
 Soviet and Cuban information that an American attack on Cuba was imminent had turned out to be wrong . The information was wrong, according to the Cuban government .
 Khrushchev, obviously under the impression of appearing weak in the eyes of his subordinates, decided to make a U-turn . He made the decision to make the move in order to appear weak .
 U.S. must remove its Jupiter missiles from Turkey in return for the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba, President Obama says . He now demands that the United States remove the missiles .
 Several times on 27 October the crisis very nearly flared out of control . Several times during the 27 October crisis, the crisis nearly blew up . The crisis nearly broke out in the early hours of October 27 .
 The strategic nuclear force of the United States was poised for action, and for the first time in history it was put on DefCon2 .37 . In addition, the U.S. was assembling troops necessary for an invasion of Cuba . The U.N. was also assembling troops
 The first Soviet missile sites were reported to be operational, and the Cuban military forces were fully mobilized . Meanwhile, the first Soviet missiles were reportedly reported to have been operational .
 By now Kennedy and Khrushchev both understood that a mere accidental incident could spark a nuclear war . A quick end to the crisis had to be found, and therefore a quick end was found .
 As a result of the ExComm meeting of 27 October, Kennedy decided to react only to the first of Khrushchev’s messages of 26 October and simply to ignore the additional demands of the second message .
 Khrushchev called for the complete removal of the offensive weapons from Cuba under UN supervision . In exchange for a United States guarantee of non-invasion in Cuba, the U.S. agreed to remove the weapons .
 American President decided to send his brother, Attorney-General Robert F Kennedy, to see the Soviet Ambassador to the United States, Anatoliy Dobrynin, with a private message for Chairman Khrushchev announcing that the missiles would be removed once the crisis was resolved .
 In times of peace the United States armed forces are usually on DefCon5 . The U.S. armed forces usually use the term 'DefCon5'
 If Khrushchev turns down offer, a military attack on Cuba would be the consequence . Khruschev would have turned down the offer, and a military strike would be possible .
 Khrushchev accepted Kennedy’s terms of a unilateral withdrawal of “all Soviet offensive arms” from Cuba . Kennedy”s terms included withdrawal of all Soviet offensive weapons from Cuba, withdrawal of Soviet weapons .
 In his answer to President Kennedy the Soviet Chairman did not mention the missiles in Turkey again . In his reply to the President Kennedy, he said: "I'm not going to be surprised by the missile attacks in Turkey"
 The Soviet military began to dismantle the missile sites and prepare them for shipping back to the Soviet Union without delay . This end to the crisis was publicly announced on the radio .
 During the crisis the exchange between the two superpower leaders was conducted exclusively through direct messages between Moscow and Washington . During that last and decisive phase of the crisis, the exchange was conducted via direct messages .
 These private exchanges were crucial in leading to the peaceful solution of the crisis . Private exchanges helped lead to the peace settlement of the Syrian conflict .
 No new offensive weapons could be shipped to Cuba after lifting of the U.S. blockade by the United States . Furthermore, they were to make sure that no new weapons were shipped to the island .
 Soviet delegate, Vasili V Kuznetsov, declared that his government would be prepared to allow the boarding of Soviet vessels bound for Cuba by representatives of the Red Cross .
 The Soviet government could not make any decision in that regard without Cuban consent . As for cargo checks in certain ports of call, this issue would be for the Cuban government to decide, the Soviet government said .
 The U.S. agreed to such a procedure, provided that the personnel used by the ICRC were exclusively Swiss . The United States air reconnaissance over Cuba would continue until on-site inspections of the dismantling were assured .
 The President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Léopold Boissier, agreed in principle . On that same afternoon of 29 October, 29 October the President of . the . Red Cross agreed to the agreement .
 His organization would be ready to accept such an assignment, but only on condition that there was a formal request by all three parties to the conflict — including Cuba . The approval of the Committee still needed, he says .
 The Cuban government and the ICRC would take a stand against the Cuban government . Thus the question was what stand they would take .
 On 30 October, Secretary-General U Thant flew to Cuba to negotiate with Castro . U. Thant's visit to Cuba was the first time the U.N. secretary-general had been to Cuba .
 U Thant’s two days of talks with the Cuban leadership failed to produce any substantial understanding .
 Castro categorically denied access to a UN supervisory mission that was to verify the dismantling of missile bases in his country . Castro denies access to the mission to verify dismantling of his country's missile bases . Castro says the mission will be verified by the UN .
 He was equally opposed to any inspection in Cuban ports by ICRC personnel . The ICRC is also opposed to inspections by Cuban ports . ICRC was also opposed by the ICRC to inspect ports in Cuba .
 If the Soviet Union permitted the ICRC to inspect its vessels on the high seas, then it was their business, he would not oppose that, he said .
 Documents give no proof of U Thant suggesting to Castro the possibility of ICRC involvement in verifying the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba .
 In all U Thant’s talks with Castro, the superpowers and the ICRC there was only the question of using the latter for inspecting incoming ships to Cuba . The ICRC has been a key part of the talks .
 The responsibility for verification of the dismantlement always remained with the U.N. The United Nations has always been responsible for verification .
 The only good news he brought with him was the information gathered from the Soviet general of the rocket forces in Cuba . The dismantling of the missiles and their installations was already in progress and would be completed by 2 November, he said .
 The other positive result of these talks was Castro’s consent to send back to the United States, under the auspices of the Secretary-General, the dead body of Major Anderson, whose plane was downed over Cuba in October .
 Notes on meeting Roa in Havana, October 30, 1962, Cuban with Premier Fidel Castro of Cuba in Havana . Dorticos, Premier Castro and Foreign Minister . Notes on my second meeting with Roa: Cuban with Castro in Havana in 1962 .
 Dorticos, Premier Castro of Cuba and Foreign 50 U. U. Thant, op. cit. , 186. 50 U Thant: 50th Thant. 50th, 50th and 50th . 50th. U . Thant was Cuban President of Cuba
 The Committee decided to follow President Boissier’s initial favourable response . In the end, however, the Committee decided not to support the President .
 Rüegger was to state the conditions of acceptance by the ICRC of the planned assignment to it . He was to explain the humanitarian organization’s motives in lending its good offices .
 These were the maintaining of international peace and the desire to spare mankind from suffering . These were in particular the maintaining international peace .
 ICRC’s definite decision would depend upon the result of this mission . ICRC's definite decision will depend upon result of mission, ICRC says .
 If inspectors are unable to carry out their task, they would report to the UN headquarters . The inspectors would then report to UN headquarters if they were unable to work .
 U Thant agreed in general and suggested that Rüegger meet with the representatives of the three parties the next day . The meeting will take place next week .
 In talks with the American delegates there was a wide consensus on the procedure, and the delegates even presented a list of Swedish ships which might be chartered for inspections by the ICRC . During the following meeting with the Soviet side there were clear indications that these inspections would never be carried out
 ICRC personnel saw no necessity for continuing inspection after 10 November . The date at which the Soviet Union intended to finish withdrawing its rockets from Cuba was the date .
 Rüegger stated that “a good week” was necessary to put the corps of inspectors into operation . He requested a clear indication of when the operation was to begin and how long it was to last .
 The Soviet negotiator stressed his point of view that the operation should come to an end with the final removal of the Soviet rockets . Once again, he stressed that the Soviet negotiations should be completed .
 The ICRC’s good offices would be obsolete by the time its inspectors were ready for action, the ICRC says . It became clear that if the Soviets insisted on this, it would have to be obsolete .
 Cuban delegate gave his consent and did not oppose inspections outside Cuban territory . The Cuban delegate said he would allow inspections outside his country .
 Following these meetings, Rüegger reported the day’s events in a long telegram to the ICRC in Geneva . The ICRC is based in Geneva.
 Direct negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on the settlement of the crisis were pursued . U.S. and Soviet Union pursued direct negotiations between them .
 Soviet troubleshooter Anastas Mikoyan failed to get Castro to allow UN verification of the dismantling of the missile sites in Cuba . This plan took shape when the Soviet forces sent to Cuba had abated .
 The Soviet Union and the United States agreed that American ships would come up close to Soviet vessels in order to see and photograph the missiles being shipped . The U.S. and the Soviet Union agreed that the ships would be allowed to come close to the Soviet vessels .
 American helicopters could be sent if conditions at sea did not permit verification from ships brought alongside, and the photographing could be done from them . In addition, helicopters could also be sent .
 The first Soviet transport left Cuba on 6 November . The U.S. Navy carried out the first inspection on the high seas on 7 November .
 Rüegger came to the conclusion that the planned ICRC inspections would never be implemented . As the United States simply continued monitoring the island by air reconnaissance with the Soviets’ tacit consent .
 The US sea blockade was lifted and the dispute between the superpowers officially settled . The U.S. and Russia have been at odds for more than a decade .
 François-Poncet obviously belonged to those in favour of a wider field of activity for the ICRC in the atomic age . Léopold Boissier was likewise seeking a more active role for his organization at that time .
 Swiss government sceptical about ICRC’s determination to extend its field of activity . ICRC: Swiss government and press sceptical of ICRC's decision to extend field of activities .
 There was a danger that by taking part in an operation of a political nature, the ICRC would compromise its neutrality — an absolute prerequisite to its humanitarian duties . Willy Bretscher, a Liberal Democrat and Member of Parliament, wrote that there was no reason for ICRC to take
 Bretscher says the Soviets were just seeking a way out of the crisis without losing face . He says they would assign the task of international inspection to the ICRC to make it look like a humanitarian operation .
 The ICRC should turn down the request for its good offices and the U.N. should entrust one or several neutral nations with the inspection . The United Nations eventually decided differently, but there were also voices within the Committee that questioned this position .
 Letter Petitpierre to 7 November 1962, NL Rüegger, Dossier Boissier, 31 October 1963, ibid. Letter Petitspierre was published in 1962, and in 1963, it was published again in 1963 .
 A lot of new material and information on the Cuban missile crisis has surfaced during the last ten years . Conclusion: The missile crisis was a major failure in the U.S. military .
 The ICRC has made possible a detailed analysis of the hitherto untold story of the ICRC’s involvement in the crisis . It has, for the first time, made possible, it has been made possible .
 Documents show ICRC was ready to play an extraordinary role by lending its good offices to the United Nations and the parties concerned for a highly political mission . The planned inspections of Soviet vessels by ICRC personnel never took place .
 President of the ICRC, Léopold Boissier, gave the UN SecretaryGeneral the idea of asking for help in this unusual task .
 Borsinger, op. cit. , 162. Persistent rumours that its involvement in the crisis was due to a request by the 76 Borsingers . The 76 was asked to take part in a crisis by the government .
 The reason that the ICRC inspections were never carried out is twofold. The reason is that they were not carried out . The ICRC says the inspections never took place .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro was opposed to any form of international inspections on Cuban territory in settling the crisis . First, the Cuban leader refused to allow international inspections in his country .
 This considerably complicated and delayed the establishment of any inspection procedure . This considerably delayed and delayed an inspection procedure. This significantly delayed the formation of any inspections.
 The ICRC's involvement in the Cuban missile crisis led to a broader discussion of its future role in the atomic age . ICRC has now set up a new internal policy setting the conditions under which it would be prepared to lend its good offices in a nuclear crisis .