 The European Union fell into a second recession after debt crises in IX Greece, Spain, Portugal, and elsewhere led to massive street protests, bailouts, and austerity budgets . In 2008, some countries climbed back from the financial upheaval of 2008 .
 Chinese citizens used microblogs to bypass their government and have their say . Twitter-like microblogs bypassed the government and bypassed militants and governments .
 For help with military data issues, we thank the late Randall Forsberg . For suggestions, we also thank our colleagues, and the students in our world politics classes . We also thank the students and colleagues for their suggestions .
 Names are politically sensitive in international relations . Different actors may call a territory or an event by different names . C P xv A Note on Nomenclature .
 Jobs in Government and Diplomacy offer team players the chance to affect policy, but require patience with large bureaucracies . Jobs in government and diplomacy offer team-player chance to influence policy .
 People follow various paths to an interest in teaching and researching in the field of international relations . People follow different paths to a teaching and research interest .
 Your own professor or instructor is likely to have a unique story about how he or she became interested in international affairs .
 One advantage of an academic career, whether at a teaching-oriented institution or a large research university, is intellectual freedom . The author of a new book, "The New York Times" is published by Simon Tisdall, at 8 p.m. ET .
 One can spend a career approaching a variety of topics that are interesting and constantly evolving . That may involve travel abroad for fieldwork, and that may let you network with hundreds of colleagues interested in similar topics .
 First, these jobs often give more direction to an individual in terms of the research to be performed . Second, they often give the individual more direction in what research to do .
 IR jobs can result in a wider dissemination of one’s work to a broader audience that often includes policy makers . Still, for those interested in IR research, such jobs can be useful for IR research .
 Masters degree programs often take between one and two years . A Ph.D. in international relations usually takes a minimum of five years to complete .
 Students take time off between their undergraduate and graduate educations to travel internationally or get work experience to hone their interests .
 Many students never return to extend their education if they find a job that allows them to achieve their personal and career goals . Of course, many students never come back to find a new job .
 In completing most advanced degrees, a large amount of self-direction is necessary . Self-directed self-directed is necessary in most advanced degree programs .
 Writing a thesis requires you to work on your own time schedule . Balance other duties (such as work as a teaching or research assistant) that can easily crowd out your own work .
 Many who complete the coursework for an advanced degree do not finish their thesis or take many years to do so . Many of those who do not complete their thesis often take years to complete it .
 There are important skill sets to develop to pursue advanced degrees . There are skills to learn for teaching in academic setting or engaging in applied research .
 Think about developing a set of applied skills to use as a toolbox while analyzing questions . Finally, think about developing an applied skills that can be used to answer questions .
 The contents of this toolbox might include other languages to facilitate fieldwork abroad . This toolbox may also be used to help field work abroad .
 It could include statistics and data skills to facilitate quantitative analysis . Data skills could be used to help with quantitative analysis of data .
 Specialized skills will help you answer research questions, whether as part of the academy or in a private or governmental research organization . No matter which tools you emphasize, specialized skills can help your research questions .
 Barents Sea ■» $Z X&tft St ta KAZAKHSTAN Qiraglimd/ MONGOLIA 1 UF3 KM CAPSTAN AFGHANISTAN YEMtN South China See Nicobar MALDIVESIA
 Collective goods are provided to all members of a group regardless of their individual contributions, just as these migrant workers crossing the Sahara desert in 2006 all depend on their progress even while perhaps jostling for position among themselves .
 7 of people contribute to international disaster relief funds after tsunamis, earthquakes, or hurricanes because of a shared identity as members of the community of human beings . People contribute to relief funds because of shared identity .
 Actors and Influences 17 global banking system, and reach a global audience with videotaped appeals . Actors must use videotaped appeal to reach the global audience of $1 billion .
 IR scholars have proposed various level-of-analysis schemes, most often with three main levels . The individual level of analysis concerns the perceptions, choices, and actions of individual human beings . IR scholars propose various levels of analysis .
 Hong Kong container port ships goods to and from all over the world, 2008 . 2008 .
 23 geographical element at the global level of analysis . Nine Regions of the World Russia /CIS China Japan / Pacific South Asia 2000 Kilometers 0 2000 Miles 2000 Kilometer 0 2000 miles .
 On worlddevel geography, see Kidron, Michael, Ronald Segal, and Angela Wilson. See Kidron and Wilson for more information .
 Nothing like those wars has happened since, and they remain a key reference point for the world in which we live today . Nothing like this has happened in the world since the Second World War II, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 For many people, World War I symbolizes the tragic irrationality of war . For many, the war symbolizes an irrationality that war is irrational and irrational .
 The Two World Wars, 1900-1950 Europe mobilization plans developed Balkan crises . World War 1 Sarajevo United States enters war Italy invades Ethiopia Munich Agreement i World War II . Defeat Weimar Republic hyperinflation Hitler invasion .
 U.S. Defense Department 28 Chapter 1 The Globalization of International Relations accidental accidental . United States Defense Dept. 28 Chapter 28 .
 Contrary to expectations, the war was neither short nor decisive, and certainly not glorious . The war in Afghanistan was neither a success nor a victory, but a failure, says President Obama .
 In 1950, the Korean War broke out when communist North Korea attacked and overran most of the United States -allied South Korea . The Korean War started in 1950, when North Korea overran the U.S.-allied country .
 President John F Kennedy imposed a naval blockade to force their removal . Instead of removing them, the blockade was imposed by the President .
 The fall of South Vietnam in 1975 appeared to signal U.S. weakness, especially combined with other setbacks in the Middle East . The 1973 Arab oil embargo against the United States and the 1979 overthrow of the shah of Iran .
 Scholars do not agree on the important question of why the Cold War ended .
 One view is that U.S. military strength under President Reagan forced the Soviet Union into bankruptcy as it tried to keep up in the arms race . The Soviet Union was bankrupted by the United States in the 1980s .
 U.S. -led coalition applied escalating sanctions against Iraq . Working through the UN, the United States-led coalition applies escalating sanctions . The U.N. says the sanctions will continue to be imposed on Iraq .
 Western relations with Russia and the other republics have been mixed since the 1990s . Western countries provided only limited aid for the region’s harsh economic transition, which had drastically reduced living standards . Western fears of an expansionist, aggressive Russian nationalism were unfounded .
 Japan and Russia could not resolve a lingering, mostly symbolic, territorial dispute . Meanwhile, Russia and Japan were unable to resolve a long-standing dispute over a Japanese island .
 Despite these problems, the world’s great powers overall increased their cooperation after the Cold War . Despite these issues, the relationship between the world's great powers increased .
 They tried to contain the conflict by assuming a neutral role as peacekeeper and intermediary . Instead of intervening in the conflict, they were trying to contain it with the help of the UN .
 In the end, Serbian forces withdrew from Kosovo and NATO has controlled the province ever since . NATO has held the province since the end of the war .
 Kosovo declared independence in 2008, bringing protests from Serbia and its allies . In 2008, with the UN Security Council still deadlocked over Kosovo's status, Kosovo declared its independence . Kosovo's independence was declared by the UN in 2008 .
 The U.S. pulled out of Afghanistan after sustained casualties in the fighting . The United States pulled out when those forces were drawn into the fight .
 In 1994, Rwanda in 1994, the genocide of more than half a million civilians in a matter of weeks was virtually ignored by the international community . In Rwanda, more than 500,000 people were killed in just a few weeks . The Rwandan genocide took place in 1994 .
 The dispute disrupted the Atlantic alliance for several years . It weakened the UN’s role as the United States -led coalition went forward despite its failure to win Security Council authorization for war .
 In Afghanistan, fighting worsened beginning in 2007 as the Taliban ran an insurgency campaign from bases in Pakistan . Disputed elections, corruption, and ‘insider’ attacks by members of Afghan security forces on NATO troops all made the foreigners’ jobs difficult .
 North Korea produced possibly a half-dozen nuclear bombs and tested three in 2006, 2009, and 2013 . Iran tested three nuclear bombs in 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013 .
 Iran made and broke several agreements to suspend the enrichment of uranium that could be used to build nuclear weapons . UN Security Council passed a series of sanctions against Iran, demanding that it stop its enrichment program . Iran's nuclear program began in 2004 and has been hit with sanctions since .
 In 2010, centrifuges key to Iran’s enrichment program began mysteriously destroying themselves . Investigation pinned the problem on the sophisticated Stuxnet computer virus, a computer virus .
 Latin America and Russia/CIS have nearly extinguished wars in their regions, joining a zone of peace already encompassing North America, Europe, Japan/Pacific, and China . Warfare is diminishing even in the arc of conflict from Africa through the Middle East to South Asia .
 China Sea, but it has not fought a military battle in 25 years . China Sea has not seen a military conflict in more than a decade .
 IR is a field of political science concerned mainly with explaining political outcomes in international security affairs and international political economy . IR is also concerned with explaining the outcomes of international political affairs . IR has been used as a model for international security and economic relations .
 French forces intervene in Mali, 2013. Listen to Chapter 2 at MyPoliSciLab . Realist Theories O Listen to chapters 2 of the Realist Theory .
 He showed rulers how to use power to advance their interests and protect their survival . He also showed how to protect their interests .
 Thucydides wrote an account of the Peloponnesian War focusing on relative power among the Greek city-states .
 Study and Review the Pre-Test & Flashcards at MyPoliSciLab . The Prisoner's Dilemma is a pre-test and review of the pre-Test and flashcards .
 Hans. Theories of IR Individual Domestic Levels of Analysis Interstate Realism ' Neorealism Global Liberal Theories Democratic Liberal Institutionalism Peace Constructivist Theories Postmodernist Theories Peace Studies Gender Theories Marxism Marxism .
 International influPower is the ability to influence the behavior of others . International influence is a form of influence that can influence others .
 Power as in influence is also gained by forming the rules of behavior to change how others see their own national interests . Rules of behavior can be formed to change the way others see themselves .
 Realists emphasize dominance approaches, they acknowledge that 9Nye, Joseph S. Nye, Jr. is not a realist, but a socialist, realist .
 In the short term, Japan had superior military power and was able to occupy territories in Southeast Asia while driving U.S. forces from the region . In the long-term, the Japanese were able to drive United States forces out .
 Military forces are such a capability — perhaps the most important kind . Military forces have a capability that can be vital to the U.S.
 David Sanger: U.S. spending on foreign aid is consistent with this thinking . Sanger, David. Sanger says it's a good idea to spend more money in foreign aid . He says the government is spending more on foreign policy than ever .
 Morality can contribute to power by increasing the will to use power and by attracting allies . The International System 49 aid has increased dramatically since the attacks of 9/11 . Morality is key to the success of the international system .
 States have long clothed their actions, however aggressive, in rhetoric about their peaceful intentions . States have often used rhetoric about peaceful and defensive intentions to justify actions .
 The 1989 U.S. invasion of Panama was named “Operation Just Cause” Of course, if a state uses moralistic rhetoric too often, it loses credibility even with its own population .
 China did not make an issue of it (the plane had not gone into service) and a U.S.-China summit the next month went forward .
 Other scholars find the international system quite enduring in its structure and state units . The international system is quite enduring, according to scholars .
 States may seek to balance threats rather than raw power . United States power was greater than Soviet power but was less threatening to Europe and Japan . Small states create variations on power-balancing themes when they play off rival great powers .
 Cuba during the Cold War received massive Soviet subsidies by putting itself in the middle of the U.S. -Soviet rivalry . Cuba received massive subsidies from the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 Other small states may, for domestic reasons, fail to mobilize to balance against threats . Small states may not be able to mobilize against domestic threats, experts say .
 It explains patterns of international events in terms of the system structure, rather than the internal makeup of individual states . The system structure is the international distribution of power, not individual states, it says .
 Neorealism has lost some of the richness of traditional realism, which took account of many complex elements (geography, political will, diplomacy, etc. etc.) Recently, neoclassical realists have sought to restore some of these lost aspects .
 The polarity of an international power distribution refers to the number of independent power centers in the system . An international system has an independent power center in each country's power distribution .
 A multipolar system typically has five or six centers of power, not grouped into alliances . Each state participates independently and on relatively equal terms with the others . The International System 57 is based on the International System of Power .
 In the classical multipolar balance of power, the great power system itself was stable but wars occurred frequently to adjust power relations . The great power systems were stable, but wars frequently occurred to adjust relations .
 Tripolar systems with three great centers of power are rare, owing to the tendency for a two-against-one alliance to form . Tripolar system is rare, with the tendency to form two-to-one alliances .
 The U.S.-Soviet standoff seemed to provide stability and peace to great power relations . But rival blocs in Europe before World War I did not .
 If a challenger does not start a war to displace the top power, the latter may provoke a "preventive war" to stop the rise of the challenger before it becomes too great a threat . The top power could provoke a ‘preventative war’ to stop
 Hegemony is one state’s holding a preponderance of power in the international system, allowing it to single-handedly dominate the rules and arrangements by which it dominates . 31Organski, A F K World Politics.
 Britain’s predominance followed the defeat of its archrival France in the Napoleonic Wars . Britain in the 19th century and the United States after World War II .
 China chafed under United States -imposed economic sanctions for 20 years after 1949, at the height of United States power, when China was encircled by United States military bases and hostile alliances led by the United States .
 It was founded as a breakaway from the European-based international system . Its growth in the 19th century was based on industrialization and expansion within North America .
 Opposition to the Iraq War, a protracted conflict in Afghanistan, and difficult economic times at home have spurred a new isolationist trend in the United States .
 2003 war in Iraq marked a peak of U.S. unilateralism, with few allies and no UN stamp of approval . 2003 war was the peak of unilateralism in the world .
 The United States is the world's most powerful single actor . The U.S. is the most powerful individual actor in the world .
 Its ability and willingness to resume a role as hegemon — as after World War II — is important factors that will shape world order . The United States role is still uncertain, but the U.S. role still uncertain .
 In the Concert of Europe, the five most powerful states tried, with some success, to cooperate on major issues to prevent war . This is a possible precedent for today’s UN Security Council .
 Germany, Italy, and Japan were defeated in World War II by a coalition of the U.S., Britain, France, Russia, and China . After a 20-year lull, the war ended in 1945 .
 Alliances 65 and to Syria and Egypt in the 1970s could result in a disastrous war with the U.S. The United States. 65 and 65 could be at risk of war with Syria, Egypt and Syria .
 At present, two important formal alliances dominate the international security scene . NATO and NATO are the most powerful alliances in the world .
 By far the more powerful is the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . It encompasses Western Europe and North America . The organization is the most powerful in the world .
 NATO has been the world's strongest military force since 1949 . Its mission in the post-Cold War era is somewhat uncertain . Longtime members France and Ger Ger have been NATO members for more than 50 years .
 Turkey refused to let U.S. ground forces cross into Iraq . many strongly opposed the war, and Turkey strongly opposed it . President Kennedy reviewed the situation in Germany in 1963 .
 The 1999 NATO bombing of Serbia heightened Russian fears regarding NATO’s eastward expansion, as has NATO cooperation with Ukraine and Georgia . Russia has attempted to expand its own military cooperation with states such as Venezuela, Venezuela, and China .
 The second most important alliance is the United States -Japanese Security Treaty . The U.S. and Japan are the two most important allies in the world .
 In the global South, many states joined a nonaligned movement during the Cold War, standing apart from the U.S. -Soviet rivalry . Many states joined the Nonaligned movement in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The African Union’s first real test came with allegations of genocide in Darfur region of Sudan in 2004 .
 AU deployed 3,000 troops, joined by a much larger force of UN peacekeepers . In response to the AU deployment, UN peacekeeping forces deployed more than 1,000 more troops . The AU has deployed more troops than ever before .
 The United States tended to favor the Pakistani side as well, but both U.S. -Indian and United States -Chinese relations have improved since the Cold War ended .
 The main conflict in the Middle East became the opposition of Shi’ite and Sunni countries, centered on Iran and Saudi Arabia . The civil war in Syria embodies that split, with the civil war embodying that split .
 The United States has close relations with Egypt and cooperates closely with Turkey, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Morocco . The U.S. has cooperated closely with many of the Arab nations .
 United States -Iranian relations remain chilled 30 years after the 1979 revolution . U.S. and Iran have been at odds for 30 years since the Iranian revolution .
 Iran, with its Shi’ite population, has close ties with Iraq’s new U.S. -backed government . The new government is dominated by Shi'ite religious parties . But, oddly, Iran has ties with the United States - backed government .
 United States relations with Libya were hostile for decades until a 2003 agreement . Relations with Libya became friendly after Libya’s U.S. -backed revolution in 2011 .
 Classical realists emphasize statecraft — the art of managing state affairs and effectively maneuvering in a world of power politics . Explore the Simulation ""You are the Prime Minister of India"" at MyPoliSciLab Strategy 73 .
 If deterrence works, its effects are almost invisible; its success is measured in attacks that didn't occur . Success is measured by attacks that did not occur, not the ones that did .
 A strategy of compellence, sometimes used after deterrence fails, refers to the threat of force to make another actor take some action . Generally, it is harder to get another state to change course is to get it to refrain from changing course .
 U.S.-Soviet nuclear arms race created arsenals of tens of thousands of nuclear weapons on each side . The arms race process was illustrated vividly in the United States-Soviet arms race .
 Realists assume that the actor exercising power is a single entity that can “think’t about its actions coherently and make choices . A state’s actions seek to advance its interests, the author says .
 Game theory was first used extensively in IR in the 1950s and 1960s by scholars trying to understand U.S. -Soviet nuclear war contingencies . Game theory first used in IR to understand United States - Soviet nuclear war scenarios .
 For neoliberals the emergence of international institutions is key to understanding how states achieve a superior rational outcome that includes long-term self-interest and not just immediate self-interested .
 The current revolution in information technologies is strengthening regimes, particularly in this aspect . nKrasner, Stephen D. Krasner . ed. ed.
 With better international communication, states can identify conflicts and negotiate solutions through regimes more effectively . Liberal Theories 91: States can identify conflict and negotiate through regimes better .
 In international security affairs, the UN and other IOs provide a stable framework for resolving disputes . IPE is even more institutionalized because of the heavier volume of activity and the wealth that can be realized from cooperation .
 A proposed U.S.-British resolution authorizing military force was withdrawn after France promised to veto it . France, Germany, Russia, and China had all strongly opposed it and the war .
 In the late 1990s, democracy replaced long-standing dictatorships in Indonesia and Nigeria . South Africa, the last white-ruled African country, adopted majority rule in 1994 .
 constructivists recognize that power is not absent from international relations . Constructivists also recognize that . power not absent .
 Iran was the center of two military conflicts in the first half of the 20th century that killed millions .
 It would not be hard to consider such behavior terrorism even CONSTRUCTING IDENTITIES though the pirates had no political goals .
 Even if not terrorism, no one would doubt the costs associated with 25Checkel, Jeffrey. Checkel .
 constructivist scholars note that there is a powerful logic of appropriateness . For example, some cases of humanitarian intervention seem difficult to explain in realist or liberal terms .
 constructivists emphasize that identities and norms must be used to explain this seemingly puzzling behavior . Constructivists say that identity and norms are necessary to explain behavior .
 Research in the constructivist tradition has expanded rapidly in recent years . The constructivist movement is an important form of thought .
 Scholars have examined the role of the European Union in socializing elites in new member states31 as well as the United Nations in conferring legitimacy on the use of force .
 Postmodern critiques of realism center on analyzing realists’ words and arguments . Postmodernists pay special attention to texts and to discourses — how people talk and write about their subject .
 A central idea of postmodernism is that there is no single, objective reality but a multiplicity of experiences and perspectives that defy easy categorization . Postmodernism says there are no single objective reality, but there are experiences that defy categorization.
 The hidden meanings not explicitly addressed in the text are often called the subtext . The subtext is often known as the hidden meanings in a text . Subtext is the hidden meaning of a text that is not addressed explicitly .
 Realist theories of IR omit women and gender, for example . Omissions are an aspect of subtext, as when realist theories omit women, gender .
 One important class in revolutions during the past century (contrary to Marx’s expectations) has been peasants . The peasants have been an important part of the revolutions in recent years .
 Marxists have mostly (but not exclusively) followed a line of argument developed by V I Lenin, founder of the Soviet Union, before the Russian Revolution of 19 17 . Lenin’s theory of imperialism argued that European capitalists were investing in colonies where they could earn big profits and then
 Indonesia threw out Dutch, Lebanon threw out French, Cuba threw out the Americans . This pattern was repeated, with variations, in dozens of countries . In India at the same time, Gandhi used a different means to achieve similar ends .
 Socialists can generate their own self-sustaining cycles of accumulation and lift themselves out of poverty . However, such an approach has not worked well .
 Trotsky’s archrival Stalin wanted to build “socialism in one country,” and he prevailed . Most third world revolutions since then have had a strongly nationalist flavor .
 In Nicaragua, former communist leader whom U.S.-organized rebels fought in the 1980s won election as president in 2006 . Former communist leader was elected president of Nicaragua in 2006 after a decade of guerrilla warfare .
 Peace studies challenges fundamental concepts behind realism and neoliberalism . Peace studies seeks to shift the focus of IR away from the interstate level of analysis .
 Peace studies also seeks peace not in the transactions of state leaders but in the transformation of entire societies and in transnational communities . Peace studies seeks to reject the supposed objectivity of traditional approaches .
 Pakistan secretly passed messages between China and the United States before the breakthrough in U.S.-Chinese relations in 1971 . For example, Pakistan passed messages to China before the break in relations between the two countries .
 In these roles, the mediator is like a translator between the two sides, or a therapist helping them work out psychological problems in their relationship . The mediator can be like a therapist or a translator to help a couple work out their relationship problems .
 Travel and discussion by private individuals and groups can serve as citizen diplomacy , to ease tensions as well as ease tensions .
 Protesters respond to an outbreak of violence in Belfast, Northern Ireland, 2013 . Demonstrators respond to a violent incident in Belfast .
 Gandhi organized Indians to resist the British colonial occupation without resorting to violence, even when British troops shot down unarmed Indian protesters . Gandhi said nonviolence must be active in seeking to prevent violence, and especially to stand up against injustice enforced violently .
 Nonviolence is often the most cost-effective way of standing up against injustices by the powerful . Nonviolence spread widely in the 1960s in the U.S. in the civil rights movement, especially through the work of Martin Luther King, Jr.
 One list of ‘fifty key thinkers’ in IR includes four women, three of whom are gender scholars . None of the 46 males are listed as gender scholars, according to a 2005 survey of top IR scholars .
 Feminist scholars emphasize the importance of gender roles in IR, especially the distinction between males in the political-military roles and females in the domestic-family roles .
 In this view, men are inherently the more warlike gender, and women the more peaceful . This view is based on the belief that women are more peaceful than men . Men are inherently warlike and women are peaceful, the author says .
 Realistic may accurately portray the importance of war and military force in IR as we now know it, but this merely reflects the male domination of the international sphere to date . This is not necessary, eternal, or inescapable logic of relations among states .
 The United States military, with one of the highest proportions of women anywhere in the world or in history, is 85 percent male . The U.S. military is still 85 percent men .
 For liberal feminists, the main effect of this gender imbalance on the nature of IR is to waste talent . For liberals feminists, this imbalance of IR has to be seen as a waste of talent, they say .
 Women state leaders, like men, seem capable of leading in war or peace as circumstances demand . Overall, women state leaders seem to be able to lead in peace or war, as well as men .
 Women soldiers have performed as well as men in military tasks, as predicted by liberal feminists . In the late 1990s, women began serving on some U.S. military bases .
 Postmodern feminists criticize liberal feminists for trying merely to integrate women into traditional structures of war and foreign policy . They criticize difference feminists as well, for glorifying traditional feminine virtues .
 Scholars argue that women are not just passive bystanders or victims in war, but active participants in a system of warfare tied to both genders . Women act not only as nurses and journalists at the “front” but as mothers, wives, and girlfriends on the ‘home front-
 Postmodern feminists reject realism but also some of the alternative approaches that emphasize the protection of women and other noncombatants . Justwar doctrine is considered too abstract .
 United States -Canadian relations seem better explained by liberal institutionalism than by realism . U.S. and Canadian relations seem to be better explained than by realistic institutions .
 Decision-making is a steering process in which adjustments are made as a result of feedback from the outside world . Decision making is a . steering process, which . adjustments are . made in response to feedback from . outside world.
 Decision makers suffer from misperceptions and selective perceptions . They take in only some kinds of information when compiling information on the likely consequences of their choices . Decision makers also suffer from selective perceptions when compiling data .
 Often they simply FASTEN YOUR SEAT BELTS ignore any information that does not fit their expectations . Ignore any information about the seat belt situation .
 Foreign policies often deviate from rationality as a result of the misperceptions and biases of decision makers and populations . Foreign policy often deviates from rationality due to misperception and biases, say experts .
 Some leaders create a ‘kitchen cabinet’ — a trusted group of friends who discuss policy issues with the leader even though they have no formal positions in government . For instance, Israel’s Golda Meir held many such discussions at her home, sometimes literally in the
 The remainder of this chapter considers other liberal theoretical approaches that operate at the domestic level of analysis . These approaches see international outcomes as the result of processes within states rather than just those among states . Foreign policy is constrained and shaped by substate actors .
 French farmers have turned out in large numbers across the country to block roads, stage violent street demonstrations, and threaten to grind the national economy to a halt . More dramatically, when their interests have been threatened — as during a U.S. -European trade dispute in 1992 — farmers have
 In democracies, military industries also influence public opinion through advertising that ties their products to patriotic themes . U.S. military industries give generous campaign contributions to national politicians who vote on military budgets .
 Governments sometimes adopt foreign policies for the specific purpose of generating public approval and hence gaining domestic legitimacy . Governments sometimes adopted foreign policies to generate public approval .
 Any agreement they sign must be approved by their domestic legislature . Executives may attend summits and talks, but can't attend any such summits or talks .
 IR scholars are less interested in specific policies than in the foreign policy process . They are interested in how policies are arrived at and implemented, they say .
 States establish organizational structures to create and carry out foreign policies . States establish various organizational structures and functional relationships to create foreign policy .
 No simple rule has been found to predict a state’s warlike tendencies based on these attributes . Unfortunately, there is no simple rule to predict the state's tendencies .
 Foreign policy outcomes result from multiple forces at various levels of analysis, experts say . Foreign policy outcome is a result of multiple factors, including analysis, analysis .
 The outcomes depend on individual decision makers, on the type of society and government they are working within, and on the international and global context of their actions . The outcome of the outcome depends on individual decisions makers' actions .
 This chapter will focus on the remaining wars and historical cases to explain the causes of international conflicts . The next chapter will be focused on the other wars .
 The United States -led war against Iraq in 1991 retook the territory of Kuwait but did not go on to Baghdad to topple Saddam Hussein’s government . For instance, the U.S.-led war in 1991 took over Kuwait but not on to topple the Iraqi government .
 Marxists often said that the aggressive and greedy capitalist states were prone to use violence in international conflicts . Western leaders claimed that the expansionist, ideological, and totalitarian nature of communist states made them especially prone to using violence . The domestic level of analysis draws attention to the characteristics of states or
 Anthropologists have found that a wide range of preagricultural hunter-gatherer societies were much more prone to warfare than today’s societies . Likewise, rich industrialized states and poor agrarian ones both use war .
 Power transition theory holds that conflicts generate large wars at times when power is relatively equally distributed . At this level, too, competing theories exist that seem incompatible .
 The theory of arms races holds that wars are caused, not prevented, by such actions . No general formula has been discovered to tell us in what circumstances each of these principles holds true .
 Ethnic Russians living in Ukraine, and ethnic Ukrainians in Russia, experienced conflict . There are also religious differences between Ukrainian and Russian forms of Christianity .
 Today such conflicts are widespread — in Northern Ireland, Quebec, Israel-Palestine, India-Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tibet, Sudan, and many other places . Today, these conflicts are all over the world .
 The Netherlands helped establish the principle of self-determination when it broke free of Spanish ownership around 1600 and set up a self-governing Dutch republic . The Dutch Republic was established in 1600 .
 In some locations where millions of members of a single ethnic group live as the majority population in their ancestors’ land, they usually think of themselves as a nation . But in some locations, the majority of those who live in their ancestral land are not considered citizens .
 Territorial control is closely tied to the aspirations of ethnic groups for statehood . Territorial controls are closely linked to aspirations of statehood for ethnic groups .
 Ethnic conflicts play a role in many international conflicts . In the 1990s, rival Kurdish guerrilla armies fought each other in Iraq .
 Some scholars believe that ethnocentrism has roots in a biological propensity to protect closely related individuals . This idea is controversial, though it is controversial .
 If killings based on age-old hatreds are inevitable, then inaction by the rest of the world might help . 28Krause, Jill, and Neil Renwick, eds.
 The international community’s ineffective response to the mass murders in Darfur, like that in Rwanda in 1994, shows the limited reach of international norms in today's state-based international system . Darfur is the focus of the U.S. response to mass murder in the Sudan
 In cases of genocide and less extreme scapegoating, ethnic hatreds do not merely bubble up naturally . Ethnic hatreds are not merely bubbling up naturally, says Simon Tisdall . In the U.S. and Canada, he says .
 Each of these actions runs counter to the norms of the international system and to the assumptions of realism . The U.S. should not be allowed to take part in any of the actions it has taken place in the world .
 Some have suggested that international conflicts in the coming years may be generated by a ‘clash of civilizations’ — based on the differences among the world’s major powers .
 The idea RELIGIOUS DIFFERENCES has been criticized for being overly general, and for assuming that cultural differences naturally create conflict . The idea Religious DIFERENCes has been criticised for being too general .
 Religious intolerance can exacerbate tensions between groups, sometimes increasing violence, with international implications . Many international conflicts around this zone involve Muslims on one side and non-Muslims on the other .
 The split played out in devastating violence in Iraq around 2007 and now helps fuel the Syrian civil war . The split is a result of geographical and historical circumstances including colonialism and oil .
 In the 1990s, Islamic parties gained ground in Turkey, making Turkey an important model of moderate Islam in the region . Turkey is a secular state, but the military has intervened repeatedly to prevent religious politics .
 In several countries, Islamists reject Western-oriented secular states in favor of governments more explicitly oriented to Islamic values-36 . These movements reflect long-standing anti-Western sentiment in these countries .
 Anti-Western feelings in Islamic countries came to a boil in 2006 after a Danish newspaper published offensive cartoons depicting 36 Binder, Leonard. Religion has therefore become a means to express opposition to the status quo in politics and culture .
 Muslims think non-Muslims are: Fanatical Jordan Turkey Turkey Egypt Egypt Indonesia Pakistan Not respectful of women ^53% 52% Source: Pew Global Attitudes Survey .
 In Iran, the top religious leaders can overturn the laws passed by the parliament . In 1979, a popular uprising overthrew the United States -backed shah and installed an Islamic government .
 Iran strongly supports Hezbollah militia in Lebanon and the government in Syria . Hezbollah runs hundreds of schools, hospitals, and other charities, but is also included on the U-S. list of terrorist organizations . Iran strongly supported — with money, arms, and training — the Hezbollah militia .
 The most important center of this fundamentalist movement currently is in Afghanistan and next-door tribal areas of Pakistan . Militants following the same philosophy are also active across Northern Africa in 2013, notably in Nigeria, Mali, Libya, and Somalia .
 In some Muslim-populated countries, Islam is a political rallying point . In authoritarian countries in which the mosque is a rare gathering point . Centered in the Gaza Strip, Hamas sent suicide bombers who killed hundreds of Israelis after 2000 .
 For realists, ideological differences among states do not matter much, because all members of the international system pursue their national interests in the context of relatively fluid alliances . Realists believe that ideological differences are not important for realists .
 Ideology plays only a limited role in most international conflicts . Ideology only plays a small role in many of the world's most violent conflicts .
 Israel and Egypt made peace in 38 Walt, Stephen M Revolution and War . For example, 38 Walt was about to write about the Middle Eastern conflict .
 In this way, threats to peace are actively dealt with by the community as a whole . The community is actively dealing with the threat of peace, says the author .
 The Indian-held part of Kashmir is predominantly inhabited by Muslims . A Line of Control divides the disputed province . Pakistan accuses India of oppressing Kashmiris and thwarting an international agreement to decide Kashmir’s future by a popular referendum .
 The pro-Russian incumbent carried the eastern region and was declared the winner after an election that international monitors declared unsound . Russian president Vladimir Putin had personally campaigned with him, and strongly opposed letting Ukraine — a former part of the Soviet Union — come under the influence of the West .
 The Soviet Union did this in Czechoslovakia in 1968; the United States did so in Iraq in 2003 . People generally resent having foreigners choose their government for them . The international community frowns on such overt violations of national sovereignty .
 The theory has been used to help explain both World War I and the expansion of Japan prior to World War II . Another kind of economic conflict that affects international security concerns .
 Soviet founder V I Lenin portrayed World War I as a fight over the imperialists’ division of the world . Lenin portrayed the conflict as a struggle against imperialists' imperialists .
 In Mexico, deadly violence among drug gangs spiraled out of control in the past decades, claiming tens of thousands of lives . Mexico is a major supplier of illegal drugs to the next-door United States .
 When the Cold War ended in the years between 1989 and 1991, observers hoped for a new age of U.S.-Russian cooperation . Russia and the United States have been at odds for decades .
 Where their interests converge, U.S.-Russian cooperation works smoothly in Afghanistan . U.K. and Russia have shared interests in the war against Islamic extremists in the region .
 Conventional armed force is the most commonly used military form of leverage . Weapons of Mass Destruction include nuclear weapons, chemical and biological weapons, and nuclear strategy .
 The most fundamental purpose of conventional forces is to take, hold, or defend territory . An army’s supplies must flow from home territory along supply lines to the field . The most basic purpose of a conventional army is to protect territory .
 Military forces with armed foot soldiers can occupy a territory militarily . Armies are adapted to this purpose. Armies can be adapted to the purpose .
 Controlling the seas in wartime allows states to move their own goods and military forces by sea while preventing enemies from doing so . States can move goods and troops by sea and prevent enemies doing so.
 Marines move to battle in ships but fight on land — amphibious warfare . Marines move on land but fight in ships and on land . Marine Corps is based in the U.S.
 In cases of low-intensity conflicts and guerrilla wars, bombing is of limited utility, especially where forces intermingle with civilians in closed terrain such as Vietnamese jungles or Iraqi cities .
 The United States continues to invest heavily in its own air force . Air power may be less useful in small-scale warfare, but states continue to build their air forces .
 Military logistics is a huge operation, and in most armed forces the majority of soldiers are not combat troops . All military operations rely heavily on logistical support such as food, fuel, and ordnance .
 Global-reach capabilities combine long-distance logistical support with various power-projection forces . Global-reaches capabilities combine logistics support with military-inflicted forces .
 These capabilities allow a great power to project military power to distant corners of the world and to maintain a military presence in most of the . world’s regions simultaneously .
 Ballistic missiles, which travel through space briefly, are not generally included in this category . Ballistic missiles are generally not generally considered to be launched in space .
 In 2010, the United States -Israeli Stuxnet virus targeted Iran’s nuclear centrifuges . In 2012, the Flame virus was found on thousands of computers across the Middle East, mostly in Iran .
 The September 2001 attackers used information technology to coordinate forces while keeping U.S. authorities in the dark . They carried out precision strikes over long distances with very small, dispersed units . As a result, 19 attackers killed nearly 3,000 people, and an expenditure of under $1 million
 In Chapter 5 we discussed conflicts involving armed Islamist militias and terrorist networks . Here we discuss terrorism itself as a tactic* Since September 2001, governments and ordinary people have paid much more attention to terrorism than ever before .
 The methods used by terrorists have become more diverse over the past decades, so have the policies implemented to prevent terrorist incidents . There are also debates about why individuals engage in terrorist attacks in first place .
 States may undertake smallor large-scale conflicts to counter terrorist organizations . U.S. launched cruise missile strikes against plant in Sudan believed to be producing chemical weapons for al Qaeda, but turned out to be making infant formula .
 Terrorist attacks often reflect the weakness of the perpetrators and their lack of access to other means of leverage . Nearly every state that undertakes counterterrorism policies uses some combination of these methods .
 Nuclear weapons were invented during World War II and used on two Japanese cities in 1945 . North Korea, Iran, Iraq, and Libya all built the infrastructure to do so in nuclear weapons .
 In 2009, Iran alarmed the West by testing a missile that could reach Egypt, Israel, and parts of Europe . North Korea, evidently in cooperation with Iran, successfully tested a long-range missile capable of transcontinental distances .
 A chemical weapon releases chemicals that disable and kill people . Chemical and Biological Weapons are a form of warfare that can be used to carry out chemical warfare .
 The chemicals vary from lethal ones such as nerve gas to merely irritating ones like tear gas . The chemicals are often harmless or irritating, such as tear gas or nerve gas .
 In 2001, the United States pulled out of talks to strengthen the 1972 treaty, declaring the proposed modifications unworkable . Civilians are more vulnerable to chemical weapons than soldiers are, the U.S. says .
 Proliferation Proliferation is spread of weapons of mass destruction into the hands of more actors . Researchers try to ascertain the military implications of advances in biotechnology,22 Proliferation .
 Nuclear proliferation could occur simply by a state or nonstate actor’s buying (or stealing) one or more nuclear weapons or the components to build one . Nonstate actor could buy (or steal) a nuclear weapon or build one, the author says .
 As political unrest occurs in other nuclear states, thoughts often turn toward the safety of nuclear weapons and materials . Pakistan, notably Pakistan, has a history of political unrest .
 Strong potentials exist for arms races in regional conflicts and rivalries . Here, larger numbers of weapons are involved and there are potentials of arms races .
 The relevant regional conflicts are those between Israel and the Arab states, Iran and its Arab neighbors, India and Pakistan, the two Koreas, and possibly Taiwan and China . Israel and Iran are at odds with each other .
 India and Pakistan each have dozens of nuclear weapons and missiles to deliver them . The two countries each has dozens of nukes capable of delivering missiles .
 The mission soon shifted to defending some U.S. missiles in a massive Soviet attack . However, the mission was soon to defend some United States missiles in the Soviet Union attack .
 Japan is spending $1 billion a year to build a U.S. -designed missile defense system . The system was tested successfully in late 2007 . Japan tested the system successfully .
 World military spending is a vast flow of money that could, if redirected to other purposes, change the world profoundly and improve major world problems . The money could be used to solve major problems like climate change, the author says .
 Of course, ‘the world does not spend this money or choose how to direct it, states do . States do, and the world doesn't choose how it spends it, but states do. States should be able to spend the money and direct it .
 In late 2001, U.S. special forces were traveling with Hamid Karzai, believed to be the only person who could lead a united, United States -allied Afghan government . Karzai was believed at the time to be a leader in Afghanistan .
 CIA covert activities were sharply scaled back after congressional hearings in the 1970s revealed scandals . After September 2001, the executive branch enjoyed greater authority in conducting covert operations with less congressional scrutiny . Overall, states face complex choices regarding the configuration of their military forces in the post-Cold War era .
 The next chapter discusses the evolving structures and norms governing international political relations and how they are changing the nature of world order* 47Feaver .
 International organizations include intergovernmental organizations such as the UN, and nongovernmental organizations . These institutions have proliferated rapidly in recent decades, and continue to play an increasing role in international affairs .
 World religions have organized themselves across borders, often in the face of hostility from one or more national governments . Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Buddhism and Judaism, Judaism, Hinduism, and other world religions organize themselves across state borders .
 Missionaries have deliberately built and nurtured these transnational links . Missionaries deliberately built these links, they say. Missionaries say .
 Catholic Church historically held a special position in the European international system, especially before the 17th century . The Catholic Church has a special role in the international system .
 NGOs with broad purposes and geographical scope often maintain observer status in the UN so that they can participate in UN meetings about issues of concern . NGOs are often able to participate in meetings with the UN about issues that concern them .
 A web of international organizations of various sizes and types now connects people in all countries . The web is a web of organizations that connect people around the world .
 The rapid growth of this network, and the increasingly intense communications and interactions that occur within it, indicate rising international interdependence, suggests the rapid growth .
 The United Nations is a relatively new institution, just over 60 years old . Watch the video ""UN Aid in Somalia"" at MyPoliSciLab .
 The UN and other international organizations have both strengths and weaknesses in the anarchic international system . The UN is one of the most powerful institutions in the world, but also has weaknesses in its power .
 Until 1971, China’s seat on the Security Council was occupied by the nationalist government on the island of Taiwan . But as newly independent states began to predominate, the U.S. found itself in the minority on many issues .
 Throughout the Cold War, the UN had few successes in international security because of the United States -Soviet conflict prevented consensus . The United States and Soviet Union prevented consensus on international security .
 U.S. free riding shows that support of intergovernmental organizations presents a difficult collective goods problem . The United States agreed to pay up after criticism from allies, but under renegotiated terms for the future .
 When France threatened to veto a UN resolution authorizing war, the U.S. -British coalition toppled the Iraqi government without explicit UN backing .
 Documents recovered during the Iraq War showed that high-ranking UN, French, Chinese, and Russian officials illegally profited from the UN’s $64 billion oil-for-food program for Iraq . The program was supposed to ease the civilian suffering caused by economic sanctions in the 1990
 Military actions notapproved by the Council tend to be controversial . Military actions such as the 1999 bombing of Serbia and the 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq tend to have been controversial .
 UN peacekeeping has become more intensive in recent years . New missions have expanded the range of what are now called broadly peace operations . UN peacekeepers have been involved in more than 50 per cent of the world's most dangerous missions .
 The universal membership of the United Nations is one of its strengths . Its regional commissions look at how UN programs work together in a particular region . Its functional commissions deal with global topics such as population growth, narcotics trafficking and human rights .
 UN programs aim to help countries in the global South to overcome social and economic problems . UN programs, operating under the General Assembly, are meant to help the South overcome social problems .
 International law, unlike national laws, derives not from actions of a legislative branch or other central authority, but from tradition and agreements signed by states* International Law differs in the difficulty of enforcement, which depends not on the power and authority of central government .
 International law prohibits attacks on diplomats and embassies . Although we do not know how much mischief goes on in diplomatic pouches , it is safe to OUT of reach .
 Just war doctrine has been undermined, even more seriously than have laws of war crimes, by the changing nature of warfare, says David Cameron . Just war doctrines have been undermined by the nature of war, he says .
 International law concerns human rights against certain abuses of their own governments . Human rights are the rights of human beings against certain violations of their governments .
 relativists point out that much of the origin and development of human rights ideas are Western in origin . Of course, criticisms of these ideas exist, on both a theoretical and a practical level .
 Economic-social rights are referred to as “positive rights” and include rights to good living conditions, food, health care, social security, and education . Economic-Social rights are known as "positive rights"
 These rights are often held to be best promoted by the expansion of governments to provide minimal standards to their people . These rights often held in the hope of promoting them in the world .
 China notes that the United States has 40 million poor people, the highest ratio of prison inmates in the world, and a history of racism and violence . During the Cold War, the U.S. criticized the Soviet Union and China for violations of civil-political rights .
 Unlike the UDHR, these treaties are legally binding contracts signed by states . Unlike the U.N. it is a legally binding treaty signed by the states of the world .
 The remaining treaties each deal with a particular group that the international community considers vulnerable . The treaties are each dealing with a group of people that the U.S. considers vulnerable.
 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women entered into force in 1981 . CEDAW is the body that bans discrimination against women in all forms of discrimination .
 Free trade agreements frequently contain provisions that condition trade benefits on the respect for human rights, especially workers' rights . Free trade deals often contain provisions requiring respect for the respect of human rights .
 These treaties provide policies beneficial to the developing states . They create a ready mechanism to punish countries who abuse their citizens . The treaties are beneficial to developing states, they say .
 Amnesty International operates globally to monitor and try to rectify glaring abuses of human rights . The leading organization pressing this struggle is Amnesty International, an NGO that operates globally .
 Amnesty International has a reputation for criticizing abuses in many countries, including the United States . Amnesty International is impartial and has criticized abuses in countries such as U.S.
 NGOs provide information and advocacy for UN and other regional organizations . NGOs often provide information to UN, other regional groups .
 Supporters of human rights hope publicity will embarrass the regime and change its behavior . Through a process some scholars have dubbed “naming and shaming,” some scholars hope to embarrass and shame regime .
 U.S. leaders are concerned that American soldiers, serving in peacekeeping missions or in NATO allies, will fall under the jurisdiction of the ICC rather than under the American military’s own justice system . In 2005, after several ICC members refused to sign a BIA, Congress
 Under the ICC, individuals can be prosecuted for their roles in violations of human rights . Three mechanisms can trigger an ICC trial, including a criminal conviction, can trigger trial .
 The most important principle in the laws of war is the effort to limit warfare to the combatants and to protect civilians . It is hoped that the ICC, more than prosecuting every individual case of war crimes, will also serve to deter potential violators .
 In the war on terrorism, the U.S. does not consider the “enemy combatants” it detains to be POWs . Exchanges of POWs are usually negotiated through the ICRC .
 More controversial is the U*S* policy called “extraordinary rendition,” which lets terrorist suspects captured overseas be transferred to other countries, including some that use torture, for questioning . The laws of warfare impose moral responsibility on individuals in wartime, as well as states .
 German officers defended their actions as ‘just following orders,” but this was rejected . Some officers were punished, and some executed, for their war crimes . Not all Nuremberg defendants were found guilty, however, however .
 The AU Explore the Simulation ""You are Egypt's Representative to the UN"" at MyPoliSciLab has called for the ICC to suspend all ICC proceedings relating to Darfur .
 They distinguish combatants from civilians, giving each certain rights and responsibilities . They are distinguishable between combatants and civilians .
 Scholars of international political economy study the politics of international economic activities . Scholars of political economy are concerned with international economic relations . International political economy is a form of international diplomacy .
 One approach, called mercantilism, generally shares with realism the belief that each state must protect its own interests at the expense of others . This is not relying on international organizations to do so .
 Marxism is often treated as a third theoretical/ideological approach to IPE, along with mercantilism and liberalism . Marxist approaches are attuned to economic exploitation as a force .
 When there are multiple buyers and sellers of a good (or equivalent goods that can be substituted for it) prices are determined by market competition . When there is multiple buyers, sellers of good, prices will be determined by price competition .
 Free markets are supposed to produce stable patterns of buying and selling at a fairly uniform price . In practice, free markets produce a stable pattern of buyers and sellers at fairly uniform prices . Free markets should produce a more uniform price distribution of goods and services .
 The state sits on a pile of money representing potential power . Trade with a crisis or fight a war, the state sits in power . Balance of Trade with the state is important for the country's economy .
 Historically, mercantilism literally meant stockpiling gold (gained from running a trade surplus) as a fungible form of power . Such a strategy is attuned to realism’s emphasis on relative power and is a strategy .
 The benefits and costs of trade tend to be unevenly distributed within a state . Also, the benefits and . costs of a state trade are unevenly . distributed within state .
 A 20 percent steel tariff enacted by the Bush administration in 2002-2003 cost consumers $7 billion and saved 7,300 U.S. jobs — a pricey $326,000 per job . One estimate: The Bush administration's 20 percent tariff enacted in 2003-2002 cost $7
 7,300 workers benefit greatly, but the roughly $20 cost per U.S. citizen goes unnoticed . 7,000 workers benefit from the tax system, but it goes unnoticed in the United States .
 No world government owns industries, provides subsidies, or regulates prices . Still, world markets are often affected by politics, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Albania for decades did not participate in world markets but relied on a centrally planned economy designed for self-sufficiency . The communist state split from both the Soviet Union and China .
 Albania pursued autarky to prevent outsiders gaining power over it . The curtain of isolation finally fell in 1991 after decades of isolation . Albania was as poor as decades earlier and missed out on the prosperity that came to rest of Europe .
 China's experience also illustrates the problems with autarky . China’s economic isolation in the 1950s and 1960s, resulting from an economic embargo imposed by the U.S. and its allies .
 When China opened up to the world economy in the 1980s, the pattern reversed . North Korea maintained a policy of self-reliance and isolation even after the Cold War .
 Protectionism uses various means to keep foreign imports from competing with domestic products . Protectionism is a means of keeping foreign imports out of competition .
 American manufacturers complain that the subsidies given to the EU-based company make it difficult for them to compete . The subsidies allow the European company to place a lower bid than the American company .
 The GATT’s role as a negotiating forum for multilateral trade agreements that lower trade barriers on a fair and reciprocal basis . The WTO continues to be a negotiating .
 Five G7 summit meetings eluded five successive G7 summits in 1990-1994 . The rough outlines of a new GATT agreement emerged after a few years . Closing eluded closure eluded G7 meetings in 1990 and 1994 .
 Multilateral negotiations have advantages of reducing collective goods problem inherent in multilateral negotiations . They have the advantages of . reducing the collective goods problems inherent in . multilateral . negotiations and facilitating reciprocity .
 When WTO negotiations bog down, bilateral agreements can keep trade momentum going . Bilateral agreements can help keep momentum going, says John Defterios .
 In 2007 the ten ASEAN countries met with China, Japan, India, Australia, and New Zealand to begin negotiating an East Asian free trade area* The group, unlike some other Asia-Pacific IGOs, does not include the United States .
 Regional agreements might divide the world into three competing trading blocs, each internally integrated but not very open to the other two blocs . Europe and the Americas are free trade zones in Europe and Asia, and perhaps in Asia in the future, raising the possibility of trading zones practicing liberalism inward
 Most often producers and not consumers form cartels, because there are usually fewer producers than consumers, and it seems possible for them to coordinate to keep prices high . It is an unusual but interesting form of trade regime, writes Andrew Keen .
 In many countries, government not only responds to industry influence, but works actively with industries to promote growth and tailor trade policy to their needs . Such industrial policy is especially common in states where one or two industries are crucial to the economy .
 Several industries are particularly important in trade negotiations currently* Atop the list is the agricultural sector . Traditionally, agriculture has been protected since self-sufficiency in food reduces national vulnerability (especially in time of war)
 Agriculture is at the top of the agenda of international trade negotiations, as developing countries push richer onesto end farm subsidies . It is technically easy and cheap to copy such works and sell them in violation of Agriculture .
 The use of reciprocity to enforce equal terms of exchange is especially important in international trade . States often negotiate complex agreements based on reciprocity, such as commodity by commodity .
 Despite some loss of state sovereignty as a result of growing interdependence, these efforts have benefited participating states . Stable political rules governing trade allow states to realize great economic gains that can result from international exchange* Economic Globalization .
 The expansion of trade is a central aspect of globalization in the international political economy, but hardly the only one . Globalization is transforming not only trade but money, business, integration, communication, environmental management, and economic development of poor countries .
 By the outset of the 20th century, the world’s largest and most advanced economy was no longer Britain but the United States . The industrialization of the U.S. economy was fueled by territorial expansion throughout the 19th century .
 The U.S. economy attracted huge pools of immigrant labor from Europe as well . The U,S., economy attracted large pools of immigrants from Europe also .
 These examples illustrate the variety of sources of backlash against free trade agreements . Study and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at MyPoliSciLab .
 The United States ranked near the bottom in the survey, with 65 percent supporting trade . 65 percent of Americans support trade, the survey found .
 The benefits of free trade, as noted earlier, are much more diffuse than the costs . Free trade is a form of form of free life, but it's a formative form of life in the United States .
 Clean Air Act regulations are functioning as nontariff barriers, the government says . The U.S. is seeking to make changes to the law to ease the burden on imported gasoline .
 Financial integration also carries risks . Financial integration allows for better returns on investment for individuals investing for college tuition or retirement .
 Many Americans who had taken out loans on their homes found themselves unable to pay them back . Such was the case in 2008, as an economic downturn began in the United States .
 Several large U.S. banks announced they were on the verge of failing because they had too much money tied up in bad home loans . Several large banks then announced that they had to deal with the problem .
 Several British banks then announced they were near bankruptcy . The U.S. government responded with a rescue package of $800 billion to help shore up failing banks, Britain also created a $450 billion .
 Nearly every state prints its own money. You Are a Foreign Market Analyst"" at MyPoliSciLab . You are a foreign market analyst. You are an analyst of foreign markets .
 Most exchange rates are expressed in terms of the world's most important currencies . The United States dollar, the Japanese yen, and the EU’s euro are the currencies most important in the world .
 China has kept its currency pegged to the U.S. dollar for years, even as economic conditions in the two countries have diverged and a huge trade imbalance developed .
 Such losses reduce the trust people place in the currency, as a result, demand for the currency drops . Investors become wary of future devaluations, and indeed such devaluations often follow one after another in unstable economies .
 In 2009, Russia devalued its ruble six times after the price of its main export, oil, plummeted . A currency may be devalued by being allowed to float freely after a period of fixed exchange rates, often bringing a single sharp drop in values*
 The United States has blamed the undervalued yuan for costing America 1.0 million jobs . The 2012 American presidential election featured recurrent ""China bashing,"" further exacerbating political tensions . Explore the Simulation ""You are CEO of a Multinational Corporation"
 The central bank seeks to maintain the value of the state’s currency by limiting the amount of money printed and not allowing high inflation . The economists and technical experts who run the central bank seek to keep the state's currency value .
 World Bank works to stabilize and develop economies in poor and middle-income countries . The World Bank is based in Washington, DC .
 If a state has more money flowing out than in, it gets that money from its reserves . These changes in reserves consist of the state’s purchases and sales of SDRs, gold, and hard currencies other than its own .
 Failure to repay debts makes it hard to borrow in the future, a huge impediment to economic growth . In 2001 Argentina collapsed under more than $100 billion of debt accumulated over the prior decade .
 One major reason is a trade deficit, which must somehow be made up . A second reason is the income and consumption pattern among households and businesses . A trade deficit is common to borrow money to pay for trade deficit .
 A third reason for national debt is government spending relative to taxation . The credit card they use may be from a local bank, but that bank may be getting the money it lends to them from foreign lenders .
 In 2004, Russia’s largest oil company was shut down by President Vladimir Putin because of nonpayment of a $10 billion tax bill, only to have its assets purchased by a state-owned business . The state has consolidated its control of major companies and the media again, using
 Russia has registered strong economic growth and reduced runaway inflation to less than 10 percent a year . High oil prices have helped Russia pay off debts and build large foreign reserves . Incomes are rising and poverty shrinking, poverty shrinking .
 Despite example of Japan’s financial system, these mistakes were repeated almost exactly in the 1990s by other countries of East and Southeast Asia . Real estate and stocks became overvalued as rapid economic growth led to speculation and ever-rising expectations .
 Authorities opened this toy-testing lab in 2007 . Authorities opened the lab in response to a series of toy-related incidents .
 The role of MNCs in international political relations is complex and in some dispute . The role is complex, and there is some dispute over its role in international politics . MNC's role in the world's political relations with the U.S. is disputed .
 Some scholars see MNCs as virtually being agents of their home national governments . Some scholars say they are agents of the home governments .
 MNCs have clear national identities and act as members of their national society under state authority . This view resonates with mercantilism, in which economic activity ultimately serves political authorities . This is the view of mercantillism .
 Dow Chemical head said he dreamed of buying an island beyond any state’s territory . Dow's world headquarters would be placed in the island . Dow Chemical chief said he wanted to buy an island with Dow's headquarters .
 In such a view, MNCs act globally in the interests of their (international) stockholders and owe loyalty to no state . In the view, the view is that they must be more loyal to international stockholders than state .
 Investments in the manufacturing sector usually entail the greatest investment in fixed facilities and in training workers and managers* Investments in service sector tend to be less expensive and easier to walk away from if conditions change . Investments in manufacturing tend to involve more investment in the service sector .
 In developing countries, foreign direct investment often evokes concerns about a loss of sovereignty . Most foreign investment in the global South once came from colonizers, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Host governments can regulate activities on their own territories . MNC cannot operate in a state against the wishes of its government . Host governments may step in to help the MNC .
 Government restrictions on trade seldom help foreign MNCs; more often they help the host country’s own industries . Another source of conflict is the trade policies of the host government . Trade restrictions are thus another form of leverage that states have in luring foreign direct investment .
 When a state’s currency devalued, imports suddenly become more expensive . Foreign direct investment is often sought by host governments because it stimulates employment and economic growth .
 International business prospers in stable political environments in host countries . Relationship of a host country with an investing MNC can be complex . The relationship of an MNC with an investor can be complicated .
 In the 1990s, the United States-based Conoco oil company agreed to a billion-dollar oil development project in Iran . The United States government was trying to isolate Iran as a rogue state .
 Corporate alliances involving MNCs often have international implications . Corporate alliances involve MNCS often have global implications .
 Such a shift in sovereignty to the supranational level would probably entail some version of federalism, in which states recognize the sovereignty of a central government while retaining certain powers .
 The most successful example of the process of integration by far is the European Union . Other modest examples of the integration process have been encountered in previous chapters . But these arrangements hardly challenge states’ territorial integrity .
 IR scholars used the term integration to describe what they observed in Western Europe . Integration challenged the assumption that states were strictly autonomous and would never yield power or sovereignty . Integration processes in Europe and elsewhere are making state borders more permeable to people, goods, and ideas .
 Neofunctionalism is a modification of functional theory by IR scholars to explain these developments . The European experience went beyond the creation of specialized agencies to include the development of more general, more political supranational bodies such as the European Parliament .
 The new wave of integration in Europe and elsewhere encountered limits and setbacks . European integration has been hit by a series of setbacks, including a crash .
 Today the European Free Trade Association is an extended free trade area associated with the European Union . Its members are Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein, and Switzerland* In a customs union, participating states adopt a unified set of tariffs with regard to goods coming in from outside the free trade
 A common market means that member states allow labor and capital (as well as goods) to flow freely across borders . A common union means that in addition to the customs union, members of the EU allow labor, capital and goods to flow .
 Under the 1957 Treaty of Rome, goods can move freely across European borders to reach consumers in any member country . The free trade area was created by the 1957 treaty of Rome .
 Commission bureaucrats worked to smooth out inconsistencies and create a uniform set of standards . For instance, professionals licensed in one state should be free to practice in another .
 The struggle between nationalism and supranationalism seems precariously balanced between the two . The transition between sovereignty and sovereignty has not yet been accomplished in the realms of sovereignty and foreign and military policy . The struggle is not yet achieved in the realm of sovereignty .
 Slovakia’s single-handed veto of a massive euro bailout briefly in 2011 . Slovakia has joined the EU since 2004 . The ability of the EU to reach decisions by consensus became more complicated in recent years .
 The working time required to make decisions in the Council of the European Union expanded . Potential conflicts and alliances on a particular issue among 28 rather than 15 members of the EU's 28 members .
 The European Union added 12 members, mostly from Eastern Europe, in 2004 and 2007 . A new position called the High Commissioner on Foreign Affairs and Security Policy was created in 2007 .
 Recently, when France held the EU presidency, it demanded delays of Turkey's accession talks . Turkey's membership in the EU is not popular domestically .
 In 2012, the world had 6 billion cell phone subscriptions, almost as many as people and far outnumbering the 1. billion landlines . Even more empowering of ordinary citizens are telephones and the Internet, they say .
 In Arab Spring revolutions, cell phone videos played a critical role in winning support by showing governments brutally murdering citizens . Videos of political demonstrations in one country end up on TV in another country .
 Kenya has become the world’s leader in using cell phones for banking . The country has 10 million banking transactions daily . Half of the population lacks a bank account .
 Russia, China, Russia and others saw the Internet as a system of government-controlled networks . Others, including Google and various NGOs, saw it as a more amorphous entity to facilitate the free flow of information .
 This gap, along with the gap in access to information technologies within countries, is known as the digital divide . This gap is also known as 'digital divide'
 The North-South Digital Divide, 1994-2010 Fixed Phone Lines, Cell Phone Subscribers Internet Users . As the Internet wires parts of the world into a tight network centered on the United States, Europe, and East Asia .
 Since 2007, the One Laptop Per Child project has been mass-producing an inexpensive Web-capable wireless personal computer, priced at $200.21 .
 In Ghana, very popular talk shows on private FM radio programs — allowed after 1995 — gave voice to ordinary people who then threw out the ruling party in 2000 .
 One U.S. group used a Web site to schedule protesters’ phone calls to their congressional representatives every minute of one day . To counteract such uses of information, governments throughout the world try to limit the flow of unfavorable information .
 Later, Google compromised with the Chinese government, angering some U.S. critics . Google's decision to compromise with China angered some United States critics .
 U.S. secretary of state Hillary Clinton has been active at promoting Internet freedom on her visits to countries that limit Internet access . Clinton: Internet freedom as a core human right is a human right .
 Capabilities such as fiberoptic cables or satellite communications serve governments in conducting their foreign and military policies . Nonstate actors such as terrorist organizations have also harbored the power of cellular phones and the Internet to recruit operatives .
 States don't control the global flow of information, which has become a potent force in world politics . States do not control the information flow of the world, which is a powerful force in politics .
 The Olympics (run by the International Olympic Committee, an NGO) is a global event with a worldwide audience . The Olympics is run by the IOC, and is an event run by an NGO called the Olympics .
 The United States table tennis team made the first official U.S. visit to China in 1971 . The rapprochement of 1971 was so delicate that political cooperation was impossible until the way was paved by sports .
 A monetary union requires roughly comparable inflation rates and financial stability in participating states . The biggest experiment with money in history had great success in its first years but hit a crisis in 2010-2013 over members’ debts .
 The European Parliament has members directly elected by citizens in EU states, but it has few powers and cannot legislate the rules for the community . However, the Council of the European Union representing member states has power over Commission*
 Regimes are an important part of the solution, providing rules based on the reciprocity principle to govern bargaining over who gets the benefits and bears the costs of environmental protection .
 The first UN conference on the international environment took place in Stockholm, Sweden, in 1972 . The first conference was held in Stockholm in Sweden .
 The concept applies to both the industrialized regions and the global South . The concept is similar to that of the industrialized and the South .
 Developing countries such as China rely heavily on coal and other dirty technologies for the energy and raw materials they need . China relies heavily on dirty technologies such as coal for its energy needs .
 The greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide, methane gas, chlorofluorocarbons and nitrous oxide . Carbon dioxide and methane are among the greenhouse gases .
 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. United Nations Environment Program Northern Sea Route miles . Canal Route 13,000 miles . United Nations .
 The prevention of global warming is a collective good that affects the entire world but results from the actions of the world’s states individually* Those affected most actually will be those least responsible for causing it* Weather disasters such as the 2010 catastrophic floods in Pakistan would become more common if the
 Major players such as the United States did not ratify the Kyoto Protocol, and the world’s output of greenhouse gases has not slowed . The international community has not yet been able to address the very serious problem of global warming*
 Countries of the global North and global South differed on their approaches* Agreement proved elusive* A deadline came and went. Agreement was supposed to be reached, but a deadline came to a close .
 Such states can benefit economically from exploiting forests — freely cutting lumber, clearing land for agriculture, and mining . Such states are free to freely cut lumber, clear land for farming, mining and agriculture .
 Until recently, leaders of rich states have been most interested in encouraging maximum economic growth in poor states so that foreign debts could be paid . With little regard for environmental damage, environmental damage has been avoided .
 MyPoliSciLab 22Polgreen, Lydia, and Marlise Simons. You Are an Environmental Consultant. You are an environmental Consultant? Please email us at 22PolGreenGreen.com .
 The importance of oil in the industrialized economies helps explain the political importance of the Middle East in world politics . The Middle East is a major source of oil wealth in the world .
 Energy is a crucial economic sector, but it is also one of the most politically sensitive because of the West's dependence on energy imports from the Middle East . The West relies heavily on energy imported from the Mideast and the rest of the global South . Energy is also politically sensitive as
 United States MNCs were heavily involved in the development of oil resources in the area from the 1920s through the 1960s . The United States did not claim colonies or protectorates, but the U.S. did not .
 U.S. and European oil companies kept the price paid to local states low and their own profits high . Local rulers depended on the expertise and capital investment of these companies .
 The dominance principle comes into play in resolving conflicts over natural resources . Thus, the dominance principle is used to solve conflicts over resources .
 One side of this relationship is the role of the environment as a source of international conflict . The relationship between the environment and international conflict has been described as one of the world's most violent conflicts .
 Death rates kept falling faster than birthrates, leading to accelerating population growth . But in nearly 70 other poor states, death rates fell faster than births . That's leading to an acceleration in population growth in the United States .
 China has started to encourage wealthy and more educated families to have two children . Now, in some Chinese cities such as Shanghai, couples are allowed two-child families .
 Controlling population growth helps economic development and vice versa . Control population growth is key to economic development .
 60 percent of China’s population has had hepatitis B, compared with 1 percent in the U.S. and Japan . As a result, 60 percent have hepatitis B . This is a danger sign for the future growth of HIV in China .
 An international campaign has increased the use of iodized salt from 25 percent of households worldwide in 1990 to 66 percent in 2006 . Epidemics among animals have major effects as well as major effects on animals .
 In 2001, tobacco companies with some U.S. support sought to weaken a new proposed treaty, the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control . In 2003, the United States dropped its objections and WHO member states adopted the treaty, which entered into force .
 Everyone agrees that much of the global South is poor, and some of it extremely poor . But some of the world's poorest countries are very poor, especially in the South .
 In all, about a billion people live in abject poverty, without access to basic nutrition or health care . About a third of the world's poorest live in poverty .
 Every five seconds, somewhere in the world, a child dies as a result of malnutrition . The bottom line is that every five seconds is a child dying from malnutrition .
 A person who can read and write can obtain a wealth of information BABY BOOST about farming, health care, birth control, and so forth .
 Nearly a billion people in the global South — most of them in Africa and South Asia — live in abject poverty, lacking safe water, housing, food, and the ability to read .
 The 75 percent of the world’s people living in the global South have about 30 percent of world's doctors . The 75% of the people . living in . the global . South have more doctors than anyone else .
 Children are a main focus of efforts to provide basic human needs in the global South . Safe water is another essential eleventh essential to the region's survival .
 A math class in Kandahar, Afghanistan, in 2002 followed the Taliban's fall . It was a way of meeting basic human needs. The Taliban's defeat of the Taliban in Afghanistan has been a problem .
 There are still 1 billion people lacking safe water and more than 2 billion without adequate sanitation . Despite the tremendous progress the world has made in improving water and sanitation, with population growth, there are still many basic needs .
 In war zones, economic infrastructure such as transportation is disrupted . Government services such as health care and education are also disrupted . The U.S. military says it will be a major factor in the outcome of war zones .
 States, IGOs, and NGOs rushed food to Pakistan after the floods, hoping to avert a major humanitarian catastrophe . The floods are expected to lead to a humanitarian crisis in Pakistan .
 International food aid itself can sometimes contribute to these problems . Food aid is often used to help people in need of emergency food .
 International agencies help women organize small businesses, farms, and other income-producing activities . UNICEF has helped women get bank loans on favorable terms to start up small businesses in Egypt and Pakistan .
 Millions of people from the global South have crossed international borders, often illegally, to reach the North . Millions of those who do so have done so have crossed the borders to reach North .
 In Western Europe, they come largely from North Africa, Turkey, and Eastern Europe . In Eastern Europe they come from North and North Africa .
 Some Western European leaders worry that the loosening of border controls under the process of integration will make it harder to keep out illegal immigrants . The loosened border controls could lead to problems in Europe's borders, some say .
 Tens of thousands of refugees from Tunisia and Libya poured into Italy in 2011 . They could pass freely into other nearby European countries . The problem came to sharp focus in 2011 when tens of thousands poured into the country .
 France stopped accepting them, and EU leaders reviewed their freemovement rules . The EU stopped accepting France's request to accept them in 2010 .
 Remittances are important for states in many regions, says Donald Terry, Donald F., and Steven R Wilson . Remittance is important for many states, says Wilson .
 In 2010, the U.S. State Department listed 13 countries making insufficient efforts to stop human trafficking . Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Malaysia, and Saudi Arabia are among the countries listed in the list .
 There are two contrasting theories of wealth accumulation, based on more liberal and more revolutionary perspectives . A view of the problem from the perspective of capitalism is based on liberal economics — stressing overall efficiency in maximizing economic growth . A Marxist view of capitalism stresses the need to increase wealth accumulation in order to
 This view sees the global South as merely lagging behind the industrialized North* More wealth creation in the North is a good thing, says David Frum . The two are not in conflict, he says .
 A different view of things, from the perspective of socialism, is concerned with the distribution of wealth . It sees the North-South divide as more of a zero-sum game in which the creation of wealth in the North most often comes at the expense of the South . It also gives
 Capitalist and socialist approaches are rather incompatible in their language and assumptions about the problem of poverty and its international implications . These countries are Venezuela, Bolivia, Ecuador, and Nicaragua*
 This chapter somewhat favors socialist approaches, focusing on the past history of imperialism as a central cause of the North-South divide, and on revolutionary strategies and massive redistribution of wealth as solutions . Chapter 13 leans toward capitalist approaches .
 The global system of regional class divisions has been seen by some IR scholars as a world-system or a capitalist world economy . The World-System is the result of a global class division in the world .
 The most important class struggle today, in this view, is that between the core and the periphery of the world-system . The class struggle is between core and periphery, says the author .
 The concentration of capital and the scale of wages each form a continuum rather than a sharp division into two categories, says the economist .
 In world-system theory, the semiperiphery is an area in which some manufacturing occurs and some capital concentrates, but not to the extent of the most advanced areas in the core . The semiperiperipery is a part of the world's economic system .
 Protesters demanded that billions of dollars be spent on social services for the poor . President warned against spending what could be a temporary windfall . Chile's main export commodity, copper, quadrupled in 2003-2006 .
 The high export earnings strengthened Chile’s currency, making it harder for other industries to export their products*36 Then in late 2008, the global recession caused a crash in copper prices, drastically cutting Chile's income* Imperialism has a long history .
 We review how imperialism affected the South over the centuries and how its aftereffects are still felt around the world . In Chapter 3 we discussed Marxist theories of imperialism .
 The European conquest of the world brought about a single world civilization, albeit with regional variants and subcultures . Ultimately the European conquest was the creation of a single civilization .
 European imperialism got its start in the 15th century with the development of oceangoing sailing ships in which a small crew could transport a sizable cargo over a long distance . European imperialism began in the 1500th century .
 Inside the Chevron compound, U*S. workers drive on paved roads, eat American food, and enjoy an 18-hole golf course . They spend 28 days there, working 12-hour days, then fly back to the United States for 28 days of rest .
 European colonialism worldwide promoted values and norms implying that the colonizer's culture was superior to the indigenous culture . Traveling the 12 miles to the airport by helicopter, the Americans rarely leave the fenced compound .
 They are not unpatriotic, but their interests tend to converge with those of foreign capitalists* For instance, they want to keep local wages as low as possible, to produce cheap goods for consumers in rich countries .
 After World War II, a third form of dependency became more common — penetration of national economies by MNCs . The local capitalists, in alliance with political authorities, enforce a system of domination that ultimately serves the foreign capitalists* This is another form of dependence*
 To create local markets for such manufactured goods, income must be concentrated enough to create a middle class that can afford such goods . The middle class must also be able to afford to buy such goods, the author says .
 South Africa's former president, Nelson Mandela, had unusual success in making the difficult transition from revolutionary to state leader, and then leaving office peacefully . Nelson Mandela's transition was unusual .
 MNCs’ foreign investments primed rapid growth in Chinese exports — to $250 billion in 2000 and over $2 trillion in 2012 . China became the world’s largest exporter in 2010 . China is poised to join the United States, Japan, and Germany as a major
 In rural villages, peasants openly protested land seizures, taxes, pollution, and corruption by local officials . President Xi declared the battle against corruption a top priority in China .
 China’s economic success has given it more prestige in the international system . President Hu and other Chinese leaders made high-profile visits to resourcerich areas of the global South .
 China is also a key member of the Group of 20 organization . In 2009, the large Western economies announced that China would join them in a trade deal .
 Other sizable developing countries have pursued various development strategies, with mixed successes and failures .
 Thailand was often suggested as a potential “fifth tiger/’ It received enormous foreign investment in the 1980s and created a sizable middle class . Thailand is often considered a potential "fifth tiger"
 In the two decades since NAFTA, Mexico has seen neither a breakthrough nor a disaster . Despite periodic political and economic upheavals, Mexico hasn't seen a major breakthrough or disaster . Mexico's economy has seen no major breakthrough nor disaster .
 Turkey suffered recession in 2000-2001 and received a $30 billion IML bailout . Turkey received the bailout from IML in 2001 . Turkey was hit by a recession in the early 2000s and received $30bn bailout .
 The largest developing countries are following somewhat different strategies with some„“„ , “ theV,deo what different results.” Watch the full video of the lessons learned by developing countries .
 These themes concern trade, Kenya s Developmental Challenge"" the concentration of capital, and corruption . at MyPoliSciLab .
 Low-capital industries can begin generating capital, which can then be used to move into technologically demanding and capital-intensive kinds of manufacturing . A favorite starter industry is textiles .
 In developing countries incomes are often so low that corrupt officials are more tempted to accept payments . Furthermore, in developing countries income is often too low for corrupt officials to take payments .
 Corruption is a major impediment to economic development in both rich and poor countries . Corruption in the global South presents a collective goods problem for states and MNCs in the region . Corruption is more devastating to economies in the South and to transitional former communist economies .
 Delhi supporters of hunger-striking anti-corruption activist Anna Hazare hold a ""key" to corrupt officials' Swiss bank locker, 2012 . Hazare's hunger strike in Delhi ended in December 2012 .
 Chad promised to use 72 percent of the money to reduce poverty . But in 2005, as the oil money flowed in, Chad’s government pulled out of the deal to use the money for its military, and the World Bank suspended its loans .
 Many governments in the global South have feared the loss of control that comes with foreign investments by MNCs . Sometimes the presence of Mncs was associated with the painful process of concentrating capital and 10 World Bank data .
 The lender may be a private bank or company, or a state (both nTomz, Michael. Tomz) The lender is a state or private company .
 IMF scrutinizes developing countries’ economic plans and policies, withholding loans until it is satisfied that the right policies are in place . IMF can make funds available on favorable terms, as a political entity rather than a bank, the IMF can .
 Such legal disputes can cost millions of dollars to litigate, requiring expensive lawyers and a large staff at WTO headquarters in Geneva . Such disputes are costly legal disputes that can cost thousands of dollars .
 A summit meeting of the nonaligned movement in 1973 first called for the New International Economic Order . Central to the NIEO was a shift in the terms of trade to favor primary commodities relative to manufactured goods .
 Efforts continue to boost cooperation and solidarity in the global South through groups such as the nonaligned movement and the UN . Nonetheless, such efforts have done little to change the South’s reliance on the North .
 Explore the simulation ""You are Managing Director of the IMF"" at MyPoliSciLab . Explore the Simulation ""You Are Managing Director  at My PoliScienceLab"
 MyPoliSciLab covers a variety of programs, from individual volunteers lending a hand to Relief in Haiti to government packages .
 Crcdits are grants that can be used to buy certain products from the donor state . Crcdit grants can also be used for certain products .
 Governments provide more than $50 billion annually in foreign assistance . Private donors contribute $10 billion in additional aid to the United States .
 They work at the request and under the direction of the host state but are paid an allowance by the U.S. government . They are paid by the United States government .
 Oxfam has tried to minimize the role in its projects of governments in both the North and South . For instance, Oxfam does not accept government funds, nor does it make grants to governments .
 Having a system of disaster relief in place provides the global South with a kind of insurance against sudden losses that could otherwise destabilize economic accumulation . Disaster relief has become more organized and better coordinated in the past decade but is still a complex process .
 In 2006, the UN set up a $500 million fund to enable it to respond quickly to disasters without waiting to raise funds first each time disaster strikes . Typically, international contributions make up no more than about about onethird of the total relief effort .
 The world’s children — 2 billion people under age 18 — have special humanitarian needs . The future depends on them, yet they are among the most vulnerable members of their societies .
 The top four donors to UNICEF after the United States are Norway, the Netherlands, Britain, and Sweden . All countries where humanitarian aid is a strong element of national identity .
 Instead of becoming self-sufficient, the Turkana people became totally dependent on outside aid . Instead of self-sustaining, they became dependent on external aid .
 In the past decade, many scholars have undertaken research to understand whether foreign aid is effective at creating economic growth and alleviating poverty in the global South .
 The global South cannot reliably sustain capital accumulation, assistance from the North is necessary to jump-start economic growth . The North is needed to help jumpstart the global South's economic growth, experts say . The South cannot rely on the North for its capital accumulation .
 Research suggests that aid does not always help poor countries develop . Countering this position, however, is research suggesting that aid is not always helpful .
 In some African countries, the massive infusion of foreign assistance after decolonization led to increased poverty and dependence on charity, rather than increased wealth and independence, say experts . They argue that in some African nations, the influx of foreign aid after decolonialization has increased poverty .
 Sometimes foreign assistance contributes goods to third world economies with little understanding of local needs or long-term strategies . Sometimes foreign aid contributes goods without understanding local needs, says CNN.com editor .
 Evidence does not support a strong association of economic growth with wealth distribution or with internal inequality . South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore show that it is possible to rise out of poverty into sustained economic accumulation . China has registered strong economic growth in the past 30 years of market-
 In IPE, we see simultaneous trends toward integration and disintegration among states . People continue to speak their own language, to fly their own flag, and to use their own currency with its pictures and emblems . At the same time, people also hold competing identities based on ethnic ties
 German expansion was followed by further German expansion, which triggered World War War II .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization was formed in 1949 with mainly West European members . It was formed to oppose and deter Soviet power in Europe . North Atlantic is a U.S.-led military alliance .
 United States -Japanese Security Treaty was created in 1951 against the potential Soviet threat to Japan . U.S. and Japan formed a bilateral alliance against the Soviet threat .
 Ann, 105n44, 110n63 Tierney, Michael ]., 1 1 ln65 Tilly, Charles, 160n20, 454n43 Tobias, Sheila, 114n71 Tolba, Mostafa K., 388n3 Tomz, John, 380n