 Ernest May investigates how Ke1medy demonstrated his leadership skills during the crisis . Ernest May looks at how he demonstrated leadership skills in the aftermath .
 Soviet soldiers secretly set up nuclear-armed missiles . They showed Soviet soldiers hurriedly and secretly setting up nuclear missiles .
 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev had promised not to send offensive weapons to Cuba . America's top intelligence analysts had predicted that he would keep his word, Ke1medy said .
 The U.S. at the time had more than 25,000 nuclear weapons in their arsenal . The United States at the then-presidential level of nuclear weapons was the largest in the world .
 Kennedy's predecessor, Dwight Eisenhower, calculated in 1960 that if a crisis led either side to fire nuclear weapons, all humans in the no1ihern hemisphere could perish . Eisenhower calculated that, in 1960, the world could die if a nuclear war broke out .
 Kennedy had to make a decision about a CIA plan to land Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy had hoped the exiles would overthrow Cuba's Communist government, headed by Fidel Castro .
 Kennedy had asked for advice about this from only a handful of people those he knew he was officially obliged to consult . Kennedy had been advised by only a few people he knew were required to consult. Kennedy said: 'I'm not sure what I'm going to do'
 The operation proved to be a fiasco, and afterwards Kennedy had resolved in future to consult more widely . The operation was a disaster, and Kennedy resolved to consult widely .
 Included in the ExComm were the regular participants in National Security Council meetings . Kennedy's brother, the attorney general Robert Kennedy, and the President's chief speechwriter, Theodore Sorensen .
 Both of these men could help Kennedy to think about the domestic political aspects of the crisis .
 C Douglas Dillon, Dean Acheson, Robert Lovett and Llewellyn Thompson helped Kennedy see the current crisis in longer historical perspective . Thompson was probably the person in the President's circle who was best acquainted with Khrushchev . Lovett, who had served under Truman,
 He had told no one about this other than his private secretary, the two guards who maintained the machines, and perhaps his brother, Robert .
 Anyone today can listen in on the proceedings of ExComm meetings . Since he kept it on through almost all meetings, anyone today can watch the proceedings .
 Kennedy, Bundy, Bundy and some others spoke of a 'surgical strike' solely against the missile sites . Kennedy and Bundy said the strike would be aimed at missile sites, not at missile bases .
 The chiefs of staff say an attack should also take out air defence sites and bombers . They want to limit losses of US aircraft and prevent an illlll1ediate air reprisal against U.S. bases .
 The under secretary of state, George Ball, had commented that a U.S. surprise attack on Cuba would be ' ... like Pearl Harbor'
 Robert Kennedy and Dean Rusk concurred that decisionmakers could carry 'the mark of Cain' on their brows for the rest of their lives .
 President Eisenhower ordered a blockade to prevent the introduction of fmiher missiles, and demanded that the Soviets withdraw the missiles already there . The blockade was designed to prevent introduction of new missiles .
 To those of Kennedy's advisers who still favoured quick use of military force (the 'hawks' in later classification), this quarantine constituted an ultimatum . The quarantine was meant to be a test for Kennedy's decision to use military force .
 If Khrushchev did not capitulate within a day or two, a U.S. air attack on Cuba would follow, followed by an invasion . A U.N. strike on Cuba was expected to follow, then an invasion would take place .
 The quarantine bought time for possibly developing some diplomatic solution . For those in the ExComm who would later be classed as 'doves, the quarantine was a good move .
 Kennedy blamed himself for the crisis . 'Last month I should have said that we don't care,' he said . 'It doesn't make any difference if you get blown up by an ICBM flying from the Soviet Union, or one from 90 miles away'
 Kennedy explained over and over to members of the ExComm and others why he had issued the warning . Khrushchev had chosen to challenge him, Kennedy said . The crisis involved much more than just a personal affront, Kennedy explained .
 The crisis was not centrally about missiles in Cuba; it was about Berlin, Kennedy said . Kennedy: "The reason was that, for Kennedy, the crisis was . about Berlin. The reason was . for Kennedy to Kennedy was concerned about Berlin."
 Khrushchev had once more revived the threat, and he continued to do so . Their blockade had been frustrated by an Anglo-American airlift and by the astonishing resolution of the West Berliners .
 In 1961, he and the East Germans built a wall around West Berlin as a stopgap measure to halt the exodus of East Germans from Soviet areas . The wall was built in 1961 to stop the exodus from Soviet-controlled areas .
 Earlier in 1962 he told Kennedy that he intended to act on West Berlin as soon as the U.S. congressional elections were over .
 Kennedy interpreted the installation of missiles in Cuba as a move preparatory to a showdown on Berlin . Thompson interpreted the move as preparation for a showdown with Berlin .
 The U.S. had promised to protect the million and a half West Berliners from Soviet take-over . East German and Soviet troops surrounded Berlin, but had no means of physically preventing them from taking control of the city .
 The only protection for West Berlin was the U.S. threat to respond to an attack by using nuclear weapons against the Soviet Union . West Berlin's only protection was the United States threat to use nukes against Russia .
 If Kennedy demanded uncompromisingly that the Soviets remove their nuclear weapons from Cuba, Khrushchev would have to decide whether to comply or to take the risk of actual war, which might become a nuclear war . If Kennedy wanted to remove Cuba's nuclear weapons, he would have had to
 If Kennedy showed weakness in face of Khrushchev's challenge, the effect might be to embolden him to ignore U.S. warnings about Berlin . Kennedy showed a weakness in the face of the challenge .
 On Monday 22 October, Kem1edy went on radio and television, describing the secret Soviet build-up in Cuba, proclaiming the quarantine, and demanding that the Soviets remove the missiles .
 Kennedy mulled over the question of how to stop a Soviet ship that crossed the quarantine line . Kennedy and his advisers mulled the idea of stopping the Soviet ship .
 Robert McNamara described the Navy's plan for dealing with a Soviet submarine escorting a merchantman . The plan was described by McNamara as a plan to deal with the Soviet submarine .
 A destroyer would use small depth charges to signal that the submarine should surface . A submarine would use the small depth charge to signal if it was to surface .
 McNamara aclmowledged that the submarine might think he was being attacked rather than being sent a signal and might fire at the destroyer .
 All Soviet merchantmen bound for Cuba to turn back . Fortunately, before there was an encounter at sea, Kln'ushchev ordered all Soviet ships to turn away .
 Kennedy authorised low-level daytime surveillance flights in addition to continuing U-2 flights . At the urging of McNamara and the chiefs of staff, Kennedy authorised the operation .
 He agreed provisionally to nighttime coverage involving the use of flares . He also agreed to provide coverage using flares .
 Khrushchev cabled Kennedy that he was prepared to remove missiles from Cuba in return for a U.S. promise not to invade Cuba a promise that had already been given more than once . Kennedy was the president of the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev broadcast a second message saying the missiles would be removed if, in addition, the United States withdrew nuclear missiles and other 'offensive means' from Turkey . But, just as Kennedy and his ExComm began to discuss a response, the message was broadcast from Moscow .
 Kennedy advisers said almost unanimously that Khrushchev's new condition was unacceptable . Ball in the lead, Kennedy's advisers said . Ball was the leader of the anti-Khrrushchev camp .
 America's NATO allies would think the U.S. was sacrificing their security for the sake of its own . The United States should not be sacrificing their own security for its own, the president says . The U.N. should not sacrifice its own security, he says .
 Robert Kennedy sent Robert Kennedy to see the Soviet ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, to tell him that the missiles in Turkey were obsolete . The US planned to pull them out within about six months, Kennedy said .
 Kennedy would deny Khrushchev's claim that the U.S. had struck the deal . Kennedy would not remove the missiles from Turkey, he said .
 What Kennedy wanted was to mollify Khrushchev without seeming to make a concession, and above all to avoid any prolonged negotiations, he says . Kennedy wanted to avoid prolonged negotiations with the Soviet leader .
 He had to insist that Soviet missiles come out of Cuba unconditionally, or he would compromise the display of firmness that he judged necessary to protect against a Berlin crisis .
 In fact, the exchange between Kennedy and Dobrynin had no effect . The exchange between the two men had nothing to do with .
 Khrushchev had already decided to retreat to a simple request for a no invasion pledge . "No invasion pledge" was a response to a request for the pledge .
 The Soviets dismantled their missiles and loaded the parts on ships for return to the Soviet Union . U.S. reconnaissance aircraft kept watch while the Soviets dismantled the missiles .
 The world escaped nuclear war in October 1962 largely because of the prudence of Kennedy and Khrushchev . Kennedy's prudence saved the world from a nuclear war . The world was saved largely by the actions of the two world leaders .
 Kennedy had felt it necessary to be uncompromising in his demand for removal of the missiles from Cuba, he had been careful to put off to the last possible moment any action that could kill a Russian .
 Khrushchev had probably decided to drop his demand for quid pro quo removals from Turkey as a result of learning that a Soviet anti-aircraft missile in Cuba had shot down a U-2 plane, killing the pilot .
 Because Khrushchev had been faced down, he did not force a new Berlin crisis . The crisis did not occur again until the end of the Cold War .
 The Soviet bloc lived for the next 27 years with a wall around West Berlin that marked East Germany as a huge penitentiary . It eventually became possible for west and east to turn towards the stabilising compromises of the later period of detente .
 The influence of such Cold War accepted histories impacted American foreign policy for the next fifty years . The impact of these Cold War histories impacted U.S. foreign policy in the 1950s .
 It argues that American diplomats did compromise with the Soviet Union and Cuban leader Fidel Castro . Diplomats removed Jupiter missiles in Turkey and agreed not to invade Cuba, the document says .
 Other topics include historical revisionism, collective memory, and the politics of diplomatic history .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy's skillful management of the Cuban missile crisis has been elevated into the central myth of the Cold War . 50 years ago this autumn, 50 years after the crisis, the Cuban crisis was a key moment in history .
 The crisis blossomed as an unabashed American triumph and unmitigated Soviet defeat . Thus the crisis blossowed as unabashed U.S. triumph . The crisis was a triumph for the United States .
 Kennedy's victory in the messy and inconclusive Cold War naturally came to dominate the politics of U.S. foreign policy . Kennedy won the Cold War in the '60s and '90s .
 It deified military power and willpower and denigrated the give-and-take of diplomacy . It denigrated diplomacy, it said. It also denigrated military power, willpower and willpower .
 It set a standard for toughness and risky dueling with bad guys that could not be matched -because it never happened in the first place . It set the standard for . toughness and dangerous dueling that could . not be . matched .
 Americans had a long-standing mania against compromising with devils, but compromise they did . Of course, Americans had to compromise with devils . Americans had long been wary of compromise with devil .
 President Harry Truman offered communist Moscow a place in the Marshall Plan . Truman even went so far as to offer communist Moscow an offer in the plan . Truman also offered Moscow an opportunity to be included in the plans .
 JFK demonstrated the strength proposition in spades . JFK demonstrated that he could resist compromise with those devils . The Cuban missile crisis was JFK's first test of his leadership .
 JFK succeeded without giving an inch in the Cuban missile crisis . JFK succeeded in policy deliberations and political debate, spoken or unspoken .
 It's there now, all these decades later, in worries over making any concessions to Iran over nuclear weapons or to the Taliban over their role in Afghanistan .
 American leaders don't like to compromise, and a lingering misunderstanding of those 13 days in October 1962 has a lot to do with it . American leaders are not willing to compromise in the wake of the war .
 The crisis concluded not with Moscow's unconditional diplomatic whimper, but with mutual concessions . In fact, the crisis concluded in fact with mutual concession, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Soviets withdrew their missiles from Cuba in return for U.S. pledges not to invade Fidel Castro's island . The Soviets also withdrew their Jupiter missiles from Turkey and removed them from Cuba .
 The Kennedy clan kept the Jupiter part of the deal secret for nearly two decades . Even then, even then, portrayed it as a trifle . For reasons that seem clear, the Kennedy clan .
 Kennedy's people went out of their way to conceal the Jupiter concession . Kennedy's Jupiter concession was revealed in an interview with the White House .
 The president's brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, met Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to present the Jupiters-for-Soviet-missiles swap . The exchange took place in October .
 We'll take the Jupiters out, but it's not part of the deal, and you can never talk about it . We'll always be able to talk about the game, but we'll take them out, and we'll never talk .
 The Soviets removed their missiles, the United States removed the Jupiters, and the secret held for 16 years . The secret was only discovered in a small paragraph in an Arthur Schlesinger book upon which few remarked .
 Kennedy's advisors wrote a Time article on the 20th anniversary of the crisis in which they admitted including the Jupiters in the agreement . Four years later, Kennedy's key advisors wrote an article about the crisis .
 JFK had already decided to remove the Jupiters from Turkey . They did so, however, in such a way as to diminish its importance, presenting it as an afterthought .
 JFK had still been fighting Vietnam war when he was assassinated . Most ended up opposing a Vietnam war that JFK was still fighting when he died . Most of those opposed to the war were opposed to it .
 They all grew skeptical about the value of military might and big-power confrontations . They became formidable advocates of diplomatic compromise .
 It was not until 1988 that one among them clearly and openly acknowledged his decades-long hypocrisy and its costs .
 A well-timed Soviet leak after the Jupiters were removed could have done two things for Moscow . A well timed leak could have helped the Russians .
 First, the story of the swap would have sharply blunted accounts of their utter defeat . First, they would have been far more likely to have been the result of a swap .
 JFK was planning to replace the Jupiters with Polaris missile-firing subs . Never mind that JFK planned to replace them with Polaris missiles .
 RFK told Dobrynin that this fear was his major reason for keeping the deal secret . It would have caused great consternation in NATO, where the swap would have been portrayed as selling out Turkey, RFK said . RFK even said this was his main reason for not
 Dobrynin fully grasped how the myth chilled U.S. willingness to compromise, he said . He told me about in the late 1970s when I was ensconced at the State Department .
 He didn't say publicly until his memoirs came out in 1995 . His memoirs were published in 1995, but he didn't speak publicly until 1995 .
 It's quite possible, even likely, that Khrushchev and his Politburo never considered leaking because they had no idea how the crisis would be portrayed - how weak they would look . It is quite likely they never leaked because they didn't want to know how the situation would be
 On the day the crisis was reaching a crescendo, before he knew that Kennedy would offer up the Jupiters, Khrushchev was ready to back down . The crisis was at a point of crisis when he knew Kennedy would give up the weapons .
 He wasn't thinking about the Jupiters; he just wanted out . He was determined to convince colleagues that a U.S. pledge not to invade would be enough to protect Soviet power and pride .
 All backed this theory, though they acknowledged not knowing the details of Khrushchev's thinking .
 Soviet leaders, they said, genuinely feared a United States invasion of Cuba . Soviet leaders feared a U.S. invasion of Cuban territory .
 None were moved by my argument that by the time of the crisis, there was no likelihood of such an invasion . None was moved by his argument that the invasion was unlikely .
 After the Bay of Pigs fiasco, this idea was laughable in U.S. policy circles . The idea is laughable in the United States policy circles, but it is still relevant today .
 None would grant that Moscow's leaking of the swap was necessary to preserve Soviet honor . Moscow leaked the swap to protect Soviet honor, but none would grant it .
 JFK speechwriter and confidant Ted Sorensen touted Bobby Kennedy's Thirteen Days as the definitive account . In Moscow at a retrospective on the crisis in 1989, JFK's speechwriter touted the book as the best account .
 Reporters covering the meeting took it upon themselves not to chronicle this exchange . Reporters covered the meeting did not report the exchange .
 Foreign-policy chatter has little reference to the Jupiters in the past .
 The COMPROMISE is mentioned so infrequently that Fred Kaplan had to nail it to the wall in a recent Slate review of Robert Caro's latest volume on President Lyndon B Johnson .
 Caro relied on sources that extolled Kennedy's resolve, and he ignored the Jupiters . Caro: "I'm not sure what I'm doing here, but I'm glad that I'm here"
 Compromise is NOT a word that generally makes political hearts flutter, and it's even less loved when it comes to the politics of U.S. foreign policy . Compromises is NOT one of the words that generally make political heart flutter .
 The myth, not the reality, became the measure for how to bargain with adversaries . The myth of the deal with the U.S. President Barack Obama was the measure of how to deal with his adversaries .
 Everyone feared becoming the next Adlai Stevenson, whom the Kennedys, their aides, and their foes discredited for proposing the Jupiter deal publicly . The deal was ultimately discredited by the Kennedy administration and its foes .
 Washingtonians had a long-held desire to emulate the missile-crisis myth . It was very much a part of the city's ether in columns and conversations with friends from the early 1960s to the 1990s .
 Few wanted to expose themselves by proposing even mild compromises with enemies . Few feared even mild compromise with enemies and wanted to avoid exposing themselves .
 LBJ ordered a review of U.S. policy toward Vietnam after the 1968 Tet Offensive . We weren't even permitted to study possible compromises with Hanoi, author says .
 Only a dyed-in-the-wool Cold Warrior like Richard Nixon could have withdrawn from Vietnam . Nixon's Vietnam withdrawal would have been a victory for the U.S. President .
 It took extraordinary courage to propose compromises in arms control talks with Moscow . It took extra courage to suggest compromises with Russia, it took .
 Even treaties for trivial reductions in nuclear forces on both sides faced furious battles in Congress . Even treaties to reduce nuclear forces in both countries face furious battles .
 Today, it is near political suicide to publicly suggest letting Iran enrich uranium up to 5 percent with strong inspections . The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty permits it, though the N.N.A. Treaty allows it .
 Barack Obama's team is talking to the Taliban, but its demands are so absolute - the Taliban must lay down their arms and accept the Kabul constitution - that any serious give-and-take is impossible .
 The White House would have to at least dangle the possibility of a power-sharing arrangement with the Taliban . Were it at all serious, the White House may have to dangle a deal .
 For too long, U.S. foreign policy debates have lionized threats and confrontation and minimized realistic compromise . For too many years, the United States has been focused on confrontation, not compromise .
 "Yes, to be sure, compromise is not always the answer, and sometimes it's precisely the wrong answer" "Sometimes compromises are not always always the right answer," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Policymakers must examine it openly and without fear, and measure it against alternatives . But policymakers and politicians have to be able to examine the issue without fear .
 Compromises do fail, and presidents can ratchet up threats or even use force . Compromise does fail, but presidents can then use force if they don't reach a compromise .
 JFK found a compromise solution to the Cuban missile crisis -and the compromise worked . JFK was a steely-eyed JFK . JFK found the compromise .