 Laos and Cambodia are granted independence in 1956 . South Vietnam ruled by American sponsored Ngo Dinh Diem . North and South to be reunited by free elections in 1956. Laos, Cambodia and Cambodia granted independence .
 U.S. fears that a communist takeover in Vietnam would lead to the fall of all of Southeast Asia, and possibly spread to India, the Philippines and possibly Australia . The United States Foreign policy 1950s and 1980s fears that the takeover could lead to an invasion of Vietnam .
 Begins preparations to support a non-communist Vietnamese state in the South .
 Cuba's economy relied mostly on sugar production and export to the U.S. This was due to the fact that Cuba\u2019s economy relied mainly on sugar . Cuba was heavily dependent on its sugar production .
 Castro goes to Mexico and meets Che Guevara . He is captured with his group and placed in prison until amnesty is granted . Castro is captured and put in prison .
 Castro and Che escape to the mountains and begin a guerrilla war with their men . Che and Castro's men begin to fight in the mountains . Che's men are killed in the war .
 May 1958 Batista launches a major offensive against Castro's guerrilla army . May 1958 was Batista's first major offensive in Cuba . Batista was overthrown by the Cuban government .
 Castro nationalizes U.S. owned refineries when refineries refuse to process oil . Cuba nationalizes refineries in response to refineries refusing to process the oil . Castro says the refineries are now nationalized .
 USSR increases its sugar purchases to \u00bd of all sugar produced in Cuba . December 1960 \u2013 USSR increased its sugar purchase to    $00bd  of  Cuba .
 Cuba nationalizes USA interests and seizes $1 billion in land and business from the USA sugar companies . June 1960 – 2013 . Cuba nationalized U.S. interests and seized $1 Billion in land .
 While planned by Eisenhower, Kennedy\u2019s new administration authorizes a covert invasion of Cuba . The invasion was approved by Kennedy's new administration .
 USSR agrees to deploys nuclear ballistic missiles to Cuba to prevent USA invasion . USSR agrees and deploys missiles to prevent invasion of Cuba .
 Khrushchev promised to remove the missiles from Cuba in return for a pledge by the USA to not invade Cuba . In return for the promise, the USA promised not to invade Cuba, and the missiles were removed from Cuba .
 Among these people were a large amount of highly skilled professionals . Among them were people who were highly skilled professional professionals .
 NATO insists on maintaining their access rights to West Berlin . NATO pledges to defend West Berlin from any forms of aggression . NATO says it will maintain access to the area .
 Kennedy Speech 1963: "I'm not afraid to go to Berlin" After the Western response was confined to diplomatic protests, the West responded only with diplomatic protests .
 The United States emerged from World War II the preeminent military and economic power in the world . The U.S. emerged from WWII to be the world's most powerful military power .
 Foreign Policy in the early 1960s . Study your notes and key terms from Cold War Day 1 .
 There will be a small quiz to test your knowledge of the Cold War . Cold War, Iron Curtain, Containment and Containment will be featured .
 Korea is divided at the 38 th parallel in 1945 . U.S. controls the South, Soviets the North . Each country sets up governments .
 In the 1900s, Cuba’s wealth was controlled by American companies . Cuba gained its independence from Spain in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Write down one question you have about Kennedy’s domestic policies, or the Spectrum . Write down a question about Kennedy's domestic policies .