 Caused due to the placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba by the Soviet Union, it was the closest the Cold War came to escalating into a full scale nuclear war . Caused by placement of the nuclear missile in Cuba, it is the closest to escalating to a full-scale nuclear war
 Known as the Bay of Pigs Invasion after a bay in southern Cuba, it was thwarted by the Cuban armed forces in three days . It was known as the 'Bay of Pigs invasion' after a three-day invasion .
 The failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion strengthened the position of Cuban PM Fidel Castro . Failure of the invasion was an embarrassment for the United States government led by John F Kennedy .
 It also strengthened Cuba’s ties with the Soviet Union and made Castro fear that a U.S. invasion of Cuba was on the cards . Castro feared that a United States invasion of Cuban territory was on its cards .
 U.S. imposed embargo and continued covert operations against Castro’s government . United States imposed embargo, continued covert operation against Castro's government .
 The operation to place nuclear missiles in Cuba was code named Operation Anadyr . The two major superpowers at the time United States and the Soviet Union were involved in a long conflict to dominate world affairs .
 By 1962 there was presence of American nuclear missiles in Italy and Turkey against the Soviet Union with their capital Moscow within range . By 1962, there had been presence of U.S. nuclear missile bases in Turkey and Italy .
 Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro agreed to place nuclear missiles secretly in Cuba . If successful would be a blow to the communist cause, it would have been a blow .
 The Soviets employed the strategy of Maskirovka for Operation Anadyr . Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev used the strategy for the operation .
 Anadyr was a river and town in the chilly far-east; soldiers were told that they were heading for a cold region and provided with winter equipment like ski boots . KGB provided partially correct information to Cuban exile organizations which they knew American intelligence didn't trust .
 Apart from weapons, Soviets were able to transfer 40,000 troops to Cuba . Apart from the weapons, Soviet Union was able to get 40,00 troops to the island .
 CIA’s estimate of the number of troops was 6,000 to 8,000 . CIA estimate was 6-8,000-6,000 when it discovered the nature of the operation by US . CIA estimates of the size of the troops involved in the operation were 6,
 U.S. restricted U-2 flights over Cuban airspace for five weeks starting in September 1962 . Cuba was worried that Cuba would shoot down a CIA operated U.2 leading to another international event .
 A U-2 flight piloted by Major Richard S Heyser took photographs while making a high altitude pass over Cuba on October 14 . The flight was taking photographs of the Cuban Islands .
 The photos showed clear evidence of medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic missile facilities . The photos were taken in the area of the base .
 EXCOMM considered various options including full force invasion of Cuba, air strike primarily on missile bases and naval blockade to prevent further missiles from entering Cuba .
 It was considered a strong but limited military action which was unlikely to provoke a Soviet attack . The action was considered to be a strong military action .
 On October 24, a crucial moment in the crisis arrived when Soviet ships neared the blockade but military confrontation was avoided . The blockade was a tense standoff between Russia and the West .
 Soviet Union agreed to dismantle weapons in Cuba and bring them back . United States agreed that they would not invade Cuba without provocation and will publicly declare so . U.S. agreed that the United States would not attack without provocation .
 Secretly it was agreed that U.S. would dismantle and remove their nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy but will not declare this to the public . Secretly agreed that United States would dismantle . and remove . their nuclear missile bases .
 They started to drop explosives to force the submarine to come to the surface for identification . Not knowing that the submarine was armed with a nuclear-tipped torpedo .
 B-59 had not been in contact with Moscow for several days and the crew didn’t know if war had broken out or not . The crew didn't know if the crew had been sent to war .
 The captain was adamant on launching the torpedo but such an action required the consent of the three primary officers on board . Such an action would have to be approved by the captain of the ship, the captain said .
 Officer Vasili Arkhipov alone opposed the launch and B-59 was forced to surface . The launch took place in the early hours of Saturday morning . The mission was the first of its kind in the Soviet Union .
 The launch of that torpedo could have possibly started nuclear warfare between the two nations . The launch was launched by the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 This led to criticism of Khrushchev and was in part responsible for his fall from power two years later . It led to his downfall as a Soviet Union leader .
 Castro was upset from Khrushchev as he hadn’t been consulted before the decision to remove the missiles . Although Cuba was protected from invasion, Cuba was not safe from invasion . Castro was angry that he wasn't consulted before removing missiles .
 It was a direct communication link between the two countries to prevent future crisis . The two countries have been in touch for more than a decade .
 A series of agreements after the crisis reduced US-Soviet tensions for a few years . The crisis reduced tensions for the U.S. and the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Robert F Kennedy, brother of President Kennedy, wrote the famous book Thirteen Days giving an account of the crisis . The book was written by Robert Kennedy's brother, Robert .
 Greville Wynn was just an ordinary guy who made an extraordinary difference, and so did his friend who was from the Soviet Union . His performance in the film truly is remarkable, and what’s so amazing is that Greville .
 Learnodo Newtonic September 28, 2021 at 11:09 am .