 Most people find it easier to think in terms of what I call the time horizon for an event . Most people think of events as an event that takes place on a time horizon .
 If nuclear war has one chance in a thousand of occurring each year, then it has a 1,000 year time horizon . Nuclear war has 1% chance of occurring in a year, according to the odds of occurring .
 Because the risk of a nuclear war varies with time, this is not the same as saying we expect to survive 1,000 years, even though, to simplify, I sometimes may say something like that. Because of the risk, it is not as easy to predict we will survive 1
 Risk analysis can help us estimate the time horizon for a nuclear war . It helps to consider what various values for that parameter would imply . The risk analysis is based on various parameters, such as a risk factor .
 A 1,000 year time horizon at first sounds safe because none of us will be around that long . A time horizon is safe because of the fact that no one will be able to predict how long it will last .
 A child born today would have almost a 10% chance of not living out his or her expected life of 78 years . A baby born today has a 78-year-old expected life expectancy .
 The risk is closer to 78/1000 or 7.8%, but scientists and engineers often use an order of magnitude estimate . The estimate is rounded to the nearest power of 10 to avoid giving an impression of greater accuracy than is warranted .
 The table on the next page puts the risk for various time horizons for a full-scale nuclear war into perspective, assuming that it would kill most people . The table is based on the risk of a nuclear war in the U.S.
 The second column is the probability that a child born today would die in a nuclear war . The last column is how often you would have to skydive from an airplane to bear the same risk . The third is the number of nuclear power plants around your home town to produce an equivalent
 For example, in the skydiving analogy, the whole world is in the harness with you . The whole world, including the world, is with you when you're in a harness, says author .
 Chernobyl is not considered a modern design because it did not have a containment vessel . Chernobyl might seem inconsistent with that million year design goal, but it's not considered modern .
 The accident at Three Mile Island was not catastrophic because its containment vessel did what it was supposed to – contain the radioactivity that was released by the accident . The containment vessel contained radioactivity released .
 Chernobyl killed over 50 people immediately, and the total death toll is estimated to be at least in the thousands . In contrast, Chernobyl's immediate death toll was over 50, with some arguing that the number is nearly a million . Chernobyl was the first disaster to hit the Soviet
 The last column is based on skydiving having a fatality rate of one in 100,000 per jump . Skydiving fatality rates are based on one in 10,000 jump jumps .
 A table similar to the one shown above can be constructed for a nuclear terrorist event . The entries would depend on where you lived and the assumed severity of the event .
 The numbers in the table would be reduced by a factor of 100 . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” was published by the U.S. Department of Energy in June 2012 .
 Most research about the danger of a nuclear disaster focuses on nuclear terrorism to the exclusion of nuclear war . This helps explain why, even though most research focuses on the danger, it is necessary to consider both possibilities .
 Nuclear war has a lower probability each year, but a much higher cost – potentially infinite . Nuclear war is a lower chance each year but a higher cost - potentially infinite - each year .
 In March 2008 I published what appears to be the first quantitative risk analysis of nuclear deterrence . The analysis was published in March 2008 . It appears to show the risk of a nuclear attack .
 That paper was intended for an engineering audience and therefore used some mathematics that is beyond the reach of the layperson . That paper is intended for engineering audience .
 I believe the basic ideas can be expressed in plain English, as I will attempt in the next few sections . However, I will try to explain them in a plain English .
 If the math is more complex than you can handle, skip over that part and don't worry since it is not be crucial to what follows . If you can't handle math, skip it out of the math .
 Even if you cannot follow the math, the math should help explain why the risk is so much greater than most people realize .
 An in-depth risk analysis would have required expertise in a number of areas, and involved a large team effort . The risk analysis was carried out by a large number of experts .
 A crisis involving Cuba is one of the possible trigger mechanisms for a nuclear war, CNN's John Defterios says . He says he simplified the analysis by considering only one scenario .
 The approach ignores other potential causes, it underestimates the risk and is called a lower bound . Because that approach is called "a lower bound," it is often underestimated by the risk .
 Three events divided by 50 years produces an occurrence of 6% per year . The rate is 6% higher than the average rate of occurrence in 50 years .
 Such an action would have violated one of our key concessions in return for which the Russians removed their Cuban missiles . Such a move would have been a violation of a key concession in exchange for removing missiles from Cuba .
 Had Reagan reimposed the blockade, the Russians would likely have taken some action, possibly even threatening to redeploy missiles unless the blockade was lifted . The blockade was likely to have been lifted .
 Reagan was in the process of deploying Pershing IRBMs (socalled “Euromissiles”) in Western Europe, over strenuous Soviet objections . Such a reaction was made more likely by the fact that, at that same time, Reagan was . Reagan was
 The only way the Soviets could match such weapons was with missiles in Cuba . While not as close to the Soviet border as the Turkish Jupiters had been, the only way they could match the Turkish weapons was to Cuba .
 The next step in my analysis was to estimate the probability that, once an event had occurred with the potential to initiate a major crisis involving Cuba, such a crisis actually followed . The analysis was based on the likelihood that such an event would lead to a crisis in Cuba .
 Only the first initiating event led to a full-blown crisis, it might be argued that we learned from that mistake and ⅓ is too large an estimate today . Because only the first inciting event . led to the crisis, we might argue that we have learned from the mistake .
 The fact that we did not adequately learn from the first mistake, or that we learned the wrong lesson . Conversely, the fact that the latter two potential initiating events occurred at all is evidence that we didn't learn the first lesson, or the second .
 Because these two factors tend to cancel each other, I used ⅓ as a reasonable estimate . I used this estimate to estimate the amount of time it takes for a person to be in a state .
 There is a 2% chance of having a Cuban crisis each year . Multiplying this by the 6% chance each year of a potential initiating event, results in the 2% probability of a crisis .
 We can expect to see a Cuban crisis about once every 50 years . Equivalently, I estimated that we can expect that we will see a crisis about one in 50 years. Equivalently, I . estimate that we . expect that the Cuban crisis will occur once every . 50
 Nuclear weapons were first developed in 1945 and a second nation obtained them in 1949 . Until approximately 1960 there were too few weapons for the strategy to be called deterrence . This is not a precise estimate and 1% per year (100 nukes)
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, 2012-13 . Hellman: “4% per year could also be argued, but would not change the conclusion appreciably .”
 The probability is not possible in estimating the probability that a crisis comparable to 1962’s actually crosses the nuclear threshold . Up to this point, I was able to make use of historical data in estimating probabilities .
 Because nuclear weapons have not yet been used during the deterrence era, this estimate, of necessity, involves some subjectivity . This estimate is based on the fact that nuclear weapons haven't been used in deterrence era .
 Risk analysis uses a technique known as expert elicitation to assess risk . Risk analysis is carried out using expert techniques such as expert knowledge .
 In that process, experts with different views of the risk are combined . The risk is considered to be a factor in the risk of an injury or illness .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, 2012-13, has to go ahead . Hellman: ‘Nuclear weapons, risk and hope.’ Hellman .
 In my analysis, I used a range of 10% to 50% for this probability, discounting Bundy's and Dillon’s optimism for the reasons explained in the following two subsections . In the following subsections, I also discounted Bundy's optimism .
 A major danger of crossing the nuclear threshold was totally unknown to Kennedy and his advisors . The unknown nuclear torpedo was a major danger to Kennedy .
 Only on the 40th anniversary of the crisis in 2002, we learned that two Soviet submarines that had been forced to surface by U.S. destroyers each possessed 15-kiloton nuclear torpedoes . The subs’ captains considered using them .
 The destroyers were under orders to enforce the American naval blockade of Cuba . They used what they regarded as signaling depth charges to command the subs to surface .
 Depth charges caused damage to the sub, leading the crews to believe they were under attack . Though smaller than normal depth charges, the charges still caused damage .
 Because submarines maintain radio silence when being hunted, one captain feared World War III had started up on the surface .
 Others on board the sub succeeded in calming the captain and he eventually surfaced . Such a "surrender" was a blot on both the officer's and the Soviet navy's honor . Fortunately, the captain eventually surfaced, even though such a “surrender’s” was
 During the crisis, there was repeated, strong pressure for an American invasion of Cuba . Soviet battlefield weapons for repelling a US invasion were developed .
 Those advocating this strategy either were unaware of or did not adequately consider the risk that the Soviets might have battlefield nuclear weapons on the island to repel such an invasion – which we later learned they did . Those advocating such a strategy either did not consider or not adequately .
 McNamara’s statement could be interpreted as being about conventional war between the U.S. and the USSR, or as relating to full-scale nuclear war . McNamara's statement could also relate to conventional war, or nuclear war, the author says .
 Given that submarines routinely practice radio silence in a war zone, I suspect that these details on the signaling procedure never reached the sub .
 Hellman's advisors should have considered that the Soviets would take such a step and were delaying the announcement until it was needed . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, 2012-13, AUT 2012-
 declassified records show the possibility was given inadequate attention and often overlooked . Yet declassified documents show that, at a minimum, that possibility was not given adequate attention .
 The unsuccessful 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion humiliated Kennedy and the U.S. and the United States . Pressure to invade Cuba intensified when Soviet missiles were discovered on Cuba . Many saw Castro as a communist cancer in the Western hemisphere .
 Evidence for this perspective comes from tapes Kennedy secretly made of ExComm meetings . Kennedy secretly recorded his meetings with ExComm .
 General Earle Wheeler, Army Chief of Staff, insisted that only bombing, blockade, plus an invasion could protect the U.S. against a nuclear strike from Cuba . Wheeler: Only bombing, a blockade, and an invasion can protect the United States from a Cuban nuclear strike .
 Kennedy never convinced his military advisors of the wisdom of delaying an attack on the missiles and Cuba, he did manage to restrain that sentiment within the ExComm .
 Senator Russell suddenly lashed out: “Mr President, I could not stay silent under these circumstances and live with myself.” Senator Russell lashed out at the President, saying he couldn't stay silent .
 Definitive evidence that the Soviets had battlefield nuclear weapons on Cuba only came to light twenty-five years later . The breakup of the Soviet Union lifted the veil of secrecy from many of their records .
 Khrushchev understood the importance of the decision to send tactical nuclear weapons to Cuba . He took pains to maintain direct control of these weapons .
 A day after he authorized the new shipment, the Minister of Defense drafted an order permitting the Soviet commander in Cuba, General Issa Pliyev, to employ these battlefield nuclear weapons . In the event that communications to Moscow were cut and a U.S.-led invasion had begun, the
 Malinovsky’s deputy, Marshal Zakharov, signed in his capacity as army chief of staff, but not army chief-of-staff . He signed the document in his role as chief-de-staff, but Malinov did not . He was replaced by
 With or without authorization, Pliyev almost surely had the ability to use the nuclear weapons under his command, as did a number of lower level Soviet officers . With or not authorization, he could have used the weapons he was in command .
 Use of Permissive Action Links or PALs to prevent unauthorized use of nuclear weapons did not become widespread until later . The use of PALs was first widespread in the U.S. in the 1950s . PALs were used to prevent the use of unauthorized nuclear weapons .
 Even today, such safeguards are likely to be removed if armed conflict seems imminent . The U.S. government is likely to remove such safeguards if it seems to be imminent .
 Pliyev might well have used the weapons even if not authorized to do so . Under the intense pressure of an American invasion, Plyev might have used them even though not authorized .
 Presidium worked out a set of instructions for the Soviet commander in Cuba, General Pliyev . On the assumption that a U.S. invasion was more likely than a blockade, the Presidium issued instructions . The instructions were intended for the commander of Cuba in Cuba .
 The group's first reaction was to take steps to avoid an accidental nuclear exchange . The group’s first reaction to the nuclear exchange was to .
 A cable was drafted that ordered Pliyev to “put all of his forces on alert” but not to contemplate using any of the nuclear weapons deployed at his command . A cable also ordered that order not to use nuclear weapons .
 The more the Soviet leaders thought about the restrictive language of this cable, however, the less they liked it . The more they thought about it, the more the more restrictive language, they didn't like it .
 If the Americans attacked Pliyev and the 41,000-man Soviet contingent in Cuba Prof. Prof. David Perry says the Americans would have attacked the Soviet contingent . He says the U.S. would have to defend itself from the attack .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, 2012-13, would be outnumbered . Hellman: ‘Nuclear weapons, risk and hope,’ would be outweighed by the majority of the
 The nuclear tipped Luna and cruise missiles were his only potential salvation . His only potential saving was the launch of the Luna, a nuclear tipped missile .
 Presidium tentatively came up with a different set of instructions . Unwilling to sacrifice the Soviet group, Presidium decided to use a different approach . Presidium was unwilling to sacrifice Soviet group .
 Pliyev would be authorized to use the tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a U.S. landing . But without a direct order from Moscow, he was not to fire the 1,100-nautical-mile R-12’s .
 A look at the blast effects of these weapons left little doubt that if Pliyev used his battlefield nuclear weapons there would be enormous pressure on President Kennedy to destroy Cuba, at the very least .
 One FKR cruise missile carried enough power, roughly twelve kilotons of TNT, to blow a U.S. aircraft carrier group apart . The missile carries enough power to blow the United States aircraft carrier .
 Of the eighty missiles with nuclear warheads originally ordered to be shipped, the Kremlin has already sent thirty-six to the island . The Kremlin had already sent 30-six of the 80 missiles originally ordered for shipment to be sent . The missiles are believed to have nuclear warheads .
 Concerned that Khrushchev and Presidium were rushing to brink of nuclear war prematurely, Malinovsky recommended to the group that it wait until 1 AM or 6 PM Washington time, to authorize Pliyev to fire the Lunas .
 Malinovsky: U.S. should not give Americans a pretext to use their own nuclear weapons before this was absolutely necessary . He says they should not be given a pretext for use of their own weapons .
 Kremlin decided to send first set of conservative instructions immediately, barring the use of any nuclear weapons . Malinovsky said the Kremlin was persuaded to send the first instructions .
 The second set of instructions was prepared in September 1962 but not signed by Malinovsky . The order would be held pending developments in the Caribbean . The orders would not be signed until the end of September 1962 .
 As you can see, not only did Dillon not have detailed information on “what would have followed,” but that was also true for Kennedy and all of his advisors . Kennedy and his advisors had no idea what would have happened .
 The record shows little to no concern for the possibility (which turned out to be an actuality) of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons being used to deter – and if need be repel – an American invasion .
 The probability of a Cuban crisis crossing the nuclear threshold is 0.2% to 1% per year . Multiplying the 10% to 50% range that I estimate for the probability of such a crisis going nuclear by the 2% probability of the Cuban crisis .
 I rounded those numbers to avoid implying greater accuracy than is warranted . As usual, I round those numbers up .
 When other potential initiating events that could cause us to cross the nuclear threshold (e.g., a nuclear terrorist attack, or a crisis involving Georgia) are included, the risk becomes even larger . The risk is even greater if a terrorist attack or a Georgia crisis occurs .
 Kissinger and Lugar’s survey, mentioned earlier in this handout, said nuclear terrorism has a much higher probability of causing a nuclear disaster . Nuclear terrorism, all by itself, has a greater chance of causing nuclear disaster, Kissinger said .
 A first use of nuclear weapons in a Russian-American confrontation carries a higher risk of producing a full-scale war than if the first use is by terrorists or India or Pakistan .
 A crisis involving Cuba has somewhere between a 15% and 50% chance of causing a nuclear disaster over the lifetime of a child born today . This section is not needed to make the case for changing our approach to nuclear weapons, it says .
 The probability of an event that has never happened is difficult to imagine . That somewhat alleviates the difficulty of again estimating the probability of such an event .
 This last step is to estimate the odds of a full-scale nuclear war resulting from a Cuban crisis, given that the nuclear threshold already has been crossed earlier in the crisis . The nuclear threshold has already been crossed in the Cuban crisis .
 Kennedy did not specify what he meant by the 1962 crisis ending in war . His evacuation order to the families of White House staff lends support to the hypothesis that he meant full-scale nuclear war .
 McNamara’s stated fear that he would not live out the week is also consistent with that 11 . While it is sometimes wrong to multiply probabilities, it is can be done here because the probabilities are conditional probabilities .
 "I wanted you to know that I took that issue into account. Explaining that would be far beyond the scope of this handout, but I wanted to explain that I did," he said .
 It should also be remembered that these estimates are lower bounds, so the true risk is higher . It is also a reminder that the risk is lower, so there is a higher risk of an earthquake .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, 2012-13 . Hellman: ‘Nuclear weapons, risk and hope.’ Hellman’, ‘Risk and Hope’
 If that is the case, the probability range is for a full-scale war, not just crossing the nuclear threshold . The probability range for a nuclear war is likely to be higher than that of a nuclear strike .
 To avoid being seen as alarmist, my estimate used a range of 10% to 50% for this new probability as well . However, to avoid seeing this as alarmism, I used a higher estimate of 10-50% .
 The risk of a nuclear war runs from 0.02% to 0.5% per year for a full-scale nuclear war . Multiplying that range by the previous range for crossing the nuclear threshold results in a range that runs from .02% per . year .
 The corresponding risk of such a war over the lifetime of a newly born child ranges from 1.5% to one-in-three, considering only crises involving Cuba as the cause of the war .
 When all possible trigger mechanisms are considered, the risk becomes even higher . The risk is even greater when all possible triggers are considered .
 Operation Northwoods demonstrates how intent the Joint Chiefs of Staff were on toppling Castro . The Joint Chiefs were determined to topple the Castro regime .
 If the goal were not so serious, the proposed ruses would read like a slapstick comedy routine . The goal is to win the world's most serious prize money .
 When the crisis first started to unfold, Kennedy was unaware that we had similar missiles in Turkey . Kennedy unaware that similar missiles were in Turkey, he says .
 Kennedy: "Yeah, but that was five years ago.” Kennedy then used tortured logic to try and invalidate the relationship he had just said would be “goddam dangerous”
 In actuality, our Turkish missiles became fully operational in April 1962 . In actualities, the missiles were launched in 1962 .
 Decision-makers in 1962 were well aware of the analogy between U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey and Soviet missiles in Cuba . They were preoccupied with finding ways to deny it .
 Cuba and the Soviets would have been within their rights to fire on U.S. planes . The Soviet government and top brass recognized the danger of escalation and issued strict orders .
 Major Rudolf Anderson was killed when a Soviet surface-to-air missile shot down his U-2 spy plane . Anderson died in October 27, 1944 .
 The downing of Major Anderson's U-2 led a number of Kennedy’s advisors to urge military action . The U.2 was downed by Major Anderson in June 1963 .
 The surface-to-air missile that hit Major Anderson’s U-2 was fired without the required permission and in violation of a standing order . Major Anderson was hit by a missile fired without permission and violated of standing order, authorities say .
 General Pliyev had given orders that such action should only be taken on his command, but his deputies were unable to reach him during the short time when they had any chance of hitting Anderson’s U-2 .
 For all of Khrushchev’s efforts to control the use of force in Cuba, he had not been able to prevent the first U.S. casualty .
 His commanders in Cuba had given a liberal interpretation to his earlier order to defend their positions from a U.S. air attack .
 Richard K Betts, Nuclear Blackmail and Nuclear Balance, The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, 1987, page 113 . Betts: "Nuclear Blackmail, Nuclear Balance" is the result of nuclear blackmailing .
 Crisis now moved into its most dangerous phase since October 22 [when Kennedy announced the naval blockade]. 15 5.5.5 . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, 2012-13, .
 Captain Charles Maultsby flew a U-2 out of Alaska, became lost, entered Soviet airspace, and was detected by their air defense . On the same day that Major Anderson’s . U.2 was shot down, Captain Charles . Maultby was also detected by
 Soviet or Cuban attacks on American aircraft within their airspace were seen as “firing the first shot” in the 1950s . Potential Soviet penetration of U.S. airspace was seen in a very different light .
 The day before Major Anderson was shot, a Soviet convoy was ordered to move a cruise missile with a 14-kiloton nuclear warhead into position to attack the American naval base at Guantánamo Bay .
 One of the vehicles fell into a ravine, killing three people and injuring a number of others . Traveling at night, with lights blacked out, on treacherous roads, one of the cars was traveling at night .
 The sudden sound of the crash, accompanied by screams, at first led some in the convoy to believe they were under attack by rebel forces or even American troops . The sudden crash is believed to have been caused by a crash in a convoy .
 If the Soviet warhead had accidentally detonated, in the confusion and chaos, it could have been mistaken for an American nuclear attack on Cuba .
 He was able to keep the situation secret from the public for six days, during which time he was better able to recognize the implications of such actions . Fortunately, with cooperation from the press which had been ready to break the story but held back in the interests of national security, he was
 An attack on the Cuban missiles would require an equally forceful Soviet response . It would require a tit-for-tat bombing of the American missile sites in Turkey or blockading West Berlin . The crisis the year before had brought the two superpowers close to war .
 An attack on Turkey, under NATO’s Article 5, was to be considered the same as a Soviet attack on U.S. soil . Adding to the danger, an attack on Turkish soil would be considered to be same as an American attack on American soil .
 Kennedy also came to realize that an air strike could not guarantee taking out all the missiles . Miami, Washington, and other American cities that were within range of the surviving missiles .
 Even if the Soviet hierarchy did not authorize such an attack, it was recognized that a low level officer in charge of a missile battery might take matters into his own hands if under attack .
 Kennedy decided to start with a naval blockade of the island, and announced that in his Monday, October 22, television broadcast to the nation, Cuba .
 A Cuban missile strike would send a strong message to the Soviets with less risk of escalation than an outright attack . While that would not prevent more of the missiles already on Cuba from becoming operational, it would prevent new ones .
 Kennedy was aided in his effort to portray Khrushchev's actions as fundamentally different from America’s placement of missiles in Turkey because the the American deployment had been done openly . The American deployment of the missiles was done openly, while the Soviet actions were made more sinister . Khrush
 Khrushchev had acted surreptitiously because he assumed that American public opinion would react violently to his action . He had acted secretly because he correctly assumed that U.S. public opinion was against him .
 He reasoned that announcing the missiles would leave America little choice but to accept what the Soviet Union had lived with for years – hostile forces close to its borders .
 OAS approval from the OAS for that action . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, AUT 2012-13, was approved by OAS. Hellman .
 President Kennedy’s tapes were portrayed as a complete suit of clothes by his advisors . In spite of these fig leafs, the president and his advisors held their breath as Soviet ships approached the line Kennedy had drawn .
 Other ships approached the quarantine line days afterward, producing new concerns about what would happen and how to respond . Other ships also approached the quarantined line .
 The previously described, dangerous confrontation between the American destroyers and the nuclear-torpedo-armed Soviet submarines occurred three days later, October 27 .
 McNamara reflected that he feared he might not live to see another Saturday night . Anderson’s U-2 violated Soviet airspace, and McNamara feared he may not live again . That day was also the day that Anderson and Maultsby were shot down .
 The danger continued for months after the public thought the crisis ended . The public thought it was over and the crisis had ended, but the danger continued .
 A 2007 article cites evidence in the John F Kennedy Library to claim that the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff continued to prepare to invade Cuba if diplomatic settlement fell apart .
 The danger of that occurring was exacerbated by Castro prohibiting American inspections on Cuban soil . Kennedy’s advisors feared that perhaps perhaps the Soviet missiles had not all been removed .
 The Soviets left the missiles in plain view as they left Cuba to help U.S. reconnaissance aircraft verify their removal . Those fears persisted even though, as shown in the photograph, the Soviets took steps .
 The Soviets felt the need to have all missiles operational as soon as possible, in order to fulfill Khrushchev’s original plan of having a local nuclear deterrent to prevent American attacks on either the missiles or Cuba .
 Kennedy and his advisors felt pressure to take out the missiles or invade Cuba before more missiles were operational . For exactly the same reason, Kennedy . Kennedy felt the pressure to invade Cuba was similar .
 For example, Kennedy received two conflicting messages from Khrushchev . Kennedy received a conflicting message from the Soviet Union .
 Rusk and the others mistakenly believed that it was the missile-carrying ships that turned around at that point in time, even though they had done so the day before . Dobbs notes that Rusk believed that the ships turned around the day after .
 Even a Soviet ship carrying innocuous cargo could have tested the blockade, with possibly deadly consequences . The blockade could have potentially deadly consequences if it were tested .
 What the ships carried was less important in some ways than what the Americans feared they might carry . The Americans feared what they might have been carrying was not important .
 All intellectual property rights for material from this site are reserved . We are happy to feature some of the world's most recognizable characters .
 All reproduction as well as all use of the material other than for consultation within the domestic and/or private circle or for publication for a strictly scientific purpose is prohibited . Without express permission all reproduction is prohibited.
 Hellman offered to remove the Soviet missiles in return for an American pledge not to invade Cuba . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, 2012-13, autographed by Hellman. Hellman .
 The letter is on line as part of a large collection, and you can locate it within the collection by searching on Moscow, October 26, 1962 . The entire letter is available on the Internet .
 A second, public, more formal, and more demanding letter arrived the next morning . A second letter arrived next morning, demanding that the letter be returned .
 This saved Kennedy from having to deal, at least immediately, with objections from Turkey, and gave the appearance that he had won the contest of wills . It gave him the appearance he'd won the battle of wills.
 Being the apparent winner had important domestic political overtones since midterm elections loomed early in November . The apparent winner has important domestic overtones .
 Had the missile trade been publicly known, Kennedy would have been skewered by the Republicans . Republicans still smarting from his use of a fictitious missile gap to defeat Richard Nixon in 1960 presidential election .
 The Democrats performed much better in the Cuban crisis than originally forecast . The Cuban crisis was a major factor in the Democratic Party's success .
 Kennedy's advantages from this secret deal were Khrushchev's problems . Kennedy’s advantages from the secret deal are Khrushche's problems, he says .
 Khrushchev had to deal with Turkey feeling publicly betrayed . Kennedy did not have the same problem with Cuba . Kennedy didn't have the problem with Turkey and Cuba . The two countries were allies for decades .
 Khrushchev struck a good bargain, getting the two key concessions he wanted . On the surface he appeared to lose on the surface, but he had a good deal .
 These days, it is usually Republicans who paint Democrats as “soft on defense,” they learned the value of doing this from Kennedy . While other factors were also involved in his ouster as leader of the Soviet Union two years later, 22 years later he was ousted .
 On 12 November 1962, United States reconnaissance planes photographed the Soviet freighter ‘Kurchatov’ on her return to the Soviet Union . The freighter was photographed by U.S. reconnaissance planes on its return to Russia .
 Missiles can be seen on the ship’s deck because the Soviets purposely uncovered them to allow the U.S. to monitor their withdrawal from the ship . Missiles were uncovered by the Soviets to allow them to be monitored .
 The starting points for potential initiating events occur approximately every 20 years, including after the end of the Cold War . The starting point for these potential events occurs approximately every . 20 years .
 Potential initiating events for non-Cuban crises are continuing to occur . Events such as the 2008 Georgian war (which we will study in greater detail) show that potential initiating events are continuing .
 An indepth study would catalog many more such events, rate their severity, and result in a plot of these events versus time . The study would be able to map the severity of these incidents .
 The effort would likely show variation with time, and that variation could then be brought into the analysis to produce a better estimate of the risk we face . That effort would be likely to show variation .
 In July 2008, the last potential initiating event I identified (our Eastern European missile defense system) came close to producing a full-blown crisis over Cuba . The last possible initiating event was in July 2008 when it occurred in the U.S.
 The Russians indicated they would respond to that perceived threat to the credibility of their deterrent by basing bombers on Cuba . Air Force Chief of Staff, General Prof. Prof. David Perry, said the Russians were responding to that threat . The Russians said they would base their bombers in Cuba .
 The Russian response to General Schwarz’ “red line’ could just as well have been to draw one of their own, or point out that they had effectively already done so when they strenuously objected to the placement of American missiles in Poland .
 Such a response would have brought us much closer to, if not into, a full-blown crisis, says David Cameron . Such a crisis would have been a major crisis, he says .
 Russia issued a formal denial of the first press report, while still having military planes quietly visit both Cuba and Venezuela . Fortunately, the Russians took a much more cautious approach .
 Even that response could have blown up if American media, or the president’s political opposition, had picked up on it and brought it into the public spotlight . The president's political opposition could have brought it under the spotlight .
 The chances of that happening depend on who is president and the nature of his or her political opposition . And, as noted earlier, that's a good chance .
 If something like that were to happen now, with Obama in office, the risk would be higher, he says . "I suspect that [Obama] would be more likely," he adds .
 An in-depth risk analysis would look at this question in more detail, but the preliminary evidence seems to indicate that any changes in the estimate for a potential initiating event producing a crisis will not be so large as to invalidate the need for reducing the risk .
 Russian leaders know the horror of war on their own soil and tend to act more prudently as a result . For example, in the past, we have benefited somewhat from Russian leaders knowing the horrors of war in their own territory .
 As a new Russian generation takes power, that tendency may be reduced, increasing the risk . The risk is increasing as a new generation of Russian politicians take power .
 Once a major crisis has erupted, the primary question is the maturity level of the actors involved . The question is whether the maturity of the people involved in the crisis is too mature .
 The more mature they are, the more likely they can defuse the crisis before any nuclear weapons are used, experts say . North Korea is the most likely to use nuclear weapons in the world, experts believe .
 Some of the missile interceptors in Bush’s plan were to be based in Poland . What is required is an ability to 24 interceptors to 24 .
 In September 2009, President Obama modified the plan, moving to what many saw as a more flexible (and less threatening to Russia) sea-based system . President Obama's plan was initially modified in September 2009 .
 Hellman: Put aside hurt pride and understand the opposing point of view . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 19 of 29 .
 There has been some growth in human maturity over the last 50 years, with women’s rights and minority rights being indicators . There has also been a rise in minority rights and women's rights in recent years .
 War fever tends to be one of the first victims of war fever . But that growth is limited geographically and often limited geographically . War fever is often the first victim to war fever.
 45% believed Saddam Hussein was ‘personally involved’ in the attack, according to a poll . In the later poll, 45% thought Saddam Hussein had been “personally’s involved” in attack .
 44% of Americans believed that “most” or “some” of the hijackers were Iraqi citizens, according to a 2003 poll . In a related poll also done in 2003, 44% thought that ‘most’ or ‘some’ of the
 Today's nuclear weapons have more safeguards than those of 1962, making it harder to bypass chain of command . Today’s nuclear weapons are more secure than the ones of 1962 .
 Once a crisis has reached major proportions, there will be strong pressure to remove those safeguards . But once a crisis reaches major proportions there is strong pressure for those safeguards to be removed .
 If a commander in the field is facing a possibly nucleararmed adversary, he is at a major disadvantage if he must receive approval before being able to fire .
 As an example of the military’s greater concern that nuclear weapons be available for use compared to their concern that they might be used without authority, consider the story related by Bruce Blair in 2004 .
 Last month I asked Robert McNamara, the secretary of defense during the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, what he believed back in the 1960s was the status of technical locks on Minuteman intercontinental missiles .
 The locks had been installed, but everyone knew the combination, he said . What he had just learned from me was that the locks had already been installed .
 The Strategic Air Command in Omaha quietly decided to set the ‘locks’ to all zeros in order to circumvent this safeguard . The move was made to circumvent the security measures .
 During the early to mid-1970s, during my stint as a Minuteman launch officer, I was still had not been changed . I was a launch officer for the U.S. Air Force in the 1970s .
 Our launch checklist in fact instructed us, the firing crew, to double-check the locking panel in our underground launch bunker to ensure that no digits other than zero had been inadvertently dialed into the panel .
 Saddam Hussein was a secular dictator, who did not share power with religious elements – or any others . SAC remained less concerned about unauthorized launches than about the potential of 25 launches .
 Al-Qaeda is a fundamentalist Islamic organization which wants to replace secular governments with Islamic-based ones . Al-Zama wants secular governments to be replaced by Islam-based Islamic ones .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, 2012-13 . Hellman: These safeguards to interfere with the implementation of wartime launch orders. Hellman .
 The “secret unlock code” during the height of the nuclear crises of the Cold War remained constant at 00000000 . And so the ‘secret unlock’ code was kept at 00000000.
 A more recent example of this unsafe approach is described in one of my blog posts from October 2010 . The most recent example was described in an earlier version of this article .
 A system failure at Warren AFB in Wyoming affected fifty ICBM’s . Various security protocols built into the missile delivery system were offline .
 U.S. nuclear missiles still could be launched from airborne command centers, it was noted . Assuaging fears that America's nuclear deterrent might have been compromised .
 There is an unavoidable tradeoff between the danger of not being able to launch our missiles when wanted versus accidentally launching them . That sounds risky because there is a tradeoff, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The system design can reduce the risk of either of those errors, at the expense of increasing the other, experts say . It can reduce risk of both errors by reducing the risk and increasing the cost of error .
 A design that allows the missiles to be launched during a system failure would seem to increase the risk of an accidental launch .
 An in-depth risk analysis will find little change in the odds of a new crisis crossing the nuclear threshold, even when just a Russian-American crisis is considered . For these reasons, I suspect that a risk analysis finds little change .
 When the new risks of nuclear terrorism and a war between India and Pakistan are factored in, it is conceivable that the odds today are even worse than they were in 1962 . The odds of a war in Pakistan and India war between the two nations could be even worse .
 Kennedy had almost a week from the discovery of the missiles until he was forced to go public with that information and present a plan of action . Kennedy had nearly a week before he went public with the information .
 He fought off repeated calls for such action from others, notably the entire Joint Chiefs of Staff . During that time, as he thought through the implications of his initial plan to bomb the missiles, his opinion changed .
 Kennedy had the luxury of so much time partly because the press cooperated when he asked them to hold their stories until after his television address . Kennedy had to wait until after the television address to get his story to be aired .
 How We Can Prevent the Crisis that Might Bring on a Nuclear War, Houghton Miflin Company, Boston, 1985, page 37. How We can prevent the crisis that might bring on a nuclear war, was published in 1985 .
 It would seem to be just as applicable today as with respect to 1962 . Hence it would seem that today as well as 1962 .
 Our current nuclear strategy is at least 1,000 times riskier than living next to a nuclear power plant . For example, a preliminary risk analysis indicates that our current nuclear . strategy is more risky than living near nuclear power plants .
 If we agree that an acceptable level of risk would be no greater than living next to one such plant, then we need to reduce that risk by at least a factor of 1,000 . The risk needs to be reduced by at at least one factor of a factor .
 MIT’s Prof. David Rothkopf writes a very insightful paper on risk analysis . The risk analysis is based on the risk of a terrorist attack in the United States .
 George Apostolakis argues that risk analysis needs to be seen as a process, not a one-time effort . He argues that decisions should be risk-informed as opposed to risk-based . Apostolaki argues risk analysis is a process and not an attempt to predict outcomes .
 Risk analysis should be one of the tools brought into the decision process, but should not be thought of as a dictator, telling us exactly what needs to be done . Risk analysis shouldn't be a dictator telling us what must be done, it should be a tool for decision-makers .
 Apostolakis also explains that risk analyses need to be peer reviewed and improved based on that process . Apostolaki: Risk analyses must be peer-reviewed and improved .
 If risk analysis in an area has problems, that calls for correcting those problems to the greatest extent possible, not throwing out the baby with the bath water . If the best risk analysis finds problems, it should be corrected, not thrown out of the water, he says .
 Decisions made in the absence of a quantitative risk analysis still depend on subjective estimates of the risk, but those making the decisions no longer have to justify the assumptions that support their conclusions .
 My risk analysis of nuclear deterrence forced me to explain why I chose the numbers I did, allowing objective criticism to correct errors . In contrast, my risk analysis was forced to explain what I chose to do, and how it happened .
 If you disagree with my estimate of 6% per year for the rate of occurrence of potential initiating events, you can explain why you believe the evidence I presented is incomplete or inapplicable .
 If you disagree with my estimate of 10% to 50% for the probability of a full-blown Cuban crisis crossing the nuclear threshold, again we can argue our positions more objectively .
 Contrast the benefit of knowing where and why we disagree in our estimates with the situation when no risk analysis is available . Contrast the benefits of knowing if you disagree with your estimates .
 "My own experience dealing with nuclear deterrence from a risk analysis perspective over the last several years has convinced me of the value of that approach," he says .
 Risk analysis provides early warning signs for faulty system designs that are headed for catastrophic failure . But only if we pay attention to those signs, risk analysis can be used to identify problems .
 History shows that society usually makes the mistake of distorting early warning signs into evidence that all is well . Unfortunately, history shows that . history shows . that society often makes the . mistake of . distorting the mistake into evidence of all being well .
 The oil industry has said the Deepwater Horizon rig catastrophe was a unique event . Oil industry said it was the result of a series of missteps unlikely to be repeated .
 In the months before and after the Deepwater Horizon, the oil industry was hit with several serious spills and alarming near-misses . Some of them were strikingly similar to what happened aboard the oil rig . The oil industry has been hit with many serious spills, some of them strikingly similar
 The Deepwater Horizon “was an isolated incident,” says Erik Milito, a senior official at the American Petroleum Institute . Milito: The Deepwell Horizon was an "isolated incident"
 The failures and missed indications of hazard were not isolated events during the preparation of the Macondo well for temporary abandonment . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, 2012-13, Aut Aut Autistic 2012
 Numerous decisions to proceed toward abandonment despite indications of hazard … suggest an insufficient consideration of risk and a lack of operating discipline . Numerous decisions were made to proceed to abandonment, according to the report .
 As we now know, all those early warning signs were ignored and the near misses were mistakenly seen as proof that all was well . The near misses have been mistakenly thought to be signs of progress .
 Ignoring early warning signs and mistakenly viewing near misses as proof that all was well also led to the loss of the Challenger space shuttle . Ignoring the warning signs is also a mistake, NASA says .
 The Orings on the shuttle’s booster rocket were designed to prevent hot gases from escaping from the combustion chamber . Orings are designed to keep hot gases out of the chamber .
 Ignoring the early warning signs and misinterpreting near misses as successes because an accident had not yet occurred proved fatal to the Challenger’s crew .
 Prior to being destroyed by Katrina, New Orleans was known to be vulnerable to a slow moving category 3 hurricane . The city was known for being vulnerable to slow-moving category 3 hurricanes .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, 2012-13 . Hellman: ‘Nuclear weapons, risk and hope,’ is a catastrophe. Hellman’s ‘Risk
 I don't know why this early warning sign was overlooked, but suspect that successfully escaping a real near miss the year before played an important role . I do not know for sure why this year's near miss was overlooked .
 Hurricane Ivan had a 23% chance of hitting New Orleans with disastrous results, an evacuation was ordered . Evacuation was ordered when Hurricane Ivan was expected to hit .
 Even a 23% chance of a disaster warrants evacuating when needed . Given the catastrophic consequences of failing to evacuate when needed, evacuating would be catastrophic .
 Many people ignored the evacuation order for Katrina which had a slightly smaller 21% chance of hitting the city . Many people therefore ignored the order .
 Hurricane Gustav triggered the largest evacuation in U.S. history . Hurricane Gustav in 2008 triggered largest evacuation of United States history .
 Gustav weakened before making landfall, leading one evacuee to complain, “Next time, it’s going to be bad because people who evacuated like us aren’t going to evacuate.” Gustav weakened into a tropical depression, leading to an evacuation .
 It takes time to evacuate a city, so the decision must be made well before the hurricane hits, when its ultimate strength and path are only roughly known . The decision to evacuate cities is a crucial decision .
 An objective analysis is needed that balances the costs of the two types of error – needlessly evacuating versus not evacuating when we should – and then factors in the probability of a storm hitting the area in question .
 I suspect such analyses would vindicate evacuations that were ordered . In the case of Ivan, Katrina and Gustav, such analyses could vindicate the evacuations .
 The problem is getting society to recognize that we live in a world with imperfect information, so “needless evacuations” are needed to reduce the risk of disaster (errors of the second kind)
 The financial meltdown provides another good example of how hard it is to get society to start paying attention to early warning signs . The crisis is not the first time we have seen a near miss .
 The meltdown first came to public consciousness in the summer and fall of 2008 . The nation was told that, if it didn’t provide $700 billion to Treasury Henry Paulson, we faced a crisis that could rival the Great Depression .
 The situation was so dire that Paulson’s original proposal stated that all of his actions in using those funds “may not be reviewed by any court of law or any . law” The only way to have zero errors of one kind is to have 100% errors of
 The only way to never “needlessly” evacuate is to never evacuate . If you cannot be 100% certain of your decision, then the only way of avoiding evacuation is never to evacuate . Never evacuate.
 That guarantees that every time you should have evacuated, you won't, giving an error rate of 100% in that direction . That guarantee is 100% of the time you have evacuated .
 Congress added oversight provisions before appropriating the funds . Congress added some oversight provisions to the original proposal .
 The figure below charts the Dow Jones Industrial Average for a five year period from 28 JAN 2006 to 28JAN 2011 . The figure is a five-year chart charting of the five years from 2006 to 2011 .
 It shows that, until the meldown started, its potential magnitude was not appreciated even by sophisticated investors . The potential magnitude of the mineldown has not been appreciated by even sophisticated investors, it says .
 derivatives were not the sole cause of the meltdown, but their use of leverage greatly amplified the damage . The derivatives were used in the meltdown .
 Several years later, the head of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission recognized the danger posed by derivatives, but was blocked from regulating them by Congress .
 As reported in the March/April 2009 issue of Stanford’s alumni magazine . Stanford's Alumni magazine .
 He had warned in his annual letter to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders that disaster awaited those who invested in those related financial instruments .
 Even “the Oracle of Omaha,” as Buffet is often called, can be seen as a Cassandra when his warnings contradict a widespread belief that all is well . Buffet: Even ‘Oracle of Omaha’s’ can’t be considered a Cassandra
 "We view them as time bombs, both for the parties that deal in them and the economic system," says David Cameron . "They are time bombs for both parties and the economy," he says .
 In spite of warnings, society overlooked the danger, an error for which we all now are paying a heavy price . "Financial weapons of mass destruction" is about as graphic as you can get .
 While no public funds were used, this should have been seen as an early warning sign that high leverage could produce systemic effects . This should be seen as a warning sign of high leverage in the U.S.
 The successful wind-down appears to have added to complacency that the financial system was working as planned . Instead, it appears to be adding to complacent complacent that the system is working well .
 At the start of 1998, LTCM had leverage greater than 25:1 on $129 billion of debt, and derivatives tied to $1.25 trillion of financial instruments . At the time of the crisis, the company was in control of more than $130 billion in debt .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6a, STS152, 2012-13 . Hellman: “Investors can only leverage 2:1.” Hellman. Hellman’s view is that investors
 Prior to the Great Depression, stocks could be leveraged 10:1, but that ratio was lowered when it exacerbated the crash of 1929 . The ratio was lower when it was lowered in 1929 .
 People continued to trust their money to risky financial institutions because they were protected by government backed insurance, and the risky institutions paid higher interest rates . People still trusted banks because of the government-backed insurance, the government said .
 This deregulation without de-insurance led many institutions to take outsized risks and ultimately cost American taxpayers $124 billion . The U.S. taxpayers will be hit with a bill of more than $100 billion, the authors say .
 Because the cost was not catastrophic, this early warning sign was largely neglected . Because of the cost, the cost of the project was not considered catastrophic, it was overlooked .
 The above evidence shows that society often overlooks catastrophic risks until it is too late . Society overlooks these risks until they are too late, according to the evidence .
 It was successfully attacked and entered by armed men in November 2007 . Armed men attacked the building in 2007 .
 While they were lost, these six weapons were inadequately protected from theft .
 That same day, Russia was flying strategic bombers toward the United States in an exercise . Russia also flew strategic bombers into the U.S. in a similar exercise .
 If the Russian military had not learned of the terrorist attack and grounded the bombers before an accident could occur, in the confusion, they might have been shot down even outside U.S. airspace .
 Both the 1991 and 1993 Russian coup attempts created dangerous conditions that also were not generally understood in the West . Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” is Hellman’s book .
 Intelligence officers at the North American Aerospace Defense Command headquarters called their families and told them to leave Washington out of fear that the Russians might launch a nuclear attack . A number of American intelligence officers were told they should leave Washington .
 Sarah Palin has said that the U.S. should be ready to go to war with Russia if it happens . Palin says the United States should prepare for a rematch of the Cold War . Russia is a major source of tension in the world .
 The consequences of a failure of nuclear deterrence would be so catastrophic that overlooking these early warning signs is not an acceptable option . Unlike with the Gulf oil spill, the space shuttle disaster, the destruction of New Orleans by Hurricane Katrina and the economic meltdown of Hurricane Katrina, the consequences of such a
 As explained on my related web site, your involvement, coupled with in-depth risk analyses of nuclear deterrence, has the potential to play a key role in bringing the danger into clear focus .
 To end this section on a positive note, in the process of combatting ignorance and misperceptions that produce much of the nuclear risk, we will create a better world that we can pass on to future generations .
 "That positive goal motivates my efforts even more than eliminating the danger," he says . "I encourage you to think in those terms as well," he writes .
 It provides a better foundation both for one’s own mental state and for reaching out to others, says author . "It provides a good foundation for one's own mental health," says author. "I'm glad to see people reaching out for others"