 By examining these visual texts and recognising their contexts, you will be more familiar with the interpretations to answer the source based case study questions effectively . You will also be able to recognise the context of each text .
 The cartoon portrays Castro as a towering figure over two petite looking persons representing Cuba and Brazil . By Estonian and American cartoonist Edmund S Valtman .
 In late August 1961, Cuba was facing food shortages, whereas Brazil was in debt . Cuba was faced with food shortages while Brazil was facing a debt crisis .
 The cartoon was possibly meant to depict Brazil's skepticism towards Castro’s revolution . It was possibly intended to depict Brazilian skepticism towards the Castro's revolution .
 The cartoon depicts both superpower leaders feeling annoyed over their neighbour’s tree branch extended into their own territory .
 Cartoonist depicts an ironic illustration of Moscow’s true motives on Cuba . The cartoonist depicts the Russian state of Cuba as a Russian state .
 In Sept 1962, an agreement was signed between Cuba and USSR for the construction of a port in the Bay of Havana . Castro claimed the port would be a base for the Soviet fishing fleet in the Atlantic . The port was claimed to be the base for Soviet fishing fleets .
 The cartoon depicts a miniature-sized Castro targeting the Soviet missile at a terrified ‘Uncle Sam’ Khrushchev looks on from afar in delight .
 The cartoon illustrates both Kennedy and Khrushchev taking part in an arm wrestling match that neither side was likely to win .
 The cartoon illustrates Kennedy in The White House and Khrushchev in the Kremlin facing each other with nuclear missiles placed outside their buildings . By Hungarian-British cartoonist Victor Weisz .
 In context, the cartoon depicts Kennedy as being hypocritical as he questioned Khrushchev about the missiles in Cuba . There were twice as many American missiles as there are than the Russians, since there were twice more American missiles than Russians .
 Third, pay attention to the date of publication and the source origin to consider the motive . Fourth, consider the date and source of publication to consider .
 This section will be important when you attempt to derive the provenance of each source .
 JC History Tuition will teach you to organise the content and improve your answering skills . If you are looking for additional help, why not join our JC history Tuition . Join our history tuition programme .
 JC tuition programmes include GP Tuition, Economics Tuition and Chemistry Tuition . China Studies in English Tuition is also a tuition programme .
 For Secondary Tuition, we have Secondary English and Math tuition, Secondary Chemistry Tuition and Secondary Economics Tuition . For Secondary English, you can pay for secondary English, Math, Chemistry and Economics tuition .