 Rusk was the son of a poor Georgia minister-turned-farmer who rose to be the chief foreign policy steward for two presidents . Rusk, who died Tuesday night at 85, rose to become the chief Foreign Policy steward .
 Rusk swore never to tell tales or write his memoirs . Rusk was so loyal to both presidents, he swore to never tell tales . He swore not to write memoirs.
 Rusk joined the State Department as a junior foreign service officer after World War II Army duty . Rusk will be remembered most for his anti-communist fervor and for his skill managing U.S. interests .
 He was secretary of state for eight years, from 1961 to 1969, during an era that saw the signing of the first nuclear non-proliferation treaty . That era also saw challenges to America's national security in Cuba, North Korea, Berlin and Vietnam .
 In the battle to contain communism, Dean Rusk was as effective as any general . Rusk's role was key to containing communism in the Soviet Union .
 After North Korea invaded South Korea in 1950, the United Nations Security Council adopted a resolution dispatching United States troops to help South Korea repel the invaders . Rusk was then the assistant secretary of state for Far Eastern Affairs who seized the opportunity .
 The Soviets stalked out of the Security Council in anger in anger . That opportunity arose when the Soviets were angry at the United States .
 U.S. representatives persuaded the other council members to approve the measure . When the Soviets weren't there to veto the resolution, the United States approved it . The resolution was approved by the United Nations .
 Rusk said if the U.S. had failed to act, the Soviets would have marched on Berlin . Rusk defended his views on Vietnam, declaring that if the United States had not acted, they would have seen this as a sign of weakness .
 In defending his Vietnam policy, Rusk gave weight to the ""domino theory,"""If Vietnam ""went"" communist, the nations on Vietnam's border Thailand, Laos and Cambodia would also ""fall"" like dominoes to the red menace .
 Rusk contended it was the failure of American will power that resulted in the collapse of the anti-communist regime in the south of Vietnam . Rusk: The failure of U.S. will power led to Vietnam's fall to the communists .
 Rusk was also there in 1961 when Kennedy ordered the ill-fated invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs, when East Germany began building the Berlin Wall and when the world was on the brink of nuclear war in 1962 .
 Rusk chose never to write about what happened in the Kennedy-Johnson era . History may be robbed of the full story of Rusk's involvement in many Cold War crises .
 His father was a Presbyterian minister who was forced to work as a teacher and farmer when he developed throat cancer . His father worked as a mail carrier and a teacher before becoming a mailman .
 In 1991, Rusk said he never thought ""I'd live to see the day"" his communist foes would collapse . Rusk: 'I never thought I'd live a day'
 At one of the most critical moments in our nation's history, the president's ability to lie convincingly proved crucial to preserving peace . The president's lying proved crucial in preserving peace, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Thirty years ago this week, the world held its breath as a nuclear game of chicken was played out over Soviet missiles in Cuba . The world held their breath as the world watched as Soviet missiles were fired at Cuba .
 Having Maria Shriver, the niece of John and Robert Kennedy, as host of the program is a bizarre casting decision . Also, having Maria . Shriver as host is a strange casting decision, too .
 The chilling details of how close the world was to a nuclear holocaust and personal anecdotes of those involved in the decision-making process make it an engrossing two hours, even if you've already heard a lot of what is said . Nevertheless, the chilling details about how close .
 The U.S. wasn't going to be fooled by Kennedy and his men . The United States wasn't, at least not at first, which is why the disinformation spread was critical .
 JFK told Soviets to get missiles out or else else, the CIA had photos confirming their presence . JFK had photos of the missiles taken days before he went on national TV .
 It was essential, however, that the Soviet government not be aware of what we knew until our military was prepared to back up the ultimatum . The Soviet government was not aware of the information until the U.S. military was ready to back it up .
 President Barack Obama cancels campaign appearances on behalf of Democratic candidates . Obama had to come up with an explanation as to why he canceled appearances .
 It was decided to float a story that the president was suffering from a cold and needed to return to Washington to rest .
 The president also had to play an effective game of liar's poker with the other side . The White House has been accused of lying to the public .
 JFK met with Soviet ambassador Andre Gromyko in the Oval office . JFK had reconnaisance photos of the Soviet missiles at his fingertips . The president met with the Soviet ambassador at the time .
 JFK shook his head as if accepting this as truth . Gromyko maintained that reports of missiles in Cuba were groundless . JFK shook head as he accepted this as true .
 It might be wise to remember that honesty in the Oval office might not be always be the best policy . So when considering for whom to cast your vote in a couple of weeks, it might well be wise .
 Khrushchev also thanked Julius and Ethel Rosenberg for helping the Soviet Union develop the atomic bomb . The former Soviet leader was ousted in 1964 and died in 1971 .
 Khrushchev made a series of tapes as he lived out his last seven years under virtual house arrest . The former Soviet leader made the tapes during his time in the Soviet Union . The tapes were made in a bid to help him cope with the pressure of living under house arrest.
 Khrushchev's friends and relatives withheld some of the tapes, fearing he had been too candid . The tapes were made in the 1960s and '60s, but were kept from the public .
 Khrushchev said Josef Stalin was grateful to the Rosenbergs . Rosenbergs were executed in 1953 after being convicted of conspiring to give U.S. atom bomb secrets to the Soviet Union .
 The Rosenbergs provided significant help in accelerating the production of our atom bomb, says Stalin and Molotov . I cannot say what kind of help they gave us, he says, but I heard from both Stalin . The Rosenberg’s help was ‘significant help’ in
 Khrushchev recalled intelligence reports indicated the U.S. was preparing to strike Cuba after Soviet missiles were installed in the country . The Soviet Union had installed Soviet missiles in Cuba, Khruschev recalled .
 Kruschev: "Castro was hotheaded'' The Soviet leader's reaction to the withdrawal of missiles was "hotheaded''
 Khrushchev: 'We believed this came from his being young and inexperienced as a statesman' Khrushchchev: "We believed it came from ... inexperience as a stateman"
 Cold War tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union had turned red hot . Cold War tension between the United States and the . Soviet Union .
 50 years ago this week, Henry Mack had his finger on the button to launch . The launch of the Apollo One rocket took place in 1968 .
 In South Florida and in Cuba, the missile crisis put millions of people on what seemed like the front lines . Millions of people were on the front line during the crisis .
 At bases in Florida, missiles were raised to the go position and tilted in the direction of Fidel Castro's island . The Cuban leader's island is located in Cuba .
 The Kennedy administration had learned from spy plane reconnaissance, the Soviet Union was building what looked like an offensive missile base near San Cristobal . The base was located in the area .
 In south Miami-Dade County, thousands of Army troops moved to and from encampments that sprang up in tomato fields and cow pastures . Thousands of Army soldiers were moved to or from camps .
 Portable Hawk anti-aircraft missiles set up along beaches from Miami Beach to Key West . Portable Hawk missiles were set up in Miami Beach .
 Nate Conner, 19, from Becket, Mass., assigned to the 2nd Missile Battalion of the 52nd Air Defense Artillery at Carol City, Fla. Conner is assigned to a missile battalion in Carol City .
 In Trinidad, Cuba, Maria Teresa Rodriguez was a 21-year-old elementary-school teacher . She was a teacher at the age of 21 .
 Five years later, Rodriguez would leave Cuba on a freedom flight, meet Conner, and fall in love . Rodriguez and Conner fell in love after meeting in Cuba .
 President John F Kennedy and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev was resolved with mutual concessions . Ultimately, the ""eyeball-to-eyebal" confrontation between President Kennedy and . Soviet prime minister Nikita .
 Khrushchev agreed to a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba in exchange for a removal of missiles . The United States announced a naval blockade of shipments of arms to Cuba . The U.K. agreed to remove the missiles in return for the removal of the missiles .
 The 13 days that preceded the agreement stands as ""the loneliest experience imaginable," says Mack . Mack: "It was the most lonely experience imaginable" Mack says the 13 days before the agreement were the "loneliest experiences imaginable"
 Mack's journey to the command of the 2nd Missile Battalion, 517th Artillery in Carleton, Mich., is as improbable as the nuclear standoff itself . Mack: "It's a good thing for the U.S. to be able to get to the top of the
 He served in Korea and Vietnam with the Buffalo Soldiers in the still-segregated Army . He was a member of the famed Buffalo Soldiers, who served in Vietnam .
 He rose to the rank of major before retiring in 1968 while assigned to the Pentagon . He retired from the Pentagon in 1968 .
 Mack was to launch a nuclear missile if an incoming aircraft failed to respond properly to a challenge . Mack had to launch the missile if the incoming aircraft did not respond properly . The missile was launched in response to a threat from incoming aircraft .
 Last week, more than 2,700 pages of documents housed at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library in Boston were released .
 Among them are a draft of a speech the president would have delivered to the nation . Among them is a draft draft of the president's speech he would have given .
 Documents shed light on how the Kennedys and their closest advisers averted catastrophe in 1962 . U.S. spy planes discovered the USSR was secretly constructing nuclear missile bases on Cuba, its ally .
 I was a 22-year-old Army private, just 22, who had just graduated from college in June 1962 . I was just 22 when I was killed in Vietnam .
 I had arrived in Fort Leonard Wood in early August and had just completed basic training . I had just arrived in August . I was in basic training for the first time in the Army .
 It was during a warm mid-October evening, if I recall, as we sat around a black-and-white television set in the barracks' day room . President Kennedy described how the Soviet Union secretly had installed nuclear missiles on Cuban soil earlier that year .
 The youthful Kennedy described how he would now deal with the crisis even if it meant nuclear war . Kennedy: 'I would deal with it even if I was going to go to war' Kennedy: "I would not be surprised if I went to war."
 On that fateful Tuesday night, Americans learned that Soviet ships carrying more missiles were steaming toward Cuba . On that night, U.S. learned that Soviets were sending missiles to the island .
 Kennedy said if Soviet ships didn't turn around by the following Monday, atomic missiles could be hurling in both directions . Kennedy said that if the Soviet ships hadn't turned around, atomic missile missiles would be hurled . Kennedy: "If the Soviet ship did not turn around, the missiles
 The 1962 Cuban missile crisis was the most serious incident of the Cold War between the U.S. and the former Soviet Union . The crisis nearly brought both countries to the brink of nuclear war .
 Many details of the crisis wouldn't emerge until later . Fortunately, many of the details would be later revealed .
 The Cuban crisis had been around ever since Fidel Castro sent longtime Cuban dictator Fugencio Batista into exile on Jan., 1959 . The crisis began in 1959 when Castro Castro sent Batista to exile .
 Diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Cuba quickly would sour and would be broken by President Eisenhower . President Eisenhower would have broken relations with Cuba by breaking the deal .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion would sputter and fail in the spring of 1961 . Then, shortly after Kennedy took office, the Bay would try to invade the U.S.
 In the spring of 1962, rather than face the draft, I enlisted for a six-year hitch in the Minnesota National Guard . I enlisted in the National Guard in 1962 and served in the Army .
 After graduation in June 1962, I would report to Fort Leonard Wood for six months of active duty beginning in early August . After graduation, he would report for 6 months of service beginning in August .
 By October, basic training was behind me and I was enrolled in light truck-driving school . "By October, I was able to learn how to drive a light truck," he says .
 The humid, sweltering days of August in southern Missouri had mercifully given way to the cool, golden days of autumn .
 The World Series had been grabbing our attention as the Cuban situation began heating up . The Cuban situation has been heating up as the World Series began .
 Americans learned that Soviet missiles with atomic warheads could reach many of the American cities from Cuba, only 90 miles off the coast of Florida . During that live broadcast, Americans learned of the Soviet missiles .
 American warships were sent out to confront the Soviet vessels, boarding and seizing them if necessary . American warships boarded and seized Soviet vessels .
 Rumors run amok as we pondered our fate following the gut-wrenching telecast . Rumors ran amok following the show .
 The week slowly crept, one day after another, toward the looming deadline . It was hard to concentrate on training. The deadline deadline is looming .
 "We would try to watch television in the day room each night or read a newspaper," she says . She says she and her husband would watch television and read the newspaper .
 The ships from both sides appeared to be on a collision course, and neither side was blinking . Neither ship was blinking at the moment .
 The weekend finally arrived, but no one ventured far from a television set . Nikita Khrushchev continued to be belligerent and Kennedy remained combative .
 After church services, we headed to the Edwards Service Club on base to catch up on what news had occurred overnight . The club is a private club on base .
 It turned out to be a glorious, bright autumn day, one I never will forget . It was a glorious autumn day - one I will never forget .
 The headlines in the Sunday newspapers said the Soviet ships had turned around . The headlines of the Sunday papers said the Soviets had turned .
 The possibility of an atomic war had been eased for at least this time . The possibility was eased for the first time this time.
 If Soviet ships hadn't turned back, an invasion might have occurred Oct.-30 if those Soviet ships had turned back . "Raw recruits would probably have been in the thick of it. We would find out later," he says .
 The Soviets would remove their missiles from Cuba in exchange for a promise by the United States that it wouldn't invade Cuba . The U.S. would remove the missiles in exchange with a promise that it would not invade Cuba. The Soviets agreed to remove missiles in return for a U.
 The Soviet Union is no more; Khrushchev was forced out of office within a year . Khrushchev was forced to step down as a result of his government's failure .
 Many still shudder at the thought of how close we came to nuclear war so long ago . But for many, including myself, we still shudder to the thought .
 Visitors listen in as the President and his advisers work furiously to avert a nuclear war . Visitors listen to the President's efforts to avoid a nuke war .
 The exhibit runs from October 12, 2012, through February 4, 2013, in the Lawrence F O'Brien Gallery of the National Archives Building . The exhibit is free and open to the public .
 Museum hours are 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., daily, except Thanksgiving and December 25 . Museum hours range from 10 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., except Thanksgiving .
 Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum made possible in part by the Foundation for the National Archives, the John F Kennedy Library Foundation, and the generous support of Lead Sponsor AT&T with special recognition to Lawrence F O'Brien Family .
 The documents, once classified secret by the government, were released by the State Department under pressure from a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit filed by a public interest group . The National Security Archive released the documents in response to the lawsuit filed .
 State Department official advised U.S. ambassador to U.N. Adlai Stevenson to hold fast to President Kennedy's 'assurances' against invasion of Cuba .
 Once-secret document at another junction tells Stevenson 'sticking to language of presidential statement' was important not only for winning negotiating points with the Soviets but also for the American public .
 Stevenson was Kennedy administration 'point man' at the U.N. when negotiations between the two superpowers raged over missiles in Cuba . Stevenson was the Kennedy administration "point man" at the United Nations .
 The crisis erupted after the Soviets secretly introduced nuclear missiles in Cuba . The missiles were capable of hitting the U.S. with little warning . They were able to hit the United States without warning .
 The precise wording was critical to negotiations in 1962 that led to temporary easing of the Cold War . Kennedy promised 'not to invade Cuba' or 'peace in the Caribbean'
 Archive is a public interest group that calls itself an 'investigative library' and strives to win release of classified documents for use .
 The reason is that such a missile ""defense"" reinforces the second strike capability of the deploying nation . The system could thus increase the likelihood of a pre-emptive first strike by the nation against which it is deployed .
 Robert S McNamara realized this paradox in the 1960s, when he was secretary of defense under U.S. president John F Kennedy and then Lyndon Johnson . McNamara's career spanned the globe since 1964 .
 Kennedy was elected to the presidency partly on concerns of an imaginary ""missile gap" between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 McNamara was horrified to discover that the U.S. had nuclear plans to unleash an all-out nuclear retaliatory strike against the ""Sino-Soviet bloc,"" as the two powers were termed in the paranoia of the day . McNamara: "The two powers should either
 Scott D Sagan writes, "The nuclear superiority of the United States in 1961 was indisputable. The nuclear superiority in 1961 in the U.S. in 1961 .
 At about the same time in the winter of 1961, the new Discoverer spy satellite provided data on Soviet ICBMs . There was a missile gap alright but the reverse of the Pentagon's paranoid thinking . The U.S. outgunned the Soviet Union massively .
 War planners pushed for preemptive nuclear strike on Soviet Union . Paul Nitze pushed for a preemptive strike on the Soviet Union in 1950s .
 McNamara's new strategy was responsible for a further spike in the arms race . Both sides seemed to come away from the Cuban missile crisis in October 1962 with renewed resolve to defuse the nuclear confrontation .
 In the midst of the U.S. war on Vietnam, McNamara argued against a missile defense system proposed by Lyndon B Johnson . McNamara realized that all efforts toward a ""rational"" nuclear arms strategy had done nothing but result in an ever upwardly spiraling arms race .
 In short, bilateral paranoia between Moscow and Washington had increased the number of nuclear weapons and decreased security, the author says . "Bilateral paranoia" increased number of weapons, he says .
 McNamara argued that the easiest way to circumvent any missile defense system was to merely increase the number of missiles . McNamara argues that the system would be overloaded if it was increased .
 Any attempt at deploying such a system in the U.S. would only result in an escalation of the arms race by the Soviets, he said . Therefore, he explained, any attempt to deploy such a device in the United States would only lead to an increase in arms race .
 U.S. Missile Defense Agency announces successful test of interceptor . Ground-based Midcourse Defense interceptor targets ICBM decoy .
 The antimissile missile was fired from Vandenberg air base in the United States state of California at the decoy . The decoy launched from Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands, some 8,000 km from Los Angeles .
 The test targeted North Korea with a strong message that is likely to spark a further escalation of tensions with South Korea and the U.S. The test is expected to spark further escalation in the region .
 As was predicted in 1967 for the Soviet Union, so would it be today with North Korea . North Korea is predicted to be a major problem for the North Korean government .
 The two viewed documents and letters exchanged between their fathers during the crisis . They examined a copy of the 1963 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty signed by their fathers that had been kept by Caroline's mother, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis .
 He compared the defense of Cuba to the U.S. commitment to defend West Berlin . The Cuban president compared the Cuban defense to the American commitment to defending Berlin .
 He said both superpowers needed to assure their allies they were serious in their commitments . He said the U.S. and its allies needed to be reassured they are serious .
 The crisis began when President Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the U.S. President Kennedy became aware of Cuba's nuclear missiles .
 The crisis ended two weeks later when Khrushchev promised to remove the nuclear missiles in exchange for a promise by Kennedy not to invade Cuba . The crisis was the first time the crisis ended in two weeks .
 The United States also agreed to remove U.S. missiles from Turkey, a Soviet neighbor . The U.N. agreed to pull missiles from the country's borders with Turkey .
 Schlessinger said never before had two opposing powers had the technical ability to destroy the world . Schlessingers: Never before had . opposing powers have the technical . ability to . destroy world .
 Many Florida churches offered special services, and people streamed in to pray . People were streaming in to the churches to pray for the victims .
 Most people were supporting Kennedy's strong stand . Still, even with this ambiance of impending horror, most people supported him .
 A Gallup Poll showed that 80 percent of Americans supported the president's speech . The poll shows 80 percent support the speech, according to the poll .
 Moscow took more than half a day to react to John Kennedy's announcement of a blockade of Cuba . Moscow did not react for more than a half an hour .
 Khrushchev put the Soviet military on war-alert, but in his letter to Kennedy he made only a vague request for negotiations to resolve the crisis . The Soviet military was put on war alert, but only the Soviet Union was on the brink of war .
 He avoided a specific statement about what he intended to do about the blockade . He avoided any specific statement .
 At an embassy reception in Washington, a Soviet military man, Lt. Lt. Vladimir Kuznka, was seen at the embassy in Washington .
 General Vladimir A Dubovik appeared to suggest that Soviet ships had orders to defy the blockade . General Vladimir Duboviki appeared to have ordered Soviet ships to defy a blockade .
 At the White House, top-level ExComm group was told that an ''extraordinary number'' of coded messages were being sent to Soviet ships . CIA didn't know what the messages contained .
 25 Soviet ships were in the Atlantic, headed toward Cuba, heading toward Cuba . Soviet submarines were being spotted in the Caribbean, according to reports .
 The U.S. military was sending out low-flying Crusader planes to photograph military sites in Cuba . The planes were flying low to photograph Cuban military sites .
 State and CIA officials decided exile groups should be stopped from carrying out any raids on Cuba during the crisis . Officials discussed whether Operation Mongoose, the covert program against Cuba, should be closed down .
 Cuban weapons would never be used offensively, to attack another country, he said . He said weapons would be used without hesitation to defend the motherland . He added weapons would not be used in offensive attacks .
 We must learn how to live in our allotted times and with the dignity with which we know how to do so . We must live in the time of our allotted time and with dignity . We need to learn to live with dignity, not just with time .
 A squadron of 13 submarines and a division of eight warships left Key West naval base to take part . A division of 8 warships also left the Key West base .
 A contingent of 5,000 Marines arrived in Key West to protect the island and prepare for a possible invasion . Meanwhile, the island is being protected by a contingent of troops .
 Beginning at 10 the next morning, no ship carrying military material would be allowed to go to Cuba . The Cuban government ordered the ban on military material to be lifted .
 The Russians had still given no indication how they would respond to the attack .
 Harry Harris Jr. is the commander of U.S. Pacific Command . He testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee . Harris Jr.'s testimony was before the committee .
 Harris said he has no doubt that North Korean leader Kim Jong Un intends to fulfill his pursuit of a nuclear-tipped missile capable of striking the United States . Harris: "I have no doubt" that North Korea's leader will fulfill his ambition to strike the U.S.
 U.S. intelligence agencies are unsure how far along North Korea's nuclear and missile programs are, admiral says . The admiral acknowledged there is uncertainty over how far North Korea is developing .
 The Trump administration has declared that all options, including a targeted military strike, are on the table to block North Korea from carrying out threats against the United States and its allies in the region .
 A pre-emptive attack isn't likely, U.S. officials have said . The administration is pursuing a strategy of putting pressure on Pyongyang with assistance from China . China is North Korea's main trading partner and economic lifeline .
 With international support, the U.S. wants to exert a "burst" of pressure on North Korea that yields results within months to push the communist government to change course from developing nuclear weapons . The Trump administration says it wants a ""burst"" of economic and diplomatic pressure on N.
 The acting top U.S. diplomat for East Asia said there's debate about whether Pyongyang is willing to give up its weapons programs . Susan Thornton, the acting top United States diplomat, said there is debate about North Korea's willingness to hand over its weapons program .
 She said the United States wants to test the hypothesis to the maximum extent we can" for a peaceful resolution . The U.S. wants ""to test that hypothesis"
 President Donald Trump's national security team briefed lawmakers on North Korea's advancing nuclear capabilities . The briefing served to tamp down talk of military action amid alarm over Pyongyang's atomic and missile testing .
 A joint statement from the agency heads made no specific mention of military options . It said the United States would defend itself and friends . The U.S. will defend itself, friends and allies, it said .
 Harris says financial sanctions have done nothing to slow North Korea's quest for weapons of mass destruction . Harris: Financial sanctions imposed by the U.S. and other countries have done little to slow the North Korean regime .
 He also said he's skeptical of China's willingness to exert influence over North Korea . He said he has been skeptical about China's ability to exert its influence over Pyongyang .
 Harris said he's become 'cautiously optimistic' following recent talks between Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping . Harris: "I'm optimistic" about the talks between the two countries . Harris says he's looking forward to talks between President Trump and China's president .
 North Korea's pursuit of an atomic arsenal comes at the expense of the North Korean people, Harris says . Harris: North Korea is isolated and forced to live with a lifeless economy . North Korea has long-range missiles to deliver nuclear weapons, he says .
 Harris said it's a 'hollow hope' to think that North Koreans will rise up and topple Kim Jong Un . Despite the depravity, Harris said there is no hope that Kim will be toppled . Harris said the North Korean dictator's depravity is despicable .
 Harris said Kim Jong Un is revered and considered a ""god king" by many North Koreans . Harris said the North Korean leader is considered a 'god king' by many .
 In a show of military might, the United States has sent a massive amount of American weaponry to the region . The U.S. has sent massive amounts of weaponry to Syria .
 A group of U.S. war ships led by the aircraft carrier USS Carl Vinson is in striking range of North Korea . Harris: "If the president were to call on it, he would be able to do it"
 Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense is being installed in South Korea . The U.S. missile defense system will be installed in the South Korean country .
 Harris said he has adequate forces to ""fight tonight"" against North Korea if that were to become necessary . Harris said the U.S. has sufficient forces to defend itself against the North .
 The admiral says he lacks all the attack submarines he needs and has no capable defense against the thousands of artillery pieces North Korea has assembled near the Demilitarized Zone separating North and South Korea . But the admiral also said he lacks enough attack submarines to defend against North Korea's
 There are about 28,500 U.S. military personnel serving in South Korea .
 Cuban government armed 270,000 people in tense days of the Cuban missile crisis . Cuban government prepared to fight 'to the last bullet' if U.S. invaded, says French journalist .
 His comments came at the close of a conference in Moscow on the 1962 crisis . Former officials of the United States and the Soviet Union and present officials of Cuba were there .
 Former U.S. officials surprised to learn of large number of armed Cubans in Cuba . Robert McNamara was secretary of defense in the administration of President Kennedy .
 Some U.S. participants said they doubted that anything like 800,000 people would have died in the invasion . Some United States participants doubted that any such a death toll would have been higher .
 Risquet said this total included both civilian and military casualties . The total of casualties was included in the deaths of both civilians and soldiers .
 At the time of the crisis there were 42,000 Soviet troops in Cuba, mainly there to guard the 42 nuclear missile batteries built on the island .
 U.S. estimated only 5,000 to 10,000 Soviets were there at the time of the invasion . The United States estimated previously that only 5-10,000 Soviet troops were in the area .
 Washington's discovery of the missiles sparked a confrontation that led the world to the brink of nuclear war . Washington discovered the missiles in 1950s .
 Biden told two fundraising audiences in Seattle over the weekend that he expects world figures to test Obama early if he wins the election in two weeks . Biden said he expected world leaders to test him if he won the election .
 McCain spent all day Tuesday in Democratic-leaning Pennsylvania, worth 21 Electoral College votes . He then headed to New Hampshire, a formerly reliable Republican state that Obama has made competitive this year .
 McCain says Obama has expressed support for both teams playing in the World Series . McCain: Obama has said both teams play in the upcoming baseball championship .
 McCain noted Obama has identified himself with both teams while campaigning in their home states . The Phillies will represent the National League starting today against the American League champion Rays .
 Cuba in many ways finds itself in a predicament similar to the one it faced in 1962 . Cuba is now in the midst of a crisis similar to that in 1962, Cuba's president says .
 In the days after the missile crisis, Cuba felt alone, betrayed by the Soviets who agreed to a U.S. demand to withdraw the missiles without consulting Castro . Castro was still fearful that the United States might attack him .
 There is no longer a Soviet protector to buffer it from the United States from the U.S. And there are no longer Soviet protectors to protect it from Russia .
 Former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev announced the withdrawal of a training brigade from Cuba last fall . The brigade's existence dates to the time of the 1962 crisis .
 Once again Castro wasn't consulted, and once again it was what the U.S. wanted . Castro was not consulted on the issue .
 Castro remains the Abominable Snowman in the furthest recesses of the Cold War icebox . But Castro remains .
 Cuba is still considered the most hostile of enemies to the United States . United States officials admit that the island is scarely a threat to U.S. security .
 President Bush signed legislation to make the trade embargo against Cuba even more stringent . There are no formal diplomatic relations, and President Bush recently signed legislation . The island economy is already in crisis .
 Thirty years ago, Fidel Castro allowed the Soviets to install nuclear missiles on the island . Castro was fearful of a repeat of the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Castro has repeatedly sounded the missile crisis themes of resistance and survival at all costs . As Cuba's economy falters, Castro has stressed the survival of the Cuban people .
 25 years ago this week, America and the Soviet Union came to the brink of a nuclear catastrophe . America and Russia came to brink of nuclear catastrophe.
 Like Keystone Kops entrusted with nuclear missiles, the two greatest superpowers on Earth almost stumbled into the abyss . The U.S. and the world's most powerful nations almost stumbled to the brink of disaster .
 Most scholars agree that the crisis provides chilling proof of the fatal role accidents and misunderstanding can play in the nuclear era . After a quarter-century of study, innumerable books and a conference last week at Harvard, most agree .
 In the aftermath of President Kennedy's assassination, his handling of ""the missiles of October"" was often regarded as one of his greatest accomplishments .
 He persuaded the Soviets to withdraw their missiles from Cuba and avoided a nuclear confrontation . He persuaded them to pull them out of Cuba .
 Graham T Allison wrote in his 1971 study of the crisis, Essence of Decision . Allison: "Kennedy's presidency was one of the most important moments of Kennedy's presidency"
 Revisionist scholars have questioned whether Kennedy took too great risks . Kennedy's management of the crisis was in fact prudent, according to historians .
 Last Tuesday, for the first time, Soviet participants in the affair publicly explained their country's intentions in the crisis -and its bungling . Soviet participants explained their intentions in a public statement .
 McGeorge Bundy, Kennedy's national security adviser, also spoke at Harvard's John F Kennedy School of Government last week . Bundy said Americans made their share of mistakes .
 The crisis began on Oct. 1962, when Americans discovered that the Soviets were placing nuclear missiles in Cuba . The Cuban crisis began in October 1962 .
 The photographic evidence, gathered by a U-2 spy plane, was conclusive . U.S. officials say the U.N. mission was a success .
 Nikita Khrushchev feared a United States invasion of Cuba and sought a step toward nuclear parity with America . The missiles were seen as a way of deterring an invasion and doubling the number of Soviet missiles that could hit the U.S.
 Khrushchev took a nuclear risk to take a risk, but did not foresee that fear of invasion would prompt him to take the risk . The failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, a secret CIA-directed effort to destabilize Fidel Castro, a military buildup in the Caribbean and a
 Khrushchev took the gamble to keep the weapons in Cuba before the U.S. detected them . The Soviet Union could have the weapons before the United States detected them, he says . The U.N. didn't detect the weapons .
 The Russians who went to Cuba to install the missiles lengthened the odds of success . A crucial error was made by the Russians in Cuba, but it was a crucial error .
 They built sites that looked exactly like those in the Soviet Union, and then failed to camouflage them . They built them up to look like Soviet-style sites, and failed to hide them .
 When the U-2 photographic evidence came in, the executive committee of the National Security Council, known as ExComm, began meeting secretly to plan a response . ExComm met secretly to discuss a response to the evidence .
 Hawkish advisers pressed for quick military attack on Cuba, taking out the missiles and getting rid of Castro at once .
 The strategy would have meant killing up to 20,000 Soviet troops in Cuba . But that strategy would mean killing up and down the number of Soviet troops .
 Others wanted President Kennedy to negotiate secretly with Khrushchev for removal of the missiles . Others wanted the removal of missiles from the Soviet Union . President Kennedy wanted the missiles removed .
 President Obama made a surprise announcement of the crisis on national television in Oct. 2013 .
 He believed that the blockade allowed room for flexible responses short of a military attack . The blockade allows room for flexibility short of military attack, he said .
 Some have seen the blockade as a course of moderation, others have seen it as brinkmanship . The blockade has been described as 'brutal' by some .
 Kennedy should have engaged in secret diplomacy with the Soviets, Khrushchev adviser says . The week before Kennedy went public on TV, he should have had secret diplomacy, he says . Kennedy should not have gone public before TV went public, aide says .
 Once the larger strategy was set, smaller, but potentially provocative, mistakes and near-mistakes were made that could have led to disaster . The larger strategy set, however, was set to set up a larger strategy .
 CIA almost sent in a team of commandos as part of its ongoing plan to destabilize Castro . The CIA almost did it to send in commandos in the midst of the Castro crisis .
 The White House learned of the plan by accident and canceled it, professor says . Stanford history professor Barton Bernstein says . The plan was canceled by accident .
 Another grave situation arose when Soviet submarines slipped into the area of the blockade . The situation was described as a 'serious mistake' by the Soviets .
 The Defense Department warned the Soviets that small depth charges would be used to force the subs to surface . The Soviets were using depth charges to force them to surface during the Cold War .
 Kennedy feared depth charges would lead to an unintentional war . Kennedy feared that the depth charge could lead to accidental war .
 At least one Navy vessel did drop a depth charge near a Soviet submarine in the area of the blockade, professor says . The depth charge was dropped by a Navy vessel, he says .
 Kennedy and his top civilian assistants examined logistical details on the shipping blockade . Sagan said they didn't pay close attention to the submarine strategy . Sagan: Kennedy didn't look closely at the strategy .
 The Soviets now say the shoot-down was a mistake made by a lower-level commander . But to the Americans it appeared then that the Soviet Union was preparing for battle . The Americans say the Soviets were preparing to battle .
 An American U-2 accidentally strayed over the Soviet Union . Just as strange, that afternoon, an American U.2 accidentally wandered over the USSR .
 The U.S. gave Khrushchev an ultimatum after the shoot-down of the U-2 . That evening, the United States gave the Soviet leader the U.N. gave him an 'ultimatum' to respond to the shoot down .
 Either accept our pledge not to invade Cuba in exchange for your withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba, or get ready for a full-scale attack on Cuba, the U.S. says .
 The United States had several hundred thousand men ready to invade Cuba, McNamara said . McNamara told Congress in 1963 that the U.S. had hundreds of thousands ready to attack Cuba .
 The former secretary published a book on nuclear danger earlier this year, Blundering Into Disaster . The book was published by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton .
 Those who were involved in or studied the events of October 1962 stress the importance of avoiding crises in the first place .
 Views about how best to do that are as diverse as approaches to the Cold War . The U.S. needs to win back control of the world's Cold War, experts say .
 Kennedy's national security adviser: More honest communication between superpowers . Bundy: "One of the keys is more honest communication"
 In his view, glasnost, the new Soviet policy of greater openness, is a hopeful sign, he says . He says the new policy of openness in the Soviet Union is hopeful .
 He believes the missile crisis was brought on in large part by a misunderstanding . He believes it was a misunderstanding that led to a missile crisis .
 The Soviet Union secretly installed missiles in Cuba because its leaders expected a U.S. invasion of the island . No such invasion was planned - but no such an invasion was .
 Others believe the United States and U.S.R. understood each other all too well . Others say the U.N. and the United.S., R.S.-R.R.'s relations have been strained in recent years .
 Paterson: "It's not a case of miscommunication, it's the case of powers struggling over Cuba" Paterson says. It's not the miscommunication .
 The lesson of the crisis is the importance of compromise on both sides, he said . The lesson is that compromise is necessary, he added .