 There is no single key to peace, no…magic formulas… genuine peace must be a product of many nations, the sum of many acts . Man‟s reason and spirit have often solved the seemingly unsolvable .
 "It must be dynamic, not static, changing to meet the challenge of each new generation," says President Obama . "The world is changing, changing, and must be changing," says Obama .
 Signing nuclear test ban treaty was not a victory of one party over another, but a triumph of peace over war, of negotiation over faith, of faith over fear, he says .
 A term used by the U.S. to refer to her impasse with USSR over the latter‟s missiles deployment in Cuba . The term was used in reference to an impasse between the US and USSR .
 Most of the literatures on Cuban missile crisis treated the negotiation process of the conflicting parties or the actors as “entities in themselves” trying to make good or cut deals appropriate for their respective parties . Most of these literatures treated the negotiations process of conflicting parties as ‘
 An analyst must contextualize and conceptualize the whole process as a complex web of international war of power dynamics . Otomar observed that in order to fully grasp the negotiation dynamics with its challenges, an analyst must . .
 This means that the negotiation process must be seen as a continuum of balance of power . Negotiating power is a 'continuing' process that must be balanced, says the PM .
 This paper focuses on analyzing the negotiation process of this crisis . It focuses on analysis of the negotiations process of the crisis .
 Hard tactics and negotiating styles worked together to avert missile crisis . Hard tactics were used to avert the missile crisis, says Peter Bergen .
 The main objective of this paper was to show the dynamics of crisis management and the need to use “rational-cool-calm-self-belief diplomacy” in the face of contending and provocative rhetoric””s.”
 On October 14, 1962, two American reconnaissance planes flying over Cuba identify a construction of lunch sites at “Pinar del Rio in Western Cuba” (Blight, 2002, 9, Garthoff, 1988; Paul-Sampino, 2003; Martin, 2002;
 Due to lack of credible opposition leader, the operation failed . The operation failed due to a lack of credibility in the country .
 President Kennedy ordered the “quarantine‟ of Soviet missiles shipment to Cuba, and demanded that all the missiles should be removed from Cuba . Kennedy also demanded that the missiles were removed from the country .
 In October 28, the Soviet dismantled and removed their missiles from Cuba . United States pledged to remove their „Jupiter‟ missiles from Turkey and Italy as well as calling off the invasion of Cuba as a result .
 During the crisis negotiation, the actors were overtly reduced to two – the US and Soviet Union, with Cuba as the ‘participant-observer‟ even though their territory was the environment or the context of the crisis .
 Khrushchev was not defending Cuba as he would have the world to believe . Clearly, the truth was not true . The Cuban government was in the midst of the Cold War .
 Gilbert & Lauren: International negotiations of crisis management is simply not enough to identify the ‘critical variables” rather to explain which variable is historically constant or changing with time (i.e. the purposes and objectives) by exploring the intellectual capacities of decision-makers to clearly articulate,
 Negotiators, therefore, must understand that ‘the players’ in conflicts usually starts off with zero – sum negotiation tactics and most often than not ends up with the collective search for creative alternatives after all options have been weighed . Negotiator: “The players”
 In the Cuban missile crisis the integrative negotiation style influenced the “decisions and results eliminating any productive panic” (Gilbert & Lauren, 1980, 654) from the actions and inactions of the major players .
 According to Druckman, predatory or hard tactics could lead to competition of both global and specific needs of parties .
 Fisher & Ury: Problem-Solving approach of resolving conflicts is moving parties from positions to global interests, that is focusing on the bigger picture not dwelling on parochial needs .
 It is hoped this paper will lend credence to integrative negotiations by helping to control the volatile social, economic, and political volcanoes of the world .
 The parties are the actors or players who are involved in the negotiation process . The parties involved are the parties or players in the negotiations process .
 The primary conflicting parties, in the Cuban missiles crisis, were Washington and Havana . The Cuban missile crisis was centered around the Cuban city of Havana .
 Soviet Union became secondary party to Havana, in the missiles crisis . Thus, the Soviet Union was a secondary party in the crisis .
 The Soviet Union assumed direct control over the crisis and the subsequent negotiation process . From this position, the Soviet Union took direct control of the crisis .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union were involved in the Cuban missile crisis . Cuba became “the bargaining-chip” of the Soviets, with Cuba becoming ‘the bargaining chip”
 Negotiation at the early stages of the Cuban missile crisis was characterized by distributive negotiation tactics . Negotiations were characterized by distributed negotiation tactics.
 In the latter stages, the actors began to use the integrative negotiation style . However, in the final stages of the play, they used the integrative negotiation style .
 Most of the literatures treated the negotiation process of the crisis as either distributive or integrative . As a result most of the . literatures treat the . negotiation process as either distributed or integrated, they say .
 This therefore, gives the impression of two separate processes of negotiation . This is not the same process of negotiation. This is the case of negotiation between the two sides of the border .
 According to Harvard Business Essentials Series every initial negotiation stage has the tendency of making parties compete, in most cases over the distribution of a fixed sum of value .
 This makes the parties to contend, thus any gain to one party was a loss for the other . This makes it easier for one party to win, so any gain from one party is lost .
 William Zartman calls the distributive negotiation process, the unilateral model . William calls it the "disadvantage-freezing" model . The model is called the "distributive negotiation"
 He noted that the model is characterized by power-playing tactics, use of force and also the parties view negotiations through a tunnel vision .
 This is a typical ‘move and countermove‟ between the U.S. and Soviet Union. This is the typical “move and . countermove,” between the United States and . the Soviet Union .
 The objectives of the parties in the Cuban missile crisis formed the bases of their contentions . The objectives were the objectives of both sides of the conflict .
 This might have given the Soviet‟s offensive advantage which might equalized the power differentials between them and the United States . The Soviet military might have been able to equalize the power differences .
 Khrushchev‟s observation attests to this fact that “USSR does not accept America should be everywhere and to rule everywhere.” “U.S. should rule everywhere,” says Russian leader .
 Evidence of ideological propagation is when McCone (U.S. Director of Central Intelligence) articulated the two underlying objectives of United States global position on ideology . Also the evidence of ideological propagating is that McCone articulated the objectives of U.S .
 HBES defines “where” to include the context, conditions and constraints under which actors of a negotiation process operated or are operating . “Where’s” is defined by the context and constraints of the negotiations .
 The face-to-face confrontation occurred on October 20, 1962 . President Kennedy ordered the naval blockade, whereas the Soviet's vessels were still advancing the blockade line .
 U.S. regarded this move as a proposed deal by Moscow . It is important to note that United States regarded it as a possible deal by Russia .
 This information had been public in United States through the KGB (i.e. the Soviet”s intelligence outfit) channels . However, this information was public in U.S. through KGB channels .
 It is characterized by lofty aspirations of both sides with little apparent common ground . Both sides are seeking to find common ground in the world's most populous state .
 It uses pressure, politics, or trickery in order to achieve party‟s goals . Party”s use of trickery to achieve political goals, or to achieve them .
 The ultimate goal is to provoke a response from the other party, a more favorable Best Alternative to Negotiated agreement or find a Zones of Possible Agreement to reach a common ground, and compromise . The ultimate aim is provoke a reaction from other party to find a better deal .
 The two leaders does not want to appear ‘soft or weak” in the eyes of the hardliners or the conservatives in this hot-round-up negotiation . Another constraint was the two leaders do not want .
 Fisher and Rajagopalan observed that on October 27, 1962; Soviet and Cuban information was that U.S. was about launching an attack on Cuba . Soviet tankers then began to approach the blockade lines .
 Besides, an American U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down killing the pilot Major Rudolph Anderson Jr. Besides, the pilot was killed in the U.S. mission .
 Speculation in U.S. was that, Soviet diplomats were destroying their sensitive documents in anticipation for a full scale war . In addition, the speculation in the United States was that . Soviet diplomats may have been destroying their . sensitive documents .
 President Kennedy then invoked Defcon2, this means the second-highest alert posture for enemy attack . President Kennedy was in the middle of a crisis in the U.S.
 Khrushchev communiqué to Kennedy for trade of Cuban missiles for Turkish U.S. Jupiter missiles . It was during this condition and constraint that Khrushchekchev .
 Kennedy met Anatoliy Dobrynin, the Soviet Ambassador to U.S. to close the deal in camera . Kennedy met the Soviet ambassador to the United States . The deal was signed in camera by the Soviet Embassy in Moscow, Russia .
 The Cuban missile crisis is a continuum between negotiating and integrative negotiation . Even though existing literatures have treated it separately, these processes are continuum, he says . He says they should be treated as separate entities .
 To draw from Otomar, the initial stages of the negotiation was purely distributive where contentious tactics such as negotiating from position of strength, threatening and threatening took the center stage . Boulware-ism is a French-style approach to negotiating .
 Negotiations were characterized by high emotions and use of force to achieve negotiated objectives . Also the negotiation was characterized by . high emotions, use of . force to . achieve objectives .
 Fisher and James had stated that the U.S. demanded a complete removal of the offensive weapons from Cuba under UN supervision .
 She established that any attack on her would be considered as an attack by Soviet Union, which would be retaliated . She also established the fact that any . attack by . Soviet Union would also be considered an attack . on her .
 Fisher noted that the UN, under its Secretary-General U Thant, acted as the third-party by mediating between the three parties in October 26, 1962 . Fisher said the UN acted as a mediator between the two parties .
 American ships will monitor Soviet vessels entering Cuba . Inspection of Soviet and Cuban vessels would be performed by a neutral country . International Committee of Red Cross should be used in this regard .
 Washington added that her air reconnaissance over Cuba will continued until she is assured of the total dismantling of the missile sites and the removal of weapons of mass destruction . The U.S. added that it will continue until it is assured that the sites have been dismantled .
 The negotiations entered into an integrative phase and assumed a bilateral posture involving the two-superpowers . Furthermore, the negotiation entered into a . bilateral posture .
 The exchange between the two-superpower leaders was conducted exclusively through direct messages between Moscow and Washington . Fisher noted that “during the last and decisive phase of the crisis the exchange was conducted .
 HBES says integrative negotiation is also called “win-win” or “collaborative” negotiation . According to HBES, it is also known as “interactive negotiation’s”
 Parties seeks to cooperate to achieve maximum benefits by integrating their interests into an agreement while also competing to divide the value . In this process parties seeks to . cooperate to . achieve maximum . benefits .
 William Zartman, in his view calls integrative negotiation a joint solution negotiation model . William Zarman calls it "integrative negotiation" William Zerman calls the model "integration negotiation"
 He further spells out some of the factors which make parties integrate or come to table . He also spells out the factors that make parties come to terms .
 James noted that the Soviet Union saw the deployment of its missiles in Cuba under the nose of United States will increased their expansion in the Western Hemisphere, increased their power potential and prestige . Thus in the Cuban missile crisis, James noted .
 The prominence of balanced of power in present nuclear age could be attributed to the deterrence theory . In addition, the prominence of balance of power could also be attributed . The deterrence theory is based on the theory of balanced power .
 The destructive nature of the nuclear weapon and that there is no or limited defense against them, the only way to protect oneself militarily is to threaten to retaliate . The only way of protecting oneself is to retaliate in the hope of deterring the other side from using these weapons .
 Integrative negotiation became a “sine qua non‟ in averting the Cuban missile crisis . Therefore, to prevent any hurting stalemate and nuclear holocaust, integrative negotiation was a ‘sinequa non.‟ The U.S. and Cuban
 Any peace-loving person in the world would opt for the integrative approach of negotiation to distributive process . In sum, from the above it is abundantly clear that, any peace loving person would prefer the approach .
 Negotiating starts from distributive phase and ends with integrative phase . Negotiations usually start with negotiation, negotiation starts from distribution phase to integration phase .
 It does not mean that the reverse order of this continuum could not occur in some cases of negotiations . However, it doesn't mean that it does not happen in some of the cases .
 It is essential to note that the crisis did not last for thirteen days as claimed widelye. from the time Washington discovered the construction of launching facilities for the Soviet medium-range missile in Cuba, to Khrushchev‟s formal agreement to withdraw, and Kennedy”s pledge
 U.S. naval quarantine lifted and the special alert status of the military forces of the two countries ended . However, a consideration must be given to the second phase of the negotiation process which started from October 28 to November 20, 1962 .
 The perspectives of both U.S. and Soviet Union were shaped by the dynamics of the negotiation process . Also, it is important to recognize that it was important to note that the perspectives of the two countries were shaped .
 The United States saw the Soviet missiles deployment in Cuba as bolstering their strategic military power and diplomatic-political strength . The deterrence of a U.S. attack on Cuba was at most a smoke-screen or secondary objective for the Soviet‟s .
 Canadian Journal of Political Science / Revue canadienne de science politique, Vol. Vol. 1, published in Canada's Revue. 1 .