 The Candidates had similar policies but Kennedy had two key factors on his side . Kennedy won't be surprised if he wins the White House .
 Expert on foreign policy and hoping to expose opponent\u2019s inexperience . Hopes to expose opponents' inexperience.
 Small force sent to distract Castro\u2019s forces did not reach the shore . Small force was sent out to distract forces from the shore of Cuba .
 October 14, 2013 photographs reveal Soviet missile bases in Cuba with missiles ready to launch . October 14 \u2013 photos reveal Soviet missiles ready for launch . Images show Soviet missiles in Cuba ready for launches .
 Kennedy informed the nation of such missile sites and of plans to remove them . October 22, 2013, Kennedy told the nation that such sites will be removed from the nation .
 U.S. agreed not to invade Cuba &amp; remove missiles from Turkey . How did it end? United States agreed to Cuba not invade Cuba . U.N. agreed to remove missiles and remove them .
 The threat of nuclear war prevented Khrushchev from closing roads to West Berlin . The threat was the threat of a nuclear war preventing the move .
 August 1961 was the beginning of the construction of the wall separating East Germany from West Germany . The wall was built in 1961 to connect East Germany with the West .
 John F Kennedy was a Democratic senator who was elected President in 1960 . Richard M Nixon was a former Republican . Richard F Nixon was the President of the United States in the 1960s .
 Kennedy’s Background Wealthy Family that expected public service . Roman Catholic Charismatic and highly appealing to American. years old Roman Catholic .
 Democratic nominee for president was Massachusetts Senator, John Kennedy Kennedy Kennedy . Kennedy had well organized campaign, backing.
 Turn in your assignment from yesterday if you have not already done so . Turn in assignments from yesterday's opening assignment .
 1960 Democratic nominee John Kennedy Promised active leadership Get America moving again . Republican nominee Richard Nixon promised active leadership in 1960s .
 Kennedy & the Cold War Chapter 28: The Cold War Begins . Explain the steps Kennedy took to change American foreign policy .