 John F Kennedy was destined to be a hero in the warped mind of Lee Harvey Oswald, President Kennedy’s assassin; and who in 1964 is still a major campaign issue . Cuba, Castro and JFK were to be the major foreign policy issue of the i960 Presidential campaign .
 "No other individual in the world has created such a conflict of opinion in the United States. It is safe to say that no other person in the . world has . created such an . opinion," CNN's John Sutter says .
 The opposing view, which I share, is that Castro is a dangerous threat to our peace and security . We cannot tolerate the presence of his communist regime 90 miles from our shores, he says .
 Castro said Castro spoke to Castro in a conversation he had with him more than five yeass ago . Castro was Castro's first president . Castro has been accused of corruption in Cuba . Castro is a former CIA director .
 CNN's John Sutter met with Cuban dictator in the U.S. Capitol on a Sunday afternoon . Sutter: "There was nothing I wanted less to do than to go down to my Capitol office for a meeting"
 There were special circumstances which prompted me to schedule the appointment . But there was special circumstances that prompted the appointment, she said .
 Castro had come to power in Cuba a little more than three months before . Castro had been in power for three months prior to his arrival .
 He was now in Washington at the invitation of the American Society of Newspaper Editors .
 President Eisenhower declined to see him because he had been making violent anti-American statements . Eisenhower had declined to meet him because of his visit was unofficial and he was making violent statements .
 President Obama met with Cuba's Castro Castro in Cuba for the first time in the 1960s . The Cuban leader has been in the country since then, but Castro has not been friendly .
 I agreed, on the condition that the two of us would talk alone, without members of his staff or mine present, and that there should be no photographs taken or other attempts made to exploit our conference for publicity purposes .
 It seemed to me that until he demonstrated some intention of modifying his anti-American stand he should not be accorded the same treatment I would give to other visiting foreign officials . I would also give other foreign officials the same respect I would have given to others .
 As I told President Eisenhower later, he seemed to have that indefinable quality which, for good or evil, makes a leader of men, he said . As I . told him, "For good or . evil, make an evil leader of man"
 He had a compelling, intense voice, sparkling black eyes, and he radiated vitality . He had an intense, compelling voice and sparkling eyes, he said .
 After 3V2 hours of discussion I summed up my impressions in this way — he looked like a revolutionary, talked like an idealistic college professor and reacted like a communist . After 3.2 hours, he summed up his impressions of the meeting with a revolutionary .
 He gave an appearance of sincerity, but what he said followed a pattern all too familiar to me. He gave the appearance of genuine sincerity . What he said was a pattern that is familiar to him.
 "I had had conversations with many communist leaders abroad and in the United States," she says . She says she had a lot of conversations with communist leaders around the world .
 The answers to questions came back almost parrotlike from them, as they now did from Castro . Castro's answers to the questions were parrot-like from the answers, as well as Castro's .
 A The people of Cuba don’t want free elections; they produce bad government . A The People of Cuba . Don’s people want a free elections, they want a better government, he says . A
 I made no headway in attempting to convince him that international communism is more than just an economic and political idea . International communism is dangerously effective in their ability to grasp power and to set up dictatorships, he says .
 At the conclusion of our conference I wrote a four-page secret memorandum, and sent copies to President Eisenhower, Secretary Herter and Allen Dulles, head of Central Intelligence Agency .
 In the weeks immediately after Castro left Washington, several spirited policy discussions on Cuba took place within the Eisenhower administration . The Eisenhower administration had a spirited policy discussion on Cuba in the weeks before Castro left .
 "The majority view in the State Department was in sharp disagreement with my appraisal of Castro," says Obama . The majority view of Castro was "in sharp disagreement" with Obama's view .
 Most of the career foreign-policy experts argued vigorously that C \stro was “liberal” but that, despite some communist associations, he definitely was not a communist . C \ Stro was ‘liberal’ but ‘not a communist’
 "Their view prevailed over mine at the outset, and their recommendations were followed," he said . "They prevailed over me," he added .
 The lack of a firm and consistent policy toward Castro has caused the U.S. to accept a continuing series of defeats, he says . The United States has allowed our avowed enemies to become entrenched in the Western Hemisphere, he writes .
 He had come to power with the tacit support and encouragement of the majority of foreign-policy experts in the State Department, as well as the enthusiastic approval of powerful elements of the American press, he says .
 Batista’s misrule, was in need of a revolution . Vv. v;a ... v%\< $m »‘ v . . *«s> •:•; ■ 2(96 O/fM, CASTRO AND JOHN F K
 The mistake made by some of our gullible State Department officials was that they failed to recognize the real problem we faced . The mistake was that some of the State Dept. officials and some influential columnists and editorial writers didn't recognize it .
 Our choice was not between Batista and somebody better, but between somebody far worse . Our choice is not between someone better, it between someone far worse, it's between someone worse .
 President Eisenhower began to realize that the original appraisal of Castro was wrong . It was not long before President Eisenhower realized that he had been wrong . President Eisenhower later realized that Castro was a good leader .
 Within months, bloody purges, illegal confiscations and Moscow-line attacks on the U.S. were unmasked Castro and exposed him for what he really is . Castro was the subject of Moscow-led attacks against the United States . Castro is now the subject subject of a
 By early i960 President Eisenhower reached the conclusion that Castro was an agent of international communism and a menace to peace in this hemisphere . Eisenhower concluded Castro was a threat to peace and peace .
 In a top-secret meeting in his office, at which I was present, he authorized the CIA to organize and train Cuban exiles . In the eventual purpose of freeing their homeland from Castro’s communist rule, he said .
 The Castro issue forced me to make the most difficult decision of my political career . Six months later, on October 21, i960, just four years ago, it was the Castro issue which forced him to make a difficult decision .
 The subject was to be foreign policy, which most observers considered me to have the advantage because of my wider experience in that field . The subject of the interview is to be a foreign policy policy .
 i960 campaign leader says headlines in the afternoon papers put him at a serious disadvantage in discussing foreign policy . But the headlines forced him to make a critical decision which put him on the defensive .
 The issue was then, as it is in 1964, what should be U.S. policy toward Castro’s communist government in Cuba . In 1964, the issue was asked: What should be American policy toward Cuba?
 Kennedy had been criticizing our administration’s policy without making specific recommendations as to how it should be changed . For several weeks Kennedy had criticized our administration's policy . Kennedy has been critical of the administration's policies .
 A few days earlier, in a speech before the American Legion Convention in Miami Beach, I had gained the initiative on the issue . I had called for a quarantine of the Castro regime and setting forth a specific program to accomplish that objective .
 Kennedy counter-attacked, just before we were to debate this • issue face-to-face on television before 1 70 million voters . And now, just . just before . debate, just as . debate was to be debated, Kennedy said, "I don't think it's
 In a statement he declared, “We must attempt to strengthen non-Batista, democratic, anti-Castro forces in exile and in Cuba itself who offer eventual hope of overthrowing Castro.”
 At the time of the debate, however, I had to proceed on the assumption that Kennedy had been briefed on the secret program . The issue could well have been the decisive factor, however .
 As I finished reading the story, I realized the difficulty of the decision I had to make. But I have never had any regrets about this decision, or any doubt it was the only one I could make under the circumstances .
 For months I had known that we had been doing exactly what Kennedy seemed to be advocating— supporting and training Cuban exiles so that they could free Cuba from communist control . For months, I'd known that . We had been training and supporting exiles in Cuba .
 I was one of only three members of the President’s cabinet who had been briefed on it . The irony was that I had been the strongest aacLmostpersi-ste-nt-adv voca£e*fprj;et .
 If in the TV debate I were to reveal the existence of the training program and point out that I had been one of the strongest advocates, I would pull the rug out of under Kennedy’s position, he says .
 The project would be doomed, and also the lives of brave men, both inside and outside of Cuba, who were receiving training and assistance. ting up and supporting such a prcT gram. But if I did so, the project would have been doomed, it would be .
 President Eisenhower instructed Allen Dulles, head of the CIA, to brief the Democratic candidate on all operations, including top-secret operations . President Eisenhower had instructed Dulles to brief President Eisenhower on all .
 I had only one choice: Oppose Kennedy on his position of aiding anti-Castro forces in Cuba . I had to oppose Kennedy's position .
 When the debate was concluded, Kennedy emerged as the man who was advocating a “get-tough policy” toward Castro . Kennedy was seen as advocating a tough policy .
 I was the man who was “soft” on Castro— the exact opposite of the truth, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says he was "soft" on Castro, but he was the opposite of truth .
 Any number of factors could have made the difference in what was to ity line to ask if briefings covered Cuba .
 I was scheduled to make a foreignpolicy speech in Chicago the following week, and I had written Allen Dulles to ask that he brief me on some of the latest developments . I was about to speak in Chicago, the next week .
 President Kennedy readily gave his approval; I had an appointment to meet with Dulles at six o’clock on the afternoon of the 19th. ‘I had a meeting to meet [Dulles] at six:00 p.m. ET. ET . President Kennedy
 CIA says Dulles will be delayed for at least an hour . CIA: Dulles delays will be at least one hour long .
 Allen Dulles was one of Dulles' advisers to the Herter Committee, of which he was a member . The Bay of Pigs was the first time Dulles had known and worked with him since the summer of 1947 .
 The minute I saw him I realized that he was under great emotional stress. The minute he saw him he realized that . He said he had been suffering from a great deal of stress .
 The incident was out of character for the smooth, cool professional I had seen handle so many difficult situations through the years, he answered, “I certainly would. I certainly would,” he said .
 I had known, of course, that the invasion was in progress, but it never crossed my mind that it would be allowed to fail . "I never thought it would fail. It never crossed me mind," he says of the invasion .
 Dulles briefed President Kennedy on the training program before he took office in January .
 The President-elect indicated that he felt the program should go forward, and said he would follow through on it after his inauguration .
 President Kennedy’s advisers had sharp differences of opinion about Castro . But, as had happened in the Eisenhower administration, a sharp difference of opinion developed among them .
 His liberal advisers from the State Department and on his personal staff took the line that if U.S. support of the invasion became known, world opinion would react unfavorably .
 This group advised that the U.S. should either try to get along with Castro or find some other method for dealing with him . This group also said that the United States should either get along or find other ways to deal with Castro .
 President Kennedy overruled his soft-line advisers and decided to go forward with the plan . President Kennedy finally overruled soft-liners and overruled them . Kennedy's decision to go ahead with the controversial plan was made in the 1960s .
 Soft-liners won their point and, by last-minute compromises, doomed the operation to failure . But in the end the soft-liners had their point, winning their point . The operation was doomed to failure.
 November the Western Hemisphere, they persuaded the President to curtail the original concept of the operation . M ■ • • • ' ' ' ■ ■ v . i* V ( y«.' • > ^ ■ ■\*»v‘,Y w\'*V-V (
 Two of three Free Cuban air strikes designed to knock out Castro’s air force were canceled . Two of the three air strikes were canceled, depriving the invasion of air support .
 We got the blame for intervening; we were denied the credit we would have received for winning . Castro was more firmly entrenched than ever. We were denied credit for winning; and Castro was even more entrenched .
 The next day, April 20, when I returned to my home after a visit to the Capitol, I found a note by the telephone, left by my 15-year-old daughter, Patricia . President Kennedy’s reaction to the death of his daughter, who was 15 .
 1 told him that he would be at his office at four o’clock and would be available to see him at any time his schedule permitted . "Any time will be all right," he said .
 At Last — The Truth About the Bay of Pigs,” The Reader’s Digest, September *64.64. At Last .
 I hadn't been in that historic oval room since I had said good-by to President Eisenhower there on January 19, three months before . I hadn’t been there since January 19 .
 The President was standing at his desk talking with Vice President Johnson . President Johnson was talking to Vice President Lyndon Johnson at the time .
 Johnson left the room, and the President sat down in his famous rocking chair . Shortly after, Johnson left, Johnson sat in the rocking chair again .
 'Talking to them and seeing the tragic expressions on their faces was the worst experience of my life. Talking to them [the children] and seeing them [their] tragic expressions were the worst . I'm not sure what happened to the children, but I'm sure they will never forget
 Kennedy did not try to hide his frustration, disappointment and fury over the failure of the operation . Kennedy said he was 'disappointed' by the failure to find a suitable candidate for a second time .
 Pacing around the room and using his down-to-earth Irish, rather than his Harvard vocabulary, he told me how disappointed he had been in the advice he had received . He said he was disappointed with the advice given to him .
 "Over and over again, he reiterated the fact that these assurances had been given to him," he said . Over and over, he said, "These assurances were given to me. Over over again"
 He did not mention the fatal advice given him by some of his liberal State Department and White House advisers . The White House did not discuss the plan .
 U.S. should send forces in to protect the lives and rights of the several thousand American citizens still living in Cuba . Send American forces into Cuba to protect American citizens .
 I emphasized that I felt we must do whatever was necessary to rid Cuba of Castro and communism . "I emphasized that . I felt ... we must . do whatever we . need to rid Castro of Cuba of communism," she said .
 Kennedy heard me out without comment, then replied, “Both Walter Lippmann and Chip Bolden (who had been our ambassador to Moscow) have reported that Khrushchev is in a very cocky mood at this time .
 If their appraisal is correct, he may believe this is the time to move against us . He might seize upon any action on our part in Cuba as an excuse for doing so, he says .
 American support of a neutralist regime seemed to be leading to an eventual communist takeover of Laos . Laos was ruled by the U.S. in the 1950s and '60s, but was ruled out of communist territory .
 "I told President Kennedy I thought that in both Laos and Cuba the important thing was to take some affirmative action, including, if necessary, at least a commitment of American air power," he said .
 The failure to come to grips with communism in one part of die world has weakened our position in every other part of the world, he said . His next remark underlined how the failure to . come to terms with communism has weakened .
 I want to tell you that I will publicly support you to the hilt if you make such a decision in regard to either Laos or Cuba . I will urge all other Republicans to do likewise. I will support you publicly if you do .
 Some political observers say you might risk political defeat in 1964 if either the Cuban or Far East crises involve an American armed forces commitment . The U.S. military might be involved in either of the crises .
 His reply, in the light of what happened three years later, was prophetic, although I do not think he intended it that way . He replied, 'Yes, yes, yes. I do think it was prophetic'
 I assumed that President Kennedy foresaw that he might now have to take risky military action . President Kennedy had been in the middle of a crisis in Vietnam .
 The Bay of Pigs failure was fresh in his mind, and he realized that another such defeat could be disastrous for him politically in 1964 . And with the Bay of . Pigs failure fresh in mind, he knew that another . defeat could . be disastrous .
 White House car was waiting in driveway on the South Lawn, waiting for President Obama . President Obama ordered the White House cars to be sent for me, says CNN.com correspondent .
 There's something about being an author which really builds the reputation of a political figure. There’s something about . being a . author which builds a political . reputation, he said .
 As he walked away, his head bowed, his hands jammed characteristically into his pockets, he seemed to be carrying the weight of the world on his shoulders .
 As I watched his weary, stooped figure, usually so erect and buoyant, disappear into the terrible loneliness of the White House office, I had an overwhelming sense of how depressed and discouraged he must have felt .
 I realize that political figures are not supposed to experience ordinary emotions, particularly where their political opponents are concerned . Political figures are supposed to be kept away from emotion, especially in the face of opponents .
 Jack Kennedy was the man who had come to Congress the same year I did, 14 years before . "I can truthfully say that, in this darkest hour of his political career, my heart went out to my friend"
 Cuba is a classic example of how not to conduct foreign policy in dealing with the communists . It is essential that we see where we went wrong in the past in order to determine what policy we should adopt in the future .
 First, when a decision has been made to commit American prestige, we must be prepared to commit an adequate amount of American power, he says . First, he said, when an American decision is made, the U.S. must commit adequate power .
 "The United States should always have a concern for the opinions of our friends in other nations," says President Obama . The U.S. should always be concerned for the opinion of other nations, he says .
 As the strongest nation in the world, it is our responsibility to lead, not follow, the forces charged with the defense of freedom . But, as a strong nation, it's our responsibility not to follow, President Obama says .
 In the Kremlin, Khrushchev must have watched with interest America’s inept and fainthearted efforts to free Cuba . In the U.S. it was not the first attempt to free the Cuban people from Cuba .
 The failure at the Bay of Pigs led to the Soviet decision to move into the Western Hemisphere in force, with both men and missiles .
 Khrushchev ignored warnings, chiefly by the CIA and by Sen. Richard Nixon . State Department clique and “liberal” members of the White House chose to ignore warnings .
 Kenneth Keating repeatedly stated that Soviet forces of men and missiles were being landed in Cuba . Keating was the president of the Cuban government in the 1960s .
 The CIA laid on the President’s desk photographs of Soviet missiles in place in Cuba . The President's desk was filled with photos of Soviet missile missiles in Cuba.
 The photos had been taken by the CIA’s U -2 planes, and the evidence could not be brushed aside . The photos were taken by CIA's U-2 planes .
 K C }'.' had sccredy moved medium-range ballistic missiles and jet bombers into Cuba . K C.'.' had moved medium range ballistic missile and jet bomber into Cuba. K C. had moved .
 He ordered a blockade, and demanded the removal of existing missiles, with on-site inspection to make certain that the job was done . The blockade was ordered by President Obama .
 "People ... applauded this forceful commitment of American strength to the defense of freedom and the cause of peace," President Obama said .
 President Kennedy assured his own place in history as the man who made nuclear blackmail an obsolete form of diplomacy . By finally calling Khrushchev’s bluff, President Kennedy ensured his own .
 The tragic history of American indecisiveness repeated itself. But, again, the tragic history has repeated itself .
 The persistent clique of advisers who had stayed Kennedy’s hand at the Bay of Pigs began at once to nibble away at the new strong policy .
 They insisted that the whole dispute be turned over to the United Nations for negotiation and settlement . The United Nations has refused to negotiate and settle the dispute .
 By convincing the President that he should back away from the strong course of action he had initially outlined, they enabled the U.S. to pull defeat out of the jaws of victory . They enabled the United States to pull victory from jaws of defeat .
 Until today, Cuba is the strongest military power in the Western Hemisphere . Except for the United States and Canada, the U.S. and Canada are the only two countries to send arms to Cuba .
 At an informal news conference, which I held on November 21, the questions were concerned chiefly with the visit of President Kennedy . President Kennedy was scheduled to arrive in Dallas the following day .
 There might be demonstrations against him and Vice President Johnson, who would be in the party . One of the questioners pointed out that considerable opposition to some of the President’s programs .
 I urged, in a statement to the press which I later repeated on television, that the President and Vice President be shown the respect to which their offices entitled them . I urged the President to be shown respect, which he said was the respect he deserved .
 This is the way I learned the news of President Kennedy’s assassination . This is how I learned of the news .
 I asked a cab driver to take me to my apartment rather than to my office. I asked the driver to drive me to his apartment instead of to the office, he said .
 I called J.Edgar Hoover, in Washington, and asked him wMf information he had. I called him j J. Edgar Hoover, a former FBI director, to ask him for information . I called Edgar Hoover to explain what he had to say to me .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, known to the FBI as a member of the pro-Castro Fair Play for Ctiba Committee, was alleged to have been involved in the alleged crime . He told me that a Lee Harvey . Oswald was known to be a . member of a pro- Castro pro
 Edwin A Walker and had been restrained by his wife from making an attempt on my life as wellj, said Walker . Walker had attempted to kill himself . Walker's wife had restrained him from making a suicide attempt . Walker was arrested and taken into custody .
 One of the major factors which warped his mind and drove him to this terrible deed was his contact with communism generally, and with Castro’s fanatical brand of communism in particular .
 Fidel Castro, therefore, proved to ibe the most momentous figure in John F Kennedy's life . Fidel Castro proved to be the most important figure in the life of JFK's life. Fidel Castro was the Cuban leader of the Cuban revolution .
 It was Castro who provided the major foreignpolicy issue in Kennedy’s campaign for the Presidency . Castro who brought him to the lowest point of his career, at the Bay of Pigs . Castro supplied the opportunity for Kennedy's greatest act of leadership as President, during the blockade .
 Cuba, along with Vietnam, is the major foreign policy issue of the 1964 Presidential campaign, as it was in i960 . i960: Vietnam, Cuba and Vietnam are the major issues in the 1964 campaign . Vietnam is also the major issue in the campaign .
 It symbolizes our approach to the menace of communism, our entire approach to foreign policy . Precisely because it symbolizes . Our entire approach . to the . menace of . communism .
 The last four years have seen the greatest series of foreign-policy failures of any comparable period in our history, says President Barack Obama .
 In Europe, the Grand Alliance is in a shambles, with several of our allies refusing to support the U.S. in Latin America and Asia . In Asia and Latin America, the United States is failing to support its policy toward Asia, Latin America .
 In Germany, the Berlin Wall stands as a grim monument to U.S. weakness and indecision in the face of a flagrant communist challenge . The Berlin Wall is a grim reminder of American weakness in Germany's struggle to defeat the Soviet Union .
 In Asia, Vietnam is only the most recent and most shocking of a series of foreignpolicy disasters that has reduced American prestige to an all-ume low in that part of the world . Vietnam is one of the most shocking foreign policy disasters in Asia .
 In countries scattered around the world, mobs descend on American embassies, stoning our representatives and tearing down the flag have become commonplace . Mobs descend on U.S. embassies and tear down the American flag have been commonplace .
 We have been humiliated, frustrated, outguessed and outmaneuvered at every turn. We have to be humiliated and frustrated, says David Cameron . We need to be 'humiliated, frustrated' and 'outmaneuered'
 Communism isn't changing; it isn’t sleeping, sleeping, relaxing; it is, as always, plotting, scheming, working, fighting, fighting . Communism isn”t changing, it’s not sleeping, it's always plotting and scheming. Communism isn
 There is strong support in the State Department and in the administration for Fulbright’s view that Castro is not a danger but just a nuisance . Fulbright: We should be more flexible and more conciliatory in our policies toward the Soviet Union and other communist countries .
 Those who urge a more flexible response to communism point out that there are difficulties in the communist bloc . Those who want a flexible response point out difficulties in communist blocs .
 There is trouble that the Soviet Union is having with its satellites in Eastern Europe, whose people are overwhelmingly against their communist government . The Soviet Union has trouble with its satellite states, including Eastern Europe .
 Communism, economically, has not been working in Soviet Europe or in Communist China or in Cuba or in the satellite countries . And there is the fact that communism has not worked economically in the Soviet Europe, China or Cuba .
 "Those who formulate our foreign policy say that the world situation has changed in our favor. Putting these developments together, those who formulate . foreign policy . say that . Those who formulate foreign . policy say . that they . formulate their foreign policy. say that that .
 They argue that the cold war is thawing and that a new period of accommodation is in order . Noting the test-ban treaty, the sale of wheat to the Soviet Union and a less belligerent attitude by Khrushchev .
 Thousands of young people from non-communist countries are today being trained in the arts of subversion . From staging riots to guerrilla tactics, young people are being trained . The arts include staging riots, staging of guerrilla tactics .
 In the bloodletting in Southeast Asia, Cyprus, the Congo, Yemen, Yemen and other areas, communists are direcdy or indirectly involved .
 The danger of destruction by total war has gone down, the danger of defeat without total war is gone up, says President Obama . "The danger of total war without a war is going up," says Obama .
 Those who urge that we seek an “accommodation” with the communists fail to realize that when the communist leaders talk softly they are increasing their subversive and revolutionary activities . Those who want to seek an accommodation with the communist leader are increasing subversive activities .
 This is the situation with which the United States is presently confronted . The U.S. is in the midst of a major crisis in the Middle East, says Obama .
 It is a situation which calls for realistic thinking about communist strategy and tactics, and for a new policy to meet the threat that faces us . The situation calls for real-time thinking about the threat facing us .
 We must understand that the communist threat is worldwide, and if communism takes over in one country the tremors are felt clear around the world . We must also understand that if a communist threat takes over one country, it will affect the whole world .
 I completely reject the idea that there are so-called peripheral areas, collateral areas, like Cuba and Vietnam, that are not important . Cuba is one of the most important countries in the Middle East, says President Obama .
 "All the world looks on and sees that we do nothing to help our neighbors who are enslaved by a communist dictator. All the world . We do nothing, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 At this critical period, we must make up our minds that there cannot be one further retreat any place in the free world. At this . time, we need to make up . minds . There cannot be a further retreat from the free . world .
 "We must have the military strength, the economic programs and the political-action programs to resist any further retreat," says President Obama . "We need to have the economic, military and political programs that resist retreat," he says .
 Rather than a policy of flexibility, of softening, of conciliation, we must have a strong and determined policy . We need a strong, determined policy, rather than softening and softening .
 We must let those in the target nations know that the non-communist world has had enough of this continued encroachment, and that we are now going to stand firm . We must also tell those in target nations that we will stand firm. We are now standing firm.
 It is time for us to put an end to this disgraceful, self-defeating behavior . It's time to end the disgraceful behavior of the U.S. president .
 It is time to stand firm —and then move forward— in Cuba, in Vietnam and in any other area where freedom is denied or threatened by the forces of world communism . The U.S. should stand firm .