 The world stood at the brink of Armageddon for 13 days in October 1962 when President John F Kennedy drew a symbolic line in the Atlantic and warned of dire consequences if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dared to cross it .
 Military complex Morro Cabana is open to tourists in Havana, Cuba .
 Miami area high school student Jeff Faustin attaches an aileron to a 41-foot surface-to-air Nike Hercules missile as students restore it at the George T Baker Aviation school .
 Students restore one of the original Nike Hercules missiles once tipped with a nuclear warhead and aimed at Cuba . The Nike Hercules missile was used in the Cuban missile crisis .
 Nikita Khrushchev and President John F Kennedy talk in the residence of the United States Ambassador in a suburb of Vienna, Vienna, June 3, 1961 .
 Curtis LeMay, then Air Force chief of staff, met with President John F Kennedy in the White House to discuss U-2 spy plane flights .
 World on the Brink"",""GalleryObjectId"":""572141," "contentClass"":"csm_Gallery"","",""imageObjectId": "572121," "world on the brink" "The World on The Brink," "World on
 The United States destroyer Barry pulls alongside the Russian freighter Anosov in the Atlantic Ocean, November 10, 1962, to inspect cargo as a United States patrol plane flies overhead .
 The Cold-War era Nike Missile Base is seen in Everglades National Park in this undated aerial view released to Reuters October 12, 2012 .
 Miami area high school students are restoring one of the original Nike Hercules missiles . The Nike Hercules missile was once tipped with a nuclear warhead and aimed at Cuba .
 GalleryObjectId: "572141" "GalleryTitle": "Last slide:" "GalleryObjectId": "World on the Brink" Gallery: "Csm_Gallery" is "csm_gallery" by default .
 We believe news can and should expand a sense of identity and possibility beyond narrow conventional expectations . We are committed to the idea that news should expand beyond narrow expectations .
 Hear about special editorial projects, new product information, and upcoming events . Read our weekly Newsquiz . Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline .
 Today's top 10 news stories from the Monitor . Use these photos to help us understand today's featured news stories . Share your stories with CNN iReport .
 Weekday Politics provides an update on major political events, candidates, and parties twice a week . Check out the full transcript of this week's featured news stories .
 Twice a Week Science & Nature features the latest scientific discoveries & breakthroughs . Twice a week Science and Nature is twice a week .
 Every Tuesday Commentary is a weekly digest of Monitor views and insightful commentary on major events . The Monitor offers exclusive insights into the world's most important issues .
 Culture & Learning is a weekly update on music, movies, cultural trends, and education solutions . Every Friday Culture and Learning updates on education, music and culture .
 Every Thursday Christian Science Perspective offers a spiritual perspective . The three most recent Christian Science articles feature each week on CNN.com .
 The Christian Science Monitor is a nonprofit news organization dedicated to the core of the Christian Science worldview . We are committed to providing the world's leading view of the world .
 The Christian Science Monitor is on a mission to find out more about the world's top 10 science stories . It is on CNN.com/Heroes .
 You can renew your subscription or continue to use the site without a subscription . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 If you have questions about your account, please contact customer service or call us at 1-617-450-2300 . Renew subscription to the site is free .
 The Christian Science Monitor is a weekly feature of our featured news stories . Use this weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 Use the free version of this weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Submit your questions about your account at a rate of 1-617-450-2300 .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel .