 Photographs taken by a high-altitude U-2 spy plane offered clear evidence that Soviet medium-range missiles were now stationed 90 miles off the American coastline . The missiles were capable of carrying nuclear warheads .
 Tensions between the U.S. and the USSR over Cuba had been steadily increasing since the failed April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion . Tensions had been growing steadily between the United States and the Soviet Union over Cuba .
 Castro was convinced that the U.S. would try again, and set out to get more military assistance from the Soviet Union . Though the invasion did not succeed, Castro wanted more help from the Soviets .
 During the next year, the number of Soviet advisers in Cuba rose to more than 20,000 . During the 1990s, the Soviet Union had more than 19,000 advisers in the country .
 Two days after the pictures were taken and analyzed by intelligence officers, they were presented to President Kennedy . Two days later, the president presented the pictures to him .
 A tense standoff between two superpowers ensued as a fearful world awaited the outcome . During the next two weeks, a tense standoff ensued . The standoff was a tense two weeks .
 Moncrieff Spear served at the Operations Center during that critical time . He was interviewed by Thomas Dunnigan beginning in April 1993 . He served at Operations Center .
 Helmut Sonnenfeldt’s account from the State Department and the White House and about what was happening in Moscow at the time of the Crisis .
 One was simply to monitor cable traffic coming in from the posts overseas . Another was to monitor the cable traffic . One of the main reasons for the operation .
 There were so-called editors on the teams responsible for pulling these cables together . They prepared précis of these cables and piecing them together to give a running story .
 This then went into a morning summary, which was placed on the desk of the Secretary of State . This morning's summary was then put on the secretary of state .
 We had known earlier that there were military developments going on in Cuba . Code Word had been set up which would indicate that the Cuban and Soviet forces there had an offensive missile capability .
 I remember being called at home one evening by the Senior Watch Officer, who repeated this Code Word to me . I was called to my home in the early hours of the morning by the Watch Officer .
 He then said that the Under Secretary for Management wanted to take over our Conference Room for a major briefing . He said that he then said he wanted to meet with the Under Minister for Management .
 "I went rushing down to the Operations Center and brought in one of the officers from the Bureau of Political-Military Affairs who had been following this very closely," he said .
 He told CNN that the U.S. had discovered this offensive, military capability . "He, in effect, told me that they had found this offensive capability," he said .
 This was during the week before the President made his speech and the whole thing became public . This was a week before he made his own speech .
 There was intense activity going on in the Operations Center at that time . There was "intense activity" going on during the operation, says CNN.com correspondent .
 I remember that the President’s speech kept going through one draft after another . President Obama's speech was going through draft drafts . The President's speech went through draft after several drafts .
 The State Department's communications capability to get the text of the speech out to various, important, allied capitals simply broke down under the strain . Unfortunately, the Department’s communications capability .
 I remember one evening, just shortly before the President’s speech, when the Under Secretary for Management came in . The Under Secretary of Management was in the midst of the speech .
 It turned out that they had been down in the Telegraph Branch just below us there, literally pulling tapes right out of the machines there trying to get the changes put in and get this speech sent out .
 The Department later obtained greatly enhanced communications facilities . It was brought into the middle of the 20th century in terms of its communications capability .
 Chester Bowles had been a very senior official in the State Department in the early days of the Kennedy Administration . Bowles was a senior State Department official during the early 1960s . He is now a member of the Republican Party .
 He was replaced by Averell Harriman and was given a rather grandiose title as the President’s personal representative to all sorts of Third World countries .
 The Bowles’ morning summary has skyrocketed up in classification . Adlai Stevenson’s efforts to get U.N. support in the U.S. helped change the classification .
 "We were all working about 18 or 20 hours a day. I remember, in the early days of the Cuban Missile crisis, that we were all worked about 18 to 20 hours per day. That's how much of the time it was during the Cuban missile crisis .
 They would give us reports of the various megatonnages which CINCSAC had on first strike and second strike availability . They would report on first and second strikes availability . The report would be given to the public .
 A missile is believed to have been headed for the United States . The missile was launched in the U.S. last month .
 It was quickly checked and turned out that it was coming up from the South Pole . It turned out to be coming from the south Pole .
 The role of the Navy in the quarantine line around Cuba to intercept Soviet ships bringing missiles to Cuba is well known . The quarantine line was used to intercept missiles being brought to Cuba .
 At that time it was uncertain as to whether there were actually nuclear warheads in Cuba or whether they simply had the missiles there . At the time, it was unclear whether the missiles were actually there .
 A less well-known aspect of the crisis was the interdiction effort we ran diplomatically to prevent these warheads from being flown in . The war effort was a diplomatic effort to prevent the warheads being flown into the country .
 Reports of a number of Soviet flights originating in the Black Sea area . Flights then flew via airports in North Africa, crossed the South Atlantic Ocean from West Africa to Brazil .
 Diplomats in all of those North African posts and up and down the Caribbean made strong representations .
 In due course, we got these flights stopped, although one, as I recall, got as far as Guyana before it was finally stopped . One of the flights got to Guyana, but one of them got to get as far into Guyana .
 There was also a great deal of activity going on up at the UN, as our UN Mission presented the case against the Soviets .
 They used aerial photographs and so forth to bring about UN condemnation . The UN condemned the use of aerial photographs to raise awareness of the situation .
 "We mounted a major effort in the Organization of American States to get Latin American states to support our activities there, too," Obama says . "We also mounted major effort" in the OAS to support their activities, he says .
 U.S. Navy would be happy to have their ships diverted to U. S. or friendly ports, where they could be inspected . U.N. Navy and running the possibility of an international incident .
 Pentagon has no information as to where merchant ships were . Pentagon says merchant ships are located .
 This led to a confrontation between Secretary of Defense McNamara and Admiral George Anderson which was rather well publicized at the time .
 My opposite number in the National Military Command Center, the Pentagon’s crisis center, was a naval officer . The opposite number at the center was a Navy officer .
 Because of his naval officer’s uniform, he was able to go into the “Flag Plot” and make some notes on just where all these ships were and get some of this information back .
 In turn, we were able to get some of these merchant ships diverted and so avoid incidents, perhaps having the ships fired on, and so forth . We were also able to divert some of the ships diverted, and avoid incidents .
 The crisis was far from over as far as the Operations Center was concerned . After the message was received that Khrushchev had agreed to remove the missiles, the crisis continued .
 There was the matter of getting Cuban diplomats up to the UN to continue these negotiations . There was also the matter to get Cuban diplomats to continue negotiations .
 "We wanted to be sure that none of the planes bearing these diplomats, or Soviet diplomats going into Cuba, were shot down by our forces. Because we had air and ground forces ready for an invasion of Cuba, we wanted to make sure none of these planes bearing the diplomats were shot
 This required very close coordination between the Operations Center and the National Military Command Center . The operation required close cooperation between the two command centers .
 One was that it was absolutely fascinating to work the Department at that time . Another was that the Department of Justice was at the center of the world's greatest controversy .
 No more than about 35 individuals were actually doing anything related to the crisis during this period . "No more than 35 individuals actually ... were actually ... working"
 We were heavily involved with the people in Political-Military Affairs and “Alex” Johnson . Of course, we were also heavily involved in the military .
 At other times, the whole structure of a bureau fell away, says the writer . He says: "At other times we found ourselves dealing with one of the desk officers in the Aviation Division"
 "I’d come home in the wee hours of the morning, get four or five hours of sleep, and then have to go back to the Department. I’m not going to be able to sleep,’s wife says . ‘I was in the
 Lois was working at the time, so she would be gone by the time I would get up . Lois would have been gone when I got up, so I would have to wait for her to get out of bed . Lois was also working .
 After about the second week, I found a note pinned to my pillow, saying, “I do need to see you urgently on several matters.” The note was pinned to her pillow, she says .
 A Moment in U.S. Diplomatic History . Western Hemisphere Espionage Cold War Russia/Soviet Union espionage .
 A Moment in U.S. Diplomatic History, Cold War, Espionage, Russia/Soviet Union, Western Hemisphere . Liz Dee .