 No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission from the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations .
 Bolden was framed by the Mafia almost fifty years ago . Bolden is still fighting to clear his name after being framed by Mafia almost 50 years ago.
 ‘6’: Marcello, Cuba, and Jack Ruby are the subject of a new series of conspiracy theories . ‘'6' is the latest in a series of investigations into the assassination of Jack Ruby .
 Several hundred books about President Kennedy's assassination have been published over the past five decades . Fewer than two dozen have seriously dealt with the tidal wave of new information and evidence that has emerged in recent years .
 Many of the new revelations resulted from the 4. million pages of JFK assassination files released throughout the 1990s . Many of those new revelations were released as a result of the 1992 JFK Act .
 Few books have presented that information in a clear, concise way accessible to readers not already steeped in the sometimes arcane and always complex terminology of JFK assassination research . Even fewer books have been able to present that information .
 Previous books provided ample, credible documentation to prove their claims had the additional problem of extreme length . Previous books that provided ample documentation had the added problem of excessive length .
 JFK's first two books on JFK’s murder were each more than nine hundred pages . "Ultimate Sacrifice and Legacy of Secrecy" was more than 9,000 pages long . "I have personal experience"
 Almost four thousand endnotes documenting sources, hardly the type of book that most readers can easily digest . They had a combined total of almost 4,000 endnotes . The book was published in 1996 and 2007 .
 New revelations about the case continue to emerge, both from previously released government files and from participants in operations for which files are still mostly withheld .
 Legacy of Secrecy first revealed and named the FBI’s daring undercover CAMTEX operation, which lasted from 1985 to 1986, in 2008 . The operation was the FBI's daring undercover operation .
 On December 15, 1985, that operation obtained godfather Carlos Marcello’s confession that he had ordered JFK's murder . The operation obtained the confession of Marcella's godfather that he ordered the murder .
 The name of the FBI’s undercover informant, Jack Van Laningham, appeared for the first time in the updated trade paperback of Legacy of Secrecy in 2009 .
 Most of that book’s information came from uncensored FBI files I uncovered from officials involved in the operation . Most of the book's information was uncovered from unclassified FBI files .
 Van Laningham has had dozens of interviews and conversations with the author of the book . He says he has had a lot of interviews since the book was published . Van Lanedham says he is proud to be able to talk about his work in the U.S.
 Marcello's observations illuminated many aspects of JFK's murder that weren’t completely clear from the files alone . His observations illuminated aspects of his involvement with JFK’s murder .
 Van Laningham was Marcello's cellmate and confidante for many months in 1985 and 1986 . He uncovered independent corroboration for many of his observations, originally made when he was his cellmate .
 For the first time, that documented information allows the full story of JFK’s assassination to be told in a clear, concise manner, one backed up by the most important earlier discoveries about JFK's murder .
 The story of Carlos Marcello, Jack Van Laningham, and JFK’s assassination will be told in the upcoming film Legacy of Secrecy . Robert De Niro is slated to play Marcella in the film .
 JFK’s murder was JFK's murder . JFK was assassinated in 1968 . JFK's assassination was the murder of JFK's wife, Bobby Kennedy .
 This book provides a much fuller account and provides the supporting documentation backing it up . This book is available now on Amazon.com for pre-order .
 Credibility is always important in evaluating information about JFK’s murder . JFK's murder has been a mystery for decades .
 The author's work has received more mainstream press coverage than most books documenting a conspiracy in JFK’s murder . Because I have presented documented information from credible sources, buttressed by independent corroboration, my work has gotten more mainstream media coverage .
 This includes appearing numerous times on CNN and in television documentaries about my work produced by NBC News for the Discovery Channel .
 The declassified files were shown on several PBS programs . Some organizations have been able to verify the authenticity of the files, CNN.com reports .
 Other coverage has come from hundreds of newspapers, magazines, radio stations, and television stations, this country and others .
 Many of the key disclosures in this book came from more than two dozen key associates of John and Robert Kennedy, interviewed by me .
 I then found or helped get declassified files that verified their accounts . "I then found the declassified documents that verify their accounts," she said . "It's a good thing that I've done," she added .
 Sen. Ted Cruz: "For twenty-five years, I have been building on their work and advancing the findings of the five government investigating committees"
 "This book is the first compact culmination of all that research," author says . "I spent most of that time working full-time on the case," he says .
 This book features an Annotated Bibliography, making it easy for readers to refer to the books, articles, and documents used as source material . In response to requests from readers, this book is designed to provide an easy reference to all the material .
 In my previous books, bibliographic information lay instead in thousands of endnotes . In this book, I used to use endnotes to help students with reading comprehension comprehension .
 The Hidden History of the JFK Assassination has the same high level of documentation as my earlier works . We have dispensed with endnotes for this book .
 Now, it's easy to simply Google most quotations to find more information about their source . Quotes are easy to find out more about their sources .
 This book focuses on only the most important people involved in these events . Because of its shorter length, it focuses on fewer people than earlier works . This book contains hundreds of names of officials, witnesses, participants, journalists, and sources .
 The Hidden History, which devotes almost two hundred pages to JFK’s assassination, is published by The Washington Post . JFK's assassination was JFK's first assassination .
 When I began researching the case in 1988, I started with no preconceived conclusions . I looked at the evidence against all the individuals and organizations that some considered suspects . I started looking at all the information against all of the individuals, organizations considered suspects.
 Focusing on credible sources, information, and documentation for which there is independent corroboration, led me to new discoveries and to a cohesive story of what really happened to President Kennedy . Focused on credible information, information that have stood the test of time .
 Since 1966, dozens of carefully researched and well-documented books have thoroughly debunked every aspect of the Warren Commission’s conclusion .
 The Hidden History of the JFK Assassination debunks some of the Warren Commission’s most glaring errors . The rest of the book focuses on telling the documented story of what led to the murder of John F Kennedy as simply and concisely as possible .
 The Hidden History of the JFK Assassination first gives a brief overview of the overwhelming amount of evidence for a conspiracy in JFK’s murder . It also gives an overview of how the evidence is overwhelming .
 It describes the Warren Commission’s 1964 conclusion about JFK's murder . It then describes how that conclusion is demonstrably wrong . Authors such as Stephen King, Bill O’Reilly, Vincent Bugliosi, Gerald Posner, and Stephen King have written about the case .
 It presents well-documented information that will show accused assassin Lee Oswald in a whole new light . The book also presents well documented information about Lee Oswald .
 This account begins the chronological story of Carlos Marcello's rise to power . After revealing new information about the FBI’s CAMTEX operation, this account begins chronicle the rise of power in the FBI .
 He became involved in CIA operations against Castro without the knowledge of the Kennedys . It explains why he came to be targeted by John and Robert Kennedy and how he became involved .
 JFK was assassinated in a way that forced several top U.S. officials to withhold key information from the press, the public, and the Warren Commission . Step by step, the book discloses how JFK died .
 Three CIA agents, officers, and assets who were involved in JFK’s murder are also named . Two CIA agents confessed before they died .
 The book also reveals new information from Carlos Marcello about Lee Oswald, Jack Ruby, and the Mafia hit men in Dealey Plaza when JFK was killed .
 We will also explore the hidden history of the aftermath of JFK’s murder, including just how close the truth came to being exposed on several occasions . We also explore how close JFK's murder was to be exposed .
 This history includes secret investigations conducted by the CIA, Naval Intelligence, and Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . The CIA and Naval Intelligence investigated the assassination of Kennedy .
 The account shows why Robert Kennedy’s associates pushed for the creation of the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission was limited to essentially endorsing a conclusion that had been publicly proclaimed within hours of JFK's murder . The account also shows how Robert Kennedy's associates pushed to create the commission .
 Abraham Bolden, chosen by JFK to be the first black Presidential Secret Service agent, was framed by the Mafia . Bolden was arrested when he tried to tell the Warren Commission about two earlier attempts to kill JFK, in Tampa and Chicago .
 The book identifies five later government investigating committees that had access to far more information than the Warren Commission . The book also identifies the five later investigating committees .
 The book reveals what happened after Marcello made his JFK confession . It reveals details about JFK’s assassination in words recorded on undercover FBI audiotape . The book also reveals details of the assassination .
 The 1992 JFK Act unanimously passed by Congress requires the Bureau to release those tapes and transcripts . It shows why the 1992 JFK act requires those tapes to be released . CIA and Naval Intelligence should release their remaining files related to JFK’s assassination .
 “millions” of pages of records involving JFK’s assassination have not been released, NBC News reports . According to NBC News, those agencies have still not released ‘millions' of pages .
 The Hidden History of the JFK Assassination explains what is in the unreleased files . Much of the story came directly from Kennedy associates and others who experienced crucial events firsthand .
 The book debunks some of the more pervasive myths about JFK’s murder that continue to surface on the internet, years after they were proven false . Along the way, the book also debunks .
 The book identifies those who were involved in JFK’s assassination, as well as those whose involvement is less clear . The CIA, FBI, and Naval Intelligence will release the rest of their JFK assassination files .
 Releasing all the JFK assassination files is important because US—Cuba relations have been essentially frozen since JFK’s assassination . Releasing the files important because U.S. and Cuba have been frozen since the time of JFK's assassination .
 President Lyndon Johnson and CIA Director John McCone believed fragmentary CIA reports that Fidel Castro was somehow behind JFK’s assassination . In part, those involved in Cuban operations in 1963 who later became high officials believed that Castro was behind the assassination .
 JFK's murder is one of the last remaining obstacles to ending the Cold War with Cuba . Helping to expose that, and other parts of the hidden history of JFK’s murder, can help to remove that last remaining obstacle .
 Using critical facts never reported before, this book documents exactly who was involved, why, and how they got away with it . The book documents who were involved in the crime, why and why .
 It builds on the findings of Robert Kennedy and his own secret investigations, as well as those of the House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 Using exclusive interviews and newly declassified files not available to the Committee, this book provides detailed proof of that conspiracy . The book is based on exclusive interviews with exclusive interviews .
 Marcello and Trafficante were mobsters in the 1980s . Others involved included Mafia don Johnny Rosselli and mobster John Martino . The mobsters were involved in the case .
 Few realize that all four men made credible confessions to JEK’s murder . Marcello provides by far the most detailed account, according to FBI files and sources that for the first time are fully detailed .
 All four mobsters were assets of the Central Intelligence Agency in the early 1960s, working on the Agency’s plots to kill Fidel Castro . The plots began in September 1960 at the direction of then Vice President Richard Nixon, before JFK was elected President .
 President Kennedy, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, or even JFK’s CIA director, John McCone, knew of the plots against Castro . ClA—Mafia plots continued into 1963 without the knowledge of President Kennedy or Attorney General .
 A Congressional investigator for the House Committee discovered that Morales— in 1963 a close friend of Johnny Rosselli, had confessed involvement in JFK’s murder to two close associates .
 Barker admitted under oath that he had watched JFK’s shooting as it happened . Barker said he watched JFK's motorcade through Dealey Plaza, even though it was not broadcast live .
 Barker was also identified as being behind the picket fence on the grassy knoll at the time of JFK’s shooting by two credible eyewitnesses who encountered him . Barker was identified as behind the fence by two witnesses, one a Dallas Deputy Sheriff .
 New material from FBI files and personnel allows this book to detail for the first time Carlos Marcello’s own account of how he planned JFK's murder and used trusted associates to carry it out .
 This new information finally connects all the dots, tying Marcello to the shooters, to Lee Oswald, and to Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby, Lee Oswald and Jack Ruby were killed in the September 4, 1945, attack .
 What had formerly been a mass of compelling evidence—with a few key parts missing and some connections murky—now becomes a clear, coherent, and concise story of JFK’s murder .
 For almost fifty years, polls have consistently shown that a majority of the American public believes JFK was killed as the result of a conspiracy . Polls consistently show that most Americans believe JFK was assassinated as a result of conspiracy .
 Michael Kurtz: Historical evidence for a conspiracy in JFK’s murder is conclusive . Kurtz and others have publicly expressed their belief that the historical evidence for the conspiracy is conclusive, Kurtz says .
 A bullet found in almost pristine condition had to have caused two wounds to JFK while also shattering Texas governor John Connally’s rib and wrist bones . For the ‘lone nut’ thesis to work, a bullet had to be found in pristine condition .
 The following chapter debunks this “single bullet theory,” long derided by its critics as the “magic bullet theory” The chapter shows how anyone can easily demonstrate the physical impossibility of the single bullet theory for him-or-him .
 Several years earlier, I had helped high-level Review Board staff identify crucial JFK records that had not been released . Several years later, I helped staff identify important JFK records .
 The news media rarely report that Robert F Kennedy himself, along with numerous government officials, voiced the belief that President Kennedy was killed as a result of a conspiracy . RFK and JFK were associates of RFK, JFK and JFK .
 Robert Kennedy told aide Richard Goodwin that he thought “that mob guy in New Orleans’—Marcello—was behind his brother’s death, Goodwin confirmed to me . Kennedy told Goodwin he thought Marcello was behind brother's death . Kennedy: "That mob
 RFK directed aides to conduct small, secret investigations into his brother's murder for him . RFK learned about Marcello's role because he directed several trusted aides to do the same .
 RFK's investigators included the head of the Justice Department’s “Get Hoffa Squad,” Walter Sheridan, and his press secretary, Frank Mankiewicz .
 President Lyndon Johnson, CIA Director John McCone, JFK’s personal physician Admiral George Burkley, and JFK aides Ted Sorensen, Arthur Schlesinger Jr., and Harris Wofford . Other well-documented believers in an assassination conspiracy included President Lyndon .
 LBJ aides Joseph A Califano Jr. and Alexander Haig were among those expressing belief in a conspiracy . RFK aides Joseph Goldfarb and Robert Blakey also wrote the RICO Act, used in prosecuting organized crime .
 JFK’s two closest aides, Dave Powers and Kenneth O’Donnell, witnessed two shots from the grassy knoll, from their perfect vantage point in the limousine directly behind JFK's . The two men witnessed the shots from their vantage point .
 Powers and O'Donnell both confirmed the grassy knoll shots to House Speaker Tip O’ Neill . O' Neill described in his 1987 autobiography, Man of the House, in which he described the shots .
 Powers’s perjured affidavit was taken by Commission counsel Arlen Specter, the leading proponent of the single bullet theory . The Warren Commission omitted this detail when it published Powers's affidavit . Specter was Specter's lead counsel for the Warren Commission .
 Much of the information came from interviews with former FBI, Secret Service, military intelligence, and Congressional personnel, including those critical of how their agencies handled the investigation .
 Many important new revelations are detailed in this book for the first time . The Hidden History —many important new . revelations are revealed in the book .
 It has taken almost fifty years for the full story of JFK’s assassination to emerge, for reasons of national security that are detailed later, compounded by the reluctance of agencies such as the FBI and CIA to reveal their own intelligence failures and unauthorized operations .
 Government agencies withheld hundreds of thousands of pages of relevant files and information on covert operations from the Warren Commission . Neither the public nor most journalists knew that when the Warren Report was issued in September 1964 .
 The Report was approved by a distinguished panel headed by Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren . The American news media embraced and helped to disseminate the Report .
 Many people don't realize that in addition to the best-selling one-volume Warren Report, the Commission also issued twenty-six volumes of supporting material . The Warren Report was published in the late 1960s .
 By 1966 authors and journalists were pointing out that the evidence contained in those twenty-six volumes didn’t support the Warren Report’s own conclusions . The Warren Report was published in 1966 .
 Edward Jay Epstein’s Inquest will be held in New York City, New York . Former JFK aides found the Inquest compelling . Epstein was convicted of murdering JFK aides .
 Mark Lane's Rush to Judgment and Josiah Thompson’s Six Seconds in Dallas . Sylvia Meagher's Accessories after the Fact will be released on Friday .
 Authors used Warren Report’s own information, along with fresh interviews and overlooked news accounts, to undermine its conclusion . All of those authors used the Warren Commission's own information to undermine the conclusion .
 FBI Director J Edgar Hoover and CIA Director Richard Helms issued detailed instructions on how to smear critics of the Warren Report .
 A January 4, 1967, CIA memo in which the Agency gives fifty-three pages of specific instructions on how to counter the growing tide of books and articles questioning the “lone nut” conclusion, a domestic operation far outside the bounds of the Agency’s charter .
 FBI counteroffensives by the CIA and FBI would last for decades . Some writers make the case that they continue even today .
 Garrison first focused on Carlos Marcello’s pilot and investigator in 1963—David Ferrie— in 1963 . Ferrie's name never publicly surfaced in Garrison's probe . Garrison's first focus was on David Ferrie, the pilot who was the original investigator .
 FBI files show Garrison came close to publicly naming Marcello twice but never did . Garrison says he never publicly did so . Garrison: "Marcello is the son of a man who has a reputation for being a serial killer"
 Ferrie died early in Garrison’s investigation, but it soon became a media circus . Garrison: Ferrie's death early in investigation took his inquiry far from the Mafia . Garrison's investigation soon became media circus.
 None of the hundreds of articles in the mainstream press about it mentioned Ferrie’s work for Marcello in 1963 or raised the possibility of Mafia involvement in the assassination . None of these articles mentioned the work of Ferrie in 1963 .
 By mid-1967 the mainstream media had ended serious investigations of JFK’s assassination and had become highly critical of Garrison . Garrison was criticized for his role in JFK's assassination .
 Mainstream journalists didn’t resume writing about the assassination until late 1974 and early 1975, in the aftermath of Watergate investigations, when the first widespread reports emerged about CIA plots to kill Fidel Castro .
 Revelations spawned new investigations such as the Rockefeller Commission and the Senate Church Committee . The committee added a subcommittee that included Senator Gary Hart, who was part of the committee .
 In the summer of 1975, the mob stymied those investigations by murdering two key figures in the ClA—Mafia plots before they could testify . The mob killed both Sam Giancana and Jimmy Hoffa before they were able to testify .
 Johnny Rosselli, who was central to the CIA—Mafia plots, was gruesomely murdered the following year . The resulting media firestorm led to the creation of the House Select Committee on Assassinations . The committee was created after the death of Rossella, a CIA-
 The House Committee also found itself thwarted by a spate of sudden deaths of mob-connected potential witnesses . CIA, FBI, and military intelligence withheld even more relevant information .
 CIA veteran of the 1963 anti-Castro plot should have been called as a witness . The House Select Committee and the Church Committee should have called him a witness, he says .
 The press finally linked Marcello and Trafficante to JFK's assassination . Still, due to books such as The Hoffa Wars and the House Select Committee’s investigation, the press has finally linked the two men to JFK . The press has never been able to link Marcell
 Only in the late 1970s did Jack Ruby first become widely identified in the press as a mobster . Some journalists had known of his mob ties for years . Jack Ruby's mob ties were only known in the 1970s .
 After the House Committee ended with its 1979 conclusion of conspiracy, more books and articles with evidence of conspiracy followed . More books and lengthy mainstream articles have been published since .
 Both men gave me important early assistance when I began researching JFK’s murder in the late 1980s . Both men were important, early assistance .
 In 1985 the FBI obtained Carlos Marcello's confession to JFK’s assassination, including details of how it was carried out . The godfather's meetings with Oswald and Ruby were among the meetings that led to the assassination .
 None of that information was released to the public at the time or during the intense media coverage of the twenty-fifth anniversary of JFK’s murder in November 1988 . It wouldn’t reach the public for years .
 mainstream documentaries and articles casting suspicion on Marcello and the Mafia appeared at the time . Nonetheless, mainstream articles cast suspicion on the Mafia were published .
 Gerald Posner’s 1993 Case Closed was part of a well-orchestrated media campaign to push back against the views of JFK and conspiracy books by Mark Lane and others that had become best sellers in its wake .
 Posner was criticized for presenting essentially a one-sided case against Oswald in the Warren Report’s “lone nut/single bullet” theory . Posner has since been criticized for his one-side case .
 Vincent Bugliosi’s massive Reclaiming History grew out of his work as a prosecutor in a televised mock trial . The book was published in the 1980s and 1990s . It was criticized for not being an objective account of the trial .
 Bill O’Reilly’s Killing Kennedy and Brian Latell's 2012 Castro's Secrets accept the Warren Report . That's true for O'Reilly's Killing Kennedy, which basically accepts the conclusion .
 Latell admits his work for the CIA’s Cold War against Cuba goes back to the 1960s . Latell also implies that Fidel Castro‘s government was somehow linked to JFK’�s assassination, something CIA personnel have been trying to claim for decades .
 The evidence of Carlos Marcello's guilt in JFK’s murder was extensive even before his confession . New information makes his motivation and methods even clearer .
 Marcello was far more powerful than any other godfather, and he remained so for an unusually long period of time . He was the most powerful godfather in the world, and remained so long .
 For almost forty years, he was the unchallenged ruler of a territory that included all of Louisiana, most of Texas, and much of Mississippi . For almost 40 years he ruled the state of Louisiana and Texas .
 Government investigators showed that Marcello played a key role in the ruthless, highly lucrative French Connection heroin network run by Santo Trafficante . Several members of that network played roles in JFK's murder .
 Investigators determined that by the 1960s, the revenue of Marcello’s vast criminal empire was equal to that of the largest American corporation of the time, General Motors . The revenue of the criminal empire by the time of the 1970s and '60s was equivalent to that
 Marcello's vast wealth allowed him to own mayors, judges, governors, members of Congress, and senators . This vast wealth helped him own mayors and judges, judges and governors . He also had access to the power of the United States .
 Marcello employed his own high-powered Washington lobbyist (the same one used by countries such as Nicaragua) and a powerful Washington law firm . He also employed a powerful D.C. lobbyist .
 John and Robert Kennedy dragged him in front of TV cameras covering their Senate crime hearings in 1959 . He maintained a very low public profile and managed to remain out of the spotlight .
 That started the Kennedys’ war against the Mafia, and against Marcello in particular, in particular . That started to be the start of the family's war against crime .
 Marcello was deported to Central America in 1961 . The Kennedys deported him after the war ended in 1961, and he was deported again .
 A law enforcement convoy rushed Marcello to the New Orleans airport, where a waiting plane took him to Guatemala, where he had obtained a fake birth certificate . The operation was unprecedented, and apparently extralegal, according to CNN.com .
 Marcello, who had seemed untouchable under the Eisenhower—Nixon Administration, was furious over the Kennedys’ action . Marcella was furious that Marcelli had been taken down .
 After Guatemala ordered Marcello out, his hatred of the Kennedy brothers soon became even more intense . After Guatemalan troops ordered him out of the country, he hated the brothers even more .
 The godfather had to trudge through the jungle in his Gucci shoes, accompanied only by his lawyer, all the while swearing eternal vengeance against President Kennedy and his brother .
 Marcello faced increasing pressure from the President and Attorney General Robert Kennedy, culminating in his federal trial in New Orleans in November 1963 . After sneaking back into the U.S. with the aid of his pilot, David Ferrie, he faced pressure from Robert Kennedy and the President .
 Marcello made sure he was acquitted on November 22, 1963, just after JFK’s murder . Thanks to bribing a key juror, he was able to get the case back on the stand .
 Knowing he would be acquitted, Marcello had planned a celebration with his family and associates for the evening of JFK’s assassination . Knowing he was acquitted, he had even planned to celebrate the assassination of JFK with his associates .
 Marcello ruled the oldest mob family in the United States . He didn’t have to get approval from the national Mafia commission before undertaking hits .
 Unlike most mob families, Marcello and his associates had a history of targeting government officials who posed a threat, including the 1954 assassination of Alabama’s anti-mob Attorney General—elect .
 After becoming President and Attorney General, John and Robert Kennedy had tried to convict Marcello as part of their massive war against organized crime . After becoming president and attorney general, they had tried in vain to convict him .
 Marcello killed JFK in order to end Attorney General Robert Kennedy’s power and prosecution of him . Their war against the mob became the reason for killing JFK . Marcella killed JFK because he wanted to end Robert Kennedy's prosecution .
 For years, historians believed the FBI had not followed up on the House Committee’s 1979 recommendation to investigate Marcello further for JFK's murder . The House Committee's 1979 recommendation was never followed up .
 I was the first to discover the FBI’s uncensored CAMTEX files about Marcello in the National Archives in 2006 and revealed them in about a dozen pages of Legacy of Secrecy in 2008 . I was also the first person to discover FBI files in 2006 .
 The files contained so much information that there wasn’t room to include all the CAMTEX revelations . There was so much more from exclusive interviews with FBI supervisor for CAMEX, FBI official, and another official involved .
 NBC News tracked down CAMTEX informant Jack Van Laningham for a Discovery Channel special featuring me and Legacy Legacy .
 Three new chapters of Legacy had already been added to the trade paperback of Legacy . Van Laningham had already added three chapters of important new information to the book .
 Since that time, I have had more than a dozen exclusive, probing talks with Van Laningham about Marcello . I have also had exclusive discussions about the FBI's CAMTEX files, fleshing out even more material .
 Later chapters quote Marcello describing for the first time exactly how he had JFK killed . The book is backed up with independent corroboration for many of the godfather’s statements .
 Marcello ordered the murder because of his often-voiced hatred of John and Robert Kennedy over his deportation, his ongoing prosecution, and their unrelenting and ever-escalating war against the Mafia, especially against his allies such as Jimmy Hoffa .
 Marcello had not reached and maintained his powerful position by taking rash action, especially where hits were concerned . Yet Marcella had not taken such a risk by taking such action, he said .
 The House Committee found evidence that Marcello and Trafficante had carefully planned the JFK hit for more than a year . The committee also found evidence of evidence that the two men planned the assassination .
 Johnny Rosselli, the Chicago Mafia’s man in Hollywood and Las Vegas, soon joined the godfathers’ plot . His boss, Sam Giancana, was also under intense pressure from the Kennedy Justice Department .
 Chicago is home to Rosselli's mob family, Trafficante’s base of Tampa, or Tampa, in Marcello's territory . Dallas is in the heart of Dallas, Dallas, or Dallas .
 Carlos Marcello said he imported two of the hit men from Europe for the JFK assignment . Independent account shows this was a favored technique for Marcella in other hits .
 Later chapters explain why the two men were chosen, how they obtained travel documents and aliases, and what the FBI learned about their actual identities .
 Marcello said the two shooters came into the U.S. from Canada, through Michigan, instead of making a border crossing much closer to Dallas . They also detail why they didn't cross into the United States from Canada through Michigan .
 Michigan was logical because the mob bosses planned their first attempt to kill JFK for Chicago, on November 2, 1963 . Chicago was the site of the first assassination attempt on JFK in 1963 .
 JFK’s Chicago motorcade route passed by a warehouse that employed an ex-Marine with recent parallels to Oswald . JFK's motorcade passed by the warehouse where he worked . The warehouse is where Oswald worked .
 Chicago-based Secret Service agents learned that four hit men were at large in the city . The ex-Marine was arrested and the attempt was called off .
 JFK canceled not just his motorcade but his entire visit at the last minute . News of the threat was kept out of the press by the White House and Secret Service .
 Marcello's next attempt was planned for Trafficante’s home base of Tampa, Florida, where the longest domestic motorcade of JFK's Presidency was scheduled for November 18, 1963 . Trafficante was scheduled to take part in the long-distance motorcade .
 Federal authorities learned about a plot to shoot JFK in the motorcade, Mullins says . Mullins, told me that federal authorities learned of the plot . JFK's motorcade was the target of a plot .
 JFK bravely went ahead with the motorcade for national security reasons . Security precautions were intense as JFK went ahead . The motorcade was the first of its kind for the president .
 President's men insisted that no word of the threat appear in the press . Once again, the President’s men insisted .
 Only one small article slipped out the day after JFK died, but it was quickly suppressed and never seen by the Warren Commission or the House Select Committee . The Warren Commission never saw the small article .
 Carlos Marcello explains how his second-in-command lieutenant in Dallas, Joe Campisi Sr. played a key role in managing the shooters for JFK’s murder . Campisi was a mobster and restaurateur who helped set up the assassination .
 The House Committee had been suspicious of Campisi, a close associate of Jack Ruby . Campisi is a former associate of Ruby associate Jack Ruby, who was killed in 1995 .
 Ruby has long been reported to have been the Mafia’s “payoff man” for the Dallas Police . The Dallas Chief of Detectives conducted mob business with Campisi every Sunday night for years .
 The book documents associates of Marcello and Trafficante who were reportedly in Dallas to help with JFK’s assassination . The book also documents other associates of Trafficante . It also documents associates who reportedly helped with the assassination .
 Bernard Barker was working on the CIA’s most sensitive authorized anti-Castro operation . He was a CIA agent and Cuban exile Bernard Barker, then working on a CIA operation .
 Carlos Marcello’s own words, confided to his trusted friend, FBI informant Van Laningham, provide the final pieces to the JFK assassination puzzle . The FBI informant's own words are the final piece of the JFK JFK assassination .
 Marcello had his pilot, David Ferrie, bring Oswald to meet the godfather personally and secretly . Oswald's meeting was part of the plan to set up the assassination of the president .
 The House Committee uncovered evidence that Oswald had met Ferrie years earlier when Ferrie helped supervise Oswald’s Civil Air Patrol unit . Oswald was actually working with Ferrie in the summer of 1963 when he was working with him .
 Marcello also told Van Laningham about his meetings with Jack Ruby . Ruby’s club in Dallas was one of several in that city secretly owned by the organization . Ruby's Dallas club was among several of several secretly owned in Dallas .
 Ruby just fronted the club for Marcello, and when Ruby was caught stealing from the till to pay his back taxes he was offered an offer he couldn’t refuse . Ruby was arrested for stealing from Churchill Farms when he was caught .
 Ruby had to arrange for a Dallas policeman to kill Oswald soon after JFK’s murder or else Ruby would have to do the job himself . Ruby arranged for Oswald to be killed by Dallas policeman .
 Marcello’s meetings with Ruby and Oswald are contained in the declassified CAMTEX FBI files . The FBI files contain details of the meetings with Oswald and Ruby .
 Marcello’s accounts of the two shooters and his meetings with Oswald and Ruby are backed up by much additional independent evidence, as described in later chapters . In addition to the accounts of Oswald and Oswald, the accounts are backed by much more independent evidence .
 It all forms a consistent and credible story that finally makes sense of what until now has been a sprawling mass of evidence with several key gaps . The evidence is consistent, credible and consistent, says CNN.com .
 Much of the CAMTEX information appears for the first time in this book, since I am the only author to have extensively interviewed Van Laningham, Kimmel, Kimmel and Kimmel .
 Exclusive interviews with two noncriminal businessmen in Louisiana, men who had befriended Carlos Marcello in one case and his family in another . Further confirmation comes from interviews with men who befriended the businessman and family .
 Another new source is a businessman who became friends with Marcello’s brother Joe . The businessman is a friend of the brother, Joe, who is also friends with the brother .
 Carlos Marcello's discovery of Van Laningham’s role eventually resulted in a documented hit attempt on the FBI informant . The FBI's CAMTEX informant was on parole in Tampa when he was found guilty .
 Santo Trafficante also confessed his involvement in JFK’s murder . The confession was made in front of two witnesses, and later chapters have new revelations .
 Also detailed are the confessions of two mob associates of Marcello’s, Johnny Rosselli and John Martino, who were both CIA assets, as were Marcelli and Trafficante . The confessions are also detailed in the book .
 Former Justice Department prosecutor William Hundley says Rosselli confessed to Trafficante's murder to his attorney before he was brutally murdered . Rossello confessed to his involvement to trafficante shortly before his murder, according to former Justice Dept. Hundly .
 CIA asset John Martino confessed to a reporter for Newsday . Martino died from natural causes, he also confessed to the reporter .
 Most of the mobsters Marcello and Trafficante used in the plot worked for the CIA on anti-Castro operations . The two godfathers themselves were involved in the operation . The book's author says the book was published in October 2013 .
 This enabled them to feed disinformation into U.S. intelligence networks before and after JFK’s murder to force a government cover-up . They fed disinformation into United States intelligence networks . This enabled the government to cover up the murder .
 Marcello and Trafficante used their inside knowledge of covert U.S. operations to topple Fidel Castro in order to kill JFK . The pair killed JFK in a way that forced high United States officials — including President Johnson, Robert Kennedy, J Edgar Hoover, and the CIA — to
 In the fall of 1963, the godfathers knew from their CIA associates that John and Robert Kennedy had formed a secret subcommittee of the National Security Council to make contingency plans in case Fidel attempted the �assassination of American officials” in response to United States efforts to overthrow him
 United States officials were ready when the evidence implicating Fidel in JFK’s murder quickly surfaced, triggering a cover-up to protect national security . U.S. officials were prepared to be ready to cover up when the scandal broke out .
 JFK had a top-secret plan with the head of the Cuban Army, Commander Juan Almeida, to overthrow Fidel Castro on December 1, 1963 . Also triggering cover-ups for national security reasons was the fact that JFK had plans to overthrow Castro .
 JFK’s Secretary of State Dean Rusk first revealed that plan to me . It has since been confirmed in great detail by other JFK associates and hundreds of pages of files declassified in the 1990s .
 JFK barred the Mafia from the coup and from reopening their casinos . Marcello and Trafficante managed to penetrate the highly secret operation via their CIA associates who worked on it .
 FBI files show that a surprising number of Marcello associates knew about the top-secret coup plan . Jack Ruby, John Martino, and David Ferrie, among others, knew about it . The Warren Commission and House Select Committee never learned of it .
 JFK’s goal for the coup was a democratic Cuba with no Mafia influence, but Marcello saw a way to use parts of the secret coup plan to force a massive government cover-up . JFK's goal for a coup in Cuba was to force the government to cover up
 If made public, JFK’s role in the plan to overthrow Castro could have triggered World War III in those tense Cold War times . JFK's role could have sparked World War I in the 1950s .
 The plan’s exposure could have cost the lives of JFK ally, Commander Almeida . Even years later, the plan's exposure may have cost JFK's ally a life .
 Almeida remained in place and unexposed for decades, passing away in 2009 when he was still a revered figure . That's one reason the government kept so much about JFK’s murder so secret for so long .
 The secret coup plan, and the Contingency Plans to protect it, helps explain why reporters in Dallas were warned off, for national security reasons, when they were pursuing leads .
 In the same way, preventing World War III was the real goal of the Warren Commission, and in that it succeeded . The Warren Commission succeeded in preventing a World War II war, and that was the goal .
 Marcello's name is nowhere to be found in the Warren Report . It's also one reason a dozen of his lieutenants and family were interviewed about JFK’s assassination .
 As the fiftieth anniversary of the tragic events in Dallas approaches, it’s ironic to look back and realize how important information the FBI had back in 1985 was from Marcello himself in the CAMTEX undercover operation .
 Had it been released by the twenty-fifth anniversary of JFK's murder in 1988, the public’s view would have been vastly different then and certainly would be today .
 This book represents the first full account of that operation and of Marcello’s startling admissions . I discovered those uncensored files seven years later, and this book .
 He was caught providing false information before filming was complete, as verified by the book of the JFK screenplay .
 Evidence that calls into question both theories has been available to the general public since 1966 .
 Additional information and files that demolish those key assertions have emerged in the succeeding decades have emerged .
 This chapter shows why the single bullet theory is impossible and then uses well-documented facts to present a completely different view of Oswald . The only one that accounts for all the known facts about Oswald is the only one .
 The single bullet theory of the 1964 Warren Report says only three shots were fired at the limousine . President Kennedy and his wife, Jackie; Governor Connally and wife, Nellie, in the seat in front of them .
 The Warren Commission’s theory says that one shot not only completely missed the limo but missed the entire street, hitting a curb and knocking a piece of concrete up to hit a bystander, James Teague . Teague was hit by a bullet that hit him in the head
 Connally was hit by a bullet that shattered four inches of his rib, smashed into his wrist bones, and plowed into his thigh . Connally emerged from the bullet's wounds almost pristine condition .
 A bullet supposedly found on Governor Connally’s stretcher at Parkland Hospital was later matched to Oswald's cheap, mailorder Mannlicher-Carcano rifle . The Commission said it had unanimously concluded that Oswald shot the governor .
 The Commission says Oswald fired from behind the President . The Commission said Oswald fired a single shot at President John Kennedy . Oswald's final shot was the head shot, the Commission said .
 In the Warren Report itself, the Commissioners—and the staff of lawyers that actually wrote the Report, primarily based on the FBI’s original investigation and additional testimony—claimed that the single bullet theory wasn’t essential to this conclusion, but that”s simply not correct
 The single bullet theory is required for the Warren Commission’s conclusion that Oswald did all the shooting . The only thing almost all authors and historians who have written about JFK's murder agree on is that the single-bullet theory .
 Oswald and his old rifle couldn't have fired more than three shots quickly enough . Oswald had time to aim again for his second and third shots, not even for his first and second shots . Oswald's timing of the shots was simply impossible .
 Even among seven members of the Warren Commission, the belief in the single bullet theory was not unanimous . Even among the seven members, the idea was not unanimously supported .
 Senator Richard B Russell of Georgia strenuously objected to its inclusion . Russell wanted to issue a dissenting opinion about it, until he was talked into compromise wording of the Report at the last minute .
 Commission members Senator Sherman Cooper of Kentucky and Senator Hale Boggs of Louisiana doubted the theory . Commission members also doubted the idea . Senator Cooper and Louisiana senator also doubted theory .
 Others who actually witnessed the shooting or its aftermath opposed the single bullet theory . Others said without the bullet, there must have been at least two shooters .
 Governor John Connally always stated that he was struck by the first shot and that a separate shot struck JFK . Nellie Connally agreed in her testimony that the two shots were fired at each other .
 Admiral George Burkley was the only doctor present at both Parkland Hospital in Dallas and in the autopsy room at Bethesda Naval Hospital . He filled out Kennedy’s death certificate .
 JFK's back wound was too low for the bullet to have exited just below his Adam’s apple, autopsy photos show . He described JFK's wound as being too low, as the bullet would have exited near his Adam's apple . The bullet wound was so low that the bullet
 Even the three official autopsy doctors said they did not believe the bullet that shattered Connally’s rib and wrist was the same one that struck JFK in the back .
 Forensic pathologist Cyril Wecht served on the Forensic Pathology Panel of the House Select Committee on Assassinations in 1978 . Wecht was a member of the panel who served on a panel of forensic pathologists . The panel concluded that the president's assassination was a suicide .
 The number of shots claimed by all the known Dealey Plaza witnesses ranged from two to five . In 1966, author Josiah Thompson found that with no exceptions, all those witnesses who were deep inside the Depository report hearing fewer than three shots .
 Witness intimidation/alteration always favored the theory that Oswald was the lone assassin . Many more such claims have emerged since then, and many more have emerged . The FBI had stated as fact by the FBI within hours of the crime .
 JFK’s autopsy records and clothes show that his back wound was almost six inches below his collar . JFK's autopsy records show that he died of a back wound six inches from his collar. His autopsy records also show that the wound was six inches beneath his collar when he died .
 Even the 1964 attempt to restage the shooting by the FBI depicted the wound on its test subject accurately . The FBI always slanted its investigation toward Oswald as a single assassin .
 The Warren volumes even included a photo of that FBI reenactment with the back wound accurately placed, yet the Commission ignored it when adopting the single bullet theory . The Warren . Commission ignored that photo of the FBI re-actment .
 The same bullet had to cause the wound just below JFK's Adam’s apple . That wound is significantly higher than the wound in JFK's back . Yet for the “lone nut/magic bullet theory” to work, that same bullet would have to cause a wound
 Even if the bullet somehow ricocheted off one of JFK's bones, theoretically turning upward to exit JFK’s throat, it would have been impossible for the bullet to change course in midair to dive down to hit Connally .
 Gerald Ford admitted in 1997 that he had changed the description of the “back wound” in the Warren Report into a ‘back of the neck” wound . In 1997 Ford admitted to the Associated Press that he changed the report’s description of a back wound .
 Raising the back wound almost six inches made the single bullet theory appear more viable . Raising back wound to six inches makes the single-bullet theory more viable. Raising a back wound six inches is a step closer to the theory of a single bullet .
 Anyone can disprove the single bullet theory by simply sitting a person in a chair . The theory was disproved by sitting a chair in the chair .
 With your test subject in a chair, measure six inches below the top of his collar and put a mark there . Measure six inches from the bottom of the collar and mark it .
 You don't even need to figure the exact downward angle of the bullet, which is a matter of some debate . You don’t even have to figure out the exact angle of a bullet .
 The autopsy physician who probed JFK's back wound said the downward angle was 45 to 60 degrees . All experts agree that the angle was downward at least 15 to 20 degrees, possibly much more .
 On a normal-sized adult male, the wound just under the Adam’s apple would be significantly higher than a back wound almost six inches below the collar . A back wound would be six inches above the collar in a normal adult male .
 The single bullet theory is physically impossible and should rightly be called the “magic bullet’s theory” The theory should be known as the magic bullet theory .
 A theory is a well-supported and well-tested hypothesis or set of hypotheses, the Commission’s one-bullet construction never met these demanding standards . The Commission's theory was never met with these standards, the author says .
 It was an ad-hoc invention or fabrication to meet the Commission’s requirements for a lone-assassin, no conspiracy explanation of the Kennedy assassination . The Commission's requirements for the assassination were met with no conspiracy theories .
 McKnight devoted many pages of his acclaimed Warren Commission critique Breach of Trust to the many other reasons the “magic bullet” theory is impossible . McKnight: "Magic bullet’s theory” is impossible.
 Some of this information comes from files unavailable until recent years, but most of it has been known for decades yet ignored or glossed over by “magic bullet” theorists .
 The Zapruder film disproves the "magic bullet" theory . The film is a disproof of the “magic bullet” theory .
 JFK was clearly shot in the throat as he emerges from behind a sign . JFK was shot by a gun in the neck when he emerged from behind the sign . He raised his arms to his neck as he raises his arms .
 At that exact instant, John Connally is seen just as clearly holding his white Stetson hat with his right hand, even though the “magic bullet” has supposedly already smashed his rib and shattered his right wrist . Connally's right hand is seen holding the hat with
 Doctors testified that more small bullet fragments were removed from Connally’s wounds than were missing from the almost pristine bullet . In addition, doctors testified that doctors removed more small fragments from the bullet fragments than were .
 The amount of material missing from the “magic bullet” was about the weight of a postage stamp, far less than those fragments . The material missing is about the size of a postcard . The amount missing is less than that of the bullet fragments .
 Doctors say JFK was shot from the front of his throat . The wound was a small wound of “entrance,” meaning JFK was hit from the back .
 Chapter Sixteen explains how that tiny neat entrance wound seen by the Dallas doctors became the much larger, jagged wound seen in JFK’s Bethesda autopsy photos . Chapter 16 explains how the small entrance wound was seen by doctors in Dallas .
 Doctors couldn't find a bullet while probing JFK's back wound during the autopsy . They were relieved to hear that the almost pristine “magic bullet” had been found in Dallas .
 David Osborne told Congressional investigators that he saw “an intact bullet roll . . onto the autopsy table” when JFK was first removed from his casket, before the official autopsy . Osborne was later an Admiral and Deputy Surgeon General of the Navy .
 The “magic bullet’s” wasn’t at Bethesda but many miles away at the FBI laboratory . The FBI lab is located in Bethesda, Maryland, and the FBI has a lab in Quantico, Virginia .
 The Bethesda bullet vanished from the official record, for reasons explained in later chapters . Like so much other crucial evidence, including JFK’s brain, it vanished from official record .
 The Army provided the Warren Commission with its top wound ballistic expert, Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter is a former Army officer who served in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Oswald’s actual Mannlicher-Carcano fired ‘markedly deformed’ bullets into ten cadaver wrists . “In each and every instance the bullet was ‘marksly’ and not pristine’” The bullet was fired into ten
 Warren Commission assistant counsel Arlen Specter trelied on a veterinarian’s tests, which involved shooting into horse meat, gelatin blocks, and goat carcasses, to “prove’treve” his theory .
 Wound ballistics expert said he was finally able to produce a relatively unmarred bullet after firing into a cadaver’s wrist . The bullet's speed was reduced by half and not firing it through a rib first, expert said .
 Some authors claim JFK was leaning very far forward in his seat or had his suit coat and shirt bunched up along the back of his head . But photos and the Zapruder film show that that was clearly not the case .
 The wound in the autopsy drawing and photograph lined up perfectly with the bullet holes in JFK’s shirt and suit coat, all almost six inches below the top of the collar . The bunching was minor, which is why the wound in JFK's shirt and coat lined up .
 Computer animation was used in a major television special to try to make the “magic bullet” theory work . JFK’s neck and shoulders were so distorted that he almost didn’t look human .
 When JFK's shooting was restaged accurately, it showed that the bullet striking JFK in the back would have exited through his heart, not just below his Adam’s apple . In one Discovery Channel special, the bullet exiting through JFK's heart would have hit his heart .
 The Discovery crew had trouble getting its Mannlicher-Carcano rifle to fire, even though it had been worked on by a top gunsmith, unlike Oswald’s cheap mail-order rifle .
 A 1967 special by CBS had the same problems, even though CBS used a rifle that fired faster and was in better condition than Oswald’s weapon . The problem wasn’t just the age, but the age of the rifle was also the same .
 More than a third of the attempts had to be disqualified “because of trouble with the rifle” as documented by author Michael T Griffith .
 "Not one of the eleven participating expert marksmen scored at least two hits (as the ‘magic bullet’ theory requires) on his first attempt . Not only that, CBS says, but in the case of CBS, “not one of eleven participating experts marksmen (
 Accounts supporting the “magic bullet” theory and Oswald as the lone assassin usually mention that Oswald earned a rating of “marksman” when he was in the Marines . Oswald was the impression that he was a crack shot . Accounts support the theory that Oswald was a lone
 No sharpshooter has ever duplicated the shooting attributed to Oswald on his first try and with an accurate moving target . That’s an important part of the “magic bullet/lone nut” theory since in all the years since the assassination .
 “marksman” is the lowest of the three Marine shooting titles . However, the reality is that “markman’s” title is a low-ranking title .
 Lowest possible score on the test is 190, with the highest being 250 . The lowest possible score is 190 and the highest is 250 .
 Oswald scored only one point above the minimum and sometimes missed not just the bull’s-eye but the entire target . Oswald left the Marines before he left the Marine Corps .
 The "magic bullet" was not even found on Governor Connally’s stretcher . The evidence is clear that the “magic bullet” was not found on the stretcher, says CNN.com .
 Senior Engineer Darrell Tomlinson found the nearly pristine bullet at Parkland Hospital an hour and fifteen minutes after JFK was shot .
 It was on one of two stretchers close together in a hallway, one of which had probably been used to transport Connally . Connally's body was found on a stretcher close to the hospital .
 Tomlinson initially told Arlen Specter that he had found the bullet on the stretcher that had NOT held Connally . The bullet had been found on Connally's stretcher, which had NOT been held .
 Tomlinson claimed uncertainty, still refusing to say the bullet came from Connally’s stretcher . He said he was pressured and intimidated by Specter to reverse his testimony . But after being pressured to back his testimony, he claimed uncertainty .
 McKnight’s recent analysis of the testimony of Parkland nurse Jane C Wester and orderly R J Jamison corroborates initial statement “and strongly supported the conclusion that” the bullet had NOT been found on Connally's stretcher .
 Both stretchers had probably been unattended for thirty minutes, in a hall where various people were milling about . Both stretcher were probably unattended in the hall .
 The non-Connally stretcher might have had enough bloodstains to cause a person to think it had been Connally's or Kennedy's stretcher . The stretcher may have been Kennedy’s stretcher, but it was not Connally .
 Someone could have easily planted the “magic bullet” to incriminate Oswald . Oswald was the only person to have incriminated Oswald . The bullet could have been planted in Oswald's assassination .
 Two reliable witnesses at Parkland Hospital saw Jack Ruby, a lowerlevel member of Carlos Marcello’s organization . Around 1:30m., about 15 minutes before the “magic bullet” was discovered, two reliable witnesses saw Ruby .
 One of the two witnesses, journalist Seth Kantor, even spoke to Ruby, as he later told authorities and confirmed to me . Ruby was allegedly killed by a car bomb in the early hours of the day .
 Ruby later lied to authorities about the encounter, saying that he hadn’t gone to Parkland that day . However, he later lied about it to authorities .
 Ruby would deny his presence at the site, unless he was engaged in some illegal activity, such as planting evidence . That raises the question of why he would deny it, such a possibility .
 Ruby might have planted the “magic bullet” or might have given it to someone else to plant it .
 The pristine bullet was used to link Oswald’s rifle to the shooting of JFK and Connally . Regardless of who placed the pristine bullet on the non-Connally stretcher, it was used .
 Oswald’s “commitment to Marxism and communism appears to have been another important factor in his motivation” to kill President Kennedy, the Warren Report says . The Warren Report went out of its way to stress that Oswald's ‘commitment’ to Marxism “
 Oswald had become a Marxist/Communist when he was a teenager . Oswald had continued a fascination with Russia when he joined the United States Marines . The Commission related information saying that Oswald had been fascinated with Russia .
 According to the official story, after getting an early discharge by claiming he needed to financially provide for his mother, he defected to Russia in 1959 . The official story says he got early discharge from the Army in order to help his mother . He defected in 1959 to Russia .
 After marrying a Russian woman, Marina Prusakova, he returned to the U.S. in 1962 . After marrying in 1962, he moved to the United States in 1963 .
 He worked at a photographic map firm in Dallas in the fall and moved to New Orleans in the spring . He moved to live with his uncle, after ordering the rifle and pistol he would allegedly use on November 22, 1963 .
 Marina eventually joined him in New Orleans, where he worked for a relatively short time at a coffee company . He was unemployed during August 1963 . Marina eventually moved to New Orleans .
 In that month he got a surprising amount of publicity for his local chapter of the pro-Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee . He got the attention of the media in Cuba .
 Oswald made a mysterious trip to Mexico City, visiting the Russian and Cuban Embassies there . Marina and their child were sent to live with a friend in Dallas, Texas . Oswald then headed to Dallas himself .
 He lived for a time in a Dallas YMCA before moving to a rooming house in the Oak Cliff section of the city . Marina was visiting Marina on the weekends, visiting the weekends .
 For decades, authors ranging from Gerald Posner to Bill O’Reilly have repeated and expanded on this version of the story . O'Reilly: "I’m not sure what happened, but I’ve been here for decades. It’s time to get
 Questions about Oswald’s motivation, or lack of it, have been growing since his murder by Jack Ruby . Oswald's motivation and motivation for Oswald's murder have never been fully answered .
 The Warren Report’s depiction of Oswald as a teenage Marxist who grew into a troubled, murderous loner doesn’t stand up to modern scrutiny . Oswald was a troubled teenager who grew up to be a troubled loner .
 Thousands of additional pages of Warren Commission documents were eventually released . In addition to the Warren Commission’s Report and twenty-six volumes of evidence, thousands of pages of documents were released .
 FBI, Naval Intelligence and the ClA withheld much crucial information about Oswald, author says . FBI, Navy and Naval Intelligence withheld crucial information on Oswald, he says .
 Thousands of pages of additional material from the House Select Committee’s investigation . Those have been supplemented by millions of files of additional files .
 It’s shockingly easy to debunk the Warren Report depiction of Oswald as a teenage Marxist . The Warren Report portrayed him as a teenager Marxist .
 Oswald was so desperate to join that he tried to enlist before he was legally old enough to do so . Oswald had even been so desperate he had even tried to join before he could legally enlist .
 Even the Warren Report admits that his fellow Marines called him Oswaldskovitch . The Warren Report also admits that he was called Oswaldskoevitch by fellow Marines .
 Oswald was based at the sensitive U-2 spy plane base in Atsugi, Japan . Not once was ever disciplined for his outrageously pro-Russian behavior, not even when he was based there .
 This man was a man with a security clearance; this man had access to highly sophisticated materials; and he is now showing an interest in Marxism . This man is a man who has access to very sophisticated materials, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Oswald had been a radar operator for the Marines at Atsugi, where the CIA’s supersecret U-2 spy planes were based for their flights over Russia . Blakey was right to be concerned since Oswald had worked for the CIA .
 The firm made the lettering used on the large display maps shown in televised presentations by U.S. officials .
 Oswald worked at the U-2 map firm at that dangerous time . The Warren,Posner, Posner, Bugliosi— O’Reilly version asks us to believe that the FBI and CIA saw no problem with former defector Oswald working at the firm .
 Thousands of American Communists, leftists, Socialists, progressives, and liberals in nonsensitive jobs were routinely subjected to domestic surveillance . Yet, later Congressional investigations showed that that . that was a time when thousands of . American Communists and leftists were routinely subject to domestic . surveillance .
 Oswald’s actions make perfect sense only when viewed in light of all the facts, not just a select few . Oswald's actions only make sense only if viewed in the light of the facts . Oswald was assassinated in November 1963 .
 It’s easier to evaluate Oswald accurately now that we’re decades removed from the Cold War and the “better dead than Red” mind-set of many, if not most, Americans of the early 1960s .
 He looked up to his older brothers, both of whom joined the military, with one serving in an intelligence service that ferreted out Communists . His older brothers also served in the military . He says he was inspired by his brothers' experience .
 Oswald’s favorite TV show when he was young was I Led Three Lives, based on a true story about a seemingly ordinary American who went under deep cover for years as an apparent Communist . Oswald's favorite show was based on the story of a U.S. government agent who
 Oswald had an above-average IQ, but learning disabilities hindered his schooling, so his prospects were limited . Oswald had a high-IQ, but his schooling was limited, so he had limited opportunities .
 He grew up in less-savory parts of New Orleans, where his mother knew members of the Marcello crime organization . His only father figure was a favorite uncle, “Dutz” Murret, who worked as a bookie for Marcella .
 Oswald’s limited options apparently led him to follow in the footsteps of the protagonist of I Led Three Lives . There is a great deal of evidence that he was recruited by military intelligence while in the Marines .
 Oswald was one of seven young American men who "defected" around the same time . Six of those later returned to the United States with Russian wives, author says .
 For years the CIA denied debriefing Oswald when he returned to the United States, even though the Agency routinely debriefed other far less potentially damaging travelers to Russia . For years, the CIA refused to debrief Oswald .
 Helms lied about that to government committees from the Warren Commission to the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Helms and other officials had lied about it to government committee .
 Bill O’Reilly’s book Killing Kennedy acknowledges that an erudite and sophisticated anti-Communist White Russian named George DeMohrenschildt helped Oswald get his job at the U-2 map firm in Dallas . O'Reilly's book Killing JFK acknowledges that De
 O’Reilly leaves out the fact that DeMohrenschildt was an admitted CIA asset who was in contact with the head of the CIA office .
 Oswald’s files prominently included a CIA phone number to call in case he was ever in trouble, indicating that the CIA was utilizing or planning to utilize Oswald in some fashion . In addition to the phone number, one of Oswald's files included a phone number for the CIA .
 Naval Intelligence wanted to see how the KGB might try to recruit Oswald or his wife . The monitoring of Oswald couldn’t be obvious, because it was not obvious . Naval Intelligence monitored Oswald because it wanted to know if the KGB was interested in Oswald .
 Most of the other recently returned defectors have returned to the U.S. State Department .
 Oswald was working for Naval Intelligence and had some CIA role . Helms used that justification to essentially lie to the Warren Commission and Congressional investigators about debriefing Oswald .
 The KGB saw through the ruse of having Oswald work at the U-2 map firm and made no contact with Oswald . However, just as it had in Russia, the KGB made contact with him .
 Oswald was willing to contact such people and organizations only by mail . Oswald was able to leave a paper trail at the direction of his handlers . Oswald's actions smacks of trying to build a cover for himself .
 Oswald would soon find himself working for two men who were stridently anti-Communist and anti-Castro . That's especially true when we consider that his best friend in Dallas was the staunchly anti-communist George DeMohrenschildt .
 Oswald’s notes for his “big reveal,” in which he admits hating Communism, are buried in the twenty-six Warren volumes . He could publicly proclaim only after success of his anti-Castro work, when he emerged from his deep undercover work to fame and
 Oswald was fired from his job at map firm on April 6, 1963 . Oswald moved to New Orleans on April 24, 1963, after being fired from map firm . Oswald had been living in New Orleans since 1963 .
 He left Marina in Dallas and went to live with his uncle Dutz Murret, a bookie for Carlos Marcello . He left his uncle in Dallas to live in the U.S. with his aunt .
 INS agent interviewed Oswald in the New Orleans jail before he moved to New Orleans . Oswald had been in jail before his move to the Crescent City jail .
 The INS agent was transferred away from New Orleans on April 1, 1963 . Oswald's interview had to have been in February or March and before he lost his job . Oswald was transferred to New Orleans in April .
 The INS agent didn't recall why Oswald was in jail, but the charge—if any —must have been minor, since no record of it was kept . No record of the charge was kept, but no record was kept of Oswald's jail time .
 Oswald pretended to be a Cuban national even though he couldn’t speak Spanish . Oswald, probably using a Hispanic-sounding alias, was probably using an alias . Oswald used an alias to get the interview with the FBI .
 Oswald would soon join the tiny pro-Castro organization known as the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . The group was targeted by the CIA for harassment and penetration since 1961 .
 Oswald ordered through the mail the cheap rifle and pistol he would later use to kill JFK and Officer Tippit . Oswald is accused of ordering the gun and rifle he was later accused of killing JFK . Oswald ordered the gun in the mail in early 1963 .
 Oswald had lived in Russia, but Oswald's actions made no sense . For any type of true believer, especially someone like Oswald who had lived with Russia . Oswald was the only true believer in the anti-Otheist movement .
 Oswald’s activities (and claimed activities) related to Communism and Marxism are consistent with someone building and maintaining a cover, like his childhood idol who inspired I Led Three Lives . However, here and throughout his life, all of Oswald's activities (including those of Oswald) are consistent
 Marcello’s private detective, Guy Banister, and pilot and investigator, David Ferrie. Marcella's pilot and private detective. Guy . Banister and David . Ferrie . Marcellar .
 Carlos Marcello admitted to Congressional investigators that he knew both men . Both men loom large in assassination literature, yet much of it ignores their connection to Carlos Marcelo, who admitted to knowing them .
 Ferrie had been an Eastern Airlines pilot who had known Oswald as a teenager . He helped supervise Oswald’s Civil Air Patrol unit .
 Ferrie is believed to have encouraged Oswald to join the Marines . There is also some evidence that Ferrie originally encouraged Oswald's interest in joining the army .
 By 1963 Ferrie had lost his job at Eastern Airlines because he had been accused of molesting a fifteen-year-old boy . Ferrie was accused of being molested by a boy in 1963 .
 Marcello admitted working with Ferrie directly on the two weekends prior to JFK’s assassination . Ferrie officially worked for the attorney, but Marcella admitted to working with him on the weekends before JFK's assassination .
 Marchetti said that his boss “ Helms stated that David Ferrie was a CIA agent” in the fall of 1963 . Helms said that Ferrie “was a CIA . agent’s job was to be a CIA. agent,” Marche
 Michael Kurtz, Deputy Chief of the New Orleans CIA Station Hunter Leake confirmed Ferrie’s 1963 CIA work to him . Ferrie worked for the CIA in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 Leake also confirmed that Guy Banister performed work for the CIA related to Cuba . Leake confirmed that Banister also performed work on behalf of the CIA in Cuba .
 Banister had many more, and more, more highly placed intelligence connections than his associate David Ferrie . Banister's connections were developed before both men began working for Carlos Marcello .
 The hard-drinking Banister was a former FBI Chief of Chicago in the early 1950s . He had been Assistant Superintendent of the New Orleans Police Department for two and a half years before being fired .
 Banister then opened a detective agency, though he focused more on intelligence work, strident anti-Communism, and white supremacist causes than any traditional private detective . Banister later opened a private detective agency and focused on intelligence .
 He maintained good relations with the FBI and Naval Intelligence, as well as the CIA . He took on work for the CIA, including taking on work on Cuba .
 Banister led his own group, the Anti-Communist League of the Caribbean, which was involved in a plot against Fidel Castro in December 1960 . Banister was also involved in the plot to kill Castro .
 Four months earlier, the CIA had considered Banister for a covert assignment providing cover for a sensitive CIA operation . Banister had been considered for a cover-up for the C[A—Mafia plots .
 Howard Hughes aide Robert Maheu had been Banister’s partner before Banister went to New Orleans . That job went instead to a Hughes aide, who only a few years earlier had been married to Banister, before he left for New Orleans.
 While in the FBI in the 1930s, Banister had even served on two cases with General Joseph Carroll . Carroll was heading the recently created Defense Intelligence Agency, which was supposed to oversee Naval Intelligence .
 On January 20, 1961, one of Banister’s organizations even bought trucks in New Orleans for an anti-Castro operation using the name “Oswald,” a safe alias since the real Oswald was still in the Soviet Union .
 Banister and Ferrie’s work on Cuban operations for the CIA continued into 1963, and by that summer Oswald was working for them . Oswald was the CIA's top operative in Cuba .
 In 1999 scholar and former Arizona Secretary of State Richard Mahoney published a book about John and Robert Kennedy . Mahoney gained special access to files at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library .
 Oswald gamered an unusual amount of TV, radio, and newspaper publicity for his phony one-man New Orleans chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Mahoney wrote that six witnesses saw Oswald with Ferrie or Banister in the summer 1963 .
 Kurtz added another three people to the list of witnesses who saw Ferrie and Banister together, including Deputy New Orleans CIA Chief Hunter Leake . Since that time, Kurtz has added three more witnesses to the case .
 Lee Oswald did small jobs for the CIA as well, according to Leake . Leake said that not only did Ferry and Banister work together but that Lee Oswald worked with the CIA . Lee Oswald also worked with Banister and Ferry .
 CIA Director Richard Helms was essentially the CIA’s highest operational officer in 1963 and later became CIA Director . Helms became the CIA Director in 1963 .
 What happened to the CIA’s extensive files in New Orleans about Oswald, Ferrie, and Banister is explained in a later chapter .
 Banister and Ferrie could have manipulated Oswald in a variety of ways . Banister, Ferrie and others may have manipulated him in various ways .
 He needed another intelligence assignment if he ever wanted to profit from a successful “big reveal,” after his long years of undercover work . And he needed another assignment if . He said he needed a new intelligence assignment .
 Congress was holding hearings about mail-order gun sales around the time Oswald ordered his guns through the mail . Oswald started his one-man New Orleans chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Oswald was in New Orleans at the time of the shooting .
 Banister may have initially told Oswald that ordering guns and joining Fair Play for Cuba could help those hearings . Oswald may have told Banister that joining the group could help him get the guns .
 At least nine people saw Ferrie and Banister together in New Orleans just months before JFK’s murder . It's also possible that they were helping to monitor Oswald for the CIA and Naval Intelligence .
 Someone was monitoring Oswald for Naval Intelligence, and doing so would put Banister and Ferrie in the perfect position to manipulate Oswald, who would think he was simply getting ready for his next intelligence assignment . Oswald would have thought he was merely getting ready to his next assignment .
 Ferrie and Banister could have been controlling Oswald to set him up as the fall guy for the murder of President Kennedy . In reality, though, they could be controlling Oswald .
 Oswald was told to order the rifle and pistol by Carlos Marcello, who had threatened to kill JFK to end RFK's prosecution of him . As we will see, just a few months before Oswald ordered the gun and rifle, Oswald had made a threat to JFK .
 An FBI informant heard Marcello’s threat and reported it to his contact at the Bureau . The FBI informant was in the area at the time of the threat .
 A House Select Committee looked into the informant’s account and concluded that the incident did occur . Though that report has yet to surface in any released FBI files, the committee concluded that it did .
 If Banister and Ferrie manipulated Oswald for Marcello, under the nose of the CIA and Naval Intelligence, this would resolve many of the lingering mysteries about Oswald’s unusual activities in 1963 .
 Oswald received a surprising amount of TV, radio, and newspaper publicity from a fight Oswald provoked with a Cuban exile leader on the streets of New Orleans in August of that year . Oswald was seen with Banister and Ferrie .
 Oswald secured the publicity Oswald secured seems highly unusual given how hard it was for left-wing groups to get any type of press coverage in the early 1960s in politically conservative states .
 When Oswald was arrested after the fight, an associate of Carlos Marcello bailed him out of jail . Oswald was later arrested and charged with assaulting a woman . Oswald's associate was arrested but was bailed out of prison .
 Oswald, Banister, and Ferrie used the address of a side entrance to Banister’s office building on some of the pro-Castro flyers . Oswald made a big show of distributing the flyers on the streets of New Orleans .
 The CIA had a media-propaganda expert who easily could have arranged such publicity for Oswald . Oswald could have used the CIA to get publicity for him .
 David Atlee Phillips was an expert in overthrowing Latin American governments for the CIA . Phillips was a good friend to CIA officer E Howard Hunt . Phillips is a friend of Hunt and a CIA officer .
 In fact, Guy Banister had met with Phillips a couple of years earlier about anti-Castro publicity . Phillips had also met with Banister, who had been critical of Castro .
 Phillips would also reportedly meet with Oswald and Cuban exile leader Antonio Veciana in Dallas in late August or early September to discuss killing Fidel Castro . Remarkably, Phillips also reportedly met with Oswald in August or September .
 Congressional investigator Gaeton Fonzi confirmed that meeting with Veciana . Veciana was interviewed by Veciana's research associate in an interview .
 Richard Helms was continuing the CIA—Mafia plots in 1963 without telling his own CIA Director , Robert Kennedy, or President Kennedy . Helms continued the plots without telling Robert Kennedy .
 Those plots included Marcello and Trafficante, as well as their confessed partner in JFK’s murder, Johnny Rosselli, who also visited Guy Banister that summer .
 Oswald’s unusual adventures in Mexico City can be explained in the same way . The Mexico City CIA Station Chief did missions for Washington that didn’t involve the station chief .
 Oswald spoke fluent Russian and poor Spanish, but after he visited the Russian and Cuban embassies in an attempt to get to Cuba, someone made calls in excellent Spanish and poor Russian that seemed designed to ensure that Oswald would not get permission to travel to Cuba .
 It was as if someone wanted him to stay in the U.S. so he could be of use to them later in the fall, he said .
 The Mexican Federal Police helped the CIA monitor phone surveillance of the Russian and Cuban embassies . The CIA monitored phone calls from the embassies of Russia and Cuba .
 The DFS was corrupt and involved in the same heroin network used by Trafficante and Marcello . However, the DFS is not the same network used in the heroin network as Trafficante . Trafficante's heroin network was also used by the same DFS .
 A CIA asset involved in the CIA—Mafia plots with Trafficante and Marcello had actually bugged a Communist embassy in Mexico City for the CIA not long before, so he would have known much about the monitoring and bugging of Communist embassies there . Trafficante was involved in
 Oswald's exact actions on the day of the assassination are detailed in Chapters 14 and 15 . Oswald’s exact actions were detailed in Chapter 14 and15 .
 Naval Intelligence staff in charge of monitoring secret surveillance reports on Oswald began destroying their files on him . Oswald's files were destroyed by the destruction of the files .
 My Naval Intelligence source was called back to his office in Washington and ordered to sanitize and destroy much of their Oswald surveillance file . The source was ordered to destroy most of the Oswald surveillance files .
 FBI memo from several months later says destruction continued until midday Sunday, November 24 . FBI memo: Destruction continued until November 24, and confirmation of that can be found in memo .
 The destruction of files ended after Washington received word that Oswald had been killed . However, the destruction ended when Washington received news that Oswald was killed .
 Since no trial lay ahead, the rest of the records wouldn’t have to be destroyed, just hidden from the prying eyes of other agencies . No trial was planned, so the records would be hidden from other agencies' eyes .
 Paul Hoch found indications in declassified government memos that there were more Naval Intelligence files on Oswald than were provided to the Warren Commission . Hoch has assisted several of the government's JFK investigations .
 He found references to three files as well as a “supplemental file” on Oswald . Oswald file was never explained or provided to any government committee .
 Jack Ruby murdered Oswald and it was clear there would be no trial . Naval Intelligence and Marine Intelligence conducted their own secret investigation of Oswald .
 To maintain secrecy, even within Naval Intelligence, they used the same men who had been compiling the ‘tight” surveillance of Oswald, including my confidential source . To maintain strict secrecy they used same men as the men who compiled the surveillance .
 The investigation began on November 24, 1963, immediately after Oswald’s death, and lasted for six weeks . Oswald was found dead at the scene of his assassination in November 1963 .
 Oswald had been under top-secret surveillance by Naval Intelligence . It's not surprising that the organization wanted to know how he could have been involved in JFK's murder .
 Even without a trial, if word ever leaked to the press or public about Oswald’s intelligence work or the tight surveillance, it would have been a public relations nightmare for military intelligence and for agencies such as the CIA that had assisted with the surveillance .
 Military intelligence leaders would have to be ready with as many facts as possible in case President Johnson or Congressional leaders called them to account . Military intelligence would have been ready to answer questions about the war .
 The military investigation was highly secret, even within Naval and Marine Intelligence circles . All of the investigators had to sign strict confidentiality agreements that threatened them with court-martial for any disclosure .
 No word leaked about the military investigation at the time, and the Warren Commission was never told about it . The Warren Commission never knew about the investigation .
 In 1978 the wife of a military navigator who had helped fly investigators to their destinations finally tipped off the House Select Committee on Assassinations about the secret military investigation of Oswald .
 The former Marine navigator testified to House Committee staff . He provided specific information about his former commanders, the size of the investigation force and their travel .
 Congressional staff tried to run down leads until the Committee’s term was almost over . Defense Department officials stonewalled them until the end of the House Committee's term was over .
 The first piece of official confirmation for the existence of the military investigation was provided only when the Committee’s efforts were ending . The investigation was conducted by the U.S. military .
 This confidential ex-Navy source was the son of an Admiral who, thanks to his father’s high position, had been assigned to a comfortable office job at a major naval base in the Pacific .
 While handling files, he noticed the report and, intrigued, read the entire file . He was intrigued by the report, and read it .
 He told me that the report was probably being kept so far from Washington to ensure that word of it didn’t leak . He said it probably was being kept away from Washington so far to ensure word of the report didn't leak .
 The conclusions meshed with off-the-record comments of U.S. officials who expressed doubts about the evidence against Oswald in private conversations, even as they publicly proclaimed his ironclad guilt . Oswald's conviction for the assassination was publicly proclaimed, but his guilt was publicly questioned .
 President Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover recorded a private conversation soon after the assassination . These comments came from the highest levels of government .
 Hoover pushed Oswald’s guilt to journalists, the public, and other officials . At the same time, Hoover was pushing Oswald's guilt to the public . Oswald was convicted of the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 Right after JFK's murder, Curry’s public statements had shown no such doubt . Hoover's public statements, like those of Curry, showed no doubt about his involvement .
 Curry admitted that he thought Oswald had been trained in interrogation techniques and resisting interrogation . But to himself at the time, and in public years later, he admitted to thinking Oswald was an agent .
 Evidence fails to support Warren Commission's most important claims about Oswald’s guilt, says author . Oswald's guilt is not proven to have been proven wrong by the Warren Commission, he says .
 Oswald had no getaway car (or even a driver’s license) and initially left by public transit bus . Oswald had only $13.87 in his pocket when he was arrested at the Texas Theatre . Oswald also had no driver's license or a getaway vehicle .
 Much compelling evidence, including testimony from the Warren Commission volumes, places him in the Depository’s lunchroom at the time of the shooting, near a pay phone, as if he was waiting to receive or make a call . In contrast, much compelling evidence shows he was in
 Oswald’s actions at the Texas Theatre, where he was arrested, smack of someone trying to locate a prearranged contact . The evidence and eyewitness testimony against Oswald in Dealey Plaza and Tippit case are very problematic and far from conclusive .
 Swaldald was to meet his contact at the Texas Theatre, a mobster associate of Marcello and Trafficante . In fact, John Martino told a friend that “Oswald’s contact’d be meeting at the theater,” he said
 Oswald in isolation as a suspect in JFK's murder, he can appear unusual . Oswald's behavior in isolation can be seen as unusual, says author .
 Thomas Vallee, a seemingly troubled former Marine, was arrested on November 2, 1963, on the morning of JFK’s planned motorcade through Chicago . Vallee was arrested in Chicago on the same day as JFK's motorcade was planned .
 The motorcade was suddenly called off because four possible assassins were at large . The Secret Service had learned that four possible assassinations were possible . Two phony excuses were hurriedly given, with two different phony excuses .
 When arrested, Vallee had “an M-1 rifle, a handgun, and 3,000 rounds of ammunition in his car,” the House Select Committee says . Vallee was arrested on suspicion of armed robbery .
 In interesting parallels with Oswald in Dallas, Vallee had recently taken a job in a warehouse overlooking JFK’s Chicago motorcade route . Vallee also had contact with a CIA-supported anti-Castro Cuban exile group, as had Oswald earlier in 1963 .
 Oswald tried to kill JFK in Tampa on November 18, 1963 . He was a young man living in the city at the time of the assassination . Lopez was also a young Gilberto Lopez .
 On the day of JFK’s Tampa motorcade, Lopez was working not far from the motorcade route .
 Oswald and Lopez were about the same age and had the same general physical description . Oswald was one of the two men who died in a car crash .
 In all, government files and sources show there were nineteen parallels between the two men, including having highly unusual ties to the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, getting into fistfights over seeming pro-Castro sympathies .
 Lopez reportedly left Trafficante's home base and reportedly went to Dallas, which was in Marcello's territory . The assassination attempt to kill JFK was called off and JFK successfully completed his motorcade .
 Lopez would be secretly investigated for JFK’s murder by both the FBI and the CIA . Their reports on Lopez were provided to Naval Intelligence . Lopez was the subject of a secret investigation into JFK's murder .
 Oswald was apparently positioned to “take the fall” in either of those cities, just like Oswald in Dallas . Had JFK been killed on November 2, 1963, in Chicago (home of Rosselli's mob family) or in Trafficante’s base of Tampa (
 Aside from someone to take the blame, the other personnel were mostly the same . Regardless of which city would be the scene of the assassination, the personnel were the same, regardless of the location .
 Oswald has been a mystery to many on all sides of the JFK assassination controversy . When looked at through the lens of Carlos Marcello and his associates, his documented actions finally make sense .
 Oswald worked for strident anti-Castro anti-Communists like Banister and Ferrie . The only viable explanation is that he was a U.S. intelligence asset . Oswald was friends with George DeMohrenschildt .
 In that role, he was one of several U.S. intelligence assets sent to the Soviet Union to come back to America with a Russian wife . He was sent back to the United States with his wife .
 Banister and Ferrie began to manipulate Oswald for nonintelligence reasons . Meanwhile, intelligence assets Banister, Ferrie and Banister were manipulating Oswald . Oswald was killed in August 1945 . Oswald died in August 1944 .
 Both were working for Carlos Marcello, who was planning to kill President Kennedy to end Robert Kennedy’s war against the godfather and his mob allies . Both were also working for the mob boss, Carlos .
 Oswald would have been focused on what he thought was his impending mission to Cuba . Oswald would be focused on his “big reveal,” when he would emerge from years of undercover work .
 He built a pro-Castro, pro-Communist image in public for his intelligence work . Yet his actions would make him look instantly guilty if he were ever accused of murdering the President .
 On the day an investigator for the House Select Committee on Assassinations was trying to interview him, DeMohrenschildt committed suicide . He committed suicide the day he was interviewed by the committee .
 Charles Nicolettim worked with Johnny Rosselli on the CIA—Mafia plots in 1963 . He was alleged to have been in Dallas when JFK was assassinated . That same day he was murdered, gangland style .
 He had also been scheduled to talk to investigators for the House Select Committee . He was scheduled to appear before the House of Representatives .
 No one in earshot as he hurled curses at the long-dead Kennedy brothers . Aside from those two, no one was in earsot .
 Marcello had done that before, but this time he went further than usual in his anti-Kennedy tirade . He had trusted the two men to talk to him, but he did not trust them .
 First they’d hauled him before Congress, then briefly deported him to Central America . Finally they had him prosecuted in New Orleans, the center of his multistate criminal empire .
 Carlos Marcello had become America’s most powerful godfather by being not just ruthless but also cautious and discreet . He paused his diatribe after his remarkable confession . The confession was not the first of many Americans to confess to the crime .
 Marcello turned away from them and simply walked off . Realizing that even though he trusted his two associates he had crossed a line, he crossed the line .
 After Marcello left, his deadly admission hung in the air between the two stunned men who’d heard it . The two men were stunned by the admission .
 They knew Marcello well enough to know what could happen to them if they ever revealed what they’d just heard . They knew well enough that they knew what could be happening to them . They were not afraid to reveal the truth .
 Jack Van Laningham walked away as well, leaving the prison yard’s gazebo to ponder the gravity of his situation . With that, he walked away, leaving him alone .
 Van Laningham was Marcello’s cellmate at the Texarkana Federal Correction Institute . Both men were incarcerated at the time of their deaths .
 Marcello had come to regard Van Laningham almost like a son, as someone he protected and to whom he dispensed fatherly advice . The two men had grown close, and Marcella had come close to him . He said: 'Marcello was someone he
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded in 1979 that Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante had the “motive, means, and opportunity to assassinate President Kennedy” The matter was referred to the Justice Department for further investigation in 1979 .
 It appeared to the press and public that nothing was done with the Committee’s referral and that Justice. Justice officially closed the matter in 1988 .
 A major, extremely secret undercover investigation of Marcello—code-named CAMTEX—went forward from 1985 to 1986 . However, we now know that it did go forward . The major undercover investigation was code-named "CAMTEX" and "TEXas"
 The tapes include Marcello describing how he committed the crime, including his pre-assassination meetings with Lee Oswald and Jack Ruby . The tapes also include details of his meetings with Jack Ruby and Lee Oswald .
 The Review Board created by the JFK Act was set to expire in September 1998 . The FBI waited until near the end to dump almost a hundred pages of CAMTEX files on the Board staff .
 It's doubtful that any Review Board members saw Marcello’s confession files or that any of the Review Board's staff saw the files . The Review Board was overwhelmed by even larger document dumping by the CIA .
 In 2006, after months of intense effort and with the help of National Archives staff, I located the main trove of CAMTEX files given to the Review Board . The files were almost completely uncensored .
 The public first heard about Marcello’s JFK confession files in TV news and newspaper coverage accompanying the 2008 publication of the hardcover of Legacy of Secrecy .
 In 2009 I partnered with a division of NBC News for a Discovery Channel special (Did the Mob Kill JFK?), which also involved locating Jack Van Laningham, who had maintained a very low profile since his release from prison .
 This book contains startling new revelations about Marcello’s confession and CAMTEX from declassified FBI files, from former Bureau informant Jack Van Laningham, and from key FBI personnel involved in the undercover operation . The book is available on Amazon.com .
 Since 2009 I have conducted numerous exclusive in-person and phone interviews with Van Laningham, adding to and clarifying important parts of the story told by the FBI files .
 The Committee’s findings, other government investigators, and noted historians and journalists buttress almost all the key points of the new CAMTEX revelations .
 CAMTEX revelations about Marcello are extremely reliable . Credibility is always important in evaluating information about JFK’s assassination .
 All the CAMTEX files referenced in this book came from FBI files at the National Archives . All had been officially declassified .
 CAMTEX involved several FBI agents and supervisors, as well as court-authorized wiretaps on Marcello . CAMT EXCLUSIVE: FBI agents, supervisors, supervisors and supervisors .
 The dangerous undercover operation was fully authorized by the FBI and Justice Department . The operation is fully authorized, according to the FBI .
 CAMTEX lasted from 1985 to early 1987 and targeted not only Carlos Marcello but also members of his family, including his brother Joe . Marcellos' brother Joe was the subject of CAMEX .
 The operation succeeded in persuading a Marcello family member to pay two bribes to an undercover FBI agent . An undercover agent posed as a crooked friend of Van Laningham and posed as an associate of the family . The operation was successful in convincing a family member of the Marcell
 Jack Van Laningham's comments can be verified by comparing his comments now with his extensive remarks contained in FBI files from the 1980s . As for Jack, he retains an excellent memory of those events, which can be confirmed by comparing the remarks now with the FBI files .
 When first interviewed by NBC and me, Van Laningham hadn’t seen his own notes in over two decades . He hadn't seen his notes, now in the FBI files, in more than 20 years . The notes are now in FBI files .
 Van Laningham's unaided recollection was very much in sync with what he had typed up all those years before . In fact, he had been interviewed extensively before giving him copies of those notes .
 Van Laningham took and passed an FBI polygraph test regarding Marcello’s JFK confession . In addition, after his release from prison in early 1989, he also passed and passed a polygraph .
 Until shortly before meeting Marcello in prison, Van Laningham was a successful family man . He had no criminal record until shortly before he met the convicted killer .
 In 1985 Jack Van Laningham was fifty-six years old and had spent much of his adult life as a civilian air traffic controller for the U.S. Air Force .
 In the 1970s, he’d switched to selling cars in California and was successful at that as well, supporting his English-born wife and three children . He’s now retired from the auto industry in California .
 Jack's wife was a troubled alcoholic who left him in the early 1980s . Jack’s wife was an alcoholic and left Jack in the 1980s.
 By the time he hit bottom, he was regularly drinking heavily and living in a small motel in Tampa, Florida .
 When his money ran out, he committed his first—and only—crime during a drinking spree, robbing a small bank branch using a bag of dirty laundry and a TV remote control . He told the tellers were a bomb and a detonator, which he told them .
 Van Laningham got away scot-free but was soon overcome with guilt that he called the authorities to turn himself in . He turned himself in after he was overcome by guilt and called the police .
 FBI agent says they would have never found Jack on their own . Jack was arrested in Tampa .
 Van Laningham was sentenced to eight years in federal prison for armed robbery . He wound up at the federal prison in Texarkana to serve his sentence .
 Marcello was one of the few lucky inmates who shared a two-man cell . Van Laningham wrote that while he shared “a crowded dorm with a hundred other guys,” he shared a cell .
 Marcello’s “clothes were new and pressed and his shoes were shined.” In addition, “His shoes were . shined and his clothes were new, pressed and he was shined,” says the judge . Marcella�
 Van Laningham had no idea who Marcello really was and knew nothing about his criminal empire . He knew nothing of the criminal empire and had nothing to do with it .
 In the late 1970s the FBI and Justice Department had targeted Marcello as part of a larger undercover operation codenamed BRILAB . The operation grew out of investigations related to several Watergate figures .
 The BRILAB charges were obtained with the help of an earlier Bureau informant, a business associate of Marcello named Joe Hauser . Hauser was an associate of the businessman who allegedly conspired to kill his wife .
 Hauser wore a wire for the FBI when he met with Marcello in the late 1970s, a major accomplishment since the Bureau hadn't wiretapped or bugged him in the 1950s, 1960s, or most of the 1970s . The FBI hadn’t wiret
 The godfather was initially incarcerated at the United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners in Springfield, Missouri . He is now serving time in federal prison .
 Marcello spent a comfortable and unusually short sentence there, serving only five months when he was supposed to serve two years . Twelve years earlier he had spent an unusually short prison sentence there . Marcella had spent only 5 months in prison .
 After his original stay in the early 1970s, Marcello emerged in improved physical condition and ready for his most prosperous decade of crime .
 After a year at Springfield, he was moved to the far more secure and harsher level-three federal prison at Texarkana . He is now in a more secure state of Texas .
 Officials suspected that Marcello was continuing to run his vast criminal empire from prison . The move may have been occasioned because officials suspected he was continuing his criminal empire . Officials suspected he would continue to run from prison from jail .
 Carlos Marcello still made the major decisions for a domain that included all of Louisiana, much of Texas, and the lower half of Mississippi . He had left his younger brother Joe Marcelo nominally in charge of the domain .
 Marcello had built his power by forging alliances with surrounding Mafia godfathers, such as the boss of the Kansas City mob and Trafficante in Florida . In addition to forging alliances, he had also forged alliances with other mob bosses .
 Marcello’s recent trials and imprisonment had no doubt taken a financial toll on his huge enterprise, which had grossed $2 billion a year at its peak but was still massive . The changing nature of organized crime in the 1980s had taken its toll .
 Jack Van Laningham didn’t know any of that when he first saw Marcello in prison, since the godfather was not then as well known as he is today . The godfather wasn't then as famous as he was today .
 In 1985 there had as yet been no books devoted to—or TV documentaries about— Marcello . In 1985, there were no books or TV documentaries on Marcella .
 The media focused on high-profile mob figures such as John Gotti . Instead of focusing on mob figures like Gotti, the media focused instead of mob figures .
 Marcello was a figure to be reckoned with, even in prison, says Van Laningham . He says his observations and other inmates' actions quickly made it clear to him that he was a leader in prison .
 Marcello held sway over work assignments and who got the coveted two-man cells instead of being placed in the massive dorms . He received special gourmet food, wore the aforementioned pressed clothes, and even wore pressed clothes .
 In addition, Van Laningham, like Marcello, was much older than the typical inmates at Texarkana, many of whom were in their twenties . Many of the inmates at the prison are in their 20s .
 In fact, Van Laningham was the second-oldest inmate at Texarkana . Marcello, 19 years older, was the oldest .
 Van Laningham just happened to sit next to Marcello in March 1985 . Marcella was the star of the film "The Body of the Marcellanese"
 Marcello was holding a newspaper and asked if Van Laningham had heard anything about the trial of a political figure then in the news . He asked if he had heard any of the trials of political figures then in news . The man replied: 'Yes'
 Marcello had Van Laningham read him the newspaper each day . The two men soon struck up an acquaintance, and not long after, they struck up a friendship . VanLaningham was the first to read the newspaper .
 Marcello’s age and relative lack of formal education, reading was difficult for the godfather . The godfather was unable to read because of his age and lack of education .
 Marcello was interested not only in news about the political figure’s trial but also in reports of criminal activity from other parts of his empire . He was also interested in news of the trial and reports of other criminal activity .
 Since he was closer to Van Laningham than any other inmate, they had similar tastes in things like music . The inmate was closer in age to him than other inmates .
 Like Marcello, Van Laningham was part of the “big band’s generation . Neither was a fan of the rock music preferred by the other inmates .
 Radio shows, movie palaces, World War II, and a dozen car companies were no longer in business by the 1980s . Instead they remembered—and could reminisce with each other about —radio shows, movies palaces and WWII .
 The first crime both men had been arrested for was bank robbery . Marcello admired the courage of anyone willing to rob a bank with nothing but a bag of laundry and a TV remote .
 Van Laningham lived in Tampa, the city run by Marcello’s closest mob ally, Trafficante . Unlike the other inmates, he wasn’t constantly trying to curry favor with the mob boss . Also in his favor were that he had lived in the city
 Marcello felt he could trust Van Laningham because his power was such that he could show Jack his own prison file, which had the details of Jack’s arrest and personal history . Finally, Marcella was able to trust Marcellanham because he felt he
 Not all the prison staff had been corrupted by Marcello’s influence, one said . One reported the growing closeness of the pair to an official at the prison . Van Laningham was convicted of murder in 2008 of attempted murder in 2009 .
 FBI Unit Director at FBI headquarters in Washington, Texas, learned of the incident . FBI's Texas territory included Texas, which was home to the FBI . FBI Director Thomas Kimmel, a member of the Texas Rangers, sent the tip .
 I was the first to interview Thomas Kimmel about CAMTEX, and he confirmed and illuminated much of the material in the FBI file . Kimmel was also the first person to interview Kimmel . Kimmel: "CAMTEX" is a program that was used by the CIA, FBI,
 FBI's Labor Racketeering Section would eventually head the FBI’s labor racketeering section . He had a special interest in organized crime and would eventually be head of the Labor Department .
 Kimmel's territory included three prisons, and he was well aware of Marcello’s presence at Texarkana . Kimmel was also aware of the fact that the House Select Committee had focused attention on his possible role in JFK's murder .
 Kimmel knew he couldn’t sell FBI headquarters on an investigation focused on the assassination . The FBI had publicly maintained since soon after JFK’s shooting that there was no conspiracy . Kimmel: "There is no conspiracy"
 Kimmel proposed to his superiors an operation designed to see how “Marcello was still running” his organization from prison . Kimmel proposed the operation, something the godfather had done during his brief 1971 incarceration . Kimmel: The operation was designed to look at how ‘Marcell
 Kimmel became “the driving force behind” the new CAMTEX operation targeting Marcello at Texarkana . FBI headquarters approved, and Kimmel became the driving force for the operation .
 Kimmel learned of Van Laningham’s friendship with Marcello when he was already looking for a way to get to the godfather . Kimmel learned about the friendship when he learned of the friendship of the man he was looking for .
 Kimmel could use Van Laningham to pierce the normally impenetrable wall of secrecy that surrounds the hypercautious godfather . Kimmel could also use the character to pry into the story .
 Kimmel is the first FBI veteran ever interviewed about CAMTEX and Marcello’s confession . Kimmel was willing to go on record for several reasons . Kimmel says he's willing to talk about the confession and the confession to the FBI .
 Kimmel agreed to discuss what was in the uncensored files . Kimmel also agreed to talk about the contents of the unedited files . The files were already released .
 After all, the daring CAMTEX operation had been successful in some ways, yet the public, Congress, and even most in the Bureau knew nothing about it . After all the public knew nothing of the operation, the public and Congress knew nothing .
 Kimmel had seen how excessive secrecy could actually hinder national security . Kimmel: "Excessive secrecy can be harmful to national security"
 In 1999, two years prior to the arrest of Robert Hanssen, an FBI agent and Soviet spy, Kimel tried to alert FBI Director Louis Freeh about a possible “mole” in the Bureau .
 Kimmel used a “terrific” FBI agent based in Texas as one of those to handle the operation for him locally . Kimmel used the agent to help him get the message . Kimmel says he used the FBI to help with the operation .
 FBI agent Tom Kirk was assigned to work undercover with Jack Van Laningham . Completing the team was an older FBI agent, Tom Kirk, who worked undercover .
 Jack was reluctant to speak to him, but he was told that on visiting day at the prison, someone would talk with him . He was reluctant, but was told he would be allowed to speak again .
 FBI agent posed as an old friend of Van Laningham’s. When visiting day came around, FBI agent Tom Kirk posed as a friend of the victim . Kirk was the FBI agent who posed as the friend .
 He pretended to be a shady businessman looking for opportunities, even if they weren’t legal . He pretended he was looking to find opportunities for opportunities .
 When Kirk first approached him, Van Laningham was initially very apprehensive about the operation . He said: "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm looking forward to it"
 The book, about organized crime, had fewer than a dozen pages about Carlos Marcello, since only a few books at that time had even that much information about the godfather . The book was about organizing crime, but it had a few pages about the Godfather .
 Jack “read up on Carlos Marcello all the things that this man had done. After receiving it, Jack ‘read up’ on all of the things he had done, Jack said . After receiving the letter, Jack "read up"
 He had raped the people of Louisiana, he had bribed and cheated and if that did not work, he resorted to murder, he said . He said: "He had raped and bribed, cheated and . If that failed to work, [Louisiana's] people, he
 Van Laningham revealed that “I read pages of the book to Marcello and he would listen, completely engrossed’s book,” he said .
 Jack Van Laningham quotes from his declassified FBI file come from letters and summaries soon after the events described that he either wrote by hand or later had a trusted inmate type up for him . These and many other quotes come directly from the FBI file, from letters, summaries
 The information in the book Kirk sent had the effect Kimmel hoped for . Kimmel had hoped that the information would help him get the information he hoped for.
 Van Laningham “was convinced that no matter what the FBI said, I must be careful or I would be dead," he says . He says he was convinced that "no matter what FBI said" or he would be killed .
 Van Laningham would eventually be proven right, but that was still several years in the future . He would eventually prove that he was wrong, but it was several years later .
 Once Van Laningham became an FBI informant, he continued growing closer to Marcello . "Marcello talked more and more to Jack about his array of criminal activities," he says .
 FBI files show that Van Laningham and Kirk tried to draw Marcello into a series of illegal business schemes based on ongoing criminal operations . FBI files also show that they tried to lure Marcella into an illegal business scheme . Jack and Jack were both killed in a shootout in
 Marcello didn’t go for any of the schemes for various reasons, including the innate caution he had developed during his more than fifty years of successful criminal activity .
 Jack wrote that the FBI asked the Unit Manager to move Van Laningham into Marcello’s room with him . Jack wrote: “The Unit Manager asked the FBI to move me into the room with [Marcello] with him.”
 Van Laningham was soon told by Kirk that reports about his work were going all the way up to the U.S. Attorney General, Edwin Meese . Meese was the United States Attorney General .
 Marcello began opening up even more to Jack, giving him fatherly advice while revealing more of his crimes and even telling Jack his hopes for the future . To fill the long hours in their cell, he began giving Jack advice and revealing his crimes .
 In contrast to the shady deals Kirk had proposed to Marcello, Van Laningham learned that “Marcello was really interested in getting out of prison,” he said .
 The new CAMTEX plan was to get Marcello to pay a bribe to Kirk to get to a nicer and less-secure level-two prison and then another bribe to get a level-one “country club” prison .
 The hope was that either Marcello, facing essentially a life sentence, or an associate would ‘flip’ at that point and start providing information to the FBI in return for reduced or dropped charges . The hope is that either a family member, or a friend, would
 FBI agents would also learn how Marcello communicated with his subordinates . The FBI would learn how he communicated with subordinates in the case .
 Kirk told Van Laningham “he was going to report to his boss and try for a wiretap of the prison” cell that Marcello shared with Jack. Jack. Kirk . Kirk told Kirk that he was . going to try to . report to . his boss
 Van Laningham was told that “the Unit phone in the hall would be bugged” and more importantly “that I would have a bug in the room that I shared with Marcello.” “I would have to have a bugged in the
 I bought the radio and said that he would have to take it away to see if it was legal for me to have. I bought it, he said . I told him that he had to take the radio away from him to check if he could have it legally .
 I called Kirk and he told me that the bug was being installed in the radio and it would be returned when they were finished . Kirk said it was being returned to the radio when they finished installing it .
 On the 17th of September brought the radio back and told me that I could have it . I thought to myself, here I am in this little room with the head of the Mafia from New Orleans, with a radio with a bug inside .
 The Marcello bugging operation yielded “hundreds of hours” of tapes, Kimmel confirmed . Van Laningham wrote at the time—and told NBC News for the Discovery Channel—that the bugging . Kimmel confirmed Kimmel confirmed that the tapes were made .
 Kimmel told me that while the FBI listened to every tape, they would transcribe a tape only if Marcello mentioned something of interest . Kimmel said the FBI would listen to all tapes and transcribe them only if they were relevant . Kimmel: "The FBI will listen to Marcell
 Another CAMTEX FBI agent said he was the one who actually listened to every secretly recorded tape . FBI agent also listened to all secretly recorded tapes .
 Marcello continued to grow closer to Van Laningham . Even as their private conversations were being recorded, he grew closer to the man .
 Marcello shared intimate details of his personal life, from his many girlfriends and mistresses to details about his family . He also revealed details about the family of his wife and children .
 The godfather also got well-fitting clothes, avoided bad work assignments, and gained protection from the other inmates, including those who saw him .
 Marcello even dispensed fatherly advice to Van Laningham about his future outside of prison . The actor even gave advice on how to deal with his prison sentence .
 Van Laningham grew to like some aspects of Marcello’s personality . For all those reasons, he liked some of those traits .
 Jack heard Carlos Marcello's chilling confession to JFK’s assassination . Jack was shocked when he heard Carlos Marcello confessing to the crime . Jack's life turned around when he learned Marcella's confession .
 Marcello had come to trust Jack, but he soon learned how deadly the godfather could be . Jack was shocked to discover that he had come under the influence of his godfather . Jack and Marcella were reunited at the end of the series .
 Kimmel was Commander of the United States Naval Base at Pearl Harbor when it was attacked on December 7, 1941 . Kimmel was the commander of the U.S. Naval Base when the attack occurred .
 Admiral Kimmel was scapegoated for the disaster, which was the subject of excessive government secrecy at the time and for many decades afterward . Kimmel's death was the result of excessive secrecy, which led to the death of Kimmel .
 He ruled his empire without challenge from the late 1940s to the early 1980s, a remarkable tenure for such a deadly profession . He ruled without challenge until the 1980s .
 A close look at Marcello's early life shows how he developed the confidence needed to order JFK’s assassination and how he gained the experience to get away with it .
 Marcello wasn’t like Mafia chiefs in other cities, because the history of his mob ‘family’ was very different . The history of the mob “family” in New York City is very different, he says . He says, "Marcello
 The New Orleans Mafia is the oldest Mafia family in the United States, having begun in the 1860s . The family is based in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 The New Orleans Mafia was one of the few mob families to conduct hits on government officials . The only others were Trafficante’s Tampa mob and the Chicago Mafia, both allies of Marcello in drug trafficking .
 In the 1800s, New Orleans was a favored destination for immigrants from Sicily, the birthplace of the Mafia, because the climates of the two regions were so similar . New Orleans became a favored American destination after the Civil War .
 Mob hit men shot the city’s Police Chief, David Hennessey, using a shotgun and a revolver . One hundred was also the number of members in the New Orleans Mafia by October 15, 1890 .
 He died the following day, and though nineteen mobsters were indicted for the hit, all were acquitted thanks to witness intimidation and bribed jurors . The mobster was found guilty of the hit .
 In response to Hennessey’s assassination and the resulting acquittals, the public rioted and killed eleven of the Mafia men . The public killed 11 of them in the riots .
 Within two years, the New Orleans Mafia had fully recovered and was stronger than ever . The New Orleans mafia is still strong and thriving .
 Carolla served only two years in federal prison for the crime . He emerged to continue heading the organization into the 1930s and mid-1940s . Carolla was convicted of the crime and emerged to lead the organization .
 Carlos Marcello was born Calogero Minacore on February 6, 1910, in Tunisia . He was the son of a Sicilian mother who soon joined her husband in New Orleans . He is credited with saving the lives of many in the United States .
 Carlos dropped out of school at age 14 to deliver vegetables to a New Orleans market controlled by the Mafia . Carlos helped his large family of six brothers and two sisters deliver vegetables from the family’s farm .
 Carlos soon saw crime as a greater opportunity than farming . At age nineteen he and three friends robbed a bank of $7,000 . Carlos soon became involved in crime .
 After they were caught and forced to return the money, all the charges were dropped .
 Marcello quickly learned that it was better to have others commit his crimes, so he had two teenagers rob a grocery store . He had to have the teens rob a store .
 Marcello was planning a follow-up crime with the two teens . The teens were arrested after they were arrested for another robbery .
 One of the victims told the police everything, and the police also arrested Marcello . One of them told the authorities everything, including the police .
 In the future, Marcello would come to rely on only close family members and associates who could be trusted not to talk . The former drug dealer would rely on close family and associates .
 He was sentenced to nine to twelve years in prison in 1930 . He began serving in May 1930 when he was just twenty .
 Marcello was pardoned after only four years in prison . He was sentenced to life in prison for four years . He is still serving a life sentence .
 Marcello owns or controls dozens of bars, clubs, and restaurants in cities ranging from New Orleans to Dallas . He would secretly control even gay bars and Jack Ruby's Carousel Club .
 The following year, in 1936, Marcello officially joined the New Orleans Mafia . He married the daughter of one of Sam Carolla’s underbosses .
 Marcello was arrested in 2010 for selling marijuana from his bar . Less than two years later, he was arrested for selling 23 pounds of marijuana .
 He was sentenced to a year anda day and ordered to pay a fine of $76,830 . But thanks to the mob’s influence, he paid only $400 and was released after nine months .
 In the future, Marcello would leave the actual trafficking of drugs to others to insulate himself from risk of arrest . He would be leaving the actual drug trafficking to others .
 After his release, Marcello focused on a music company he owned with one of his brothers .
 It was just a front for putting their jukeboxes and pinball machines in bars, restaurants, and clubs in the cities of Gretna and Algiers, just outside New Orleans .
 Any owners who didn’t want Marcello’s machines were dealt with brutally . Any owners didn't want his machines would have been dealt with .
 Carolla ordered Marcello to get a fourth of the machines into New Orleans’s west side . Carolla also ordered a fourth machine into the west side of the city .
 Marcello would keep twothirds of the money while Costello got one-third . Costello would keep one third of the cash .
 The deal was incredibly profitable for both thanks to Marcello’s fearsome reputation among bar and club owners . The deal is incredibly profitable thanks to his reputation as a bar owner and club owner .
 At this time Marcello made his first steps at large-scale bribery of public officials . Marcella made his . first steps . at this time . At this . time .
 He later boasted that he gave the Gretna Police Chief “$50,000 in cash every few months,” as well as smaller bribes to lower-level police .
 Marcello was so efficient that Costello and Meyer Lansky decided to build a plush gambling casino called the Beverly Country Club near New Orleans . He was a 12. percent partner in the casino's development .
 The club opened in 1945 and soon featured top nightclub acts, including Jimmy Durante . The club was founded in 1945 .
 Marcello was soon managing not only the club but all of Costello’s gambling operations in the New Orleans area . He managed to take over the club from Costello and manage his gambling operations .
 Carlos Marcello could rely on his violent reputation to keep his men in line . He was known for his reputation as a hard-working businessman . He has been in prison since 2003 .
 One victim was a hoodlum who used the names Constantine Masotto and Thomas Siracusa . The victim was also known as a hoolum known as Constantine Masotto Masotto .
 In 1943 Marcello personally helped torture and murder Siracusa in semipublic fashion at the Willswood Tavern, a rustic restaurant just outside New Orleans owned by his family . In 1943 he sent a message to mobsters, business owners, and law enforcement .
 Davis briefly mentioned the torture/murder in his 1989 biography of Marcello in his landmark 1989 biography . Davis is a key source for information about the torture in this chapter .
 FBI files reveal eyewitness account from a woman who had been dining at the restaurant that evening . She was dining at a restaurant in New York City when she was killed .
 She refused to testify in court and requested that the FBI not identify her . Twenty-four years later, when she finally told the FBI what she had seen, she was still afraid .
 When “Siracusa walked . . . back into the kitchen,” Marcello and three other men “immediately” followed him . Marcella and three others followed him. When ‘Siracus walked . back . into the . kitchen,
 One of Marcello’s men “was holding a snub-nose revolver which was pressed against Siracusa's temple.” One of his men was holding a . snub nosed revolver which . was pressed on Siracus’ temple,
 She was sent “to see Sheriff Clancy .. . and told him what she had seen and that she was scared,” she said . She was then sent to see the sheriff and said she had been scared .
 Sheriff Clancy told her that if she kept her mouth shut, she would not get hurt . Sheriff Clancy said she would get hurt if she didn't talk .
 She later went to see Captain at his home told her to keep her mouth shut about what she had told him, as they would kill her . She later told him to keep his mouth shut, and he told her not to do so .
 Siracusa "had been beaten to death with rubber hoses by Carlos Marcello and an accomplice," a report said . That report said that Siracuse “had been beat to death . with rubber . hoses’s report said he was killed by Mar
 Anyone who displeased, disobeyed, or withheld money from crime boss Marcello’s organization was targeted . The crime boss's murder and body dumping became standard retaliation for anyone who displeases or disobeyed him .
 Word of Marcello’s murder of Siracusa spread throughout the criminal underworld and beyond, to those who did business with him and to all levels of law enforcement, helping to keep all of them in line . Word of the murder spread to those involved in it spread throughout
 The mob boss later kept his hands technically clean by relying on his men and professionals to take care of the actual murders . That use of fear and corruption was a template for many of Marcello’s future crimes .
 Carlos Marcello could also be extremely personable with family, friends, and business associates . At the same time, he could be extremely polite with family and friends .
 Given the many murders for which he was responsible, it's tempting to say that Marcello combined the traits of both a sociopath and a psychopath . The killer was convicted of multiple murders in the 1980s .
 Marcello was simply like a great white shark, which must keep swimming forward or die . However, a better analogy might be that he was like a shark, it is not a shark who must keep moving forward .
 Jack Van Laningham later characterized Marcello by saying, “more cruel and vicious egomaniac I have never met.” Marcella was a “cruel, vicious and cruel eomaniac’s”
 Marcello “seemed to want to win all the time, even if he had to cheat,” he said . He added that this impulse applied even to the friendly games of gin rummy they played in prison .
 Marcello's killing may simply have been part of winning, of always moving ahead . So he may have been able to do so without killing himself, he says .
 The Mafia boss didn't achieve his position in the Mafia by inheriting it from his father, as had his friend Santo Trafficante . After all, he hadn't inherited his position from his friend, but had his father's .
 Marcello had to earn his own power and then keep earning it to fend off potential rivals and mob bosses from other areas . Instead of earning his power, he had to work hard to earn it back .
 As Marcello gained experience, he also became better at avoiding prosecution . As he grew older, he was able to avoid prosecution . He has since become a better lawyer and lawyer .
 John H Davis points out that in the late 1930s and early 1940s, “Carlos had been charged with two more assaults and robberies, violation of the federal Internal Revenue laws, assault with intent to kill a New Orleans police officer, sale of narcotics, and armed assault of
 The top Mafia figure of the 1930s had been Charles "Lucky" Luciano . Luciano left Costello temporarily in charge while Luciano was in prison . Costello was later in charge .
 Marcello was chosen to take over the Mafia in Louisiana in 1947 . Sam Carolla was slated for deportation back to Sicily in May 1947 . Costello and the other high-ranking mob bosses clearly liked what they saw in Carlos Marcelli .
 Marcello was to be Carolla’s “de facto successor,” since Carolla would still technically be the local godfather . Carolla still technically is Carolla's godfather, but he is still technically Carolla is the local Godfather . Marcell
 Marcello continued to expand his power and contacts . But with the same merciless determination that had taken him that far, he continued to grow his power .
 Within a few years, he was indeed godfather of a rapidly expanding empire . He was indeed Godfather of an empire that grew rapidly .
 Marcello became more prominent on the national Mafia scene when “Costello mob financier and adviser Meyer Lansky agreed to establish a national underworld communications center in New Orleans,” Davis says .
 Marcello became more powerful, wealthier, and more influential in the Mafia —and in Louisiana politics —with each passing year . He became more influential, wealthier and more powerful in the mafia .
 At that time, officials ranging from U.S. Attorney General Howard McGrath to FBI Director J Edgar Hoover expressed skepticism that the Mafia even existed .
 Tennessee Democratic Senator Estes Kefauver knew the Mafia was a very real threat . In 1950, as Chairman of the Special Committee to Investigate Organized Crime in Interstate Commerce, he began a well-publicized investigation .
 Kefauver called Marcello “the evil genius of organized crime in New Orleans’s own turf” He also called Frank Costello “a member of the mafia,” and held hearings on his own turf in New York .
 Kefauver possibly singled out Marcello because of New Orleans’s long-standing reputation for vice . He may have been singled out because of a muckraking newspaper columnist Drew Pearson . Pearson described the low-public-profile man as “the crime cz
 Carlos Marcello was forced to appear before Senator Kefauver’s hearings in New Orleans in 1951 . On January 25, 1951, he was forced into testifying before the New Orleans hearings .
 Marcello was in federal court the day JFK was shot . His New Orleans attorney, G Wray Gill, was sitting right beside him, as he would continue to do for years to come .
 Carlos Marcello was charged and convicted of contempt of Congress for taking the Fifth so many times . That conviction was overturned on appeal on appeal .
 It took two years, but “in 1953 the federal government issued its first deportation order against Marcello’s . The matter would reach a critical turning point soon after John F Kennedy took office .
 Marcello grew even more powerful under the new Republican administration of President Dwight Eisenhower and especially his vice president, Richard Nixon . In the 1960s, he became a powerful figure in Washington .
 The 1953 deportation order against Carlos Marcello didn’t produce results while Nixon and Eisenhower were in office . For reasons that remain unclear, the 1953 order was never followed by results .
 Marcello did eventually hire a powerful Washington attorney, Jack Wasserman, to help with his deportation case . He also retained his own Washington lobbyist to help his case, and he also retained a Washington lobbyist .
 Marcello was so experienced at funneling money to politicians in Louisiana and Texas . But it's possible that he wasn't deported because of one or more high-level bribes, he says .
 In general, as long as Nixon was vice president, Marcello and the Mafia flourished, not just in the United States but also in countries ranging from Cuba to Guatemala . The Mafia flourished in the U.S. and Cuba, as well as in other countries .
 Marcello and his closest mob ally, Florida’s Santo Trafficante, was even associated with attempted hits on government officials in 1954 and 1955 . He was associated with attempts to kill government officials .
 By 1955 Sheriff Clancy was reportedly “talking to federal agents about Louisiana gambling,” according to one Mafia history . Clancy reportedly was reportedly talking about gambling with federal agents . Clancy was the sheriff of Louisiana in 1955 .
 Clancy was hospitalized for a medical condition in 1955, but the “guard outside his door” was removed on a pretext . Clancy was taken into custody in April 1955 . Clancy died at the age of 92 in October .
 Sheriff Clancy had his skull smashed open "with a cleaver" while he lay in his hospital bed . Then the patient in the room next to Sheriff Clancy, a bank teller, had his head smashed open . Sheriff Clancy was in the hospital when the attack happened .
 It's unclear whether the hit man mixed up the rooms and killed the wrong person or if the murder of the man in the next room was meant to send a message to Clancy .
 No one was ever arrested in the hospital murder case . The same type of witness intimidation would occur after JFK’s assassination .
 Carlos Marcello became increasingly involved with Santo Trafficante and his operations in the 1950s and '60s . He became involved with the operations in order to keep control of his operations . Marcella became involved in the operations as well as his role in the operation .
 Both men preferred to avoid publicity and to wield their growing power away from the limelight . Both men prefer not to be seen in public .
 Trafficante’s mob family was linked to at least 14 murders over two decades . Marcello Trafficante was ruthless with his enemies, like his brother .
 Among those killed was a Kefauver Committee witness, who was murdered before he could testify . Among the dead was a witness who testified before he was murdered .
 Santo Trafficante had long been groomed to take over for his father, Santos Trafficante Sr., his accomplishments included creating the American side of the French Connection heroin network . Marcello Trafficantes is the son of Santos Trafficantes Sr., who created the American heroin network in the
 In the 1950s Marcello’s organization was part of that network, bringing in heroin through ports in Louisiana and Texas, as well as across the border from Mexico . The network brought in heroin from Louisiana, Texas and Mexico .
 Trafficante Sr. had sent his son to Cuba in 1946 to help with heroin trafficking that resumed after World War II . He wanted to gain a piece of the Havana casino action .
 Santo Trafficante managed casinos for his father until the elder Trafficante’s death in 1954 . Trafficante assumed control of the mob family after his father died in 1954, at which point he assumed control .
 Santo Trafficante spoke fluent Spanish and continued to spend time in Cuba as well as Tampa, with frequent visits to Miami .
 Marcello could not easily or safely travel to Cuba because of his lack of a passport . Cuba was the Mafia’s gambling mecca for wellheeled travelers from the U.S.
 Trafficante was one of the two main casino owners in Havana with the other being mob financial genius Meyer Lansky . Trafficante owned two main casinos in Havana, Cuba .
 Trafficante completely controlled one casino, the Sans Souci, and had shares in three more . Trafficante also controlled three other casinos, including three casinos in the city .
 For years it was thought that Marcello’s inability to travel to Cuba prevented him from holding a share in the Havana gambling industry . But as revealed here for the first time, that wasn't the case .
 Mafia casinos flourished under the brutal dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista, whose regime was embraced by Vice President Richard Nixon and tolerated by President Eisenhower .
 Nixon reportedly had business interests on the island with his mob-connected best friend, Charles "Bebe" Rebozo . Nixon reportedly was involved in business interests with Bebe's best friend .
 Nixon visited the Mafia casinos and had been given honors by Batista . Nixon had visited Mafia casinos . Batista had given him honors .
 The repressive Cuban dictator had partnered with mob bosses like Meyer Lansky and Santo Trafficante, who gave him a lucrative piece of the growing Havana casino industry .
 Much of the Cuban populace suffered from bad nutrition, low wages, and Batista’s vicious police state . Meanwhile, much of the Cubans suffered from poor nutrition and low wages . Batista's brutal police state led to the death of many Cubans .
 Fidel Castro, his brother Raul, and Juan Almeida were leading a small but growing guerrilla movement in Cuba’s Sierra Maestra . Che Guevara, the Argentinean doctor who helped lead the movement, was also involved in the movement .
 The charismatic Fidel got the lion’s share of favorable press attention . Other rebel leaders and groups also fought against the Batista regime, putting pressure on the corrupt police state .
 When Eisenhower established an arms embargo, it didn’t slow the fighting but only allowed the Mafia and the CIA to fill the void by providing weapons . The Mafia and CIA provided weapons not just to Batista .
 Trafficante provided small quantities of arms to Fidel Castro and his men . Surprisingly, the CIA and Trafficante played both sides, providing small quantities .
 Havana casinos continued to flourish and expand in 1957 . However, all the fighting occurred far from the plush Havana casinos .
 Frank Costello had been forced into retirement, meaning Trafficante couldn’t turn to Marcello’s old mentor for help . Trafficante was forced to turn to Costello for help after he was forced out of the role .
 Even though the Washington Post described him as the ‘leading suspect’ in arranging Anastasia’s murder, he was never charged . The Washington Post never charged him with the murder .
 Carlos Marcello didn't attend and instead sent “his most trusted brother, Joe” and his top two Dallas lieutenants, Joseph Civello and Joe Campisi Sr. The ever-cautious Carlos Marcelo didn’t attend . Marcell
 Their agenda ranged from replacing Anastasia to providing assistance for Batista and Fidel Castro . Their agenda was to provide assistance to Batista, Fidel Castro and other leaders .
 Local officers raided the unusual meeting, arresting fifty-eight mob leaders, including Trafficante and Joe Marcello . Trafficante was arrested .
 The huge meeting, combined with the recent sensational front-page news of Anastasia’s assassination, only served to fuel the frustration of many Americans—and some members of Congress— that the Mafia seemed to operate with near impunity under J Edgar Hoover and the rest of the Eisenhower
 In the 1950s, two successful assassinations of government officials were linked to close associates of Carlos Marcello . One took place the same year as Apalachin, 1957, and the other in 1954 .
 Marcello was not the driving force in both JFK and JFK murders, but both are important for understanding how the godfather later murdered JFK . The books show how he learned from his fellow mob bosses .
 Marcello's partner Santo Trafficante was one of the vice lords behind the assassination of Alabama’s Attorney General—elect in 1954 . Trafficante's partner was the vice lord behind the highly publicized assassination of the Alabama Attorney General .
 Phenix City, Alabama, long known as the most corrupt town in America, was hit by a car bomb . Phenix city is known for its corruption, but it is also known for being corrupt .
 Franklin Roosevelt had sent General George Patton to clean up the town, but no avail . Prior to World War II, General Patton had sent President Roosevelt to clean it up, but to no avail.
 Santo Trafficante had a major influence in Phenix City through one of his longtime lieutenants . Marcello had criminal interests in Alabama as well as in the state .
 State officials either looked the other way or -- in the case of Alabama’s sitting Attorney General— were part of the criminal operation . State officials or looked other way .
 Phenix City’s Albert Patterson ran for Attorney General of Alabama in 1954 . Patterson ran on a promise to clean up the town of Phenix, Alabama .
 Patterson won the Democratic nomination, which in 1950s Alabama made him Attorney General-—elect, but Patterson was quickly assassinated by gunfire . Patterson was the Democratic candidate for Attorney General in Alabama, but was assassinated .
 The confident crime lords hadn’t bothered to use any type of patsy to take the blame, so it was immediately clear that organized crime was responsible for the murder . Crime lords had not bothered to bother to use patsies to take responsibility .
 The assassination of Attorney General—elect Patterson generated huge headlines across the country . Patterson's assassination of attorney general—elect received huge headlines . Patterson was assassinated in 1992 .
 National Guard General Walter Hanna pressured the Alabama Governor, who finally got Eisenhower to take action . FBI Director J Edgar Hoover had taken a hands-off approach to organized crime .
 Phenix City was placed under “Martial Rule” by the National Guard, putting the city under United States military occupation . Phenix is under military occupation by the U.S. National Guard forces .
 Phenix City, Phenix, Georgia, ran out of Phenix . After a time they simply reorganized on a smaller scale across the river in Columbus .
 Bringing assassins of Attorney General—elect Patterson to justice was another matter . Patterson was elected Attorney General-elect in 2010 .
 After the court indicted Garrett, he stayed either in Texas or Mississippi until 1963, when all charges against him were inexplicably dropped . After the indictment, Garrett remained in Texas and Mississippi .
 As with other hits involving Trafficante and Marcello, witness intimidation and murder kept the investigation from ever reaching the level of the two bosses . The investigation was never able to reach that level .
 Of the four men indicted, just one was convicted of murder, eventually serving only seven years . One was acquitted, one was acquitted and a third was allowed to plead nolo contendere to a minor charge .
 Eisenhower—Nixon Administration didn't declare war on organized crime, but it didn't . The Phenix City assassination didn't lead to a war against organized crime .
 J. Edgar Hoover continued to turn a blind eye toward the Mafia in general and Marcello in particular . Marcella was the son of a mobster in New York City .
 Time magazine in 1975 first revealed secret meetings and friendship between Hoover and mob boss Frank Costello . Time magazine first revealed the meetings in 1975 .
 Hoover’s predilection for gambling on horse races is now well known, and it's also possible Hoover was blackmailed by the Mafia over his closeted homosexuality . Hoover was also known to have gambled on horse racing .
 Carlos Marcello’s partners had gotten away with murder, but they had lost the lucrative cash cow that was Phenix City . The city had lost its lucrative cash cash cow, but it was still a lucrative destination .
 The next time Marcello’s associates assassinated a government official, a patsy would be on hand to be quickly blamed and killed to divert suspicion from organized crime . However, they learned from their mistakes, and the next time they killed an official would be blamed, a
 Johnny Rosselli handled the Chicago mob’s interests in Los Angeles and Las Vegas . Trafficante was another important mob figure with whom Carlos Marcello became involved in the 1950s .
 Rosselli was a smooth operator who hobnobbed with movie studio chiefs . He was caught running a union shakedown operation for the mob in the 1940s . The mob boss was caught in the act of union busting .
 After Rosselli’s release from federal prison, he still had clout in Las Vegas, but the studio heads had to distance themselves from him .
 Court records show Rosselli was influential enough to be an executive producer on three low-budget film noirs in the late 1940s . His name couldn’t be listed in the credits .
 One of the films, He Walked by Night, featured a crazed ex-serviceman who turned killer . The films also featured an ex-soldier who became a killer .
 The young ex-serviceman kept his long-barreled weapon hidden away, wrapped in a blanket . But he carried a pistol and used it to shoot a policeman in his patrol car .
 Rosselli later credibly confessed his role in JFK’s murder . The case had a similar scenario involving Lee Oswald and Officer Tippit . The two men were involved in the JFK assassination .
 Rosselli helped get his friend Frank Sinatra a dramatic role in From Here to Eternity .
 The pressure Rosselli applied on Sinatra’s behalf inspired the famous “horse's head in the bed” scene in the first Godfather novel and film . The Godfather character was the inspiration for the famous scene .
 Johnny Rosselli was very active in Guatemala in the mid-1950s . His primary concern was to protect and advance the interests of a New Orleans company with ties to Carlos Marcello .
 President Castillo Armas ruled the country, having been installed as dictator after the Eisenhower—Nixon Administration used the CIA to overthrow the liberal government of the democratically elected Jacobo Arbenz .
 Carlos Marcello paid $100,000 to Guatemala’s prime minister and his former law partner for his fake birth certification and citizenship papers . Marcella paid the money to Guatemalan Prime Minister and his ex-law partner for the papers .
 There was also casino gambling in Guatemala run by Ted Lewin, Johnny Rosselli’s associate .
 President Armas tried to close the casinos, and he jailed Rosselli’s friend Lewin . Armas was jailed for trying to close casinos, but he was not convicted .
 Armas was assassinated in July 1957, apparently by a lone Communist assassin . Four days later, Armas died in a car crash in Paris .
 The United States government and news media quickly accepted that a seemingly lone Communist had murdered President Armas . The U.S. government and the media accepted that Armas was a Communist .
 Historians point out that a letter supposedly found on the patsy’s body was actually only a form-letter postcard from Radio Moscow . The bodyguard's correspondence with Moscow about his assassination assignment was only a postcard .
 Another US-backed right-wing dictator quickly took Armas’s place, and Marcello kept his fake citizenship papers . Another right wing dictator quickly replaced Armas as dictator .
 At the time of the assassination, Marcello was involved in a business venture with Rosselli in Las Vegas, the godfather’s only direct foray into that city . The godfather was involved with the business venture in that city at the time .
 Vegas needed that luxury to compete with the burgeoning Mafia casinos being built in Havana . The casinos are being built by the Mafia in Cuba .
 Rosselli was only a Mafia don, not a mob boss or godfather like Marcello, but he was the consummate dealmaker . He managed the Tropicana for a time .
 Rosselli and the Mafia were still learning how to hide mob ownership from the Nevada Gaming Commission . The Mafia was still learning about the Nevada gaming commission .
 Marcello says he tried to get into gambling in Vegas using a front man . Nevada Gaming Commission learned he was involved in the gambling scandal . Marcella says he was using a fake front man to get his gambling business .
 Marcello always tried to stay out of the limelight and the newspapers, and he could have all the gambling he wanted in Louisiana without worrying about a state Gaming Commission .
 Marcello stayed out of Las Vegas after that, even in the 1970s when he had a chance to put up money for the real casino depicted in Martin Scorsese’s film Casino .
 Marcello brokered the deal to the Kansas City mob, getting an enormous onetime ‘finder’s fee’ in the process . The FBI learned but never revealed to the public that the FBI learned .
 Even after the Tropicana problem, Marcello continued to deal with the smooth, articulate Rosselli . Even after it became ill-tempersed, he continued to work with the Italian government .
 Rosselli was close to Sinatra, Dean Martin, Marilyn Monroe and Dean Martin . He was also close to Marilyn Monroe .
 Marcello Rosselli wasn’t an American citizen, having been born Filippo Sacco in Esperia, Italy, on July 4, 1905 . He was born in Italy in 1905, not the United States .
 The U.S. government didn't realize Rosselli wasn’t a citizen until 1966, setting off a chain of events that would help trigger Watergate and lead to the 1976 murder of Trafficante’s wife . Trafficante was the mastermind behind the murder of Rossell
 Rosselli and Marcello still got along well in 1957 . The two were married at the start of their careers .
 Marcello and Rosselli had something else in common—neither hesitated to kill those who got in his way or who incurred his wrath . Neither of the two men would hesitate to kill anyone who got into their way .
 Willie Bioff was the key witness whose testimony had sent Rosselli to prison and ended his glamorous Hollywood lifestyle . By the mid-1950s, Bioff had lived in Phoenix and was good friends with Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater .
 Rosselli approved the murder of another good friend of Goldwater’s, Gus Greenbaum, owner of the Riviera casino and “mayor” of the Las Vegas strip . Three years later, he approved another friend's murder of a good friend .
 On December 3, 1958, Greenbaum was almost completely “decapitated” while his wife, Bess, had “her throat slashed with a butcher knife” according to crime writer Ovid Demaris . Greenbaum's wife had her throat slashed by a butcher
 Senator Goldwater attended Greenbaum’s funeral, but there was no arrest . Greenbaum's funeral was attended by Goldwater, who attended the funeral .
 Several years later DeMaris documented the arrival of two hit men from Miami shortly before the murder . The murder victim was shot in the head by a Miami hitman .
 Rosselli may have used his mutual associate with Marcello—Santo Trafficante—to provide the hit men . Trafficante may have been involved in the hitmen .
 Employing out-of-town hit men was a technique both Trafficante and Marcello increasingly used . It was difficult to tie them to a crime and locale since it was impossible to tie the hit men to a specific crime .
 CARLOS MARCELLO’s empire would bring in $2 billion annually from criminal operations in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas, according to biographer .
 Anyone that got in the way of what he wanted was eliminated one way or another, he said . Anyone that didn't want to stop him from doing so was eliminated .
 Marcello would send men to see the owner that he wanted to do business with . Marcellos would send them to see owners that he was looking for business . He would send his men to meet the owner of the business .
 If a bar owner made trouble or refused, fights were staged, furniture broken up, and guests harassed . If a guest made trouble, fights would have been staged and furniture was broken up .
 The owner of the bar either went out of business or went into partnership with Marcello . The bar is now owned by the owner of either a bar or a partnership with the owner .
 Marcello had his own still in New Orleans and shipped liquor in from Texas, in five-gallon cans . He shipped liquor from New Orleans to Texas .
 Since all of the police were on the payroll, it did no good to call them, he had them all in his pocket, along with the judges . The judges, police and judges were also on payroll, he said .
 The pattern was repeated dozens, probably hundreds of times, in the bar and restaurant business . Not just the bar, but also in the companies that supplied them, the pattern repeated dozens of times .
 Marcello also explained to Van Laningham that “the way to make and keep money was to buy ground” — in other words, land . “The way to buy land” was to ‘buy ground’, he said .
 Marcello’s real estate holdings in Louisiana and cities such as Dallas were extensive and growing . The real estate magnate's real estate portfolio in Louisiana was extensive .
 The Churchill Farms estate included his secluded and massive sixty-fourhundred-acre Churchill Farms . They included his massive and massive 60,000 acreage .
 Once mostly swamp, part of the land had been drained, Marcello used the remote farmhouse in the middle of it for some of his most sensitive meetings . The farmhouse was used for several meetings, including several concerning plans for JFK’s assassination .
 By 1957 Marcello had set up his daily office at the nondescript Town and Country Motel . He would use the location for routine business for the next two and a half decades .
 Located on the nondescript Airline Highway connecting the city to Moisant Airport, it was an appropriate venue for the publicity-shy godfather . The road was described by his biographer as an “endless procession of gas stations, parking lots, billboards, billboards
 Marcello’s private office behind the motel was the site of most of his weekday meetings when he wasn’t traveling through his extensive empire . He also maintained smaller offices and mistresses .
 New Orleans citizens tried to bring in experienced law enforcement help from the outside, even there they were thwarted . Three can keep a secret if two are dead .
 Guy Banister, former FBI agent in charge of Chicago, was brought in to be New Orleans’s Assistant Police Superintendent, focusing on the ties between organized crime and the police department .
 Banister seemed more interested in going after left-wingers and alleged Communists . However, the extremely conservative and racist Banister was not interested in attacking the left . Banister has been accused of being racist and racist .
 Carlos Marcello was free to expand his criminal empire, using murders when needed, according to the New Orleans Crime Commission . Those included “the gangland-style killing of two of Marcellos’s narcotics associates,” according to John H Davis .
 The heroin network Marcello and Trafficante shared with Trafficante was their most lucrative, most secret, most deadly enterprise . Trafficante's heroin network was the most lucrative and most deadly of all heroin networks .
 Marcello continued to rely on his own brothers and extended family when possible . Marcella continued to use his brothers and family to help him cope .
 Pete, Pascal, Vincent, Tony, Tony and Sammy also played key roles in managing Marcello's empire .
 Richard Nixon enjoyed increasing power and respect as the 1950s advanced, due to a series of health issues plaguing President Eisenhower . There appeared to be no concerns for Carlos Marcello on the federal front since Richard Nixon had increasing power .
 Nixon had weathered the only two potential scandals he’d recently faced, aided in one case by his longtime patron, billionaire Howard Hughes . Nixon faced only two possible scandals he'd recently faced: Watergate and Watergate .
 The other scandal involved exposure of the mob ties of attorney Murray Chotiner, Nixon’s closest advisor . The other Watergate scandal involved exposing the links of the attorney who advised Nixon .
 Richard Nixon and Murray Chotiner had longtime and well-documented links to the Mafia . Richard Nixon had long-documented ties to the mafia . Murray had a long-running relationship with the Mafia, including the Mafia.
 Los Angeles mobster Mickey Cohen admitted giving Nixon $5,000 in Nixon’s first race for Congress in California, in 1946 . Cohen admitted to giving Nixon the money in his first congressional race .
 Nixon’s chief political aide and strategist from 1946 until the time of Watergate, had arranged those payoffs . Chotiner had arranged the payoffs from Nixon's White House .
 Richard Nixon’s best friend from the 1950s until his death, Charles “Bebe” Rebozo, had extensive banking, real estate, and business ties to the mob, including associates of Meyer Lansky and Santo Trafficante . Richard Nixon's best friend
 Rebozo often fronted businesses and shady deals for Nixon in locales ranging from Cuba to Florida to the Bahamas . Evidence, including later admissions by former government officials such as John Mitchell, shows that .
 Chotiner’s role as an advisor to Vice President Nixon caught the eye of Democrats in Congress .
 A Congressional committee probing Chotiner publicized the case before having enough evidence against him . As it happened, the case was publicized before there was enough evidence to charge him . The case was dropped and Chotininer avoided charges .
 Nixon's other Mafia ties remained unexposed . He did have to assume a less prominent role for the Vice President away from the public eye .
 One of the counsels on the committee investigating Chotiner was a young Robert F Kennedy, and he learned from the mistakes he saw in that investigation . Robert F. Kennedy learned from his own experience in the investigation .
 In 1957 Robert Kennedy teamed up with his brother, Senator John F Kennedy from Massachusetts . In 1957, Robert Kennedy and John Kennedy were both Senators from Massachusetts.
 Teamster corruption started with union president Dave Beck . Beck was the only major union leader to support the generally anti-union Eisenhower—Nixon ticket . Beck supported the Eisenhower-Nixon platform .
 After corruption charges forced Beck to step down, John and Robert Kennedy focused on his successor, Jimmy Hoffa . After Beck's resignation, the Kennedy brothers focused on Hoffa's successor .
 The Kennedys’ investigation of Hoffa would have crucial ramifications for all concerned . The investigation of the Hoffa scandal would have implications for all involved .
 The corruption and Mafia ties the brothers uncovered would lead them to focus on exposing Hoffa’s crimes, first through Congressional hearings and later through prosecutions that would eventually send Hoffa to prison .
 The Kennedys' actions began a blood feud between JFK and Hoffa that would last until JFK’s assassination . Robert Kennedy was assassinated five years later by Robert Kennedy, five years after his brother was assassinated .
 The Kennedy brothers’ Hoffa investigation led them to focus on fighting organized crime . Finally, the Mafia ties uncovered in 1957 by the Kennedy brothers' Hoffa probe soon led to them focusing on fighting crime .
 Some say that effort was a way for John to counter rumors about his own immensely wealthy father’s ties to or friendship with members of organized crime .
 Others claim JFK pursued the mob to garner publicity . JFK generated huge amounts of media coverage for the anti-Mafia hearings he pushed .
 There was clearly a need for someone to take on the Mafia in America since J. Edgar Hoover and the Eisenhower—Nixon Administration seemed so reluctant to do so . But from newspaper headlines alone, there was clearly an obvious need for a new president .
 The Kennedys went after Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante, both soon to be close allies with the new Teamster leader, Jimmy Hoffa . The two men were soon to become allies with Hoffa, the new leader of the Teamster .
 Senator Kennedy dispatched a trusted investigator, former journalist Pierre Salinger, to New Orleans to look into Marcello’s criminal activities firsthand . Former journalist Salinger was a trusted friend of Senator Kennedy .
 Salinger described the fear and intimidation he encountered in New Orleans in the late 1950s . Salinger spoke to me about that before his death, Salinger talked about that .
 Salinger could document a clear paper trail, but people at all levels were afraid to talk . Salinger worried that he wouldn’t survive the experience .
 Salinger helped the Kennedys put together a remarkable list of Marcello’s criminal enterprises . The list was aided by the New Orleans Crime Commission, a group of concerned citizens headed by Aaron Kohn .
 Kennedys knew one thing Marcello feared was publicity, so they arranged to force him to testify before the Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management . Senator John McClellan chaired the committee .
 The Kennedys received the lion’s share of the enormous radio, newspaper, and television publicity the hearings generated . The hearings were held in Washington, D.C. and Washington .
 The Kennedys and Salinger knew that Marcello would simply take the Fifth, so they devised a strategy designed to convey the story to the American people anyway . Marcella was convicted of perjury in a federal court in New York City .
 Aaron Kohn of the Crime Commission gave a detailed overview of Marcello’s life and numerous crimes . Kohn also gave an extensive interview with the crime commission . The Crime Commission is investigating the case of the convicted killer .
 Salinger provided more details about the complex web of companies controlled by Marcello . Salinger also provided more documentation and details of the complex network of companies .
 Carlos Marcello himself was forced to confront the Kennedys’ Senate committee in 1959 . Marcella was a member of the Senate committee on the issue . He faced a panel of senators in Washington .
 RFK was the brash, blunt-spoken Chief Counsel of the Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management . The committee now focused on organized crime . RFK: "RFK was the chief counsel"
 Kennedy maintained what was often described as a boyish demeanor, especially when compared with his older brother, Senator John F Kennedy . But he still maintained what is often called an image of himself .
 JFK and Barry Goldwater had other business to attend to . However, on that day both JFK and Senator Goldwater were not at the hearing .
 RFK in full command of the interrogation of Carlos Marcello, the first of a series of events involving the godfather that would result in tragedy for RFK, his brother, and at times even Marcella . RFK and his brother were at the center of the investigation
 The forty-nine-year-old godfather sat at the witness table . Attired in a well-tailored, expensive-looking pin-striped suit, the father-of-two sat at a witness table.
 Dark glasses concealed his eyes, and he would wear them for the entire hearing . Dark glasses conceal his eyes .
 Marcello tried to maintain a relaxed image in his rare public appearances . Perhaps the dark glasses were intended to make it harder for RFK and the Senators to read his reactions .
 Seated beside Marcello was his top Washington attorney, Jack Wasserman, one of the country’s best immigration attorneys . Wasserman is also a top immigration attorney .
 The fact that he chose Wasserman instead of a criminal defense attorney or a high-profile Washington power attorney showed that what Marcello feared most was his lack of citizenship . Wasserman is not a criminal lawyer or a prominent Washington power lawyer .
 Unlike Santo Trafficante, Marcello couldn’t duck the Kennedys’ subpoena by traveling to another country . Marcella traveled to the U.S. to answer the subpoena . The subpoena was issued by Marcelli, the son of the late Sen
 As a noncitizen, if Marcello ever left the United States he might be denied reentry . Wasserman told him he had no other recourse than to report for the hearing . Wasserman: "As a non-citizen"
 Wasserman looked nothing like a typical mob lawyer and more like a university professor . Wasserman's bow tie and glasses, he said, was more than a college professor than a mob lawyer .
 Next to Wasserman was one of the godfather’s brothers, Vincent Marcello, who ran the slot machines for his brother's empire . The godfather's brother ran the slots machines for the brother's gambling empire .
 In contrast to his compact, portly brother, Vincent was taller and more conventionally handsome . Vincent's brother was taller than his brother .
 Carlos Marcello was a commanding presence in the hearing room . Still, with his Roman profile and imperious attitude, he was an imperious presence . The hearing is scheduled to begin on Monday .
 Robert Kennedy had already sparred with Jimmy Hoffa in earlier hearings . Robert Kennedy's carefully prepared questions were designed to reveal to the American public the scope of Marcello’s criminal empire .
 Civello conveyed Marcello’s orders to lower-level mobsters in Dallas, such as Jack Ruby . Along with another Dallas underboss, restaurateur Joe Campisi Sr., Civello conveyed orders to the mobster .
 Witnesses and huge charts clearly show the importance of Marcello and New Orleans to what would soon become known as the French Connection narcotics trade . However, other witnesses and huge . charts clearly showed the importance .
 Marcello fell back on his right to avoid incriminating himself, as he would for almost all the questions that day . Once again, he would not incriminate himself .
 RFK had said that “Mr Carlos Marcello has been under orders of deportation from the United States since about 1953,” much of their questioning centered on why he was still allowed to live in the U.S.
 Marcello had “been in court some 37 times in various appellate proceedings, and in various hearings” to avoid deportation . Some Senators felt some factor other than Jack Wasserman’s legal skill accounted for the failure to deport Marcella .
 Marcello left the hearing unbowed, and despite all the publicity, as long as President Dwight Eisenhower and Vice President Nixon remained in office, no serious additional efforts were made to deport the godfather .
 Chicago mob boss Sam Giancana was set to receive the same treatment as Marcello . John and Robert Kennedy weren’t through with the Mafia, and John was not through with it .
 Marcello ran the day-to-day operations of the Chicago mob for two elder Mafia chiefs . He wasn’t a godfather like Marcella, but essentially ran the operations of two elder mob bosses .
 Giancana’s influence extended beyond Chicago, to Las Vegas, Hollywood, and Reno, with the help of his Mafia don, Johnny Rosselli . The influence extended to Hollywood, Hollywood and Reno .
 RFK verbally sparred with Sam Giancana on June 9, 1959 . RFK tried to draw him into a revealing response, but he didn't give it .
 RFK was unable to prod Giancana to do more than plead the Fifth, which he did over three dozen times . RFK says RFK "was unable to ... prod" Giancrano to do anything more . Giancrono: "Giancana did
 RFK was still able to expose Giancana’s criminal network, which included narcotics trafficking . The Chicago Mafia for years disingenuously continued to claim it avoided narcotics trafficking, something the Chicago Mafia had claimed it avoided .
 RFK relied on questioning Pierre Salinger before the Committee to put even more of Giancana’s crimes on the record . RFK also relied on questioning Salinger for more of the crimes .
 Senator Kennedy and RFK were stymied on one occasion by the CIA, foreshadowing problems with the Agency that would plague the two men even after JFK become President .
 RFK and his aides tried to question Mafia chief in private . Mafia chief replied, “You can’t touch me. You can't touch me," Mafia chief said .
 RFK must have been stunned, but after looking into it, he found that ‘the CIA had made a deal with” the mob boss . RFK had been stunned by the revelation .
 In 1959 the CIA was working with three mob bosses from the northeastern United States, trying to assassinate Fidel Castro . As eventually documented in the 1970s by Hoffa expert Dan Moldea, the CIA worked with the mob bosses in Northeast .
 Teamster President Jimmy Hoffa acted as a “cutout” for the CIA in the transaction . Teamster president Jimmy Hoffmana was a "cutout" for the sale .
 Hoffa was a logical choice because both Fidel Castro and the Mafia viewed him as an ally . Fidel Castro was a natural ally to the Mafia, according to Hoffa's book .
 Before Castro and his allies assumed power on January 1, 1959, Hoffa had been involved in CIA-sanctioned arms smuggling to Cuba .
 By the early summer of 1959, Hoffa was participating in a complex deal, one that John and Robert Kennedy tried to unravel using their hearings and investigators . Hoffa's deal was one that the Kennedy brothers were trying to unravel .
 Hoffa’s mob associates sold surplus planes to Cuba, financed by Teamster money . The deal was financed by stolen securities and it also involved stolen securities .
 The Kennedys’ investigation hit a stone wall because they couldn’t locate a mysterious “Jack La Rue,” apparently the alias of a Hoffa associate involved in the deal . It was apparently a mysterious alias of an associate involved .
 Hoffa’s complicated transaction was also likely used to provide cover for his work on the 1959 ClA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel Fidel Castro . Hoffa's complicated transaction likely provided cover for the ClA plot to kill Castro .
 Hoffa-brokered plots would last for almost a year, but because the northeastern mobsters didn’t have extensive resources in Castro’s Cuba, their assassination plans made little progress .
 As part of their hearings, John and Robert Kennedy wanted to question godfather Santo Trafficante about the murder of Albert Anastasia . Trafficante was the godfather behind the murder .
 Trafficante fled to Cuba to avoid testifying, but in his place the Kennedys heard testimony from the Miami Crime Commission chief . Trafficante's testimony was held in place of Trafficante .
 Fidel ordered Trafficante be placed in a comfortable detention center in Havana, Cuba, along with several of his mob associates . Like the others, it would never be solved .
 Trafficante was even allowed to attend his daughter's lavish wedding at the Habana Hilton . Trafficante’s confinement was comfortable, and he was even able to attend the lavish wedding .
 Trafficante continued to visit Havana for almost three months . One account says that once the godfather was released, Trafficante visited Havana . Trafficante is believed to have visited Havana for three months before his release .
 Other historians cite Trafficante’s later testimony to the effect that his detention wasn’t voluntary and that at times he feared for his life . Trafficante's later testimony: "At times I feared for my life," Trafficante said .
 It's probable that his detention was initially unexpected and potentially dangerous, but as time went by, a financial accommodation was gradually reached, leading to his release .
 His stay in Cuba lasted until the Kennedys’ committee had finished its work . He stayed in Cuba until his stay in the country ended .
 Trafficante was in detention, it was hard for him to access his considerable wealth . Trafficante had no easy way to communicate with his most powerful ally, Carlos Marcello . Trafficantes was in jail when he was detained .
 The only way to get Marcello’s help was to use trusted messengers who could freely travel from the United States to Cuba and back without arousing the suspicion of U.S. or Cuban authorities . The only one way to help is to use trusty messengers
 Ruby’s role was confirmed by a Britsh man named John Wilson Hudson who was detained with Trafficante . Ruby's role in Trafficante is confirmed by Briton named John .
 Unlike most of the others in detention, Hudson did not have a criminal record . Hudson was held in a federal prison in New Jersey .
 Jack Ruby visited the detained Trafficante ‘frequently’ and that man was Jack Ruby, Hudson said . Hudson said the man visited Trafficante "frequently" and visited him frequently .
 Ruby came to be a messenger between Marcello and Trafficante in 1959 . He came to play a critical role for both men in their 1963 murder of JFK . Ruby's background is important to understand how he came into contact with Trafficante .
 Jack Ruby's actions before, during, and after the tragedy were dictated by the Mafia . Knowing who Ruby really was, and the role he played in organized crime for decades, is crucial to understanding JFK's assassination .
 Jack Ruby was born Jack Rubenstein in Chicago on March 25, 1911 . Ruby dropped out of high school and began working for the mob . He was born in 1911 .
 Investigator Scott Malone says Ruby moved from Chicago to Los Angeles in 1933 and began selling handicappers’ tip sheets at Santa Anita racetrack . Investigator Malone says “Ruby’s tip sheets’ were sold in 1933 .
 The victim was Ruby’s friend, showing those in power that he could not be trusted not to talk . Even though the victim was his friend, he gave no useful information to the police .
 "Murder enabled the mob, and eventually the Teamsters, to take over the union," Malone says . Malone points out “that murder enabled ... the mob to take control of the union,” he says .
 That was at a time when Marcello was just taking over control of the New Orleans Mafia . That was during the time when he took control of New Orleans .
 After Marcello was in firm control of the rackets in Dallas, Ruby began to perform work for his organization . Ruby began performing work for him in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The Jewish Jack Ruby could never aspire to the heights of non-Sicilian mob heavyweights like Meyer Lansky or Mickey Cohen . The low-level mobster basically had to scramble, to do whatever he could for the local mob powers .
 In 1950 Jack Ruby “briefed the Kefauver Committee about organized crime in Chicago,” according to Luis Kutner . Ruby told the committee about the Chicago organized crime scene .
 This was the first of many times Ruby would appear to cooperate with authorities in return for protecting his—and his superiors’ criminal activities . Ruby would later cooperate with police to find out what authorities knew .
 FBN agent “Jack Cusack had informed the McClellan Committee in January 1958 that Mafioso Joseph Civello ran the heroin business in Dallas,” according to Valentine . “Cusack linked Civell with Marcello, Trafficante
 Civello, as noted earlier, was Carlos Marcello’s top underboss in Dallas . He was the Dallas Cowboys’ top assistant at the time .
 Jack Ruby’s close relationship to law enforcement, a major factor in the aftermath of JFK's assassination, began to develop in the 1950s . Jack Ruby's relationship with law enforcement began in the '50s and '60s .
 Carlos Marcello’s own comments about Ruby during CAMTEX confirm that he was the pay-off man for the Dallas Police . Ruby was the man of the crime in Dallas, Texas .
 Ruby was soon involved in various nightclubs and with strippers and prostitutes . The police corruption wasn’t just about money, but it was also about prostitution .
 It was said that policemen never had to pay for a drink at Ruby’s club and sometimes were even provided with women . Police were said to have been provided with prostitutes at the club .
 Ruby was “very close friends’s with Dallas Police Captain Will Fritz, who headed the Homicide Bureau . Ruby was also ‘very close’ friends with Fritz, police captain Will Fritz . Ruby died at the age of 92 .
 FBI document says Ruby "took the Chief of Police” of Dallas to “Hot Springs, Arkansas, in 1956, when it was a gambling mecca . Ruby had even higher friends on the Dallas Police Force, according to the document .
 Jack Ruby took advantage of his law-enforcement ties whenever he could . Ruby was a law enforcement officer in the 1960s and '90s . He was known for his law enforcement ties .
 According to one Warren Commission document, Ruby was active in the Dallas segment of Trafficante and Marcello’s French Connection heroin network . The same network that John and Robert Kennedy investigated in their 1959 hearings was the same network they investigated .
 Ruby appears to have had a small role in making sure Marcello’s heroin that flowed through Dallas from Mexico and the Texas ports stayed en route to Chicago . Ruby appeared to have helped make sure the heroin stayed on its way to Chicago from Mexico .
 A heroin courier who worked for Ruby tried to expose the plot to assassinate JFK just prior to his murder . Ruby was assassinated by the assassination of JFK in 1963 .
 A major French heroin trafficker would be in Dallas when JFK was shot . A major drug trafficker, Michel Victor Mertz, was in Dallas at JFK's assassination .
 Mertz’s associate, French Canadian heroin kingpin Lucien Rivard, was imprisoned with Trafficante in Havana in 1959 . Trafficante was imprisoned in Havana with the drug kingpin in Havana .
 Warren Commission testimony shows ‘Ruby’s close friendship’ with the head of ‘the special Dallas Police unit charged with investigating organized crime cases as well as narcotics and vice,” he said . “Warren Commission testimony . shows regularly visited” one of Ruby
 FBI files show Ruby became involved in gunrunning to Cuba with several associates of Santo Trafficante . Among them were gangsters Norman Rothman and Dominick Bartone, as well as corrupt former Cuban president Carlos Prio .
 The FBI documented numerous ties between Ruby and Cohen’s girlfriend, a burlesque dancer from Texas . Ruby's girlfriend, Candy Barr, was a well-known burlesquer dancer . Ruby is accused of having ties to Cohen's girlfriend .
 Cuban gunrunning and arms deals with Castro's men made him an excellent candidate to be a courier/messenger between Ruby’s boss Marcello and the detained Trafficante Trafficante . Trafficante was an excellent courier for the Cuban government .
 In March of 1959, Ruby had been interviewed by the Bureau and asked to become an informant . Ruby had asked to be an informant in March 1959 .
 Ruby, no doubt after checking with mob superiors such as Civello or Campisi, agreed . Ruby was the mob boss in Dallas, Dallas .
 Such an arrangement could give him an extra degree of protection for his illegal activities . It could also give him a way to find out what crimes the FBI was interested in .
 In 1959 Ruby reported to the FBI “on at least eight occasions,” but according to historian Gerald D McKnight, the Warren Commission hid that fact from the American public . The Warren Commission did not release Ruby's report to the public .
 It was “not until twelve years after the Warren Report’s published that the American people” learned that Ruby had been an FBI informant . Ruby was an informant for the FBI for 12 years, says the author .
 The fact that Ruby’s tenure as an informant overlapped with his trip to Cuba to visit Trafficante might explain why the Warren Commission refused to reveal his role as a Bureau informant .
 Ruby met with his FBI handler on July 2, 1959, less than a month after Trafficante was detained . Ruby and Trafficante met less than one month before Trafficante's arrest .
 Trafficante originally had another messenger he could rely on, electronics expert John Martino . Trafficante had to rely on Martino for years . Martino was Trafficante's first messenger .
 Trafficante’s funds were essential for any attempt to buy his release from his Cuban detainment . Trafficante was detained in Cuba by the Cuban government in 2009 .
 Martino was arrested in Cuba on July 23, 1959, after a flurry of trips between Miami and Cuba . Martino traveled to Cuba several times between 1959 and 1959 .
 Unlike Trafficante, Martino was sent to a Cuban prison, serving three years in what he considered hellish conditions . Martino spent the time in the Cuban prison where Trafficante was imprisoned .
 Martino’s absence made someone like Ruby even more important as a potential messenger/courier . Ruby is the son of Martino, who has been in the news since 2004 .
 Other accounts say that “Carlos Marcello attempted to free Trafficante,” so his underling Jack Ruby was apparently part of that effort . Jack Ruby's underling is also said to be part of the effort .
 While Trafficante was in jail in Cuba, Jack Ruby attempted arms deals to help secure Trafficante’s release, according to several accounts . Ruby is believed to have been involved in an arms deal with Trafficante in Cuba .
 Even after the Revolution, McWillie was one of many mobsters still operating in Cuba . The mobster was still active in Cuba even after the revolution .
 Most people think that Fidel Castro shut all the Mafia casinos when he took over, that’s only partially true . The casinos are still open in Cuba .
 Frank Fiorini, a Trafficante hoodlum who’d fought alongside Fidel, was made the liaison between the Cuban government and the mob bosses who still ran the casinos . The mob bosses still ran, even if they no longer owned, the casinos still ran .
 Jack Ruby admitted frequently that Lewis McWillie was his “idol,” someone he almost worshipped as the personification of mob power and access . Ruby could only dream of having access to mob power that Ruby could have .
 Many years later, McWillie prevaricated when asked if Ruby had accompanied him on his visits to Trafficante in prison . He was interviewed under oath by the House Select Committee .
 I don’t know for sure . . | went out there with someone but I don't recall who it was . I went out with someone, but I’m not sure if it was someone else .
 McWillie testified shortly after the murders of numerous Marcello and Trafficante associates and government witnesses . He testified after the killings of numerous government witnesses and associates of the mob .
 McWillie's equivocation is as close to a “Yes, Ruby went with me” as the Committee could possibly expect . Since Marcello and Trafficante were still alive and in power when he testified, it's as close as possible to saying ‘Yes
 Official U.S. and Cuban records show a confusing array of several trips by Ruby to Cuba in the late summer of 1959 . Unclear gaps in the travel records indicate that some of his entrances and exits were surreptitious .
 Two days later, on August 8, Ruby flew to Cuba from New Orleans, listing the Capri Hotel and Casino as his destination . Ruby died in Havana, Cuba, at age 81 .
 Ruby may have helped with that bribe, and/or its aftermath, as his mysterious trips to Cuba continued into September . Ruby may well have helped in the bribe .
 After his Cuba visits ended, Ruby ceased being an FBI informant on October 2, 1959 . Ruby's Cuba visits were the last of his FBI informant visits . Ruby was an informant for the FBI until he left Cuba in 1959 .
 Hoffabrokered plots between the CIA and the Mafia to kill Fidel Fidel were continuing in the early months of 1960 . Neither Trafficante nor Ruby’s boss Marcello had any documented role in those plots .
 Former Cuban mob powerhouse Meyer Lansky reportedly placed a million-dollar bounty on killing Fidel Castro . Unlike Trafficante, Lansky had been unable to reach an accommodation with the Castro brothers .
 In January 1960, Tropicana casino manager Lewis McWillie asked Jack Ruby to legally buy four Colt Cobra revolvers in Dallas and bring them to Havana . The four revolvers were legally purchased by Jack Ruby in 1959 .
 Jack Ruby was then the manager of two small Dallas nightclubs, including one he fronted for Carlos Marcello’s organization . Ruby was in charge of two nightclubs in Dallas, Texas .
 Because so much gunrunning to Cuba had been going on, the Colt revolvers could have been easily obtained by a gangster like McWillie in Havana . The gunrunning was going on .
 Ruby, a career criminal, could have easily obtained illegal weapons illegally in Dallas, Texas . Ruby could easily obtain illegal weapons in Dallas .
 McWillie needed pistols traced back to a legal purchase in Dallas so it was clear they weren’t linked to organized crime or any illegal— or C[A—gunrunning operation . But for some reason, McWie needed these pistols to be easily traced .
 Jack Ruby for some reason balked at McWillie’s request to go to Cuba even though he had visited Cuba several times the previous summer . Jack Ruby had visited the country several times before .
 The Tropicana’s McWillie asked Ruby to ship the four pistols to him in Havana . After Ruby refused, he asked him to ship them to him . The four pistols were sent to him by the hotel in Havana, Cuba .
 What is known definitively is that Ruby purchased at least one Colt Cobra . Ruby purchased a Colt Cobra at the request of the president .
 Some evidence does indicate that the episode could have been part of the continuing plots to kill Fidel brokered by Hoffa between the CIA and the Mafia .
 Lewis McWillie had been part of Ruby’s Cuban venture with Hoffa associate Dominick Bartone the previous year . Government files show that McWie had solid Mafia connections to Meyer Lansky, who also wanted Castro .
 Cuban authorities arrested a ‘gangster’ and his associates for attempting to kill Fidel later in 1960 . Among the weapons photographed was a pistol resembling the Colt Cobras McWillie pressed Ruby to buy .
 One Colt Cobra definitely purchased by Jack Ruby in January 1960 would find greater infamy more than three years later . The Colt Cobra was purchased by Ruby in 1960 .
 Ruby used the pistol Ruby used to shoot Lee Oswald on live television on November 24, 1963 . Ruby's pistol was the pistol he shot Lee Oswald . Ruby shot Oswald in 1963 .
 Ruby’s notorious gun at the very least came out of his involvement with the Mafia and possibly from his early work with the CIA to kill Fidel Castro . Ruby's gun may have come from the mob's early work in helping the CIA kill Fidel .
 Ruby managed the Carousel strip club in Dallas, Texas, in 1960 . The club was a key factor in JFK's assassination . Ruby was involved in the 1960s assassination of JFK .
 New information shows that Carlos Marcello and his organization actually controlled the Carousel Club, not Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby was killed in the assassination of Jack Jack Ruby in September 1963 .
 Ruby was only the club's manager, but the timing indicates that being allowed to manage the Carousel might have been Marcello’s reward to Ruby for his activities in Cuba with Trafficante .
 Ruby ran a string of failed clubs before the Carousel . For decades it was assumed that he had at least one investor, Ralph Paul, who kept lending Ruby huge sums of money for his money-losing ventures .
 Ruby also owed large sums to the IRS throughout the early 1960s, first approaching $20,000 and by 1963 $40,000 . Ruby owed the IRS more than $50,000 in the 1960s .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations found that Paul repeatedly loaned Ruby money . Paul loaned the money to help him with his taxes, the committee found . The committee also found an additional “larger sum of money” to assist Ruby with taxes .
 Ralph Paul was only the owner of a relatively small restaurant in Dallas, the Bull-Pen Drive-In . He owed the IRS so much money that it was impossible to imagine he could have come up with those sums let alone continue to loan money .
 Despite best efforts of the FBI and the Warren Commission, no one could ever determine who owned the other 50 percent of the Carousel Club . Even more bizarre, despite the best efforts, the FBI could never find out who owns the other half .
 Ralph Paul simply gave up his 50 percent ownership in the Carousel Club . Ruby became famous for shooting Oswald and the club became known nationwide . Paul gave up ownership of the club after Ruby shot Oswald .
 Ralph Paul walked away from his 50 percent ownership of the club and the $180,000 he’d sunk into Jack Ruby and Jack Ruby . Instead of profiting from what could have been a must-see tourist stop, Paul simply walked away with the club .
 Carlos Marcello’s organization controlled the Carousel Club, it is believed . Jack Van Laningham admitted to Marcellos during CAMTEX that he controlled the club . The club was controlled by Marcelli, who was in charge of the Carouou Club
 One of Marcello’s underbosses in Dallas funneled the money to Ralph Paul to launder the funds for the Carousel . Ralph Paul was Ralph Paul's underboss, most likely Joe Campisi Sr.
 Campisi’s Egyptian Restaurant was large and popular, and Campisi was powerful, so he certainly didn’t need Ralph Paul as a partner . Ralph Paul was Ralph Paul's partner at the Egyptian Restaurant .
 Joe Campisi’s comment makes perfect sense if he was funneling Marcello money to Paul as part of his fronting ownership of the Carousel for the mobsters . Paul Paul was the owner of the carousel, not the mobster, according to Campisi .
 Marcello's role in JFK's murder helped him get Ruby to risk his life for the godfather after JFK’s murder . However, this arrangement would have huge ramifications for his life less than three years later .
 Trafficante and Marcello were the dark secret in the covert war the U.S. was waging against Cuba . These new CIA—Mafia plots involving Trafficante were the secret . Trafficante was Trafficante's role in the CIA's covert war with Cuba .
 Most of those involved in JFK’s assassination had some role in these new plots, so it was important to see how they originated . Most of the plotters in JFK's assassination were involved in some of the plots .
 In 1960 John F Kennedy was running for President, having announced his candidacy in the same Senate hearing room where Carlos Marcello had been grilled the previous year . In 1960, Marcella was grilled by the same Senator who grilled Marcellos in the Senate .
 President Eisenhower allowed Nixon major input on U.S. policy on Cuba . Eisenhower was one of the few areas where he allowed Nixon to influence policy . President Eisenhower's Cuba policy was one where Nixon was allowed to influence .
 Eisenhower had left Washington the previous year when Fidel Castro had come to the United States, leaving it to Nixon to meet with the new Cuban leader . Eisenhower left Washington when Castro came to the U.S.
 Instead of offering United States financial aid as Castro had hoped (since the former US-backed dictator, Fulgencio Batista—a friend of Nixon—had fled with much of the Cuban treasury . Nixon had lectured Castro and offered no help .
 Nixon confided to others that he felt Castro was dangerous, and soon after that the CIA began working with Jimmy Hoffa to have the three northeastern mob leaders kill Fidel Castro .
 Those plots had not worked, and now the 1960 election was rapidly approaching . The plot to win the White House in 1960s had failed .
 Vice President Nixon thought that if Castro was killed before the election, the public would choose the eight-year veteran Vice President over the young and relatively inexperienced Senator Kennedy . Nixon thought if Castro were killed before election, U.S. troops would be sent into Cuba .
 Nixon told a press aide the toppling of Castro would be ‘a real trump card’ for the election, according to a report . Nixon told aides that toppling Castro was a 'real trump card' for his election victory .
 Eisenhower, the former General in command of America’s D-Day forces, was cautious about Cuba . As Eisenhower prepared to end his last term as President, he was cautious .
 Nixon delegated some aspects of Cuba policy to his Vice President, Nixon . He clearly didn't want to leave office in the middle of a war with the island nation .
 According to many sources, the March 1960 meeting of the National Security Council authorized neither a huge Bay of Pigs invasion force nor a CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel Castro . President Eisenhower authorized neither invasion of Cuba nor a massive CIA operation .
 The general resolution involved support for anti-Castro operations and the creation of a US-backed coalition of exile groups . Instead of a general resolution, the general resolution was a US backed coalition of exiled groups .
 E Howard Hunt and David Atlee Phillips were two veterans of the CIA’s 1954 Guatemala coup . Hunt and Phillips were friends of the coup, and helped coordinate that coalition .
 CIA met with Nixon dozens of times about the Cuban problem, conferences for which the notes have never been released . Nixon, however, seemed to press for more direct action, and the CIA met him .
 The original CIA—Mafia plots, which began in 1959, were so cautiously structured at arm’s length, using Hoffa as a cutout, that they hadn’t been effective . Hoffa was Hoffa's cutout; the original plots were so carefully structured
 It’s also likely that President Eisenhower didn’t even know about them . President Eisenhower probably didn't even know they were there .
 Nixon apparently believed that more direct action was needed, and soon . Nixon believed it was needed to be done soon .
 He ordered his National Security Aide, General Robert Cushman, to meet with Hunt . Hunt has been accused of being a terrorist .
 Hunt admitted that he had written one of the first CIA memos calling for the assassination of Fidel Castro . The memo was withheld from Congressional investigators and has still not been released .
 Hunt wrote that Cushman had urged him to inform him of any difficulties the Vice President might be able to resolve . Hunt later wrote that “Cushman’s had urged me of any project difficulties I might be . resolve.” Hunt wrote .
 Cushman told Hunt that Nixon was the “chief architect . . . the honcho” of the U.S. effort to topple Fidel Fidel Castro . Cushmen: Nixon was ‘chief architect’ of the United States effort .
 President Nixon told a White House aide that he had been “deeply involved” in the Cuban operation . That was confirmed years later when President Nixon said he was ‘deeply’ involved in the operation .
 Hunt’s key role in the successful Guatemala coup was key to the successful coup . Nixon would have viewed Hunt, and his proposal, favorably, he says . Hunt had previously met with Nixon .
 Hunt wanted to kill Fidel Castro, but the U.S. had been trying without success to assassinate him since the previous year . Nixon also probably knew that the United States had tried to assassinate Fidel, as Hunt wanted .
 Hunt was involved in helping plan Fidel's assassination before his meeting with Nixon’s aide, he almost certainly was after it . Hunt met with Nixon's aide before the assassination of Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 Hunt, like Nixon, publicly denied knowing about, let alone working on, the ClA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel Castro . Hunt denied knowledge of the plot, but he also denied working with the mafia .
 Hunt’s mentor, Richard Helms, says Hunt was the CIA Director of the CIA . Helms was Hunt's mentor and Nixon's future CIA Director . Hunt was a CIA Director in the 1970s .
 Robert Maheu later admitted that Richard Nixon was personally behind the ramped-up CIA—Mafia plots to assassinate Fidel Castro . Richard Nixon had chosen Robert Maheu to be the CIA’s new cutout to the Mafia . Nixon was the CIA's new cut
 Nixon had worked with Maheu on two previous, successful covert operations . It was logical that Nixon would want him on the project, since he’d worked with him .
 Howard Hughes, Howard Hughes' main client, was closer to Nixon than any other politician . Maheu’s main client was Howard Hughes . Howard Hughes was also close to Nixon .
 Nixon memo confirms that the reclusive billionaire had actually met with Nixon the previous year . Hughes had vanished from public view, but Nixon memo says he had met with him .
 Trafficante was represented by famed attorney F Lee Bailey during the height of the Watergate investigation . Trafficante is being represented by Bailey, according to Daniel Sheehan, a noted activist lawyer .
 Trafficante explained to Bailey’s Chief Investigator that in the summer of 1960, Vice President Nixon had originally reached out for help to his longtime patron, the reclusive billionaire Howard Hughes .
 Hughes, who did extensive work for the U.S. government, assigned his key aide, Robert Maheu, to handle the matter . Hughes' aide, who worked for the United States government, handled the matter for Hughes .
 Maheu, a longtime CIA asset, reached out to Mafia don Johnny Rosselli, who in turn asked Santo Trafficante to join the operation . Trafficante is a member of the Mafia who has a long-term CIA asset .
 Trafficante still maintained extensive contacts in Cuba, since his former casinos remained open . Trafficante's casinos still remain open in Cuba .
 Trafficante was leery of the operation, since he had worked out a type of accommodation with the new Cuban regime . Trafficante is leery since he worked out an accommodation with Cuba's new regime, Trafficante says .
 Trafficante told Rosselli and Maheu that he wanted some form of personal assurance that Vice President Nixon was actually behind the operation . Trafficante said he wanted to know if Nixon was behind the attack on Trafficante .
 At Trafficante’s third meeting with Rosselli in Miami, a CIA security official joined them . Vice President Nixon personally ordered the Castro assassination operation, the official said .
 Trafficante agreed to join the venture and to use his men in the operation . Trafficante said he would be using his men to carry out the operation. Trafficante is known for his involvement in the smuggling operation .
 Rosselli’s boss Sam Giancana also joined the plots and, later, so did Carlos Marcello . The former Inter Milan boss was linked with a move to a new club in the Premier League .
 Nixon’s September 1960 ClA—Mafia plots with Trafficante, Rosselli, and Giancana were hidden from the Warren Commission and wouldn’t be officially exposed until Congressional hearings in 1975, a year after Watergate forced Nixon to resign .
 Watergate investigators learned of the connection eight months before Nixon resigned . Those CIA plots were never publicly linked to Watergate, even though in 2012 I first published memos showing them .
 Marcello's role in Nixon’s ClA—Mafia plots remained unexposed until 1989 and is still overlooked by most historians today . However, his role in the Nixon administration's ClA-Mafia plot was overlooked until 1989 .
 Mafia plots were first linked to JFK’s assassination in 1975 and led to two Congressional investigations of the assassination . Two Congressional investigations were launched into JFK's assassination in the 1970s . The CIA and CIA are investigating the Mafia's involvement in JFK's killing .
 Marcello's role in the ClA—Mafia plots was hidden from those investigations . The full connection between those plots and JFK’s murder hasn’t been available until now .
 Part of the ClA—Mafia plots that began in 1960 wasn’t connected to those plots until 2012 . One of the plots was connected to the plots that were discovered in 2012 .
 The mob bosses involved in the plots paid a huge bribe to Vice President Richard Nixon the same month the plots began . Marcello, Trafficante, and Giancana were among the mob bosses .
 Nixon’s background shows how that bribe came about and why Nixon turned to the Mafia to kill Castro in the first place . Nixon's background explains how he got the bribe from the Mafia .
 Cohen confessed that Nixon received even more Mafia money for his races after that . Author Anthony Summers documented many additional Mafia ties that Nixon developed in the 1950s .
 When Nixon first ran for Vice President, with Dwight D Eisenhower heading the ticket, “Sam Giancana, then a rising power in the national crime syndicate, ‘I like Ike.” Nixon said . ‘Sam Gianrana, a rising star in the
 At that time, "Our guys out in California" meant Johnny Rosselli and his associates . At that . time, “Our guys in California” meant “Johnny’s guys out” and “our guys out of California’
 Nixon also received support from his first race onward from billionaire Howard Hughes . Nixon's first race was in New York City .
 Once Nixon became Vice President, he received even more favors and illicit money from Hughes . Hughes received more favors from Nixon as Vice President . Hughes also received illicit cash from Nixon .
 Hughes had his top covert operative, Robert Maheu, help Nixon with difficult problems . Twice Hughes had him help with Nixon's problems .
 Marcello clearly had every reason to want to see JFK defeated and Nixon become president . He had a reason to support Nixon's campaign .
 Marcello and Trafficante wanted to do all they could to ensure Nixon victory . Jimmy Hoffa was soon expected to face a federal indictment as a result of all the attention the Kennedys’ hearings had focused on him .
 Marcello began to gather money for Nixon . Trafficante and Giancana later claimed that he had contributed to Nixon . Tony Provenzano, a Mafia Teamster official in New Jersey, also contributed .
 In September 1960, Richard Nixon received a bribe of at least $500,000 from the same mob bosses who began working that month on his CIA—Mafia plot to kill Fidel Castro . Nixon received the same bribe as the mob bosses .
 The Florida mobster contributing was Santo Trafficante, who was at the time joining the CIA—Mafia plots . Trafficante joined the CIA when he was a member of the Florida mob .
 Among the “mob boys” in New Jersey was Mafia capo Tony Provenzano, who was close to Marcello . Among the "mob boys" in New . Jersey was mob boss Tony Provedzano .
 The September 1960 Mafia—Hoffa—Nixon bribe was extensively documented by the Justice Department . The bribe was an attempt to bribe the President of Florida .
 The 1960 Mafia bribe would also be independently verified by Senate investigator Michael Ewing . The public would not learn about Nixon’s bribe until 1978, long after Watergate investigations ended .
 Marcello’s huge bribe to the Vice President also raises the possibility that an earlier payment to Nixon might have been the reason he hadn’t been deported during Nixon's Vice Presidency .
 The bribe given by Marcello, Trafficante, and the others produced other benefits as well as other benefits . The bribe was given by Trafficante and Marcella .
 Nixon’s ClA—Mafia plots had kicked into high gear by late September 1960, with the CIA wanting Trafficante and the others to kill Fidel Castro in classic gangland fashion .
 CIA wanted to give the public an entity other than the U.S. government to blame for the murder . That was really a primary reason the CIA wanted the Mafia in the first place, the CIA says .
 Trafficante, Rosselli, and the others focused on lowprofile types of assassination, such as poisoning . The mob bosses knew the Cuban people wouldn’t tolerate the mob retaking control of its casinos if they blamed the Mafia for the death of the popular Cuban leader, Traffic
 The CIA later admitted having its scientists work on developing deadly toxins to use in the plots . The CIA also admitted working on developing toxins to help with the plot .
 Two plots to poison Fidel Castro can be documented in the weeks leading up to the 1960 Presidential election . Two plots were documented in weeks before the 1960 election .
 One involved Richard Cain, a “made” Chicago mobster who also worked in Chicago law enforcement . Cain was also a "made’s" mobster . Cain worked in law enforcement in Chicago .
 The other effort included Frank Fiorini, who had fought for Fidel’s forces . Fiorini was the liaison between Fidel and the mobsters who ran the Havana casinos . He fought for the Cuban government and became a liaison with the mob .
 Years later Fiorini would change his name to Frank Sturgis and become infamous as one of the Watergate burglars working for E Howard Hunt . Fiorini changed his name and became famous for his role in Watergate burglaries .
 Fiorini’s mob and CIA ties have since been documented, but those links would not become widely known during the Watergate scandal . Fiorini's mob ties would not have been widely known until Watergate .
 CIA officer E Howard Hunt played a major role in the Agency’s covert plot to eliminate Fidel in the fall of 1960 . Hunt was a CIA officer in the CIA's covert operation to kill Fidel Castro . Hunt is believed to have been a major CIA operative in the 1960s .
 If Castro was killed by mob assassins and U.S. military forces were deployed to protect Americans in Cuba, it would take only a small group of trained exiles to help install another US-backed strongman or dictator .
 Though experienced with coups, Hunt had no experience with the Mafia . Hunt was an experienced coups expert, Hunt was not experienced with Mafia .
 Bernard Barker was assigned as Hunt’s assistant in September 1960 . Barker would maintain a position he would maintain for years . Barker was a longtime mob associate .
 The son of an American father, Barker had been born in Cuba and attended school in the U.S. Barker had a Cuban father, but was born in the United States . Barker is the son of a Cuban immigrant .
 He originally had dual American—Cuban citizenship but because of his service in Cuba’s brutal and corrupt secret police, his U.S. citizenship was revoked in the mid-1950s .
 Barker and Hunt say that Barker worked for the CIA for several years in the 1950s . Barker’s released CIA file says he began working for the Agency only in the spring of 1959 when he was forty-one .
 Hoover’s description perfectly matches other descriptions of Frank Fiorini's part of the C[A—Mafia plot . Hoover's description of the Fiorini plot is similar to that of Fiorini .
 Nixon’s plotting with the CIA and the Mafia continued right up until the 1960 election, but his effort was not successful . Nixon's plot to win the election in 1960s was unsuccessful, but he won't win again .
 Sam Giancana would later claim that he gave Kennedy his close win, but the claim has since been debunked . Giancrano's boast was later debunked .
 The son of one of America’s richest men would need Giancana to win in heavily Democratic Chicago . Chicago's Mayor, Richard Daley, was JFK's close ally . Daley was a close ally to JFK .
 Unlike Marcello, Giancana was open to the possibility of a Kennedy presidency . He had tried to use mutual associate Frank Sinatra to influence JFK’s tough stand on Mafia .
 Sinatra introduced JFK to one of his mistresses, Judith Campbell, earlier in 1960 . Sinatra had also introduced JFK .
 JFK and his new Attorney General Robert Kennedy declared war on the Mafia . However, it was to no avail, since JFK—and his new attorney general Robert Kennedy—wasted no time in declaring war .
 Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante were singled out for special attention in that war . RFK’s hugely increased staff of Justice Department Mafia prosecutors soon targeted them .
 The CIA continued the CIA—Mafia assassination plots into December of 1960 and into 1961 without telling the new President . Despite those stories in the press, the Agency continued the plots .
 New Orleans detective Guy Banister was linked to a CIA plot to stage a fake attack on the United States naval base at Guantanamo, Cuba, to provide a pretext for a U.S. attack on Cuba . Banister is linked to the plot .
 Cuban authorities got wind of the plot and arrested forty Cubans involved in the plot . The plot was meant to be carried out by a group of Cubans . Cuban authorities arrested 40 Cubans in Cuba .
 The Cuban government denounced the organization involved in the fake attack, “the Anti-Communist League of the Caribbean,” which was largely controlled by Banister . In the press, the Cuban government “unmasked the CIA’s participation”
 Cubela had several ties to the C[A—Mafia plots and to Trafficante associates . Cubela also had ties to several other associates of the Trafficante .
 The CIA sent a sniper rifle to Havana via a diplomatic pouch in 1960, according to Congressional testimony uncovered by historian David Kaiser . In addition, “in late 1960,” “a sniper rifle” was sent to Cuba via diplomatic pouch .
 The CIA would continue to lie to President Kennedy after he took office . That was only some of the crucial information the CIA hid from him .
 The CIA was also using ZR/RIFLE to try to assassinate another foreign leader, Patrice Lumumba of the Congo, in an attempt that succeeded shortly before JFK was sworn in . The CIA also tried to kill another foreign president in an assassination attempt .
 As detailed later, QJWIN would also be used in the plots to kill Fidel Castro and would surface in relation to JFK’s murder .
 CIA Director Allen Dulles, a close associate of Richard Nixon, never told JFK that he was continuing the CI[A—Mafia plots . Dulles was a close ally of Nixon's Nixon administration . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 JFK did want JFK to continue covert action to overthrow Fidel Castro, but the four hundred Cuban exiles then being secretly trained by the CIA in Central America clearly couldn’t do the job .
 Dulles instead told JFK they were planning a Cuban exile invasion of Cuba . The number of exiles being trained eventually reached two thousand, and the number was trained .
 Dulles knew that even two thousand Cuban exiles had no chance of staging a viable invasion against one hundred thousand members of the Cuban army and militia . The Cuba populace that largely backed Fidel Castro was largely backed by Fidel Castro .
 As a backup to the CIA—Mafia plots, he had CIA officers such as David Atlee Phillips begin a new plan . The plan recycled the failed ‘fake Guantanamo attack’ from December .
 JFK was told that the exiles being trained there were for a ‘diversionary landing” force that would stage a decoy attack on Cuba, far from the main exile force, to draw the attention of Cuban military forces . JFK told JFK that exiles were for
 The exiles would sail into Cuba on their own ship, the Santa Ana . After being trained at the secluded thirty-five-hundred-acre camp, the exiles sailed into Cuba . The Santa Ana was the largest ship in the world .
 Like JFK, they believed they were going to stage a diversionary landing on the far eastern shore of Cuba to distract Fidel from the main force . The landing was planned to distract the main forces, but it was not a success .
 Not until they neared shore would their CIA commanders break out Cuban military uniforms and explain they were to attack the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay in the guise of Castro’s forces .
 E Howard Hunt’s associate David Atlee Phillips was handling propaganda for the whole Cuban operation . Phillips could ensure that the U.S. and the world quickly heard about Castro's supposed attack on Guantanamo Bay . Phillips was responsible for the operation .
 Even if the Mafia failed to assassinate Fidel before the CIA’s exile invasion, that fake attack was designed to force JFK to break his public pledge not to use U.S. military force against Cuba . The Mafia was behind the assassination of Fidel Castro .
 Guy Banister and David Ferrie became involved in the covert operation . The CIA exile training was going on outside New Orleans .
 In an unusual foreshadowing of events to come, one of Banister’s associates even used the name “Oswald” as an alias when trucks were purchased for Cuban exiles .
 One of Banister’s associates briefly employed Oswald when he was a teenager . The name of the well-publicized defector was used in the case .
 New Orleans became a center of covert Cuban exile activity in 1963 . Marcello became involved in those operations . New Orleans was a major center of Cuban exile operations .
 In addition to being part of the ClA—Mafia plots, Marcello donated money to Cuban exile groups . In addition, he also gave money to Cuba exile groups, according to reports .
 Marcello’s access to covert U.S. anti-Castro operations only increased . As he developed ties to Guy Banister and David Ferrie, he became involved in covert operations .
 David Ferrie claimed he took leave from Eastern Airlines to assist with Cuban invasion plans in 1961 . Ferrie was still an Eastern Airlines pilot in early 1961 .
 E Howard Hunt and his assistant, Bernard Barker, played two roles in those invasion plans in the early months of 1961, after JFK became President . Hunt and Barker were involved in the invasion plans .
 Hunt worked with exile leaders such as Tony Varona and Manuel Artime . He was supposed to run Cuba after Fidel was gone . Hunt was one of the Cuban exile leaders .
 CIA admits Varona was also working at the same time on the ClA—Mafia plots with his associate Santo Trafficante, as was Artime .
 Much evidence shows the same was true for Hunt and Barker, who were also involved in the CIA . The new exile leadership of Cuba would have to be ready to take over as soon as the Mafia assassinated Fidel Castro .
 Stockton’s account shows that E Howard Hunt was working with Johnny Rosselli on assassination plotting, even as the CI[A—Mafia plots were actively under way . Stockton: Hunt was also working on assassination plots, even though the plots were still underway .
 CIA Director Allen Dulles was confident that Castro would be killed by the CIA—Mafia plots or that JFK would be forced to commit U.S. military forces because of the fake attack on Guantanamo . Dulles: JFK would have to commit United States military forces to Guantanamo .
 On March 7, 1961, another CIA memo stated that “Major Juan Almeida, Chief of Staff of the Cuban Army, has been approaching certain Latin Ambassadors in Havana to determine whether he would be accepted” for political asylum . Another CIA memo said that Major Juan Al
 Both reports about Almeida’s dissatisfaction with Castro went to CIA headquarters in Washington . CIA headquarters is in Washington, DC .
 Commander Almeida was extremely popular in Cuba and was far more powerful than Che Guevara, who wasn’t even Cuban . He was extremely powerful in Cuba, far more popular than Che .
 In a population that was 70 percent of African heritage, Almeida was the highest-ranking black Cuban official . In Cuba, the population is 70 percent African heritage .
 He was essentially the third-most-powerful man in the country, after Fidel and his brother Raul . He could have been an incredible covert ally for the United States .
 CIA Director Dulles was apparently so confident in the CIA—Mafia plots and the fake Guantanamo attack that the Agency made no approach to Commander Almeida . Dulles made no attempt to negotiate with Commander AlMeida .
 CIA did not even tell President Kennedy what it had heard about Almeida . CIA didn't even tell him what it'd heard about the CIA had heard .
 CIA memos about Commander Almeida’s offers were not revealed during investigations, later that year, into the failure of the invasion, not even to the Agency’�s own Inspector General . The memos were not disclosed during investigations into the failed invasion .
 Memos were so sensitive that they weren't declassified for decades . They were declassified after decades, but were never released .
 President Kennedy expressed his dissatisfaction with the CIA’s proposed landing site near the city of Trinidad . JFK expressed his displeasure with the proposed landing . JFK kept the plot secret from the CIA Director .
 JFK, a combat veteran from his PT boat days, thought a secluded landing spot made more sense . JFK thought a more secluded spot would make more sense for him to land in the area .
 CIA chose a new beachhead on Cuba’s southwest coast in an area called the Bay of Pigs . The CIA chose the beachhead .
 Commander Almeida was given control of the portion of Cuba that included the Bay of Pigs . Fidel divided command of Cuba into thirds for defense against the anticipated invasion .
 If JFK had told JFK about Almeida, who could have been encouraged to remain in place and assist the U.S., history could've been radically different . The CIA could have told JFK that the CIA had not told him about the CIA .
 Carlos Marcello was firmly in the sights of new Attorney General Robert Kennedy . Even as planning for the Bay of Pigs continued, the Bay was still under fire .
 RFK’s highly publicized war on organized crime was the start of RFK's highly publicized anti-crime war . Carlos Marcello was targeted for strong action by the head of the Immigration and Naturalization Service .
 RFK insisted on more aggressive action against Tunisian-born Marcello, who wasn’t a citizen and had only falsified birth records from Guatemala . RFK insists on aggressive action, saying he was only a Guatemalan citizen .
 Attorney General Kennedy decided to use Marcello’s own forgeries against him and had the INS arrange for him to be deported to Guatemala . The INS arranged the deportation .
 Carlos Marcello went to the local INS office for what he thought was a routine visit . He was detained and then flown to Guatemala without a hearing . He thought it was a visit to the INS office .
 The enraged godfather found himself in Guatemala, the same small country where the CIA was training Cuban exiles for the upcoming Bay of Pigs invasion . Just seven months earlier, Marcello had given a half million dollars to the man he thought would be the next President, and now the
 The US-backed dictator of Guatemala is already under pressure for allowing the US-supported Cuban exile training . Guatemala's press and populace have criticized the move for allowing a notorious American godfather to live there .
 He ordered Marcello and his American attorney detained and escorted to the border . He was ordered by the judge to be detained and taken into custody .
 The man who was America’s most powerful godfather now had to scramble through the junglelined back roads of Honduras in Gucci shoes .
 He collapsed three times in the dust, complaining that he could not go on any farther, that he was finished, and that it was that rich kid Bobby Kennedy who had done this to them . "He collapsed three . times, complained that he couldn't go on anymore, that it
 Carlos told his brother when he got back, ‘tell my brother when you get back, about what dat kid Bobby done to us.’ Carlos told him as he lay exhausted in a roadside gutter . Carlos told one of his friends: ‘Tell my brother about what
 Before arriving at a small airport, Marcello plunged “down a pathless slope,” he said . “I am not going to be able to get back on my feet,’ he said. ‘I’m going to go down a path
 Carlos Marcello was forced to struggle in the sweltering heat of the Honduran jungle . The godfather of General Motors is now in the middle of a battle in the tropical heat . He is now battling pain, thirst, hunger and swarms of tropical insects .
 Marcello's thoughts were no doubt consumed with the two men he saw as responsible for his plight . John and Robert Kennedy were responsible for the death of Marcella .
 Marcello talked of it often in prison to Jack Van Laningham during the CAMTEX operation . Years later, the searing experience still haunted him, and he talked about it often .
 Marcello, the CIA and President Kennedy were in the tense days leading up to the supposedly secret exile invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . The CIA and the CIA were planning JFK’s murder, the author says .
 JFK had publicly pledged that U.S. military forces would not be used to attack Cuba . Reports of the impending exile invasion were rampant in Miami and among reporters .
 Fidel Castro ordered the arrests of dissidents and suspects throughout Cuba as a precaution . Fidel Castro got wind of the threat, ordering the arrests . The arrests are a precautionary measure, Castro says .
 Eisenhower had closed the United States Embassy in Havana, depriving the U.S. of a valuable listening post in Cuba .
 JFK almost completely at the mercy of CIA officials regarding the situation in Cuba . This lack of clandestine information from observers on the scene left JFK at a complete lack of intelligence .
 Director Dulles still depended on the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel just before the invasion . The CIA was still in touch with the CIA when it was assassinated .
 The killing was supposed to throw that country into chaos and force JFK’s hand, but a communications mix-up doomed that plan . JFK's plan was to force him to pull out of the country .
 The mistake happened after right-wing CIA officer E Howard Hunt dropped out of the Bay of Pigs operation at the last minute, to protest the inclusion of a liberal in the prospective post-Fidel government . Hunt was a right wing CIA officer who dropped out .
 Even without Hunt, the CIA—Mafia plots continued, with Cuban exile leader —and Trafficante associate—Tony Varona playing a key role .
 A contact inside Cuba agreed to place a ClIA-provided poison pill in Fidel’s food just before the invasion, after receiving a signal from Varona . The poison pill was placed in Fidel's food .
 Hunt handled exile leaders like Varona . Hunt's abrupt departure left only a few officials who knew about the plots .
 Varona was placed in a secure United States military facility with the other exile leaders to await the outcome of the invasion . He was unable to give the signal to poison Castro Castro .
 The fake attack plan was set to be staged by the exiles trained near New Orleans . That still left Dulles the fake attack on Guantanamo, which still left .
 Cuban exiles were told they were to put on the uniforms of Castro’s troops and stage an attack on the American base while thus disguised . Castro's troops were told that they would attack the U.S. base .
 This provocation would let the CIA and U.S. press JFK, who did not know about the operation, to respond against Castro with massive United States military force . The CIA and United States Navy would press JFK to respond with massive military force, he says .
 Cuban exiles refused to undertake the bizarre, possibly suicidal landing and attack . However, they refused to take part in the bizarre landing .
 They were there to risk their lives fighting Castro’s troops, not the U.S. military . They were not fighting for the United States military, not for Castro's troops .
 The failure of those two operations, along with the lack of real secrecy, caused the Bay of Pigs disaster . Cuban Army Commander Almeida’s offer, primarily caused the failure of the operation .
 Internal investigations would not uncover the ClA—Mafia plots, the fake Guantanamo attack, or Commander Almeida’s offers . Internal investigations followed, though they would not unearth the plots .
 CIA Director Dulles and his second-in-command were eventually forced to resign . Dulles, who was CIA Director, was forced to step down after the scandal .
 The CIA managed one success in the weeks following the Bay of Pigs disaster, though it was one the Agency couldn't boast about .
 On May 30, 1961, Rafael Trujillo, dictator of the Dominican Republic, died in a spectacular gangland-style slaying in his car . The hit was carried out the same way the CIA had originally wanted the Mafia to kill Fidel .
 Years later Trujillo’s security chief claimed Hunt and Johnny Rosselli had been involved in the shooting . Years later, the security chief said Hunt and Rossella were involved .
 Johnny Rosselli and E Howard Hunt’s joint mission to the Dominican Republic, along with other CIA information about the two, had been withheld from that Committee .
 Mafia plots to assassinate Fidel continued even after the Bay of Pigs, with Trafficante, Rosselli, Varona, and others continuing their roles . The CIA was involved in the plot to kill Fidel Trujillo .
 Carlos Marcello continued his ordeal in Central America in the run-up to Trujillo’s assassination .
 In Honduras, Marcello—nursing his three broken ribs—barely managed the 17-mile trek to a tiny village and another slog through the jungle before finally reaching a small airport . In Honduras he barely managed to manage a seventeen-mile walk to a small village and
 FBI was fairly certain Marcello had been flown to Miami on a Dominican air force jet . FBI was also certain he had been sent to Miami by the Dominican Air Force .
 Marcello still had to regain the relative safety of Louisiana . A Border Patrol report says that pilot David Ferrie was involved in the return .
 Marcello told Van Laningham that “he hid out for a long time and moved around, so he could not get caught.” He said he hid out “a long time” and “moved around” to avoid detection . Marcell
 Marcello returned home and resumed running his vast criminal empire from his office at the Town and Country Motel . He returned to his job at the Motel and ran his criminal empire .
 Carlos Marcello's associates Santo Trafficante and Johnny Rosselli continued to work for the CIA on the Agency’s plots to assassinate Fidel Castro . President Kennedy remained unaware of the plots .
 CIA officer William Harvey was now running the Castro assassination operation . Harvey was a CIA officer now in charge of the CIA operation .
 The program continued to employ assets such as QJWIN, a European assassin recruiter linked to narcotics trafficking . The program was used to recruit European assassins to Europe .
 JFK finally replaced CIA Director Allen Dulles with John McCone . McCone was the former head of the Atomic Energy Commission . Dulles was replaced by McCone in 1961 .
 When McCone joined the CIA, no one told him about the Mafia plots to kill Fidel, either that they had occurred or that they were continuing . No one told McCone about the plots either that had occurred, or that the plots were ongoing .
 Richard Helms was named Deputy Director for Plans in December 1961 . Helms did not officially assume that position until February 1, 1962 .
 Deputy Director for Plans was essentially the highest operational position in the CIA . The Deputy Director of Plans is responsible for most of the CIA's operational operations .
 Richard Helms had no documented taint from the Bay of Pigs fiasco . Unconfirmed report from noted CBS reporter Daniel Schorr linked him to the start of the 1960 ClA—Mafia plots .
 Helms wouldn't tell McCone about his use of the Mafia even when Helms began to expand the plots . That may be why Helms didn't tell him about the Mafia .
 To a later Senate committee, John McCone “testified that he was not briefed about the assassination plots by Dulles, Bisques, Helms, or anyone else” something Helms confirmed in his own testimony .
 Also kept in the dark about the plots’ continuation were President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy and President Kennedy were kept informed of the plots .
 In working with William Harvey on the plots, Helms wanted him to focus on just Johnny Rosselli, easing Trafficante, Giancana, and others out of the operation .
 There are plenty of indications that the other mob bosses—including Carlos Marcello—remained active in the CIA—Mafia plots into the fall of 1963 . However, the Mafia doesn’t work that way .
 Marcello and his partners plotted to kill JFK in a way that would force high CIA officials to cover up crucial information after JFK’s assassination . Those plots would play a central role in helping Marcella and his associates kill JFK .
 E Howard Hunt was a protééé of Richard Helms . Hunt was apparently no longer involved in the CI[A—Mafia plots . Hunt is a former CIA operative who worked for Helms in the mid-'70s .
 Bernard Barker remained Hunt’s assistant —in addition to fulfilling other Miami-based CIA duties — and Barker also continued his work for Santo Trafficante . Barker continued to be Hunt's assistant .
 In 1962, a problem with the CIA—Mafia plots finally brought their existence to the attention of President Kennedy . President Kennedy and Attorney General Robert Kennedy .
 The prosecution of Cain’s associate had to be suppressed to avoid exposing the ClA—Mafia plots to kill Castro, which meant that RFK would have to be told something about the plots . RFK had to tell RFK that the plots were to be thwarted by the
 The CIA's General Counsel and the Agency’s Director of Security told an angry Robert Kennedy about the CIA—Mafia plots from October 1960 to the Bay of Pigs and even into early 1962 .
 RFK had learned in general terms about CIA's use of Giancana in some capacity during the Bay of Pigs . It's unclear whether RFK knew he knew about CIA involvement in assassinations or thought he was just providing intelligence .
 CIA admits RFK was not told the plots were continuing even after he was assured they were over . RFK not told about the plots, CIA admits that RFK wasn't told about them .
 Chicago Mafia had been a target of Robert Kennedy's everincreasing war against organized crime . Trafficante’s empire in Florida and Marcello's organization in Louisiana were targets of Kennedy .
 Robert Kennedy demanded that the CIA check with him first if it ever decided to work with the Mafia again . Kennedy: "If the CIA ever worked with the mafia again, it would have to check with me first"
 Richard Helms ignored it and continued to have William Harvey work with Johnny Rosselli and exile leader Tony Varona . They passed the message along to Richard Helm, who ignored it .
 The CIA has admitted that in June 1962 Rosselli told Harvey that Varona had sent a three-man assassination team into Cuba . The CIA admitted in June that the CIA had been involved in the operation .
 Marcello and his Mafia partner lost two other potential methods of influencing or pressuring JFK to back off on his war on organized crime . Also in the spring of 1962, the Mafia lost two more potential ways to influence JFK .
 Sam Giancana and Frank Sinatra became so close that JFK decided to terminate his friendship with Sinatra . JFK's friendship with the singer became so strong that he decided to end it .
 The FBI was wiretapping mobsters because of pressure from RFK . Sinatra's fruitless attempt to persuade JFK to ease up on the mob was unsuccessful .
 Sinatra introduced JFK to Judith Campbell, who later became his mistress, in 1960 . In 1960 Sinatra had also introduced JFK's mistress, Judith Campbell .
 J. Edgar Hoover sent “a top-secret memorandum to” Robert Kennedy that summarized Judith Campbell’s telephone contact with the President as well as her association with Sam Giancana . J Edgar Hoover also sent a top secret memorandum to Robert Kennedy .
 Courtney Evans was the FBI liaison between Hoover’s FBI and RFK . Evans confirmed details of the strained relationship between RFK and the FBI Director .
 RFK wanted Hoover to be replaced or forced to retire when he met the mandatory federal retirement age . Hoover's retirement age was rapidly approaching, RFK said . Hoover would be forced to step down when he reached the mandatory retirement age, he said .
 JFK was in no position to force Hoover to leave, but because of Campbell, JFK was not in position to do so . Hoover was not allowed to leave the White House .
 By the following year, Hoover had received from JFK the confirmation he sought, leaving him secure as FBI Director even if JFK served a second term . Hoover received confirmation from JFK that he had been confirmed .
 The fact that President Kennedy ended his relationships with two of Johnny Rosselli’s close friends was a critical blow to Marcello and Trafficante . Trafficante: "The fact that . President Kennedy . ended his . relationships with . two of . Johnny Rosseli�
 Campbell and Sinatra had potentially represented ways that John or Robert Kennedy might have been pressured—or blackmailed—to back off from their massive assault on the Mafia . The Kennedy family had been involved with the Mafia for decades .
 The mob bosses had few options to stop the Kennedys’ ever-increasing pressure on them . Now the mob bosses were left with few options . The mob boss was forced to take action against the family .
 RFK and JFK had developed their own effort to topple Fidel Castro . Even before learning of the ClA—Mafia plots, the Kennedy brothers had developed a plan to topple Castro . JFK and RFK had been involved in the effort to oust Castro .
 The Kennedys didn't trust a CIA official to oversee the operation after the Bay of Pigs fiasco . Instead, they picked General Edward Lansdale, fresh from the Vietnam conflict . Lansdale was the CIA's top commander in the operation .
 Operation Mongoose was in some ways a joint CIA— United States military effort, though by far the lion’s share of the operation fell under CIA control . The operation was a joint effort between the CIA and the U.S. military .
 By early 1962, “the CIA station in Miami quickly expanded into the world’s largest six hundred case officers and as many as three thousand contract agents,” according to a biographer .
 Operation Mongoose was a loose collection of actions directed at Cuba . It included support for exile groups, sabotage, and plans for military action . It was also a collection of support for the exile groups .
 As an outsider, Lansdale was not part of Richard Helms’s ongoing CIA—Mafia plots, and neither was CIA Director John McCone . Lansdale wasn't part of Helms's ongoing CIA-Mafia plot, but neither was McCone. Lansdale is
 In the summer of 1962 the CIA resumed contact with Rolando Cubela, the disgruntled mid-level Cuban official the Agency had first dealt with regarding an assassination plot a year and a half earlier .
 Cubela made no progress in 1962, but in 1963 the CIA asked for his help in assassinating Fidel Castro . The CIA asked Cubela for help in 1963 .
 Cubela’s contacts always seemed to coincide with developments in the CIA—Mafia plots . Cubela's ties to Trafficante's associates indicate that in many ways they were simply another aspect of the CIA-Mafia plot, writes John Avlon .
 In the early days of Mongoose, U.S. military leaders proposed a bizarre array of actions against Cuba . The United States military leaders suggested a variety of options .
 Declassified only in the 1990s, one proposed action was code-named Operation Northwoods . Operation Northwood is code-name Northwoods, a proposed action code-names .
 Neither President Kennedy, the CIA’s Inspector General, nor JFK‘s new CIA Director had ever learned about the fake Guantanamo attack planned for the Bay of Pigs .
 The inclusion of a similar idea in the Joint Chiefs’ Northwoods proposal in 1962 suggests that the head of the Joint . Chiefs in the spring of 1962—General Lyman L Lemnitzer, who’d had that same position in 1961, had been a witting participant
 Fake CIA attack could have been coordinated with the U.S. military at a high level . From a practical point of view this makes sense, so it makes sense .
 The Northwoods proposals shocked President Kennedy, and he rejected them all . President Kennedy rejected all the proposals .
 The plan apparently showed JFK that some of the Joint Chiefs were very much out of touch with JFK’s view of the world . General Lemnitzer was chairman of Joint Chiefs . The plan was designed to show JFK that he was not in touch with the world's view .
 JFK replaced Lemnitzer with General Maxwell Taylor, who had headed JFK’s Bay of Pigs investigation . Within months, Taylor was replaced by Lemnitz .
 General Taylor would remain Chairman of the Joint Chiefs throughout JFK’s Presidency . RFK named one of his sons after him . General Taylor was admired by RFK .
 Operation Mongoose was the culmination of three years of U.S. covert action against Cuba . ClA—Mafia plots, massive military exercises in the Caribbean in the summer of 1962, were among the most significant attacks .
 CIA Director John McCone was the first U.S. official to sound the alarm about Soviet missiles in Cuba in August 1962 . McCone's more experienced subordinates believed he lacked evidence .
 At first no one knew whether or not the Soviet missiles had nuclear warheads, but by September 19 evidence had started accumulating .
 On September 27, the United States military began preparing contingency invasion plans for Cuba . The U.S. military is preparing contingency plans for an invasion of Cuba .
 JFK briefed on October 16 that “hard photographic evidence” from a U-2 spy plane flight confirmed that Soviet medium-range nuclear ballistic missiles were being installed in Cuba . JFK was briefed by the U.S. government that the missiles were installed .
 He made plans to reveal the Crisis to the nation six days later, after having daily consultations with a full range of top military and civilian advisors . The crisis will be the first to be announced by the President of the United States .
 On October 22, 1962, at 7m. ET, President Kennedy went on national television to tell the American people the country was on the brink of nuclear war . President Kennedy told the nation that the U.S. was at risk of war .
 Families across America were riveted to their television screens as Kennedy described the missiles and the blockade of Cuba he was instituting to be sure that no more “offensive military equipment” reached the island .
 JFK drew a blockade line around Cuba, one that several Soviet ships were fast approaching . JFK drew the blockade line in Cuba .
 The firm’s sensitive work would be visible on television throughout the Crisis, which makes it incredible that Oswald would be allowed to work there unless he had U.S. intelligence connections .
 The day before President Kennedy announced a blockade of Cuba, a CIA team headed by future Watergate burglar Eugenio Martinez landed two agents on the northern coast of Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy was furious when he found out and wanted CIA Director McCone to immediately fire Harvey, "but Helms talked" both men out of it . "Helms talked” both men from firing Harvey .
 The CIA, in particular Richard Helms, would take similar unauthorized action the following year in a way that inadvertently aided the plans of Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli to assassinate President Kennedy .
 Marcello and Trafficante were consumed by the Kennedys’ war against them and the rest of the Mafia . Trafficante was consumed by that war, and the Mafia was destroyed .
 Marcello faced an $850,000 tax assessment, as well as “indictment for illegal reentry, McClellan committee hearings, indictment . for conspiracy and perjury, and now the deportation order upheld after an unsuccessful appeal, wrote John Davis .
 The IRS busted Santo Trafficante’s Orlando gambling operations and even arrested two of his family members . Two family members were arrested .
 Rosselli’s boss, Chicago godfather Sam Giancana, was also facing pressure from the FBI . RFK was at RFK's urging, and the FBI was investigating the case . The FBI was involved in the investigation .
 Jimmy Hoffa had a number of criminal activities with Marcello and Trafficante . He was under intense pressure from the Kennedys that he decided to kill Robert Kennedy .
 JFK assassinated JFK was the way to end RFK’s war against the mob bosses . RFK's war against mob bosses ended with JFK's assassination . JFK was assassinated by RFK in 1968 .
 Carlos Marcello had been in the jungles of Central America for more than a year following his ordeal . He was back in Louisiana in the fall of 1962 .
 His organization quickly recovered from his absence and was more profitable than ever . His organization had quickly recovered after his absence .
 John and Robert Kennedy were mounting the largest assault on organized crime America had ever seen . Marcello and his Mafia allies had only increased their pressure on Marcella and his allies .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy had finally persuaded FBI Director J Edgar Hoover to begin fighting the mob . FBI Director Hoover had been fighting mobsters for decades .
 RFK hired ten times more Justice Department Mafia prosecutors than were employed during the Eisenhower—Nixon Administration . RFK had hired 10 times more Mafia prosecutors in the Department of Justice .
 The Kennedys’ pressure on Marcello, and on his close partners Santo Trafficante and Jimmy Hoffa, was unrelenting . Marcella died at the age of 92 in 1975 at age 81 .
 In October 1962, Marcello briefly explained his solution to the Kennedys’ war on the Mafia . Marcella briefly explained in October 1962 that he wanted to kill the mafia .
 The godfather was with two of his most trusted associates in the middle of his secluded sixty-fourhundred-acre Churchill Farms property outside New Orleans .
 Marcello was his trusted longtime driver, Jack Liberto, and his favorite nephew, Carlo Roppolo . With him on board were his trusted long-term drivers, Jack and Carlo Liberto .
 Ed Becker, a former public relations man for two Las Vegas casinos, joins the three . Becker is a former PR man for the casinos in Las Vegas . Becker was a public relations spokesman for two casinos .
 Marcello felt comfortable talking to Becker because he’d worked for mob-run casinos . Becker was now in business with Roppolo, who vouched for him . Becker worked for the mob in the 1990s .
 Becker: Marcello “pulled out a bottle and poured a generous round of scotch.” Becker says . Becker: “Marcello’s a good man,” he says. Becker says.
 Becker made an off-hand remark about Robert Kennedy and Marcello’s deportation . The conversation wandered until Becker made a joke about Kennedy .
 Marcello didn’t speak Sicilian but was repeating an old saying he had heard many times from those who did . He was repeating the old saying: ‘Marcello’s a Sicilian man, who was in the middle of the road . Marcell
 Becker says implication was that “Bobby was the tail” and “if the President were killed then Bobby would lose his bite” Becker says the implication was ‘Bobby’s bite . Becker: “If the President . were killed, Bobby would
 Marcello "owned" Senators, members of Congress, governors, and judges . Kennedy and Johnson hated each other, and one of them was the politically savvy politician .
 If Marcello killed President Kennedy, RFK’s status as the second-most-powerful man in America would end, and with it so would RFK's extraordinary war on the Mafia . RFK was the second most powerful man in the country, with far more power
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations investigated Becker’s story, took his sworn testimony, and found him and his account credible . Becker's account was investigated by the committee . Becker was found to be credible by the panel .
 Marcello told Ed Becker about his plan to assassinate JFK in 1962 . Santo Trafficante made a similar comment to an associate named Jose Aleman . Trafficante's godfather made the comment to a friend .
 Trafficante confirmed to Congressional investigators that he knew Aleman and acknowledged having met with him on business approximately three times, although some accounts put the number much higher . Trafficante said he met Aleman on business about three times .
 Aleman’s family had recently helped Jimmy Hoffa gain control of a Miami bank that Hoffa could use to launder money from his criminal activities . Aleman's family helped Hoffa get control of the bank that he could use .
 Aleman knew Rolando Cubela, the disgruntled midlevel Cuban official and CIA asset, who had his own ties to Trafficante associates . Cubela also had ties to trafficante associates, Aleman says .
 Aleman was forced to sell the Miami Stadium and other Miami real estate, except for the motel where he met Trafficante in 1962 . Aleman lost land holdings in Cuba to the revolution .
 By the fall of that year, Aleman “was in debt,” though his contacts and reputation could still be of use to someone like Trafficante, who was always looking for seemingly legitimate fronts for money laundering and other scams .
 Aleman became involved with Trafficante in 1962 through his cousin's cousin, a lawyer for Trafficante . The Post notes that “Aleman . . became involved in . 1962 . in 1962 .
 Aleman said he was initially reluctant to testify against Santo Trafficante associates . Aleman says he had to testify in a case involving trafficante associates in 1960s .
 Aleman had been a reluctant witness, and his testimony had not been especially damaging . Aleman's testimony was not especially damaging, but Aleman was reluctant to give evidence .
 Trafficante: “You don’t understand me. Kennedy would be reelected,” Trafficante said . Trafficante says Kennedy would have been reelected .
 The Washington Post notes that after Aleman testified for the state, “Aleman’s relationship with the Bureau grew very close.”
 Aleman continued to provide information about Trafficante to the FBI through 1964 . Declassified files show that he continued to do so until 1964 .
 The House Select Committee found that Santo Trafficante was the subject of minimal, in fact almost nonexistent, surveillance coverage . In addition, the committee also found that “examination of the FBI’s electronic surveillance program of the early 1960s disclosed that .
 Trafficante had bitterly attacked the Kennedy Administration’s efforts against organized crime . Trafficante made obscene comments about ‘Kennedy’�s right-hand man,’” who had recently coordinated various raids on Trafficante gambling establishments .
 New developments in the secret war between the U.S. and Cuba gave the three mob bosses a way to kill JFK . Johnny Rosselli joined them in their plotting, and new developments gave them a way .
 Nuclear-armed Soviet missiles in Cuba were aimed at the United States, just ninety miles away . At the height of the Cold War any miscalculation could spell disaster .
 The United States secretly agreed to remove United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey targeted at Russia . Khrushchev would remove the Soviet missiles from Cuba . The U.S. would remove missiles from Turkey .
 The pledge never took effect . Cuba did not allow onsite inspection by the U.N. to verify the removal of the Russian missiles, historians say .
 JFK’s Secretary of State at the time, Dean Rusk, explained that Fidel Castro had been angry that he wasn’t consulted before Khrushchev made the deal with JFK . Fidel Castro refused to allow UN weapons inspectors into Cuba .
 JFK reaffirmed the need for UN inspections before putting a “no invasion pledge” into effect . JFK’s November 20, 1962, primetime press conference, was held in November .
 Harry Williams, as he liked to be called, was a wounded survivor of the Bay of Pigs . Harry Williams was wounded in the attack on the Cuban capital .
 Castro had released sixty injured men seven months earlier to spur U.S. efforts to ransom the remaining prisoners . The effort had been thwarted by Richard Nixon and other conservatives, including Richard Nixon .
 Cuban authorities told the men they had to return to prison in Cuba by the end of 1962 if the U.S. did not ransom the remaining prisoners . Williams and the others were released in 1962 .
 One Bay of Pigs prisoner would be shot for each released prisoner who didn’t return . Prisoners were told one would be killed for each release prisoner who failed to return .
 He had been a mining engineer raising a family in Cuba before the Revolution . He had worked as an engineer in the country before the revolution .
 Williams took a leading role in trying to win the release of his comrades who remained in prison . After his release in 1962, Williams tried to win his comrades' release from prison .
 Harry developed a working relationship with Robert Kennedy while trying to find some way to free the prisoners . The Kennedys were sympathetic, and Harry worked with them to free prisoners .
 JFK and RFK admired Williams because of his courage, which he had demonstrated during and immediately after the Bay of Pigs disaster .
 Williams was “blown into the air by an enemy shell . . He was hit by more than seventy pieces of shrapnel . Williams “fought bravely” and died in Cuba, his father says .
 Both of his feet were smashed and he had a hole near his heart and a large one in his neck,” one Cuban exile historian says . “He had a large hole in the neck and a hole in his heart” according to the historian . ‘Both of
 Williams was near death when Castro’s army brought him to a makeshift field hospital . Williams was brought to the makeshift hospital by the Castro army . He was taken to the hospital by Castro's army .
 Williams gathered enough strength to point the weapon at Castro and pull the trigger, Haynes says . Williams told Haynes, other exiles confirmed to Haynes that he pointed the gun at Castro at point-blank range .
 William's compatriots had worried that he might be in pain from his wounds and so depressed over the failure of the invasion that they feared he might use the gun on himself . They removed the bullets while Williams was unconscious, so they removed them while he was unconscious .
 Castro’s men quickly set upon Williams, but Fidel ordered them not to harm the gravely injured man . Fidel ordered that Williams and the other wounded men be taken to a hospital in a nearby city .
 Cuban Army Commander Juan Almeida visited Williams in Cuba . Williams was reunited with his old friend, the Cuban army commander . Williams says he was surprised to find out what happened .
 Almeida was frustrated that the U.S. had not acted on his clear signals of dissatisfaction with Castro . Castro was no doubt frustrated that he had never acted on those signals . The Castro Castro regime was overthrown by the United States .
 Commander Almeida told Williams that the time for action against Fidel was not right, that he was too powerful in the wake of his victory at the Bay of Pigs victory . Commander AlMeida said the time was not the right to attack Fidel .
 The Missile Crisis put on hold Williams’s efforts to persuade John and Robert Kennedy to ransom the remaining Bay of Pigs prisoners . The missile crisis in the mid-1960s put Williams on hold .
 Robert Kennedy was impressed when Williams volunteered to guide United States troops on a mission to rescue the remaining prisoners if the U.S. had to attack Cuba during the Crisis, to take out the Soviet missiles . Williams was impressed by Kennedy's willingness to guide troops on mission .
 After the Missile Crisis, as Castro’s end-of-the-year deadline approached, Robert Kennedy was shocked when Williams began making preparations to return to Cuba . After the missile crisis, the Kennedy family was shocked .
 Castro had given Williams and the others only until the end of the year to ransom the remaining prisoners . Castro gave Williams and other prisoners until end of year to pay ransom . Williams and others had until end-of-year deadline to ransom prisoners .
 One prisoner would be shot for each man who did not pay the ransom . If the ransom was not paid, they had to return, and one prisoner had to be shot each other .
 As documented by Haynes Johnson, Robert Kennedy moved heaven and earth in December 1962 to try to win the prisoners’ release, searching for a ransom acceptable to both Fidel Castro and JFK’s Republican opponents .
 $53 million in food and medicine was transferred to Cuba . JFK, RFK, their aides, and Williams were successful .
 Operation Mongoose was officially over, but six months later, JFK, RFK, and Williams would have a new plan to topple Fidel . The plan would trigger much of the secrecy that still surrounds JFK’s assassination .
 U.S. covert operations against Cuba would give Banister and Ferrie a way to accomplish that task . United States covert operations would give them a way of accomplishing that mission .
 Operation Mongoose had ended, but small-scale U.S. covert actions against Cuba continued . JMWAVE, the huge Miami CIA station, remained active in Cuba .
 The U.S. continued to distribute hundreds of thousands of dollars a month to a variety of Cuban exile organizations and leaders, including Tony Varona . The United States also continued to give money to various Cuban exile groups .
 Banister and Ferrie continued to work for the CIA, and Cuba seems to have been their main focus . According to the CIA’s Deputy Chief in New Orleans, Hunter A Leake, both worked in Cuba .
 Historian: Banister "served as a key CIA liaison with many anti-Castro Cuban refugees in southern Louisiana" Leake had admitted to him that Banister had been a CIA liaison to Cuban refugees .
 Banister often handled details of the training and supplying of various anti-Castro organizations . Banister was a key organizer of anti-Cubist organizations .
 The reasons for that building’s infamy were noted in Chapter Two and explained later . Chapter Two: The reasons behind that building's infamy will be explained .
 Ferrie was working for Carlos Marcello in 1963 . Banister and Banister were both working for the same boss .
 The testimony was first obtained in 1975, meaning that critical information was not available to the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission was not given the testimony in 1975 .
 Oswald's visit had occurred in March, February, or perhaps as early as January . Oswald’s visit was likely to have occurred in early spring or early spring . Oswald's wife, Lee Oswald, was killed in January .
 His trip to Cuba involved some sort of Cuba-related activity, resulting in his being jailed in New Orleans . He claimed to the INS to be a Cuban exile, even though he couldn’t speak Spanish . His trip there involved some of Cuba related activity .
 Oswald worked with Guy Banister and David Ferrie . Witnesses would place Oswald as working with Banister, Ferrie and Banister .
 Oswald’s unusual visit to New Orleans in early 1963— missing from Warren Commission records— suggests that he’d had contact with them well before that, which might even explain his later move to the city . Oswald's unusual New Orleans visit may explain why he moved to New
 Oswald engaged in several unusual activities that provoked controversy for decades . Oswald's activities in early 1963 provoked controversy . Oswald was known for his unusual activities in the days before his assassination .
 When viewed through the lens of the intelligence connections of Banister and Ferrie, their work for Carlos Marcello makes perfect sense .
 Oswald’s suspicious activities included apparently using an alias to order a pistol and a rifle through the mail . Oswald was linked to a shooting at the home of far-right, racist, retired General Edwin Walker . Oswald also wrote letters to the head of the pro-Castro Fair
 Some activities are consistent with simply maintaining and building his cover as a Communist/Marxist while continuing to avoid meeting or talking to any real American Communists or Socialists . Some of those activities are . consistent with . simply maintaining a . cover as . maintaining his cover .
 Other actions appear to have been undertaken in cooperation with—or on the orders of—someone else else .
 Oswald would order guns through the mail when cheaper and more reliable weapons were easily available in Dallas . Oswald ordered the guns in the mail from a Dallas gun shop . Oswald had a reputation for his actions in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald began a phony one-man chapter of a small organization called the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Both Dallas and New Orleans had legitimate far-left and Socialist organizations that he could have joined . Likewise, it seems strange for Oswald to suddenly develop a great interest in Cuba and to begin
 Marcello and ‘Trafficante’ were making plans to assassinate JFK . Congressional committees were looking into the Fair Play for Cuba Committee and into mail-order gun sales by the very firms from which Oswald ordered .
 Members of both Congressional committees had ties to Trafficante operatives Frank Fiorini and John Martino . Both hearings were held in newspapers of the time .
 Martino was released from his Cuban prison the previous fall . He was bitter over his experience, blaming the Kennedy Administration for not securing his release sooner .
 CIA admits that Martino, like Johnny Rosselli, became a CIA asset in 1963 . In addition to his work for Trafficante, in 1963 Martino became close to Trafficante's Johnny Trafficante .
 late in life Martino admitted his involvement in the JFK assassination plot . Also like Rosselli, Martino said he was involved in the plot to kill JFK JFK .
 Banister and Ferrie were well positioned to assist the CIA and Naval Intelligence with that surveillance . Both during Oswald’s early 1963 trip to New Orleans and after he moved there in late April, they helped with the surveillance .
 Oswald was probably encouraged to write and then join the Fair Play for Cuba Committee to further legitimate U.S. intelligence objectives for the CIA and Naval Intelligence . Oswald was likely encouraged by the CIA, Naval Intelligence, to write .
 These include making him more attractive for KGB recruitment, laying the groundwork for involving Oswald in anti-Castro operations, and making him part of CIA officer David Atlee Phillips’s efforts to penetrate and compromise the Fair Play for Cuba Committee .
 Oswald ordered the weapons at the behest of someone working for the Mafia, such as Banister or Ferrie . Oswald probably ordered them at the request of someone who worked for the mafia .
 Given their work for Marcello at the time, it was all too easy for them to manipulate Oswald under the guise of furthering some U.S. intelligence activity . The pair manipulated Oswald to further the United States intelligence activities .
 Banister belonged to the same white supremacist circles as General Walker, and associates of the two had been at a white supremacist conference in New Orleans just four days before someone shot into General Walker’s home .
 Any role Oswald had in that incident was probably at Banister’s behest . Banister planted evidence that would make Oswald look murderously violent after he was arrested for JFK's assassination . Oswald's role in the incident was likely at the behest of Banister, who wanted to plant
 A closer look at the timing of all these events shows just how intertwined they were and reveals other links to the Mafia's role in JFK’s assassination . The timing of the events shows how intertwined the Mafia was .
 Oswald’s wife, Marina, photographed him in his backyard holding both weapons and two Communist newspapers . Oswald was photographed holding the weapons and the two Communist papers . Oswald's wife Marina said she was shocked by the photo .
 Oswald moved to New Orleans on April 24 . He initially lived with his uncle, a bookie for Carlos Marcello . Oswald moved in April .
 Henry Hurt wrote that the theory “that Oswald chose to acquire his guns by mail order has never made much sense.”
 Under the laws at the time, “there would have been no record of his purchase and ownership” had he bought the guns at a store, as there would be for mail-order guns, Hurt says . Hurt points out that under the laws under the time of the time
 Oswald appears to have deliberately left much more of a trail than if he had made the same purchase by spending a few minutes at a busy gun shop’s counter . Oswald used the mails to leave a trail of gun purchases .
 Oswald's actions tied to a Senate committee investigating mail-order weapons . Some of the committee’s members were at the same time investigating the Fair Play for Cuba Committee .
 Guy Banister worked for racist Mississippi Senator James O Eastland, Chairman of the Senate committee investigating Fair Play for Cuba . Banister had worked for Senator James Eastland .
 Eastland would soon be working on a covert CIA operation involving John Martino, Johnny Rosselli, and Santo Trafficante . The operation took place in the early 1950s .
 Trafficante operative Frank Fiorini “later admitted to having intelligence connections to the Eastland’s Senate committee.” Trafficante operatives later admitted to being involved in the Senate committee .
 Guy Banister could have manipulated Oswald into thinking he was assisting those committees by ordering the guns and writing to the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Those connections and the newspaper headlines the hearings generated would have made it possible .
 Historian: Oswald could not have set up a more consistent pattern had he been working for the Senate committees . ‘Oswald’s conveniently timed mail-order gun purchases and contact with the Fair Play for Cuba Committee .
 Oswald may have thought that if he followed the orders of Banister and Ferrie, he might someday be testifying before Congress like his boyhood hero from I Led Three Lives . Oswald may well have thought he could testify before Congress . Oswald thought he might be testifying to Congress .
 Oswald would think he was assisting the committees when he was being set up . Oswald thought he was showing that a former Russian defector and a Fair Play for Cuba Committee member could order a rifle and pistol through the mail .
 Word of the FBI investigation of the FPCC “was transmitted to the CIA” for some reason, something that was not always the case . Newman also notes that word of the investigation was also transmitted to CIA . Newman says word of investigation of FPCC was "transmissioned
 Oswald appears to have ordered his rifle on March 13, 1963 . Fair Play for Cuba Committee hearings were held on the same day Oswald ordered the rifle .
 Lee Oswald wrote his first letter to the head of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Oswald wrote the letter March 31 . Oswald's first letter was written to the committee's head . Oswald was a Cuban exile in Cuba .
 Oswald had his wife, Marina, take the famous photos of him holding his recently arrived mail-order rifle . Oswald's wife Marina took the photos of Oswald holding his mail-ordered rifle .
 More hearings were held on April 3, 1963, and just over two weeks later Oswald wrote another letter to the head of that organization . Oswald wrote a letter to head of the Senate Fair Play for Cuba Committee on April 4 .
 Someone had fired a shot into General Walker’s home on April 10 . General Walker's home was hit by a shot fired into his home .
 Oswald moved to New Orleans on April 24, 1963, after surreptitiously visiting the city earlier that year . Oswald moved into New Orleans in April 1963 . Oswald had been living in New Orleans since April 1963, when he moved in .
 The shooting at General Walker’s was termed “an assassination attempt” by Walker and the Warren Commission . Oswald's shooting at the general's home in Dallas, Texas, was termed an assassination attempt by Walker .
 Walker’s background, the evidence, and the actions of Marcello associates such as Oswald and Ruby suggest a different interpretation of the shooting . However, Walker's background and the evidence of Oswald's actions suggest a . different interpretation .
 General Walker became controversial in 1961 when JFK removed him from command of the Twenty-fourth Infantry Division in Germany for indoctrinating his soldiers with inflammatory material from the John Birch Society . Walker was removed from command in 1961 for his use of inflammatory material .
 Walker’s opposition march erupted into a riot that left two dead and seventy injured . Two people were killed and two were injured .
 The Kennedys had Walker arrested and placed under psychological observation . After his release he ran for Governor of Texas . Walker ran for governor .
 Following his defeat, Walker continued making outrageous claims in speeches as he railed against the Kennedys, civil rights, and Castro . Walker continued to make outrageous claims following his defeat .
 Walker flew the Confederate flag in front of his home . Walker later made a wellpublicized visit of support to Byron de la Beckwith, Medgar Evers’s assassin . Walker is a former segregationist .
 The Walker shooting occurred soon after Ruby's last visit to Walker’s house . Ruby visited Walker's house soon after the shooting . Ruby was killed in the Walker shooting .
 A shot fired into an empty room would be little more than a case of serious vandalism . Otherwise, a shot fired at an empty space would be more than vandalism . "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure it's not a crime," says the author .
 Walker’s long-standing pattern of public lies and exaggerations in regard to civil rights and minorities calls into question his overly dramatic story of lowering his head just as the bullet was fired into the room . Walker has a long history of exaggerating statements about civil rights, minorities and
 The Warren Commission and others have tried to pin the Walker shooting exclusively on Oswald to show a propensity for murderous violence that is otherwise missing in Oswald’s background .
 Journalists and authors have pointed out serious problems with that theory . But numerous journalists and . authors have said that theory is wrong .
 Witnesses saw at least two people at the shooting, witnesses say . At least two cars were involved in suspicious activity around Walker’s house .
 Oswald couldn't drive and didn't own a car, raising the ludicrous spectacle of Oswald walking along the sidewalk or suspiciously skulking through suburban alleys with his rifle . Oswald couldn’t drive or take his rifle on the bus to Walker’s home, or else
 Even disassembled, the rifle would have been so long as to provoke suspicions of those he encountered, at least the following day when they learned about the shooting and recalled seeing a young man in the area .
 Oswald’s statements to Marina and his CIA monitor George DeMohrenschildt make it clear that Oswald was involved in the incident . While others were involved, Lee Oswald was as well as Marina .
 Research by Dick Russell and Anthony Summers strongly indicates that the Walker shooting was not an assassination attempt at all . In addition, research by Anthony Summers and Dick Russell indicates that Walker was not assassinated .
 It was a stunt to publicize General Walker, who faced a fading career as a reactionary extremist . Instead of a stunt, it was a publicity stunt for Walker . Walker's career as an extremist is fading .
 Walker’s breathless story to reporters that he was almost killed generated tremendous publicity . Walker: "I would have been shot in the head if I hadn’t bent down at just the right moment" Walker says he bent down to prevent a bullet wound .
 Oswald had begun the Cuban phase of his covert activity just ten days before the Walker incident . Oswald had written a letter to the national chairman of the small Fair Play for Cuba Committee . His actions in relation to Walker were probably designed to test his abilities for his new assignment .
 Oswald’s previous “defect and return” Russian assignment, anti-Castro operations demanded a new set of skills, from surreptitiously arranging and attending meetings (and keeping them secret from his wife) to dealing with firearms in covert way .
 Oswald had never served in combat . The Walker incident was a chance to see if Oswald could handle that type of assignment . Oswald was never a combat veteran .
 Oswald’s dramatic increase in Cuban activity in the months after the Walker incident, he obviously passed the test, whether he fired the shot or was involved in some other capacity . Oswald was active in Cuba in months after Walker incident .
 By late April 1963, Oswald was living with his uncle Dutz Murret, a bookie for Carlos Marcello . He would do so for two weeks, until Marina Oswald joined him in New Orleans and they got their own apartment .
 Carlos Marcello was waiting on word about his appeal to the Supreme Court regarding a new deportation order . Attorney General Robert Kennedy had spearheaded the effort to deport him .
 With that defeat, “the pressure increased many times over” on Marcello to take action against the Kennedys in order to preserve his freedom and his empire, he says . The pressure increased "many times over," he says, "to take action"
 As 1963 wore on, Marcello’s allies in the plot to murder JFK faced similar pressure from the Kennedys . The plot to kill JFK was thwarted by the Kennedy administration .
 Santo Trafficante came under ever-increasing scrutiny from the Kennedys, who busted his operations and made increasing use of IRS tax liens against him . He came under increasing scrutiny from his operations .
 RFK also made the very private and reclusive Trafficante the focus of major Congressional hearings . Trafficante was the subject of major hearings in the 1960s .
 Trafficante considered the Kennedys had broken an unwritten law by subpoenaing Trafficante’s wife . Trafficante: By subpoenaing his wife, they had broken what Trafficante said was an 'unwritten law'
 Trafficante did plenty of philandering, as did Marcello, but the godfathers liked to maintain the image of being traditional family men, and their wives had been considered off-limits during the previous decade . Trafficante was known for philandering .
 The FBI still dogged Johnny Rosselli, except when he was working on the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Castro . The FBI also still dogged him, except for when he worked for the CIA . He was still dogged by the FBI when he went on to work with the CIA
 Rosselli's power in Las Vegas and Hollywood flowed from Sam Giancana's high position with the Chicago mob . RFK’s power in Hollywood and Las Vegas flowed from his position in the mob, so unless he could eliminate RFK's pressure on RFK, Ros
 Even as the Kennedy brothers increased their attacks on the mob bosses, the crime families still conducted their deadly business as usual, even assassinating a government official in the U.S. Remarkably, even as JFK brothers increased attacks on mob bosses .
 A Chicago mobster who was a “close friend of Ruby” was “credited by law enforcement officials with the murder of Benjamin F Lewis,” as documented by investigative journalist Dan Moldea . The mobster was a "close friend" of Ruby .
 No one was ever tried and convicted for the crime . Law enforcement officials knew who did the killing, but never convicted .
 Such killings showed why Rosselli, Marcello, and Trafficante viewed a much more carefully planned hit on a much higher official as a Viable solution to their mutual problems with the Kennedys .
 Carlos Marcello made more documented remarks about assassinating President Kennedy, only this time his comments were not to Ed Becker . In the spring of 1963, Carlos made the comments to Becker . Ed Becker was the president of the United States .
 Marcello was made to a much closer associate and were not disclosed until the publication of John Davis’s biography of Marcella in 1989 . They were made to an associate and not disclosed .
 Marcello had been carefully planning JFK’s murder with his allies for about six months . At that time, JFK's murder had been planned for six months, Marcella says . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 Marcello knew JFK would order the National Guard or Army into his strongholds if he killed the Attorney General . Trafficante’s associates killed the Alabama Attorney General—elect in 1954 in Phenix City, Alabama .
 Marcello's arrest would make political figures in Louisiana and elsewhere powerless . That would render powerless the political figures he had corrupted and relied on for protection . That's what would have happened in Louisiana .
 RFK and Vice President Lyndon Johnson had animosity between them . Johnson had never made prosecuting the Mafia any sort of priority . RFK would be the new president .
 Confirmation of Marcello’s spring 1963 remarks about assassinating JFK comes from Atlanta businessman John Knight Sr. Knight Sr., who grew up in Louisiana . Knight: “Marcello said in 1963 that JFK should be assassinated .
 A forty-five-foot boat docked at Grand Isle, a popular fishing area on the Gulf of Mexico, a hundred miles southwest of New Orleans . Knight’s father, a merchant in Lafayette, owned one-third of the boat .
 Teenage Knight was introduced to Carlos Marcello by Felix Kiger, forty-three years old, who cooked and looked after the camp . Knight was the son of a fisherman who worked at the Grand Isle .
 Knight’s father was angry when he heard that Marcello Knight was going to be using his boat . Knight's father later said he was angry that Knight would use his boat again . Knight was killed in a car crash in 2010 .
 Knight and his father raced to the dock, but the vessel was already pulling away from the dock . Knight: "I'm not going to be able to get back in touch with my dad." Knight's father: "It's a good thing that you can get back on the boat
 They were told that a Los Angeles mobster was also on the boat with Marcello and Kiger . The men were told they were told by a mobster who was also aboard the boat .
 The distraught cook said that he had been cooking while Marcello and the Los Angeles mobster were talking . The cook said he was cooking when the mobster was talking to him . The mobster is known for his role in the mafia .
 Kiger asked why Marcello would want to do such a thing to President Kennedy . Knight asked Kiger why he wanted to kill the president . Knight also asked why Kiger wanted to do so .
 Kiger replied that it was because of Robert Kennedy’s sudden deportation of Marcello and the harrowing ordeal Marcella had to endure . Kiger said it was due to the sudden deportation by Robert Kennedy .
 Marcello managed to sneak back into the U.S. from Central America . Kiger said his hands and knees were still raw from injuries he had suffered .
 Marcello wasn't linked to JFK’s assassination in the press until the late 1970s . Knight didn’t fully appreciate the ramifications of what Kiger told him for years .
 Knight's account appears credible and is full of additional specific names and details . Knight’s account appears to be full of more specific specific details and details, including specific names .
 Campisi admitted meeting with Marcello at the camp, showing that the godfather felt secure conducting mob business there . Campisi said he felt secure doing mob business at Campisi's camp .
 Marcello actually had at least one face-to-face meeting with Lee Oswald in 1963 . Oswald was the leader of the Oswaldists in the Army .
 Marcello’s meeting with the nephew of his longtime bookie, Dutz Murret, was revealed by the godfather to Jack Van Laningham twenty-two years later, during the CAMTEX undercover FBI operation .
 Van Laningham prepared a written account three years after Marcello’s remarks that can be found in the FBI’S_ declassified CAMTEX file . VanLaningham later explained to me how the admission came about, but he later explained it to me
 A remarkable amount of independent evidence supports Marcello’s Oswald admission,’Seville says . ‘Marcello has admitted that Oswald was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy in the 1960s .
 Marcello felt comfortable talking to only one other inmate at the federal prison about his New Orleans activities . Jack Van Laningham explained that there was only one inmate in prison that he felt comfortable with talking to about his activities in New Orleans . The prison is a federal prison in New
 Van Laningham: "I had another friend at Texarkana that had worked for Marcello’s brother, as a bartender. That friend worked for his brother, and he was a bartender at the time of the shooting .
 The ‘little man’ would let him come to our room and talk about New Orleans for hours . The 'little man' would talk about the city for hours, says the author . The "little man" would talk to him for hours.
 Oswald was introduced to Oswald by a man named Ferris, who was Marcello’s pilot . Ferris had been introduced by Oswald by man who was the pilot of the plane . Oswald had been invited by Ferris .
 Additional confirmation of the Oswald—Marcello connection comes from another FBI informant . Another FBI informant confirms the connection with Oswald .
 BRILAB had grown out of the FBI investigation of a Teamster insurance scam involving Santo Trafficante . The FBI investigation grew out of an investigation of the scam involving the Teamster Insurance scam .
 A businessman named Joe Hauser agreed to become an informant for the FBI against Carlos Marcello . As a result of that investigation, a businessman agreed to be an FBI informant . The FBI investigated the case in the 1990s .
 He wore a wire into Marcello’s office in the late 1970s, yielding the undercover BRILAB tapes that eventually sent him to prison in the 1980s . He wore the wire into the office, which led to the conviction of Marcella in prison .
 Marcello indicated that Oswald had worked for a time as a runner for his gambling network, the same one that involved Oswald’s uncle . Oswald worked for the same network as his uncle, Marcella said .
 Oswald gained a high profile in the New Orleans media for his unusually well publicized pro-Castro activities, making it unlikely Oswald would have been used as a runner in politically conservative New Orleans at that time . However, starting in early August, Oswald gained an unusually high profile .
 Marcello may have been talking to Oswald about gambling business while checking out for himself for himself . Oswald would later take the blame for JFK’s murder .
 It's clear from other accounts that mobsters sometimes conducted Mafia business at restaurants in both New Orleans and Dallas . Mobsters may have conducted business in New Orleans or Dallas .
 Since the meeting place was his brother’s restaurant, Carlos Marcello would have felt secure there, especially since he could have had a private dining room and private entrance to avoid being seen .
 The nephew of an associate’s nephew was given a temporary job at the restaurant . It would appear to be routine business, even to the restaurant's trusted staff .
 Marcello almost certainly did not discuss the assassination of John F Kennedy with Oswald . Oswald almost certainly didn't discuss the JFK assassination with Marcella . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 Marcello spent a year carefully planning JFK's assassination only to entrust the shooting to an inexperienced young man who was out of practice with a rifle and was not a very good shot the last time he was tested in the Marines . It's highly unlikely that an experienced godfather like
 Marcello told Van Laningham that he had brought two hit men over from Europe to shoot JFK . In addition to the assassination of JFK, he also said he brought two European hit men to kill JFK . The assassination is mentioned in Chapter One .
 Marcello’s admission about the two hit men was recorded on FBI undercover audiotape . The confession was recorded in an FBI undercover recording . The FBI recorded the confession .
 Carlos Marcello’s account to Van Laningham about meeting Oswald fits with much information that would only become public knowledge years later with the 1989 publication of Mafia Kingfish . Marcelli’ account was published in the book Mafia King Fish .
 FBI memos describe Oswald getting money from one of Marcello's men at the Town and Country Motel . FBI memos first published in Davis’s biography describe Oswald .
 The nondescript motel on Airline Highway served as Marcello’s headquarters . It was far from the tawdry glitz of the French Quarter .
 Oswald was briefly in New Orleans, where he was interviewed in jail by an INS agent and claimed to be Cuban . That fits the time frame when Oswald was in jail . Oswald was interviewed by the INS agent in jail, and said he was Cuban .
 Oswald was sitting in the mostly empty dining room when the FBI's source saw the restaurant’s “owner remove wad of bills from his pocket, which he passed under the table to the man sitting at the table,” whom the source identified as Oswald . Oswald was
 FBI's source was a businessman from Darien, Georgia, named Gene Sumner . Sumner was the FBI’s source for the investigation .
 Sumner's brother-in-law was a police lieutenant in the area, and several days after JFK's murder, Sumner told him what he had seen the previous winter . Sumner said JFK's body was seen in the winter .
 Sumner’s brother-in-law then contacted the FBI, as recorded in a November 26, 1963, memo . The memo was recorded in the memo from the FBI .
 J Edgar Hoover’s FBI interviewed a dozen associates of Carlos Marcello following JFK's assassination . The investigation of this incident was cursory and routine .
 Sumner described the man he thought was the owner of the restaurant as being six feet tall, which means he wasn't Carlos Marcello . Sumner said he saw the man giving Oswald money as giving him money .
 One of Marcello’s brothers was the legal owner of the Town and Country . Joseph Poretto managed the restaurant . One of his brothers was a top lieutenant in the business .
 The FBI sent the information to the Warren Commission, it excluded important details about the Mafia from the report . The FBI excluded important information about Mafia from its report .
 This fits the pattern, noted by Congressional investigators and Hoover expert Anthony Summers, of Hoover’s FBI downplaying the organized crime ties of Marcello and his associates, Summers says .
 Hoover withheld FBI field reports like this one from Attorney General Robert Kennedy, who would have immediately grasped its significance .
 Marcello briefly mentioned the FBI interviews of his brother and Poretto to the FBI’s BRILAB informant, Joe Hauser . John H Davis was also the first to report that Marcella briefly mentioned his brother's FBI interviews to Hauser to the BRIL
 Hauser’s credibility on this point is enhanced because at the time he heard the remarks, the Sumner incident had never been mentioned in any book, he says . Hauser: At the time of the incident, Sumner had not been mentioned .
 Oswald moved to New Orleans to stay with his bookie uncle, Dutz Murret . Oswald's uncle was a bookie bookie, and he lived in New Orleans .
 Murret, Banister, and Ferrie weren’t the only links between Marcello and Oswald . Murret and Banister were also involved in Oswald's life .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations uncovered other ties between Oswald, his family, and the Marcello organization . Oswald's family was also involved in the Marcelo organization, according to the committee .
 FBI files contain other accurate information that Van Laningham had written down that Marcello told him about Ferrie . Lending further credence to the remarks, FBI files also contain other information that had been written down by the FBI .
 Ferrie admitted to authorities soon after JFK’s assassination that shortly before JEK was murdered, he had flown to Guatemala twice for Marcello regarding his deportation case .
 Ferrie's work for Marcello was not well known by the general public or even most historians . Ferrie’s work for the FBI was well known when Van Laningham reported the account to the FBI . VanLaningham: Ferrie was a good friend of
 CARLOS MARCELLO told Jack Van Laningham about his control of Jack Ruby, including an important meeting that took place in 1963, more than five months before JFK’s murder .
 Marcello’s 1985 remarks about Ruby are briefly summarized in the CAMTEX FBI file, but Van Laningham added more important information in our talks . VanLaningham: “Marcello said that Ruby was a good man, not a bad man,
 By the spring of 1963, Jack Ruby owed a small fortune to the IRS . Ruby owed almost $160,000 in today’s dollars . Ruby was desperate for money .
 The IRS filed tax liens against Ruby on March 13, 1963, and he faced ruin unless he could find another source of money to pay his bills . Ruby faced ruin if he couldn't find a way to pay the bills .
 According to Carlos Marcello, Ruby found the money he needed by taking it from cash that flowed through the Carousel Club . Ruby is believed to be the owner of one of the largest casinos in the world .
 As Marcello explained to Jack Van Laningham years later, his organization actually controlled the Carousel strip club . Ruby merely managed it .
 The Carousel was across the street from Dallas’s most distinguished hotel, the Adolphus . Ruby probably figured it would be easy to skim some of the proceeds for his own pressing financial needs .
 Marcello had hidden ownership of several clubs in Dallas . His financial operatives would have known what all the clubs should be making at particular times of the year .
 The Carousel came up short compared to in previous years or other clubs, it wouldn't have been hard for Marcello's people to confirm Jack’s ongoing theft . Jack is still at the top of the charts in the Premier League this season .
 Marcello would have been furious that a longtime mobster like Ruby would take such action, knowing the deadly consequences if caught . Ruby would have known the consequences of taking such action .
 Jack Ruby was once again the right person in the right situation at the right time to help Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante . However, just as in 1959, Jack Ruby once again was the right man to help the pair . Jack Ruby is credited with saving the lives of
 Beginning in late April 1963, Ruby became of great interest to Marcello, and not just for his skimming . Ruby was the subject of much of the most of the world's most famous stories .
 Jack Ruby’s well-documented long-distance phone calls provide a clear record that he was becoming involved in something quite unusual by May 1963 . Ruby was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy in 1963 .
 After making fewer than ten long-distance calls in April 1963, Ruby suddenly more than doubled that total to twenty-five in May and more than thirty in June . Ruby made more than 30 calls in June, more than doubling that total .
 Even in those calls, Ruby relied on coded words and phrases common in transacting Mafia business . Ruby would have relied on one or more intermediaries to get information to its destination .
 Carlos Marcello gave Jack Van Laningham the godfather’s own unvarnished view of Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby was the subject of the latest episode of the Jack Ruby series .
 FBI file: Marcello said he "had met Jack Ruby in Dallas, Texas" FBI file says he met Ruby "in Dallas" in the 1980s .
 He said that Ruby was a homo son-of-a-bitch but good to have around to report to him what was happening in town . Ruby was good to report, he said, but Ruby was homo .
 Marcello told us that all the police were on the take, and as long as he kept the money flowing they let him operate anything in Dallas that he wanted to . He said all the cops were taking advantage of him .
 Ruby’s ties to the Mafia were completely unknown to the general public until the late 1970s . Even then most writers overlooked Ruby's connections to several of Marcello's close associates . Ruby's ties to Mafia were not known to the public .
 Even the landmark biography of Jack Ruby by Seth Kantor, 1978’s Who Was Jack Ruby? doesn’t mention Marcello .
 Dallas reporter Earl Golz was one of the first to clearly make the connection between Ruby and Marcello’s organization . The link was soon confirmed by the 1979 House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 Marcello’s biography by John Davis was published in January 1989 . It was not until the twentyfifth anniversary of JFK's murder in November 1988 that the general public began to learn about Ruby's ties to mob .
 Van Laningham's report on Marcello’s remarks about Ruby was written up and in FBI files well before that . It's important to note that the report was published well before the FBI .
 FBI files from 1963 and earlier show Ruby's close ties to the Mafia . Ruby's ties to Mafia were confirmed by the FBI, according to files .
 This was a type of tickler memo highlighting problems and information the FBI knew it had withheld from the public and press . The memo highlighted problems the FBI had been avoiding from releasing .
 The FBI essentially used statements from several of Ruby’s mob associates to claim to the Commission that Ruby had no mob associates . In contrast to that secret, internal admission, the FBI said it had no ties to the mob .
 Journalists and historians had to ferret out the details of Ruby's involvement with the mob and Marcello’s men . The FBI held such information close to its vest .
 Marcello’s 1985 admission to Jack Van Laningham was withheld from the public at the time and for the next twenty years . John H Davis detailed tantalizing connections between Ruby and several associates . Ruby's relationship with Ruby was revealed four years after the admission of Marcell
 Marcello’s Dallas mob lieutenants Joe Civello and Joe Campisi Sr. were among the mob leaders in the mob . Marcella's Dallas mob led the mob in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Campisi was the first person to visit Ruby in prison after he shot Oswald . Campisi also met with Ruby the night before JFK’s murder .
 Ruby visited or made calls to five people in Marcello's organization in the weeks leading up to JFK’s assassination, Davis documented . Davis documented that in the months and weeks prior to JFK's assassination, Ruby made or made visits to five Marcellos people .
 Jack Ruby knew at least two of Carlos Marcello’s brothers via the slot machine and strip club businesses, Davis writes . In addition to those five, “It appears that Jack Ruby . knows at least . two brothers” via the slots and strip clubs, he
 Carlos Marcello made a startling admission about Ruby to Van Laningham . The godfather confronted Ruby about stealing his money—and made him an offer he couldn't refuse .
 Van Laningham is a large man with a deep voice, and he is normally good natured . He is normally a good-natured man .
 Marcello told CNN's John Sutter about the meeting with Ruby . Sutter: "When he first related to me what he told him about that meeting, he took on the menacing tone," he said . "It's not the first time I've heard from Ruby that she
 Marcello confronted Ruby in the old farmhouse in the middle of his sixtyfour-hundred-acre Churchill Farms property . Ruby was the owner of the property . Marcella confronted Ruby .
 Marcello disposed of the bodies of men who crossed him at Churchill Farms . The godfather’s organization was not lost on any member of the godfather's organization summoned there for a meeting .
 Ruby, knowing he was stealing money from Marcello, was probably already nervous when he arrived at the isolated farmhouse . Ruby stole the money from the farmhouse in an attempt to steal it from the owner . Ruby was already nervous at the time of the robbery .
 Marcello confronted him when he confronted him about his thievery . One can only imagine his fear and pleading when confronted him .
 As Marcello described the scene to Van Laningham, Ruby was trembling and begging, willing to do anything to keep from paying the ultimate price for stealing from the godfather . Ruby was terrified and begging to keep her job as a thief .
 Ruby had no choice but to shoot a prisoner in a crowded police basement, police say . Ruby had to pull out his gun, pulling out a gun, and shooting a prisoner . Ruby says he was forced to do it because of the well-armed police .
 As indicated by Ruby’s later remarks, it was likely not just his life that was on the line but those of his family as well . Ruby's life was likely at stake as was his family .
 Ruby left the meeting with his life but would become increasingly involved in the dangerous JFK plot . Ruby became increasingly involved with the JFK plot in the 1970s . Ruby would become involved in JFK assassination plot .
 As with any sensitive Mafia operation, Ruby’s participation would be on a need-to-know basis . Ruby would get only limited amounts of information about the plot when he needed to know it .
 FBI has released files with Marcello’s remarks about Ruby written in the 1980s . Jack Van Laningham also has videotaped oral history with additional details about the Ruby comments .
 Marcello's revelations were also recorded by the FBI’s secret CAMTEX taping system . The FBI also recorded the revelations using a secret camera .
 None of the CAMTEX tapes or transcripts have been released as the 1992 JFK Act requires, and they should be so that the public can hear Marcello’s own words about the matter .
 Using information compiled by the House Select Committee on Assassinations, it's possible to pinpoint the likely time of Marcello’s confrontation with Ruby . Using information from the committee, it can pinpoint the time of the confrontation .
 Committee investigators compiled detailed information on Ruby’s many calls and visits to New Orleans in 1963 . Ruby visited people or places connected to Marcello in New Orleans, usually to people connected to him .
 Ruby stayed in New Orleans during his visit to New Orleans from June 5 to June 8, 1963 . Police were unable to find out where Ruby stayed .
 Ruby may have stayed at Churchill Farms during that time, which would account for the lack of any record .
 Ruby called a club run by one of Marcello's brothers two days after he returned to Dallas . Ruby had called the club several times before that visit . Ruby called the brothers' brother two days later .
 FBI files show a horse trainer for Carlos Marcello’s brothers said he was in “a bookie joint” in New Orleans, where he worked part-time . Two weeks after Ruby's visit to New Orleans two weeks after his visit, the trainer said he
 The horse trainer told the FBI that another one of Marcello’s brothers came in and spoke to the owner . The FBI has not yet released the details of the alleged murder .
 In 1963 as in 1959, Jack Ruby was not a major player but had been given an offer he couldn’t refuse because he knew the right people in the right places . In 1959, Ruby was given an opportunity to get his hands on the deal .
 Ruby was familiar with Tampa, having once lived there and sometimes visited the city while scouting strip acts . In Cuba, Ruby had met and tried to help Santo Trafficante, and he had lived there .
 Ruby worked for Johnny Rosselli’s Chicago Mafia and knew that city well . Ruby had worked for the mobsters in Chicago, Illinois .
 The mob bosses and Hoffa had more than a dozen associates in common with Ruby, making it easy to communicate with Ruby through intermediaries, as Ruby’s phone records confirm . The mob boss and his associates had a number of associates, as well as a few associates .
 Ruby was a small part of Marcello and Trafficante’s drug network, which would also figure into the JFK plot . Ruby was also part of the drug network that would figure into JFK plot, which also figured into JFK assassination .
 Ruby arranged for anyone blamed for the assassination in Dallas to be quickly killed . Ruby also had connections with the Dallas Police to arrange for anyone to be killed in Dallas .
 If the assassination occurred in Dallas, Ruby would have to do the job himself . If that didn’t happen, the same would likely be true if it occurred in a different city .
 Ruby may have been given a small role in the ClA—Mafia Castro assassination plots . Ruby's help with the JFK plot, and to provide cover for his activities, may be in preparation .
 Jack Ruby would be having face-to-face meetings with Johnny Rosselli in Miami in the fall of 1963 . The ClA—Mafia plots to kill Castro were continuing while the ClA-Mafia plot was continuing .
 Carlos Marcello had also apparently given Ruby a substantial financial incentive for producing results in his work on the JFK plot . Ruby was also given financial incentive to produce results, according to a report .
 Several months after the Marcello meeting, Ruby began to make plans to move away from the lower-middle-class neighborhood .
 He planned for a new home in the most expensive and exclusive part of Dallas, Turtle Creek, where prominent citizens such as General Edwin Walker lived . General Walker lived in Turtle Creek .
 Ruby talked to his tax attorney, claiming “he had a connection who would supply him money to settle his long-standing” and huge IRS debt . Also around that same time, Ruby talked about his tax lawyer, saying he had “a connection”
 In a few months, Ruby had gone from being desperate for money to being afraid of being killed to feeling like he was finally ready to hit the financial big time . Ruby had already gone from desperate to desperate to be afraid to be killed to confident in his finances .
 Ruby was arrested for soliciting gay sex from an undercover officer in Dallas . Walker was arrested in Dallas, Texas, in 2010 . Ruby was convicted of soliciting sex from a Dallas undercover officer .
 Cohen was in prison then, so the LA mobster was likely someone like Johnny Rosselli . Cohen is in prison now, but he was likely in prison .
 CIA Deputy Director for Plans Richard Helms was still hiding those plots from John and Robert Kennedy and his own CIA Director . Helms still hid the plots from the Kennedy family and the Kennedy brothers . The Kennedy brothers were still in the CIA's orbit .
 Mafia chiefs could employ people and equipment for what appeared to be CIA operations . But later some would seem to be linked to JFK’s assassination . CIA officials such as Helms had to cover up or destroy much crucial information .
 Marcello and the other mob bosses needed something more than the ClA—Meafia plots to trigger a truly widespread coverup, one that would ensure there could be no thorough and complete investigation of JFK’s murder .
 Fear of revealing any possible link between the ClA—Mafia plots and JFK’s assassination would cause Helms and his close subordinates to hide important information from investigators .
 The godfathers needed a way to force CIA Director John McCone, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, and new President Lyndon Johnson to withhold crucial information from the press and public at the height of the Cold War .
 CIA and Mafia worked together on two well-documented attempts to kill Fidel Castro in the spring of 1963 . Efforts were later linked to JFK’s assassination by the Mafia .
 These two attempts aren’t well known and are missing from the CIA’s later accounts of the CIA—Mafia plots .
 Cuban authorities captured many of the Cuban participants and much of their ClA-supplied armaments and communications equipment . However, Cuban authorities extensively documented the two attempts .
 The Cubans photographed both men and material at the time, and the full details reached the U.S. press a decade later . The full details of the incident were revealed in the American press .
 Both of these attempts involved Mafia don Johnny Rosselli, operating under the supervision of CIA officer William Harvey . Both attempts were made by the Mafia don .
 Harvey, a hard-drinking, rotund agent sometimes called America’s James Bond, was becoming close friends with Rosselli, who was an expert at manipulating people for his own ends . Harvey was a hard drinker and rotund rotund, but was known for
 Cuban forces captured and photographed “lazookas, mortars, and machine guns,” along with an assassination team of five men, including one named as a CIA agent . One of the five men was named as an assassination agent, according to the report .
 Johnny “Rosselli identified the team as his own” twice in later years . Naval War College historian David Kaiser documented that Johnny ‘ Rosselli’ identified his team as “his own’ .
 Rosselli and his attorney spread provocative stories to select journalists . Accounts reached President Lyndon Johnson and other high-ranking U.S. officials . Four years after the attempt, the attempt was successful .
 Rosselli would leak the story again in 1971, adding even more details, including William Harvey’s name, to a new version .
 In planting those and similar fake stories blaming JFK’s murder on Fidel, Rosselli, Trafficante, and Marcello, it diverted blame away from themselves and ensured that it couldn’t be fully investigated without exposing dark secrets the CIA and other high officials didn�
 At least three of the men were captured and photographed, along with a large array of weapons, including sniper rifles, machine guns, assault rifles and pistols .
 Based on Rosselli’s later remarks, that attempt was also part of his CI[A—Mafia plotting . ‘I’m not sure if it was part of the plan,’ Rossella said .
 Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli failed to provide enough cover for the attackers . Trafficante was shot twice in the head in the early hours of Tuesday morning .
 Robert Kennedy and the CIA Director didn’t know about United States backing for the attempts . Richard Helms wouldn't have had the same motivation to cover up information if they were linked to JFK’s murder .
 Martino found some powerful allies for his planned operation, including wealthy and influential William Pawley, a friend of former Vice President Richard Nixon . Senator James O Eastland was investigating the Fair Play for Cuba Committee .
 Martino’s story was designed to appeal to the CIA and to JFK and was compelling though far-fetched . Martino's story was compelling but far too farfetched .
 The plan’s stated goal was to send a ten-man Cuban exile team into Cuba to bring back three Soviet technicians, who were supposedly ready to defect and reveal that Soviet nuclear missiles remained hidden in caves in Cuba .
 The scenario sounded plausible to CIA officials because thousands of Soviet technicians and troops remained in Cuba . The scenario was plausible because of the presence of Soviet troops and technicians in the country .
 Fidel had never allowed UN weapons inspections, so there was no way to prove with absolute certainty that some missiles weren’t hidden in caves or underground, beyond the view of American U-2 spy plane flights .
 President Kennedy wanted to know if Cuba still held on to Soviet missiles . He wanted to be the first to know, before his political enemies used the information to attack him .
 JFK, RFK, and their aides were skeptical of the story and didn’t become involved in the operation . JFK and RFK didn't become involved with the operation, instead .
 Martino and his mobster bosses pressed ahead with the plan, hoping one or more JFK aides might decide to support the operation . Martino's mobsters hoped JFK aides would decide to back the plan .
 Kaiser found that “Rosselli and Trafficante were using Martino to enlist the help of the CIA” for the operation .
 Martino’s ten-man exile team to be sent into Cuba was originally going to include Loran Hall, a United States mercenary who had earlier spent time in detention with Santo Trafficante in Cuba .
 A team of ten armed Cuban exiles headed off toward Cuba, watched by a photographer from Life magazine, two CIA agents, and John Martino . Eventually a team of 10 armed exiles made their way to Cuba .
 Cuban government officials claim the ten never landed in Cuba . The team never returned, and Cuban government claims they never landed there .
 The entire story had been a ruse by Rosselli and Trafficante, spread by Martino to CIA officials . In reality, no Soviet technicians waited, ready to defect .
 As noted by historian Mahoney, the mob bosses’ real goal was to provide cover for JFK’s assassination . Mahoney: The mob bosses were behind the assassination of JFK .
 By the spring of 1963, Trafficante, Rosselli, and Marcello would have no longer seen killing Fidel as their highest priority . It’s important to note that by that time, the men would no longer see killing Fidel .
 The pressure on JFK and RFK had increased by that time . The pressure had increased on the mob chiefs from JFK to RFK .
 Carlos Marcello faced federal charges later in the year and knew he would be personally prosecuted by RFK’s men . RFK's men personally prosecuted him for his role in the assassination of RFK .
 Trafficante’s operations were under increasing assault, and their ally Jimmy Hoffa faced three trials for various crimes . Trafficante was under increasing pressure from Trafficante's operations, and his allies were also under attack .
 Rosselli's boss, Sam Giancana, was severely impacted by the FBI’s “lockstep” surveillance . The FBI has been accused of targeting the FBI in the past for years .
 Killing Fidel Castro while JFK and RFK were still in power would do the mob bosses little good, which meant that murdering JFK was much more important—and time sensitive—for the Mafia chiefs . The Mafia chiefs killed Fidel Castro in order to kill JFK, RFK and JFK in order
 RFK would have no incentive to protect those operations if they appeared linked to his brother’s murder . Because they also knew nothing about the CI[A—Mafia plots in March and April 1963, RFK didn't know nothing about those plots .
 By the time Operation TILT ended in early summer 1963, a new U.S. operation against Cuba had evolved . Fortuitously for the mobsters, by the time the operation ended, it had evolved into a new US operation .
 It was one the Kennedys fully supported and directed and that the three Mafia leaders would soon infiltrate . The Mafia leaders were soon infiltrating the country . It was the first time the Mafia leaders had infiltrated the country.
 In pentrating this operation, the mob bosses would gain access to sensitive information that could compromise various branches of government . This would stifle any real investigation of JFK’s murder until at least the late 1970s .
 Kennedy Administration policy about Cuba had become muddled, according to accounts from the various subcommittees of the National Security Council dealing with Cuba .
 Some officials pressed for strong action while others called for a more cautious approach . Some officials call for a stronger response to the situation .
 Fidel was careful not to remind the public that there was not yet a “no invasion pledge” because Fidel had not yet allowed UN weapons inspectors into Cuba . That’s why he and his officials were careful not . not yet . to remind . the public .
 The secret war against Cuba, run out of Miami’s huge JMWAVE station, continued, with extravagant sums being spread among dozens of exile groups, large and small .
 JFK approved small exile raids against Cuban ships, but ships of other countries were not supposed to be attacked . By the early spring of 1963, JFK had approved small raids .
 Richard Helms appears to have taken a harder line against Cuba on his own, again without telling JFK or CIA Director McCone, which caused problems for President Kennedy . Helms took a tougher line on Cuba without telling Kennedy or McCone .
 CIA-backed Cuban exile group that Helms supported made an unauthorized attack in Cuba that violated JFK’s guidelines .
 On March 18, 1963, a group named Alpha 66, run by exile Antonio Veciana, announced that it had a Russian ship and a Russian training area in Cuba .
 Alpha 66 and Veciana were handled for the Agency by his good friend CIA officer David Atlee Phillips . According to Hunt, Veciana and Alpha 66 were handled by Phillips . Hunt was a CIA officer who worked with Phillips .
 Veciana milked the operation for maximum publicity, Phillips’s specialty . Phillips's specialty is to milk the operation .
 JFK had the U.S. State Department immediately condemn the raid . JFK was outraged at the unauthorized and dangerous attack on a Russian ship .
 It’s highly unlikely Phillips would have ordered Veciana to undertake the attack, which could have led to a new confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviets . Helms's approval of the attack is unlikely to have occurred without the approval of Phillips .
 Helms told Phillips to continue supervising Veciana and his group . The Kennedys wanted Alpha 66 and Veciana to receive no CIA assistance . Helms, without informing JFK or RFK, told Phillips not to supervise Veciana .
 Richard Helms approved an even more outrageous provocation, one that endangered the lives of three imprisoned CIA agents as well as JFK’s personal emissary, who was then trying to negotiate their release . Helms also approved a similar provocation in 1963 .
 The three agents were among the last twenty-seven U.S. citizens still held in Cuban prisons . The agents were held in Cuba by Cuban authorities .
 Donovan had helped Robert Kennedy negotiate the release of the Bay of Pigs prisoners . Donovan's working relationship with Fidel included accompanying the Cuban leader on skin-diving trips . Donovan had worked with Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 The CIA developed two plans to assassinate Fidel while he was skin diving with Donovan . The Agency admitted both in internal reports and Congressional testimony . The plans were revealed in an internal report .
 The shell would be “rigged to explode underwater,” killing Castro and anyone who might be with him . However, the shell would actually be ‘rigged’ to explode, killing Castro .
 CIA Technical Services, the same group that created the poison pills for the Mafia, “explored” the idea but found too many problems with the idea . The group also created the Mafia’s poison pills .
 The “second plan involved having James Donovan . . present Castro with a contaminated diving suit” as a gift . The ‘second plan’ involved giving Castro a contaminated suit .
 Donovan was already in some danger, since the CIA’s March 1963 and April 1963 assassination operations were being planned while he was in Cuba, negotiating with Fidel Castro . Donovan was in the midst of the CIA's assassination operations while in Cuba .
 Castro talked with Donovan about the CIA’s attempts to kill him while the men were on a skin-diving excursion . Ironically, Castro actually talked about the attempt while he and Donovan were skin diving in the Bahamas .
 For decades, former CIA personnel gave the impression that President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy pressed the CIA to assassinate Fidel Castro only because they were pressed it to do so .
 The CIA admits to many welldocumented Castro assassination attempts that were not authorized by JFK, RFK, even CIA Director John McCone . The CIA fully admits that many well documented assassination attempts were never authorized by RFK or JFK .
 CIA's attempts to assassinate Fidel Castro began before JFK became President and continued long after he was dead . More importantly, the CIA’s attempts to kill Fidel began before he became President . The CIA attempted to kill him before JFK was President .
 JFK “suggested that both options might simultaneously be pursued” — a dual strategy that would become a reality by the fall . JFK suggested that both of the options might be pursued .
 McCone followed up his meeting with a memo saying that “a military coup in Cuba the United States’ only hope” to resolve the Cuba situation . McCone said a military coup was the U.S.’s only hope .
 Most of the power in Cuba was concentrated in the hands of a relatively small number of officials that Fidel trusted . Neither was producing results, especially since Fidel trusted only a handful of officials .
 JFK delegated Cuba to Robert Kennedy, who was frustrated by the lack of progress in Cuba . Robert Kennedy was frustrated with the situation and had no clear strategy . He delegated the situation to JFK, who had time to give it the attention it needed .
 RFK gave extensive attention to Cuban matters on top of an already full plate of activities he had to oversee as Attorney General . Issues ranging from civil rights matters to the war on organized crime .
 Robert Kennedy turned to exile friend Harry Williams, telling him he didn’t want any more Cuban exile leaders coming to RFK for money . RFK told Williams he didn't want more Cuban ex-Cuban leaders coming for money from RFK .
 RFK would identify for RFK the select few he thought were serious and deserved U.S. backing . Williams would then identify those RFK thought to be serious enough to get backing . The exiles were to go through Williams .
 RFK turned to Williams because they had grown increasingly close since the Bay of Pigs prisoner release . RFK and Williams became close friends after the release of the prisoner . Williams was RFK's partner in negotiations to secure prisoner release from prison .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Haynes Johnson, Newsweek editor Evan Thomas, and historian Richard Mahoney confirm Williams was close toFK . The fact that Williams was trusted byFK has been confirmed .
 Haynes Johnson: Williams "was the closest such person to the administration" in 1963 . Williams was a key figure in the administration of the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Williams would be the only person to get the support of either side of the debate . Williams has been a strong supporter of both sides of the political divide .
 Rosselli used mob money to fund a phony Cuban exile group, the JGCE . The group was run by Paulino Sierra, a Cuban exile run by the mobster .
 CIA agent Bernard Barker, also working for Trafficante, helped spread word about the group .
 A journalist raised suspicions about Sierra's Mafia funding in May 1963 . Sierra’s daughter confirmed his ties to the mob in an interview with her .
 Sierra’s group lingered for several months, but it never received the backing of Williams or the Kennedys . The group was of no real use in the JFK plot .
 A new all-out drive to unify Cuban refugees into a single, powerful organization to topple the Castro regime was disclosed today by exile sources . The drive to topple Castro regime is disclosed today .
 The plan calls for formation of a junta in exile to mount a threepronged thrust consisting of sabotage, infiltration, and ultimate invasion . The plan was formed by an exiled junta .
 U.S. Central Intelligence agents discussed the plan with Cuban leaders, exile sources say . The exile sources said the plan had been discussed by United States intelligence agents .
 Former Premier Varona said he would cooperate in plans to unify the exiles . Varona, former Premier, said he had told Ruiz Williams he will cooperate .
 RFK and Harry Williams were furious when they saw the article revealing information about their secret plans . RFK was furious when he read out the article .
 The information was probably leaked by Tony Varona, who had volunteered to join Williams’s operation, no doubt at the urging of Santo Trafficante .
 Varona had worked on the CIA—Mafia plots with Trafficante and Rosselli, and he was still working for Trafficante in 1963 . Varona worked on CIA plots with Rossella and Trafficante .
 The CIA received a report that Rosselli’s associates had paid a bribe of $200,000 to Varona . Varona was working on behalf of Trafficante and the Mafia, the CIA said .
 Neither RFK nor Williams knew about Varona’s work for Trafficante and Rosselli or about the ongoing CIA—Mafia plots . The CIA never informed RFK about the bribe from the Mafia .
 The Kennedys’ covert plans for Cuba were penetrated by Trafficante almost from the Start . Trafficante was a key figure in the CIA’s covert operations in Cuba . The CIA was involved in the Cuban assassination of Fidel Castro Castro Castro .
 The May 10, 1963, AP article quickly caught the attention of Commander Juan Almeida, Williams’s old friend in Cuba, still head of the Cuban army . The article was published in May 1963, and Williams was still in Cuba .
 Commander Almeida reached out to Williams within forty-eight hours of seeing the article . He got a message to him to call a certain number in Cuba, a line that was safe from wiretaps . Williams was sent to a safe phone line in Cuba .
 Almeida was in many ways the third most powerful official in Cuba, behind only Fidel and Raul Castro . He wielded far more authority and men than Che Guevara .
 Commander Almeida told Williams that Fidel was becoming nothing more than a dictator, betraying the very Revolution they had all fought so hard for . Commander AlMeida said Fidel was betrayed by the Revolution they all fought for .
 Almeida offered to stage a coup against Fidel Castro if JFK would back him . JFK backed the plan, but it was never realized . JFK was the only person to back the coup against Castro .
 As soon as he got off the phone, Williams immediately called Robert Kennedy about Almeida's offer .
 Williams and RFK were in near daily contact by May 1963 . Williams appears often in RFK’s official Justice Department phone logs .
 Robert Kennedy wasted no time in discussing Almeida’s offer with President Kennedy . This appeared to be the big break regarding Cuba they’d been hoping for .
 RFK’s official phone logs at the National Archives indicate some of the timing . RFK's official phone log at National Archives indicates some of his phone calls were made at the time of his death .
 The logs show that on May 13, 1963, at 5:50m., RFK took a call from President Kennedy . RFK called President Kennedy at 5.50m. ET .
 RFK told Williams that JFK had decided to accept Almeida’s offer to stage a coup to overthrow Fidel Castro . RFK said the United States government would give the U.S. government its full backing for the attempt .
 JFK—Almeida coup plan was one of the most secret covert U.S. operations since D-Day . That was the start of the JFK—JFK coup plan . The JFK plan is one of America's most covert covert operations since WWII .
 Select officials at the Pentagon later played major roles in the JEFK—Almeida coup plan . The CIA was relegated to supporting status in the coup .
 Kennedy aides confirmed the JFK-Almeida coup plan to me . Williams and other aides to John and Robert Kennedy, including Secretary of State Dean Rusk, verified the plan . Williams: "The JFK—JFK coup plan was a very successful coup"
 The vast majority of files about the plan are still classified . A surprising number of files have slipped through the classified files .
 A 1963 CIA report to the Agency’s Director, with information from Berard Barker about an “operation including Juan Almeida” designed to “overthrow” Fidel, who would be replaced by a new Cuban government . A new government would be recognized immediately
 Another CIA dispatch discusses a plan for ‘an internal uprising’ in Cuba by “Cuban military figures, who are conspiring against Fidel Castro’s regime . Another dispatch discusses an internal uprising by ‘Cubans military figures’
 Hundreds of pages of files about the U.S. military side of the operation have been declassified . The operation was part of the United States military side .
 The JFK—Almeida coup plan was designed to avoid the main problems that befell the Bay of Pigs operation, which had been a relatively open secret known to dozens of officials, aides and agents .
 JFK, RFK, CIA Director John McCone, and CIA Deputy Director for Plans Richard Helms would know the full scope of the plan . Only about a dozen people would know about the plan, including JFK and RFK . RFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 The leading United States role in the coup plan was never supposed to be revealed, even after the coup succeeded . U.S. officials hoped Almeida and trusted exiles might play roles in Cuba’s new government .
 After Almeida’s offer was relayed to the Kennedys, the planning took on a new sense of urgency . The plan was put in place after the offer was made to the family .
 In just the next four months, ten drafts were completed, some growing to more than eighty pages . Some of the pages grew to over eighty pages, some of them growing to over 80 .
 Officials at the CIA and State Department reviewed and approved all of the documents . The documents were approved by the State Department .
 At that point no one at State knew about Almeida, and Dean Rusk would be told about him only after JFK’s death . At that time no one . knew about him .
 Most of those working on these drafts thought they were only contingency plans, just in case a ranking Cuban official could be found to lead a coup . Thus most—but not all—but some—thought they were just contingency plans .
 Drafts still give a surprisingly accurate overview of the coup plan . However, these drafts still give an accurate view of the plan .
 The plan stresses that “it is important the revolt appear genuine and not open to the charge of being a facade for a forcible United States overthrow of Castro of Castro . A well-planned and successful ‘rescue’ of a revolt could be made politically acceptable”
 The leaders of the coup “would have announced via radio and other means the. . . establishment of a Provisional Government. The leaders would have announced . via radio, other means, the coup leaders would . have announced the establishment of the Provisional . Government . The coup leaders
 JFK and others hoped that a ‘full-scale invasion’ was a worstcase scenario . However, it’s important to point out that it was not the worst-case scenario that JFK hoped wouldn’t happen .
 Commander Almeida could stage coup without U.S. military forces . It is possible that Commander AlMeida could carry out the coup without United States military forces.
 A multiracial group of Cuban American Bay of Pigs veterans—commanded by a black exile officer, was soon training at Fort Benning and Fort Jackson .
 They would be the first U.S. troops into Cuba if United States military forces were needed on the ground . The Cuban government has been criticized for not sending troops to Cuba .
 Commander Almeida could actually ask for the intervention of the U.S. forces to help prevent a Soviet takeover of Cuba . The Cuban president could ask for intervention of United States forces .
 A careful reading of all the declassified files and of exclusive interviews with participants in the coup plan shows it was even possible that U.S. military forces could wind up fighting side by side with Commander Almeida’s Cuban troops .
 JFK’s “Plan for a Coup in Cuba” with Almeida was vastly different from the CIA-—Mafia plots . JFK”s ‘Plan’ for a coup in Cuba is vastly different than the CIA”-—mafia plots
 The Kennedys’ ultimate goal was a free and democratic Cuba . The U.S. wanted support from its allies, and the U.K. wanted allies' support .
 The “Provisional Government” would include the Cuban America exile troops and the leaders of four exile groups . It would secure bases outside the United States prior to the coup .
 Tony Varona, who was working for the Mafia, worked for the mafia . Varona was a member of the Mafia in the 1970s and '80s .
 CIA memos describe disparate groups working on a major plot to overthrow Castro . CIA memos began to describe those groups as working on an overthrow plot . Within several months, CIA memos were describing the plot .
 The JFK—Almeida coup plan was a secret for decades . The American public knew nothing about the JFK-Almeidia coup plan for decades. The JFK plan was never publicly revealed to the public for years .
 Some documents were declassified in the 1990s, but the few mentioning Almeida were separate from the files about the ‘Plan for a Coup in Cuba’ Most historians thought the plans were only a what-if contingency .
 The JFK—Almeida coup plan didn’t start to become fully exposed until 2006, after the United States government sent me a written determination that some files describing Commander Almeida’s secret work for JFK could be released .
 The secrecy surrounding the JFK—Almeida coup plan helps explain why so much related to JFK’s assassination stayed secret for so long . JFK's assassination was the subject of much of the JFK assassination .
 A surprising number of documents slipped through over the years, though some of their significance is clear to historians only now, in hindsight . Nonetheless, some of these documents are still important to historians now .
 Tony Varona’s summer of 1963 $200,000 bribe from the Mafia . Among those documents are files about Varona . Varona received the bribe in the summer of that year .
 JFK wanted to keep Cuba from becoming a “political football” during the 1964 campaign, which would begin in January 1964 . JFK wanted Cuba not to become a ‘political football,’ he said .
 They had to take action before the end of 1963, preferably at least a month before the Christmas holidays . That meant they had to be taken action before they had already taken action .
 Commander Almeida could not take public responsibility for Fidel’s death and neither could Williams or the other Cuban exiles . Williams and the other exiles could not have taken responsibility for the death of Fidel Castro .
 The Cuban populace could hardly be expected to rally around new leaders who boasted of having killed Fidel, whom the CIA admitted was still admired by many on the island . The CIA admitted that many of the island's citizens were still admired .
 Williams told me, someone else would “take the fall” for Fidel’s death . Williams: Someone else would take the fall for Fidel's death .
 Evidence gleaned from CIA memos and coup plan files indicates that Fidel’s death would have been blamed on a Russian or a Russian sympathizer, a way to help neutralize the thousands of Soviet personnel still in Cuba .
 Many newspaper accounts noted increasing tension between Fidel and the Soviets in the second half of 1963 . Fidel Castro and the Soviet Union were at odds with each other .
 As head of the army, Almeida knew the locations of all Soviet forces in Cuba, as well as Fidel’s security plans, he says . Fidel knew locations of Soviet forces and security plans in Cuba .
 Almeida had enough personal prestige that if he went on Cuban TV and announced that Fidel had been killed by a Russian sympathizer, the Cuban people would accept his word, the same way most U.S. citizens at that time would accept a pronouncement by a trusted figure such
 Commander Almeida was the highest black official in a country estimated to be 70 percent of African descent . He was felt the populace would more easily rally around him than someone like Che Guevara or one of the white officials the Russians might back .
 They continued to make increasingly detailed plans to overthrow Fidel Castro . Yet they also continued to plan to overthrow the government .
 By fall the Kennedys were pursuing two different, secret ‘peace feelers,” trying to jump-start peace talks with Castro . As discussed in later chapters, later chapters of the book will be discussed in the book .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk confirmed the existence of the coup plan to Vanity Fair in 1994 . Rusk said the Kennedys tried to negotiate with Castro at the same time they were planning a coup against him .
 Rusk told Vanity Fair, “Oh, there’s no particular contradiction there . It was just an either/or situation.” Rusk said .
 JFK’s earlier-noted comments to John McCone reflect this dual strategy, as does Robert Kennedy's Oral History at Boston's John F Kennedy Presidential Library . JFK's comments to McCone are part of the JFK Presidential Library Oral History .
 Pursuing peace and war at the same time also reflected the indecisiveness of the U.S. public about Cuba, the author says . Pursuing war and war was also a sign of indecision, he says .
 A dozen associates of Carlos Marcello, Trafficante, or Rosselli knew about—and in seven cases actually worked on—the top-secret operation . The JFK—Almeida coup plan was a top secret operation .
 Learning about the coup plan gave Marcello's group the deadly secret it needed to prevent a full and public investigation of JFK’s murder, if the effort to overthrow Fidel could be linked to the murder of JFK . The group learned about the plan to oust Fidel Castro in order
 There was also a chance that phony evidence implicating Fidel in JFK’s death could trigger a U.S. invasion of Cuba, one that the United States military had been preparing for months .
 John and Robert Kennedy tried to bar the Mafia from any participation in the coup plan . The Kennedy brothers tried to prevent Mafia involvement in the plan .
 The Mafia was kept out of Cuba after the coup’s hoped success, when the mob would not be allowed to reopen their casinos . That included keeping the Mafia out of the country .
 Declassified files show associates of Carlos Marcello knew about the secret plan, but made documented comments about this otherwise top-secret operation . The operation was supposed to be a top secret, but it was not top secret .
 FBI report written weeks after JFK's assassination quotes Jack Ruby as talking about something he must have learned before being jailed for shooting Oswald . Ruby was jailed for his role in the shooting of Oswald .
 Warren Report wasn’t in the Warren Report, but it was included in the twenty-six volumes of supporting evidence and documents that the Warren Commission issued . That long-overlooked remark wasn't in the report but included in other supporting evidence .
 To most in the Bureau and on the Warren Commission, such a claim undoubtedly seemed absurd . To most . in the . Bureau, and later to the relative few who read the twenty-six volumes, such . read the . 26 volumes .
 Plans withheld from Warren Commission, House Select Committee on Assassinations and all other Congressional investigating committees . Those plans were withheld not only from the Warren Commission .
 Ruby was just one of twelve associates of Carlos Marcello, Trafficante, or Rosselli who knew important information about the JFK—Almeida coup plan . Ruby was one of the twelve associates who knew of the JFK plot to oust Almeida from power .
 Seven associates of Mafia chiefs were actually working on parts of the coup/invasion plan, even though John and Robert Kennedy had banned the Mafia from having anything to do with the operation . Even more remarkable, seven associates of the Mafia chiefs actually worked on .
 Guy Banister, Marcello’s private detective, knew about the coup plan as well as the coup . Marcella's private detective was also involved in the plot .
 Manolo Ray was one of five exile leaders chosen by RFK and Harry Williams to be part of the coup plan . RFK: "Manolo Ray" was a leader chosen by Harry Williams and RFK to be one of the leaders .
 John Martino worked with Carlos Marcello and Guy Banister in the summer of 1963 . Michael Kurtz also worked with Juanito Trafficante’s technician .
 Martino says JFK was embarking on a plan to get rid of Castro when he died . Martino is quoted as saying two months after JFK’s death that when he . died “Kennedy was embarked on a . plan to remove Castro,” Martino said
 The OAS role, as detailed in several of the fourteen drafts of the top-secret “Plan for a Coup in Cuba,” wasn’t declassified until 1997 . Robert Kennedy’s direction in the summer and fall of 1963 was drawn up under Robert Kennedy
 Marcello’s associate Martino knew about that—and more—decades earlier . Yet, he says, “I’m not surprised.” Marcella knew that, and more, decades earlier. He says he was a good friend of Mar
 Even Lee Oswald, who had connections to Marcello documented earlier, made an interesting remark about “an invasion of Cuba” by “the United States” at a time when almost no one was publicly speculating about such an operation . Lee Oswald made the remark at
 Oswald was one of the key leaders for the JFK—Almeida coup plan . In the summer of 1963, Oswald visited a training camp near New Orleans that was affiliated with Manuel Artime . Artime was a key figure in the JFK assassination .
 CIA memos I first published in 2005 confirm that in the early 1960s, Manuel Artime was also working on the ClA—Mafia plots . The plots also involved Trafficante, Rosselli, and Marcello .
 E Howard Hunt's best friend, Artime, would soon become part of Trafficante’s drug trafficking network . Artime was Hunt's friend and best friend . Trafficante would soon be part of the trafficking network. Artime would soon join Trafficante .
 Artime was one of seven associates of the three mob bosses who were actually working on the JFK—Almeida coup plan . Artime worked for the mobsters who were behind the JFK coup plan, he says .
 The same is true for Tony Varona, the first Cuban exile leader to join Harry Williams’s operation, all while working with Santo Trafficante and Johnny Rosselli on the CIA—Mafia plots .
 The Kennedy brothers worked on unauthorized plots that allowed mob bosses' men to infiltrate the Kennedy brothers’ authorized operation, the JFK—Almeida coup plan . It was their work that allowed some of the mob bosses’ men to infiltrated the JFK brothers' authorized operation .
 E Howard Hunt has long been the subject of speculation and Congressional investigations regarding his possible involvement in JFK's murder . The book's final chapter explains Hunt's involvement in the JFK assassination .
 Even Hunt’s taped “confession” isn’t really a confession at all but an account full of recycled theories, speculation, and important omissions . Hunt's taped ‘confession' isn't a confession, but it's a full account of recycled
 Barker was definitely involved in JFK's murder, according to Harry Williams, RFK’s friend and aide for the JEFK—Almeida coup plan . Barker was also involved in the assassination of JFK, a friend of RFK says .
 Long before files linking Barker to organized crime were declassified, Williams told me and his research associate that Barker had worked for Trafficante and was doing so in 1963 . At the same time Barker was working on the JEK—Almeida coup plan, Williams said .
 E Howard Hunt was one of two prominent CIA officers assigned to assist Harry Williams . Williams explained to Williams that Hunt was the CIA officer assigned to help Williams . Hunt is one of the two CIA officers who helped Williams get his job .
 Kennedy aides, former FBI agent William Turner, and Vanity Fair confirmed Hunt’s work with Williams .
 Williams detailed to me and to William Turner the important role Barker played as Hunt’s assistant in 1963, something Barker himself indicated in published interviews . Williams detailed his role in Hunt's life as Hunt's assistant .
 Many of Barker's 1963 CIA files, including those involving his admitted work as Hunt's assistant, remain unreleased . Barker’s CIA files are still unreleased .
 President Kennedy’s government had reached its ‘peak’ in efforts to overthrow Castro,” something not reflected in any history books or government reports at the time Barker made his comments .
 Harry Williams said there were “dozens from May to November “ with E Howard Hunt and a CIA security officer assigned to the operation . The operation took place between May and November .
 Bernard Barker arranged the meetings, most of them held away from Miami . Bernard Barker organized the meetings in Miami .
 Barker assisted Hunt with two of the most sensitive parts of the JFK—Almeida coup plan . Barker helped Hunt with the JFK and Almeida plot to oust the Colombian president .
 Robert Kennedy had authorized the money in the event the coup was unsuccessful and Almeida had to flee Cuba . If he was killed, the money would alternatively provide for his wife and two children .
 Barker and Hunt were also part of a covert operation in which Almeida’s wife and two children left Cuba on a seemingly innocent pretext prior to the date set for the coup . The operation was part of an attempt to get the coup under way .
 The plan was for Almeida’s family to wait out the coup safely in another country, under secret CIA surveillance . The family would be under CIA surveillance, the CIA said .
 RFK authorized Williams and the CIA to assure Almeida that if anything happened to him and his family couldn’t return to Cuba, his family would be taken care of . RFK had also authorized Williams to assure him that his family was taken care .
 Having the family in another country, under the watchful eye of the CIA, also ensured that Almeida didn’t double-cross the CIA and the Kennedys . In addition to providing for their safety, having the family moved to another country also ensured they didn�
 Even Barker’s routine CIA reports from the summer and fall of 1963 that have been declassified show him submitting a stream of information linked to the mob or the coup plan .
 Barker filed reports about a meeting between Manuel Artime and Tony Varona to discuss unity . Artime’s meeting with Trafficante ‘bagman’ Frank Fiorini in Dallas to buy an airplane . Barker filed a report about the meeting .
 Barker's CIA reports also mention Eloy Menoyo’s plan to overthrow Fidel and the operations of Manolo Ray . The CIA reports were also mentioned by Barker .
 Sam Benton, another private detective working for Carlos Marcello, is trying to recruit an American mercenary, part of the CIA . The CIA plots to kill Fidel Castro, according to a report .
 The mercenary backed out when he learned that an associate of Johnny Rosselli was involved in the plot . He backed out after learning that he had been approached by a friend of the mercenary .
 In 1963, Harry Williams and Robert Kennedy didn't know that “Barker was connected to ,” as he later learned . In 1963 Harry Williams—and Robert Kennedy—didn't know .
 Williams was not privy of FBI and CIA files tying Barker to the mob . Williams did not realize that his associates Tony Varona and Manuel Artime also had ties to Trafficante .
 The JFK—Almeida coup plan gave Marcello and Trafficante the opportunity they needed to kill JFK in a way that would prevent even Robert Kennedy from pursuing a full or public investigation of the murder of JFK .
 The Kennedys had tried to bar the Mafia from any knowledge of or participation in the coup plan . The network of Marcello and Trafficante surrounding the CIA—Mafia Castro plots allowed the mob bosses to use Barker, Varona, and others to infiltrate the plan .
 Richard Helms tried to explain to Congressional investigators why he continued the ClA—Mafia plots in 1963 without telling President Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, or CIA Director John McCone . Helms was the CIA director of the CIA in charge of the operation .
 Helms indicated then-and in later testimony, he saw no difference between hiring the Mafia to assassinate Fidel Castro . Helms said he didn't see a difference between that effort and hiring the mafia to kill Fidel . The former CIA director testified that he was not interested in the assassination effort
 To Helms, having mobsters shoot Fidel so he could be replaced by a right-wing dictator was no different from, and perhaps even preferable, helping an internal coup that would be followed by a coalition government, free elections, and democracy .
 Kennedy aides and officials tell me they disagree with Helms’s view . Kennedy aides, including Secretary of State Rusk, told me they totally disagree . Helms' view: Kennedy aides say they think Helms is wrong .
 Helms continued the CIA—Mafia plots even after the JFK—Almeida coup plan was far along . Helms' arrogant attitude is apparently why he continued the plots, even though the JFK plot was well along .
 Richard Helms was replaced by Desmond FitzGerald, a patrician figure from a family even wealthier and more blue-blooded than that of Helms . Helms' replacement was Desmond Fitzgerald, from a wealthy family .
 FitzGerald was brought over from Far Eastern operations and had no previous experience in Cuban affairs . FitzGerrard had no prior experience in Cuba .
 William Harvey continued to work with Johnny Rosselli on the CIA—Mafia plots . Harvey had also grown close to Rosseli, who was also close to him .
 FBI learned that Rosselli was visiting Harvey Harvey in June 1963 . FBI learned he was visiting the Mafia don . Harvey was killed by the FBI in 1963 .
 Morales had headed covert operations for the CIA in Havana before the closing of the U.S. Embassy . Morales had supervised David Atlee Phillips . Morales is a gruff, powerful and forceful man of southwestern Native American descent .
 Morales also had a role in the Bay of Pigs operation and was bitter at its tragic outcome, which he blamed exclusively on President Kennedy . Morales also blamed Kennedy for the tragic outcome of the operation .
 Johnny Rosselli turned the hard-drinking David Morales into a close friend . The pair even took a trip to Las Vegas together .
 For Rosselli, Morales was just another CIA agent he could use for his own ends . The JFK assassination was the JFK assassination . Morales was a CIA agent for Rosselle, who used him to help him get the job .
 Morales was a high-ranking CIA officer who could control operations, who could order weapons shipped . Morales was also working on the JEK—Almeida coup plan, he says .
 Morales made his confession to his attorney and also to a lifelong friend after going on a tirade about JFK’s sole responsibility for the failure of the Bay of Pigs . Morales made the confession after he went on a rant about JFK's sole responsibility .
 Congressional investigator Gaeton Fonzi uncovered Morales’s JFK confession and found it credible . Morales' confession was found credible by a Congressional investigator .
 Morales and Rosselli were observed working closely together in the fall of 1963 . Morales was arrested in 1963, but was never charged with murder .
 An Army Ranger assigned to the CIA in the summer and fall of 1963 later wrote an account of his time in South Florida training Cuban exiles .
 CIA was preparing to have shooters available to kill Fidel if Almeida had problems finding someone to eliminate the Cuban leader . The CIA was prepared to have a shooter ready for Fidel .
 Carlos Marcello's access to the CIA—Mafia plots and those working on the JFK—Almeida coup plan gave the godfather, and his allies Trafficante and Rosselli, the connections he needed to create grave concerns at the highest levels of the U.S
 Several exile leaders in the JFK—Almeida coup plan continued to attempt tiny raids into Cuba or against Cuban ships . In the words of one official, one official says, “keep the pot boiling until the day for Almeida’s coup arrived .
 Only a handful of Cuban exiles knew about Commander Almeida and the coup . Those raids also kept up the morale of exiles still receiving U.S. funding .
 Richard Helms increased his use of unauthorized operations designed to simply assassinate Fidel Castro . In addition to all those efforts, in the remaining months of 1963, Helms actually increased his .
 All unauthorized assassination plots involved Mafia associates, so Helms may have viewed them as different aspects of one operation, the same CIA—Mafia plots that had been running for three years .
 Helms apparently saw no real distinction between his CI[A—Mafia plots and the Kennedys’ authorized efforts to stage a coup against Fidel Castro . Also, based on his later Congressional testimony, Helms seemed to see no distinction between the plots and those of the Kenn
 If true, that belief doesn’t explain why Helms kept President Kennedy, CIA Director McCone, and Attorney General Kennedy in the dark about his unauthorized operations .
 The most generous view of the actions of Richard Helms would be that he viewed the CIA-—Mafia plots as a kind of backup plan in case something happened to Commander Almeida before he launched the coup .
 Helms might have seen the CIA-—Mafia plots as a way of salvaging the operation in the event that Commander Almeida lost his position; or decided to flee prior to the coup .
 Helms might have thought that even if Almeida could initiate the coup, it would still be helpful to have Mafia or exile sharpshooters on hand to finish the job .
 CIA had only a supporting role in the JFK—Almeida coup plan . Mafia plots were something Helms could fully control . Helms thought he could .
 Rolando Cubela, an old element of the ClA—Mafia plots, took on new prominence in the summer of 1963 . Cubela was a key figure in the organization's efforts to counter the Mafia .
 Cubela, a physician, had headed the Directo Revolucionario, a student group that had helped win the Revolution . Cubela was a physician and a physician . He had been a member of the student group .
 Cubela quickly grew disaffected with Castro rule, and by December 1960 he was working with the CIA on plots to kill Fidel . By December 1960, Cubela had been working on a plot to kill Castro .
 In many ways, Cubela was simply another part of the C[A—Mafia plots since he’d met Santo Trafficante in Cuba . Cubela knew at least two associates of the godfather who were also involved in the CIA—mafia plots .
 In June 1963 the CIA contacted Cubela again, just as David Morales was taking over the supervision of Johnny Rosselli from William Harvey .
 Cubela received a generous travel budget as the former head of the DR . He frequently flew to Europe and Communist-bloc countries .
 CIA acknowledges that a series of meetings between Cubela and CIA personnel followed . According to Cuban reports, David Morales met with Cubela in Paris in September 1963 .
 Cubela says the CIA kept pressuring him to assassinate Fidel, while the CIA claims assassination was Cubela’s idea . Cubela claims the assassination was his own idea .
 JFK had no following inside Cuba that would have allowed him to stage a coup on his own . JFK’s Secretary of State Dean Rusk told me—and as CIA files clearly show — he had no . Followers say JFK had a big following in Cuba .
 Rusk and another committee member told me that Cubela was discussed by name in some of RFK’s Cuba subcommittees of the National Security Council . But not as a possible assassin, Rusk says .
 Richard Helms and Desmond FitzGerald mentioned Cubela to some subcommittee members only as someone who might help them find a higher-ranking, more powerful official who could stage a coup .
 To an official like Rusk, who didn't yet know about Almeida, that sounded reasonable . Rusk: "To an official ... that sounds reasonable, that's reasonable"
 Rusk found out that the CIA was actually using Cubela as a potential assassin . Rusk was livid at Helms’s deceit, with an anger that the usually calm statesman demonstrated in an interview .
 Rolando Cubela played a smaller role in Cuban affairs as fall 1963 progressed . Cubela was only a mid-level official at best at best in the Cuban government .
 Richard Helms and Desmond FitzGerald increased CIA pressure on Cubela to assassinate Fidel Castro . Yet the CIA continued to pressure Cubela on the assassination of Fidel, even though he was assassinated .
 Robert Kennedy was never told about the meeting or the assassination aspect of the CIA's dealings with Cubela . FitzGerald claimed to be the personal emissary of Robert Kennedy .
 The CIA admits it tried to persuade Cubela to poison Fidel, but files also show that the Miami CIA station, where David Morales ran operations, was prepared to provide rifles to him .
 Cubela owned a house next to Fidel’s home at Varadero Beach, the resort to which Fidel drove on many weekends in an open jeep . Fidel drove to the resort in a sort of re-creation of his triumphant drive across Cuba .
 AMWORLD files indicate that at one point the CIA planned to use snipers to assassinate Fidel as he drove toward his beach house . The CIA had planned to kill Fidel Castro in order to assassinate him .
 The CIA could use his house as the sniper's nest and/or even blame him for Fidel’s murder . Fidel Castro's house could be used as a sniper nest, or even as a CIA sniper nest . The CIA may even blame Fidel for his murder .
 Cubela was both a disgruntled official and one who came in contact with Russians overseas more often than most Cuban officials . Cubela's extensive travels led to him coming in contact more often with Russians than most officials .
 Blaming Cubela for Fidel’s murder might also let the CIA implicate Russia in his assassination . The CIA may blame Cubela in the death of Fidel Castro .
 Someone in the CIA arranged for Cubela to be in a meeting with his case officer in Paris on November 22, 1963, at the exact time JFK was scheduled to be riding in an open car through Dallas . The CIA, most likely David Morales, arranged the meeting .
 Morales arranged that as part of his work with Johnny Rosselli, it was the perfect way to force Helms to hide a great deal of information from internal CIA investigators and other high U.S. officials, which is exactly what happened .
 Americans would not learn about the Cubela operation until twelve years after JFK’s murder, and it was never revealed to the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission never revealed the operation .
 Richard Helms approved keeping the CIA’s European assassin recruiter, QJWIN, on the payroll throughout 1963, despite his released files showing a complete lack of results . Helms also approved keeping QJW, the CIA's European assassin recruit, on his payroll, on
 William Harvey originally supervised QJWIN, but after David Morales took over Harvey’s supervision of Johnny Rosselli in June 1963, it was likely that Morales had some role with QJW .
 The mysterious QJWIN was part of the CIA’s ZR/RIFLE assassination program . The program was a secret CIA operation . The CIA was involved in the program .
 CIA files indicate that ZR/RIFLE had been applied to the Castro problem . CIA files show that QJWIN made a 1963 trip to Florida for an operation involving Johnny Rosselli .
 The identity of QJWIN remains unresolved, with various CIA memos and sources giving different names . As a result, the true identity of the organization remains unresolved .
 CIA files of European criminal assassins that QJWIN tried to recruit are all heavily censored . The CIA files are heavily censored, including those with last names beginning with “M”
 Mertz could have been recruited by QJWIN, and/or it would have been easy for him to assume the role or clandestine identity . It would be easy for Merts to have assumed QJW’s role or identity as a clandestine operative .
 Declassified files show that Mertz was deported from Dallas soon after JFK’s murder . Other evidence implicates him in the crime .
 Michel Victor Mertz is a little-known but important figure in the JFK plot due to his long ties to Trafficante and Marcello’s heroin network . He is one of the key figures in the assassination plot .
 Mertz perfected the technique of smuggling heroin hidden in cars on ocean liners . The technique was depicted in the award-winning film The French Connection . It was used to smuggle heroin in cars hidden in ocean liner cars .
 Mertz saved the life of French President Charles de Gaulle in 1961 after infiltrating an anti-de Gaulle group by getting into a fistfight while pretending to be anti-De Gaulle . He also had ties to French intelligence and had saved the President's life in 1961
 Mertz was considered “untouchable” by French authorities . He often visited America, and he often visited France .
 In addition to QJWIN and the Cubela portions of the CI[A—Mafia plots, Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, and Johnny Rosselli continued their connections to the Castro assassination plots . Only Johnny was supposed to be involved in the plots .
 Historians have questioned how much of the mob bosses’ efforts were really directed at Fidel . How much those same efforts were part of their plan to kill JFK remains a question .
 Historian Richard Mahoney concluded that Rosselli could move guns and assassins in relative secrecy . For example, he concluded that “under the CIA penumbra, Rossellis could move weapons and assassins .
 The mob could anticipate that the CIA would cooperate in the cover-up of crucial information related to JFK’s assassination, author says . By putting ‘fingerprints’ on operations, ‘the mob could expect the CIA to cooperate, he says .
 Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli could meet to discuss their plan to assassinate JFK, safe from law-enforcement surveillance . The group could meet in a private location safe from surveillance .
 FBI agent in charge of Marcello claimed the godfather was merely a lowly ‘tomato salesman’ who was not involved in organized crime . RFK’s Justice Department was under pressure from the New Orleans FBI .
 In 1963 Johnny Rosselli visited New Orleans and met with Guy Banister, according to one of Banister’s secretaries . Banister's secretary says he met with Rosseli in 1963 .
 Mafia protocol makes it almost certain that Mafia don Rosselli also met with Marcello . Mafia protocol dictates that Rossella and Marcelli meet before Marcella meet .
 Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli sometimes met at a secluded resort outside Tampa, the Safety Harbor Spa, whose exclusive clientele and distinctive staff freed the mob bosses from any possibility of lawenforcement surveillance .
 FBI monitored Rosselli’s movements except when he was on CIA business in Florida . RFK pressured his boss Sam Giancana to keep him in the CIA .
 FBI surveillance reports for Rosselli exist for other times and places . No surveillance reports have been released for his time in Florida in 1963 .
 Johnny Rosselli’s meetings with Jack Ruby in Miami in late September and early October 1963 . One reason for the missing records might be the meetings with Ruby .
 Investigative journalist Scott Malone confirmed that “Ruby met secretly with Johnny Rosselli in Miami” on two occasions in that time span . The pair met in Miami on two separate occasions .
 Congressional investigator Michael Ewing wrote a meticulously detailed nine-page analysis of Scott Malone’s six-page article after it was released . Ewing pointed out no problems with the description of the fall 1963 Ruby—Rosselli meetings .
 Notorious Chicago hit man Charles Nicoletti, another member of Rosselli’s Mafia family, also joined the CIA .
 Cuban officials and unconfirmed U.S. accounts say that Nicoletti also became part of the mob’s plan to kill JFK . Herminio Diaz, another mob hit man who worked for Santo Trafficante, also worked for the mob, sources say .
 Cuban authorities described him as ‘a hit man’ since the 1940s who had tried to assassinate the President of Costa Rica in 1956 . Cuban authorities said he was a hit man who had been trying to kill Costa Rica's President since 1956 .
 In 1963 Diaz began working on the CI[A—Mafia plots for Trafficante . Diaz was also of great interest to David Morales’s supervisor, Miami CIA Station Chief Ted Shackley . Diaz worked for the CIA in Miami .
 Diaz mentioned Juan Almeida and Rolando Cubela as part of a group of disgruntled Cuban officials who wanted to act against Castro . The CIA was especially interested in Diaz because in his first interview in the U.S. with David Morales’s Cuban exile agents, Diaz mentioned
 Diaz's mention of Almeida and Cubela was enough to get the CIA's attention . Diaz had probably acquired the information second-hand from Trafficante (or Bernard Barker)
 It was important for the success of the mob bosses’ plot to kill JFK that the trusted men they brought into the plan had intelligence ties . The trusted men included Diaz, Nicoletti, Michel Victor Mertz, and John Martino .
 JFK's assassination was a cover-up for the CIA, the CIA and other agencies involved in the assassination . The CIA, CIA, FBI, CIA and CIA were involved in JFK's murder . They were able to hide their involvement in the JFK assassination .
 The bosses knew that the agencies might also be reluctant to investigate their own assets, especially when there was someone else who could be blamed . The bosses were also wary of investigating themselves .
 Carlos Marcello was also still involved in the C[A—Mafia plots in the summer and fall of 1963 . Marcella was still involved with the plot in the fall and summer .
 David Kaiser wrote that “Marcello had been involved in the CI[A—mafia plot against Castro from the very beginning” and was still working on it into the summer of 1963 .
 At that time, another detective working for Marcello, Sam Benton, assisted in the CIA—Mafia plots in both Louisiana and Miami . At the time, Benton was working for the FBI in Miami and Louisiana .
 The main exile group the godfather supported was the New Orleans branch of Tony Varona’s Cuban Revolutionary Council, which also involved David Ferrie . Ferrie was also involved in the Cuban exile group, which he supported .
 The Cuban Revolutionary Council had originally been organized by E Howard Hunt with the assistance of Bernard Barker . Hunt organized the council with the help of Barker and Barker .
 Varona, Hunt, and Barker were now working on the JFK—Almeida coup plan with Harry Williams . Harry Williams was also continuing to work on the ClA—Mafia plots .
 The lines become blurred between the covert Cuban operations that JFK and the CIA Director had authorized and the unauthorized operations Richard Helms was hiding from them . It’s easy to see how the lines become .
 Helms may not have minded the crossover—he might have even welcomed it, since it gave him cover if problems arose with unauthorized operations . Helms might have welcomed it .
 It was probably also easier for him to manage the operations by using some of the same personnel, such as Morales, FitzGerald, Barker, Artime, and Cubela .
 The JFK—Almeida coup plan was compromised by mob bosses . JFK's exile plan was thwarted by the mob bosses, but it could have been compromised . The mob bosses were able to compromise each exile component .
 In addition to Harry Williams, the Kennedys wanted Manolo Ray, Varona, and Eloy Menoyo . The exiles leaders were also wanted for their operation .
 The Mafia’s effort to intimidate, buy off, or kill Harry Williams began in the summer of 1963 . The Mafia tried to intimidate or buy off or kill Williams . Williams was killed in 1963 .
 Former death squad leader Rolando Masferrer confronted Williams in 1963 . Williams was confronted by two thugs described as looking like Mafia “torpedoes’s .
 The Kennedys banned Masferrer from receiving United States backing . Williams refused to be intimidated by the threat of intimidation . Williams was determined to carry out the operation .
 Bernard Barker arranged for Williams to meet with the CIA security officer for the JFK—Almeida coup plan at a Miami restaurant . Barker had apparently arranged to meet Williams at the Miami restaurant, where he planned to meet him .
 Williams was offered a bribe by Santo Trafficante during a meeting with the CIA officer . Williams was called over to the table of Trafficante, who offered Williams a bribe . The CIA officer excused himself from the meeting .
 Williams declined, and when the CIA officer returned, the Agency man made no mention of Trafficante or the bribe . Williams declined . Trafficante was the only person to bribe Williams .
 Trafficante tried to bribe Williams after he resisted intimidation and bribery . Trafficante says Williams resisted intimidation but Trafficante decided to bribe him back . Williams was arrested on suspicion of bribery in November .
 Later in the summer of 1963, Williams traveled to Guatemala City to confer with Manuel Artime, a trip that Barker had also likely helped arrange . The trip was likely to have been arranged by Barker .
 Williams dined at a restaurant the night before the scheduled meeting, two gunmen attacked him . Williams was attacked by two gunmen at the restaurant where he was scheduled to meet with officials .
 Attorney General told him to leave the country as soon as possible . The Attorney General said he would be deported .
 Williams was in touch with the FBI before and after the incident . The FBI had warned Williams to be careful, which is why he was carrying a pistol .
 The few memos about Williams released in other documents prove that his FBI and CIA files in 1963 alone would have been quite extensive given the high-profile people he met with . Williams' files would have included FBI, CIA files, CIA records show .
 As mentioned earlier, a summer 1963 CIA memo says that exile leader Tony Varona was bribed with $200,000 from Rosselli’s boss Giancana . The CIA memo also says that Varona's boss was the boss of the Italian exile leader .
 The CIA learned of the bribe from Mafia member Richard Cain, who had been involved in the CIA—Mafia plots since 1960 . Cain was a Mafia member who was involved with the CIA in the 1960s .
 After bugging a Communist embassy in Mexico City the previous year, Cain began working for the CIA as an asset in the summer of 1963 . Cain was also Chief Investigator for the Chicago/Cook County Sheriff .
 CIA memos later withheld from Congressional investigators show that Cain’s information about Tony Varona traveled via an unusually secure channel . Desmond FitzGerald, the CIA official working closely with Richard Helms, was working with Helms .
 FitzGerald and Helms would also soon be used to convey troubling information about Lee Oswald . That secure channel was used to secure information about Oswald . Lee Oswald would soon be the subject of an assassination investigation .
 At the time of Varona’s bribe, perhaps CIA officials like Helms saw nothing wrong with the payment, since Varona, Giancana, and Cain had all been working for the CIA on the CIA .
 JFK’s murder would be yet another explosive piece of information that Helms would have to hide from his own CIA Director .
 The Agency also had in its files incriminating remarks Varona made to former death squad leader Rolando Masferrer just weeks after Varona received his bribe .
 In the late summer of 1963, Varona ominously told Masferrer that he would help remove certain “obstacles” preventing him from getting U.S. backing, something possible only if JFK was no longer President .
 CIA assigned a separate code-name, AMWORLD, and its own supersecure communications network at the Miami CIA station . The plan was so important that the CIA assigned it a code- name, AM WORLD .
 In the late 1970s, Gaeton Fonzi received information that Artime had “guilty knowledge” of the crime, but that could have come after JFK’s murder .
 Artime received so much support from the CIA and the Kennedys—and was slated for such a major role in Cuba if the coup succeeded—that he would seem to have nothing to gain by helping kill JFK before the coup .
 CIA files withheld from Congress make it clear that not only was Artime working on the CIA-—Mafia plots but the CIA looked at using the Mafia to provide cover for all the weapons it was providing to Artime .
 Agency memos show CIA was aware of talk of Mafia activity that swirled around Artime . Agency memos also show that the CIA was well aware of the talk of the Mafia activity .
 Artime’s operations were further compromised when they were linked to Lee Oswald . Artime's operations were also compromised when linked to Oswald .
 In the summer of 1963, David Ferrie reportedly took Oswald to a small training camp outside of New Orleans . The camp supplied recruits for Artime’s camps in Central America .
 The Mafia would also try to compromise liberal exile leader Manolo Ray, whose reputation for integrity seemed to render him incorruptible .
 Trafficante and Marcello’s men took an indirect approach to tie Lee Oswald to Ray and his exile group . Trafficante's men took the indirect approach .
 Oswald appears to have made an unusual visit to Silvia Odio, a female member of Ray’s group in Dallas . Odio was a member of the group in the late summer of 1963 .
 Odio's father was in prison in Cuba because of a Castro assassination attempt by Alpha 66’s Antonio Veciana . Odio was born into a family of Cuban dissidents .
 With no advance notice, an American and two Cuban exiles appeared at the door of Odio’s Dallas apartment . Odio says he was attacked by a group of Cuban ex-Cubans .
 Silvia Odio and her sister recognized Oswald during TV coverage two months after JFK assassination . Silvia and sister Silvia recognized Oswald two months later .
 Gaeton Fonzi extensively investigated and documented the Oswald—Odio meeting, finding Odio and her sister’s account very credible . Odio, her sister, and her brother Odio met in New York City .
 John Martino, Rolando Masferrer, whose brother lived in Odio’s apartment complex, met Odio's sister in Dallas, Texas . The two men were married at the time . Odio died in his apartment complex in Dallas .
 It was another example of explosive information that would cause problems for investigators and intelligence agencies when it surfaced . It was planted months before JFK's murder .
 Odio’s story would cause major last-minute problems for the Warren Commission, until an associate of Trafficante—Loran Hall—indicated that it was he and his friends who made the visit, not Oswald .
 Hall denied making the visit after the Warren Report was published . However, after the report was published, Hall denied it .
 One by one, Marcello, Trafficante, and their men attempted to compromise or link to JFK’s upcoming murder the handful of Cuban exile leaders and groups involved in the JFK—Almeida coup plan . The assassination of JFK Almeida is the first assassination attempt
 What they did to link exile leader Eloy Menoyo’s group to Oswald is described later in this book . The book is published by Simon Tisdall .
 Trafficante and Marcello's motivation to kill JFK only increased during the summer and early fall of 1963 . Trafficante's motivation for killing JFK increased in the summer, fall and winter of the year .
 New developments in their cases help explain their extensive and careful plans to assassinate the President . New developments help explain the plans to kill President Obama .
 Trafficante was fighting the IRS, the same organization that had sent Al Capone to prison . Trafficante and three of his brothers were also named in the IRS complaint .
 The Justice Department attorney presenting the case against him would be one of RFK's own Mafia prosecutors . This was one trial that Marcello couldn’t buy his way out of with bribes to local or state authorities .
 Any conviction could result in another deportation, and Marcello was still scarred with the memory of that traumatic experience . Any conviction would mean another deportation for Marcella .
 Marcello was not alone among mob bosses in his hatred of John and Robert Kennedy . The mob boss hated the Kennedy family members .
 RFK's pressure had resulted in the FBI's wiretapping other mob leaders, who vented their rage at the Kennedys . The FBI had not wiretapped Marcello's phones and had placed only one minor wiretap on Trafficante .
 Jimmy Hoffa appears to have been aware of Marcello and Trafficante’s plan to kill JFK, but he couldn’t take an active role because of intense scrutiny he was under from Robert Kennedy's Justice Department . Jimmy . Hoffa appeared to be aware of the
 Recipients of Teamster pension fund loans included Marcello and Trafficante . The latter shared an attormey --Frank Ragano -- with Hoffa . Trafficante and Frank Ragano also received loans from the pension fund .
 Ragano later said that on July 23, “he met Hoffa in Washington” before leaving to see Marcello and Trafficante . Kaiser points out that Ragano . Ragano said that he met "Hagagano in Washington"
 The time has come for your friend and Carlos to get rid of him, kill that son-of-a-bitch John Kennedy . The time is now for Carlos to kill John Kennedy, Carlos .
 Marcello and Trafficante had already been carefully planning JFK’s murder for at least nine months . Of course, by that time, by . time, they had already planned JFK's murder .
 Ragano publicly publicly toasts JFK’s murder with Trafficante on the night of the assassination . Ragano also handled a huge sum of cash for the assassination, as reported in an FBI file . But Ragano played a larger role in JFK's murder than the attorney ever admitted
 In the summer of 1963, Hundley represented the Justice Department at the Chicago hearing on Sam Giancana’s lawsuit to end the devastating “lockstep” surveillance the FBI had him under . The FBI was under constant surveillance for decades .
 Giancana helped leak a story to a reporter with the Chicago Sun-Times, which ran an article stating that he had done work for the CIA in 1960 . He helped the Agency with intelligence related to Cuba in 1960, according to the article .
 Hundley had to back off from questioning Giancana during the court hearing for fear he might reveal the CI[A—Mafia plots, which RFK had been told had ended the previous year . RFK was told the plots had ended in 2010 .
 Giancana won the suit; the ruling forced the FBI to stay farther away from him . The FBI has been ordered to stay away from Giancna .
 RFK didn’t let up the pressure and soon began working on a plan to drive the Mafia out of Las Vegas . RFK threatened to eliminate a major source of revenue for Giancana, the Chicago Mafia .
 The Chicago Sun-Times article caught the attention of CIA Director John McCone . The second major result of the article led to another fateful decision for Richard Helms . Helms made a fateful decision to withdraw from the CIA .
 Helms told McCone that the plots had lasted only from 1960 to May 1962 and had ended . Instead of giving the full story of the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel, Helms instead told him that it had ended in 1962 .
 Helms didn’t inform the CIA Director that he was continuing the plots into 1963 without authorization . Helms’s continued the plots without authorization.
 The ClA—Mafia plots were a deep secret even within the CIA . Only a handful of trusted officials like Desmond FitzGerald, E Howard Hunt, David Morales, and William Harvey still working on them .
 Helms must have felt confident that his dark secret would never leak, even within the Agency . Helms had a dark secret that would never be leaked, even in Agency .
 Even then, they usually spoke of “eliminating Castro’s regime” as opposed to eliminating an individual . Even then they usually speak of ‘elimination’ of the regime’
 Other people identified by historians as QJWIN include Moses Maschivitzan, Jean Voignier, and Michel Mancuso . Other historians identified as "QJWIN" have also been identified as those of the same name .
 Army Secretary Cyrus Vance, Joint Chiefs Chairman Maxwell Taylor and General Joseph Carroll, head of the Defense Intelligence Agency. They delegated the leading role in the coup plan to the Army Secretary .
 It would have been impossible to maintain the coup plan’s tight secrecy . They had far too many aides and staff and met too frequently with the press . The coup plan would have had to be kept tight .
 Rusk said he understood that and wasn't angry when he found out soon after JFK’s death that the extensive plans that he, McNamara, and other officials had been making over the summer and fall were for a real coup that was just days away when JFK died . Rus
 Harry Williams told me that E Howard Hunt resented the fact that the CIA had only a supporting role in the JEK—Almeida coup plan . Harry Williams said that Hunt resented the CIA's support for the plan . Hunt was a CIA officer in charge of the J
 Hunt’s mentor Richard Helms kept pursuing the unauthorized CIA—Mafia plots . That was probably also true for Hunt's mentor . Helms may have been one reason for Hunt to pursue the plots .
 Long-secret declassified files from 1963 show the CIA's support for a coup to topple Castro . The documents were never shown to the Warren Commission or the House Select Committee . One of the most important of the CIA’s “supporting operations” for the upcoming coup
 This important CIA attempt to move “assets into Cuba’s Cuba would accelerate through the summer and into the fall . It would include several men linked to JFK's assassination, including Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald would be among those involved .
 Rosselli's friend David Morales was in a position to influence the actions of CIA officer David Atlee Phillips . Trafficante’s man Barker could impact the . actions of E Howard Hunt . Morales and Barker were really acting on behalf of the mob bosses .
 Marcello's men David Ferrie and Guy Banister had the important task of using the CIA’s plan for getting “assets into Cuba” to make Lee Oswald look guilty after JFK was murdered .
 Oswald’s covert activities appear to have been largely controlled by Banister and Ferrie during at least the first nine months of 1963 . Banister, Ferrie were at the center of the CIA's covert activities .
 Ferrie and Banister were acting for United States intelligence, as later described by New Orleans Deputy CIA Chief Hunter Leake and Victor Marchetti, former Special Assistant to Richard Helms, both quoted in earlier chapters . On one hand, Ferrie was acting for U.S.
 Banister and Ferrie were also acting on behalf of their employer, Carlos Marcello . Many of Oswald's activities would later make him look guilty of JFK's murder . However, at the same time, they were also making sure many of Oswald’s activities would make him
 Banister and Ferrie both hated Fidel Castro . They no doubt hoped that blaming JFK’s death on a seemingly pro-Castro Communist would trigger the U.S. invasion of Cuba that both men knew was being planned .
 Oswald first tried to join the local chapter of the DRE, an anti-Castro group . The group grew out of Cubela’s old DR group in Cuba . Oswald was a member of the group that grew from the DR group .
 Oswald claimed that he wanted to overthrow Fidel Castro during a meeting with the head of the tiny New Orleans DRE chapter . Oswald claimed to have met with the leader of the New Orleans chapter of DRE .
 Oswald presented a completely opposite impression by very publicly passing out pro-Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee leaflets on the street in New Orleans, an act that provoked an attack by the same DRE official and two of his associates . Oswald's actions provoked the attack by DRE officials .
 Oswald’s arrest led to newspaper coverage as well as radio and TV appearances, in which he handled himself remarkably well . Oswald handled himself well in his first public appearance .
 Court records indicate a “Mr Phillips from Washington” met with Banister at his office in New Orleans . They discussed an anti-Castro TV appeal, court records show .
 CIA propaganda specialist David Atlee Phillips met with Banister the previous year . Gerald McKnight later confirmed that Phillips was indeed a CIA propaganda expert . Phillips was the CIA's propaganda specialist .
 Oswald was dealing with two organizations involving Phillips, the DRE, and the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . In 1963, Oswald dealt with Phillips and the FRE, but also Phillips' organization . Phillips, DRE and Fair Play For Cuba Committee were involved .
 CIA files confirm that at the same time Oswald was generating remarkable publicity, David Atlee Phillips was working on Manuel Artime’s AMWORLD portion of the JEK—Almeida coup plan . Phillips was also working on the plan to overthrow Almeida .
 Oswald’s unusual pro-Castro publicity blitz was part of CIA efforts to place U.S. intelligence assets in Cuba . The actions of Phillips and Oswald reveal that the actions of Oswald and Phillips were part of the CIA's efforts to put United States intelligence assets .
 Oswald’s publicity blitz was followed by his trip to Mexico City as he tried to leverage that publicity into permission to fly to Cuba . That would include a face-to-face meeting with Oswald within weeks of Oswald's publicity blitz .
 The Warren Commission didn't know about Oswald's New Orleans street fight . It's important to focus on aspects of Oswald’s New Orleans incident that the Warren Commission knew about .
 Oswald had "founded" a New Orleans chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee by mail . Lee Oswald had exactly one member, Lee Oswald . Oswald had “founded’t a New . Orleans chapter by mail, and it was exactly one .
 He continued to avoid real American Communists and Socialists who might have been sympathetic to Cuba . Moreover, he never made a serious effort to recruit anyone else .
 Oswald hoped to provoke a reaction from them, preferably in the form of a punch or other physical altercation that he could leverage into an arrest record and publicity . Oswald wanted to provoke an angry reaction from the crowd, but was not provoked .
 The Wasp’s crew only complained, and “Oswald was peacefully sent on his way,” says McKnight . However, the crew of the Wasp only complained .
 Oswald’s first leafleting incident, on June 15, occurred when he was working for the Reilly Coffee Company, run by William Reilly, a staunch anti-Communist who hated Castro .
 Oswald was officially “fired” from his job there on July 19, but four weeks later he debated the director of INCA on live radio in New Orleans . Oswald debated INCA's director of InCA in a radio debate four weeks after he was officially fired .
 After leaving Reilly Coffee Company, Oswald held no job—officially, for the next three months . After leaving the Reilly Coffee Co., Oswald was left with no job for three months.
 Unofficially witnesses—including a CIA asset —saw him working for and with Guy Banister and David Ferrie . Witnesses: He worked for and worked with David Frie and Guy Banier .
 Oswald would have earned little money, since he was still under “tight” surveillance by Naval Intelligence . Naval Intelligence hoped that the KGB would try to contact either him or Marina, so he couldn’t appear to have significant sums of money .
 Banister and CIA officers kept Oswald low on funds to ensure he had little choice but to do what they asked in hopes of a large payday down the road .
 Oswald prepared for his second attempt to get himself arrested for passing out leaflets . One building, with two addresses, became important as Oswald prepared to get arrested .
 Oswald was working for Banister in the leaflet operation . Banister was of course staunchly anti-Castro, and the addresses are one more indication .
 Historian Richard Mahoney documented that six witnesses saw Oswald with Ferrie or Banister in the summer of 1963 . Two of them said that Oswald was working for Banister at that time .
 Declassified files and Michael Kurtz later revealed additional witnesses . Declassified . files and additional witnesses later revealed .
 Consuela Martin provides a new explanation of why Banister’s office address appeared on pro-Castro leaflets . Martin: Banister's office address was used as a place to hide his office .
 Oswald sometimes asked her to do translating work for him by typing documents into Spanish . Oswald sometimes used to ask her to translate documents for him in Spanish .
 Oswald was not as far right or anti-Communist as Banister . In the Cold War environment of the early 1960s, many liberals, most notably John and Robert Kennedy, were also anti-communist .
 David Kaiser points out that far from being a “sincere” member of the far left, Oswald “only embarrassed the and the Castro cause in the New Orleans area” no matter what Oswald claimed in his media appearances . Kaiser: His behavior throughout resembled that of an
 Oswald used the address for Banister’s building on some of his pamphlets . Oswald also used the location of Banister's building in some of the pamphlets he published .
 Oswald handed out copies of the first printing of The Crime against Cuba, a pro-Castro pamphlet printed in the U.S. in 1961 . Oswald also handed out The Crime Against Cuba, which was published in 1961.
 Oswald was in Russia in 1961, when the first printing of the book sold out . Oswald was also in Russia when the book was published in 1961 .
 Only the fourth printing of the pamphlet was available when Oswald returned to the United States and in the summer of 1963 . Oswald's pamphlet was only the fourth printed in the U.S.
 Oswald would have needed help in obtaining dozens of copies of the long-sold-out first printing of the book . Oswald's first printing sold out at least 100,000 copies .
 It's possible that Banister ordered one or two copies for his files in 1961, but he had no reason to order dozens of copies . Banister may have ordered a few copies of the book .
 First-printing pamphlets were ordered when David Atlee Phillips was running operations targeting the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Phillips was a possible source of pro-Castro literature .
 Oswald was writing about what he planned to have happen six days later . Oswald wrote about the assassination of President Richard Nixon .
 Oswald would have been subject to law-enforcement attention on the day of JFK’s motorcade in Dallas . The Warren Commission was never able to satisfactorily answer that question . If Oswald had been on the Security Index, he would be subject to attention .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy and President John F Kennedy waged the largest war against the Mafia that America has ever seen . Robert Kennedy: "The Mafia was the biggest criminal organization in American history"
 Carlos Marcello, the most powerful godfather in America, confessed to an undercover FBI informant that he ordered the assassination of President Kennedy in 1985 .
 A confidential source who has provided reliable information in the past furnished the following: On December 15, 1985, he was in the company of CARLOS MARCELLO and another inmate at the FEDBRAL CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTE in Texarkana, Texas, in
 CARLOS MARCELLO discussed his intense dislike of former President John Kennedy as he often did . He also discussed his dislike of the former President .
 President KENNEDY was killed by a member of the Kennedy administration . President Kennedy was assassinated in the early 1960s . The president was assassinated by the assassination of JFK .
 Marcello talked on undercover FBI audio tapes about his meetings with Lee Oswald and Jack Ruby in 1966 . In addition to his confession, he talked about meetings with Jack Ruby and Lee Oswald . In 1966, he confessed to the murders of Oswald and Ruby .
 Trafficante confessed his role in JFK’s assassination to his attorney . Shortly before his death, Trafficante said he had confessed to his lawyer . Trafficante was convicted of JFK's assassination in 1966 .
 Guy Banister, the former FBI Special Agent in charge of Chicago, worked as Marcello’s private detective .
 Numerous witnesses saw Oswald with Banister and Ferrie in the summer of 1963 . The CIA card shows the Agency was aware of their connections .
 Lee Oswald got a significant amount of TV, radio, and newspaper publicity for his phony, one-man chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New Orleans . Lee Oswald was a member of the committee, which was formed in 1963 .
 Be is charged with trying to tell & cenfideniial [De to 2 man Indicied in the alleged cousterfeiting of $500,090 in bosds and checks . Be is accused of attempting to tell and cencial [De] to tell].
 JFK had to cancel Chicago trip and motorcade because of assassination plot involving four men . Three weeks before Dallas, JFK canceled Chicago trip due to assassination plot . JFK had been scheduled to travel to Dallas, Texas, on the night before Dallas .
 An ex-Marine, not Oswald, who worked at a warehouse overlooking JFK’s motorcade route, was arrested . The warehouse was a warehouse where Oswald was arrested, but Oswald was not Oswald .
 JFK kept word of the threat out of the press at the time, for national security reasons . JFK kept the threat of the assassination from the press, for the reasons of secrecy .
 Abraham Bolden, the first black presidential secret service agent, was arrested and sent to prison on false charges . Bolden was arrested before he could tell warren Commission staff about the Chicago plot .
 Johnny Rosselli, the Mafia don who represented Sam Giancana and the Chicago mob in Las Vegas and Hollywood, helped Marcello and Trafficante implement their plan to kill JFK . shortly before he was murdered on Trafficante’s orders, he confessed his role in JFK
 This plot was kept hidden from the press at the time by JFK, and this small article only slipped out the day after he died . JFK kept the plot hidden, and the small article slipped out of the press the next day .
 The warren Commission and five government committees that later investigated parts of the JFK assassination were never told about it . The five committees investigating the assassination were also never told of it .
 Tampa godfather Santo Trafficante and his attorney Frank Ragano toasted JFK’s murder the night he died, at the same Tampa hotel where JFK had spoken just four days earlier . Trafficante, Ragano and Trafficante drank the night JFK died .
 Three months before JFK was elected President, vice President Richard Nixon ordered the CIA to work with Trafficante, Rosselli, and other mobsters to assassinate Fidel Castro . The CIA had been ordered by Nixon to assassinate Castro .
 Carlos Marcello also joined those CIA-Mafia plots . CIA official Richard Helms continued into 1963 without telling JFK or even CIA Director McCone .
 JFK and JFK had their own plan to topple Fidel Castro if they couldn’t reach a negotiated settlement with him . JFK and the other leaders of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion planned to topple Castro .
 Q ‘Who is ""3-1"" and what is the name of the anti-Castro group both of which are mentioned on nage 89 of the Report. Both of these are mentioned in the Report .
 The CIA was using exile leader Manuel Artime in the CIA-Mafia plots with Trafficante and Rosselli in 1963 . Unknown to JFK, Robert Kennedy, or Ruiz-Williams, the CIA used Artime for the plots .
 This fact was also hidden from the warren Commission and the House select Committee on Assassinations . This fact has also been hidden from many of the House committees .
 The Kennedys’ plan in 1963 involved working with Commander Juan Almeida, the head and founder of the Cuban Army, and the third most powerful man in Cuba, to stage a “palace coup” against Fidel that would lead to free elections .
 The JFK-Almeida coup plan was completely withheld from the Commission and the House select Committee on Assassinations . Eetablish a , however rudimentary, with some sort of public clein to political viebility to provide an adequate political basia .
 Hundreds of pages of files about the JFK-Almeida coup plan were declassified in the 1990s .
 Fidel Castro's death would likely be blamed on a Russian or Russian sympathizer . Fidel’s death would probably be blamed for a Russian sympathiser .
 JFK’s Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, first revealed the existence of the coup plan to the author . The author was first told of the plan by Rusk . Rusk was JFK's secretary of state .
 JFK was pursuing the coup plan at the same time he was trying to negotiate a peaceful settlement with Fidel Castro . JFK later confirmed to Vanity Fair that JFK pursued the plan while he was negotiating with Castro .
 President Kennedy decided to continue the CIA-Mafia plots without telling President Kennedy, CIA Director John McCone, or Robert Kennedy . He decided not to tell President Kennedy or CIA Director McCone about the plots .
 Hunt’s assistant, CIA agent Bernard Barker, was also working for Santo Trafficante at the time, and sold out the JFKAlmeida coup plan to the godfather .
 Barker was one of a dozen associates of Trafficante, Marcello, or Rosselli who knew about—or actually worked on—the top secret coup plan . Barker worked with Trafficante or Marselli on the plan .
 HSCA CIA officer David Atlee Phillips, a close friend of Hunt’s, targeted Fidel Castro and the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Phillips was a publicity specialist who had targeted both Castro and Fidel Castro . Phillips, who was a CIA officer, was also a friend of
 In the summer of 1963, Phillips reportedly met with Oswald to discuss an operation targeting Castro . The operation was reportedly planned to target Castro .
 Morales also worked on the top secret JFK-Almeida coup plan in 1963 . Like Phillips, Morales was also involved in the JFK coup plan .
 Morales hated JFK because of the Bay of Pigs, and in the fall of 1963, he worked closely with Johnny Rosselli, supposedly on the CIA-Mafia plots . Morales was supposedly behind the CIA and Mafia plots, but he hated JFK .
 Morales later confessed being part of JFK’s assassination to two close associates . Marcello, Trafficante, and other mob leaders were behind the assassination .
 He hired ten times the number of Mafia prosecutors as the Eisenhower-Nixon administration . They spent 13 times more days presenting Mafia cases to grand juries . The Nixon administration spent 13 days presenting cases before grand jury .
 Jack Ruby was a low-level mobster in the Dallas arm of Carlos Marcello’s organization . Ruby was an associate member of the Dallas-based mobster group . Ruby is believed to have been involved in several murders .
 Marcello told the CAMTEX FBI informant that his group secretly owned Ruby’s Carousel strip club . Ruby was caught stealing from the till, and when he was caught he confronted him for a confrontation . Ruby's group secretly owns many other Dallas strip clubs .
 Ruby’s long-distance phone calls went up markedly when word was first published about a possible JFK trip to Texas, and they skyrocketed once the trip was officially announced . Ruby's phone calls skyrocketed when word of the possible trip was announced .
 Marcello had to either find a police officer to silence the person accused of killing JFK, or do the job himself . Ruby, the "payoff man" for the Dallas Police, had to find a policeman to silence JFK's alleged killer .
 Thay would Jike to imoy tha soacctey fox hie axpileion from the United States am his destination, Pures files are negntive end they are checking in Taras and with INS, They would Like a chock of our fflea
 Marcello told the FBI’s CAMTEX informant that he imported two shooters from Europe for the JFK hit . In addition to the FBI informant, Marcella told the informant that two shooters were brought in from Europe .
 Witnesses saw more than one man on that floor, and most said neither resembled Oswald . Oswald had recently started working at the hospital . Witnesses said neither Oswald nor Oswald resembled Oswald, who had recently moved there .
 Some witnesses saw shots from the Grassy Knoll, including JFK’s two closest aides in the limo . JFK's aides were in a limo directly behind JFK's . Some witnesses say shots were fired from the ground .
 A single bullet had to hit JFK in the back, supposedly exit his throat, then dive down and shatter four inches of Connally’s rib before smashing into his wrist bones and plowing into his thigh . For the “single bullet theory” to work, this bullet
 In addition to the improbability of the “magic bullet” theory, JFK’s shirt and suit coat all show that JFK was shot in the back almost six inches below the top of his collar . yet, for the same bullet to emerge from the throat, that
 One of the six government investigating committees to look into aspects of JFK's assassination was the Senate Church Committee, in 1975 .
 Former Chicago mob boss Sam Giancana could testify about the CIA-Mafia plots . He was murdered on June 19, 1975, in Chicago .
 Jimmy Hoffa had been leaking information to the Committee, and he was murdered on July 30, 1975 . He was murdered in 1975 .
 Johnny Rosselli’s body was found dismembered and floating in an oil drum near Miami . Trafficante kept being forced to testify to the Church Committee .
 Chicago hitman Charles Nicoletti was murdered on March 29, 1977, the same day Oswald’s best friend in Dallas, George DeMohrenschildt, committed suicide . Oswald's best friend, the anti-Communist anti-communist, also committed suicide that day .
 Both died before they could testify before the House select Committee on Assassinations . Both died in their deaths .
 The local DRE chapter in New Orleans was run by a Cuban exile named Carlos Bringuier . HSCA was founded by the Cuban exile who later moved to New Orleans .
 The DRE was a real organization managed by the CIA, but the New Orleans chapter was tiny .
 Bringuier, an acquaintance of David Ferrie, was suspicious of Oswald and declined his offer . Ferrie was a friend of Ferrie's and a member of the family .
 Oswald returned to the area to promote himself publicly as proudly pro-Castro . Four days later, on August 9, he was back in the area again to promote his views of Cuba . Oswald was arrested on August 8, 1962, in a raid on the airport .
 Oswald’s arrest and trial were “prominently reported in the New Orleans papers” and on TV, which seems to have been the goal for both Phillips and Banister . Phillips was trying to build Oswald's pro-Castro credentials so he could get into Cuba .
 Oswald’s August 1963 incident was an assassination attempt by Marcello Oswald . Guy Banister and Guy Banister were also involved in the incident . Oswald was killed in August 1963 .
 Witnesses place Martino with Carlos Marcello and Guy Banister . That is around the time that witnesses place him with Marcella and Banister. Witnesses say he was with them at the time of the incident .
 Historian Kurtz cites the former Superintendent of the New Orleans Police Department as saying that Martino “met with Marcello himself at the Town and Country Motel,” where he had his office .
 A close associate of Carlos Marcello's lieutenant Nofio Pecora arranged Oswald’s release from jail . Oswald was released from jail, as documented by the Director of the House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 Jack Ruby had called Pecora just six days earlier . Ruby had been in contact with Ruby six days before .
 Oswald once more passed out pro-Castro leaflets on a New Orleans street . Only four days later, evidently unworried about being attacked or arrested again, Oswald again passed out leaflets . Oswald was arrested four days after he was arrested in New Orleans .
 Oswald was invited to be interviewed by WDSU radio host on August 17, 1963 . Oswald had been invited to appear on a weekly radio show . Oswald's interview was the first time he had been interviewed by a radio host . Oswald was killed in August 1963 .
 Oswald was confronted on the air about his defection to Russia, which he had not mentioned . Oswald was again articulate and did well in the debate . Oswald's defection was not mentioned in the interview .
 Oswald was apparently not prepared for that, which seems odd since his defection was well publicized . Oswald's defection from the U.S. was apparently unanticipated . Oswald was not prepared to accept that .
 The subject had the effect of discrediting the Fair Play for Cuba Committee to the listening public, which is what David Atlee Phillips had been trying to do for more than two years . However, Phillips' efforts to discredit the committee were unsuccessful .
 The footage would cement in much of the public's mind that Oswald was a dangerous Communist . That footage would be played after JFK's assassination .
 Atlee Phillips met with Oswald in Dallas in late August or early September 1963 . Phillips was apparently to debrief him after his New Orleans media appearances . Phillips is believed to have debriefed Oswald .
 Oswald had built a public and documented record as firmly proCastro . Oswald had handled a variety of situations well, according to the report . Oswald's record as a pro-Castro has been documented .
 The United States could use speedboats to sneak assets and agents into Cuba at night . The U.S. couldn’t travel freely or openly talk to lower-level officials and the public .
 The United States had no embassy or diplomatic relations with Cuba, and since travel to the island was severely restricted, it needed a number of assets who could travel openly . Since the U.S. had no diplomatic relations, the United States needed to have assets who were able to travel openly
 As a former defector to Russia, someone like Oswald was especially valuable because if he ever got into trouble, the U.S. could claim that the Russians were behind his activities . Someone like Oswald could be valuable because of his connections with Russia .
 Cuban exile leader Antonio Veciana of the ClA-backed exile group Alpha 66 . It occurred openly, in a public place in Dallas, Dallas .
 Veciana and his Alpha 66 group were barred from the JFK—Almeida coup plan because of their earlier attack on a Russian ship in Cuban waters . Veciana's group was barred from joining the JFK coup plan due to their earlier attacks on a ship .
 Veciana was also very close partners with Eloy Menoyo, one of the exile leaders the Kennedys and Harry Williams wanted to participate in the JFK—Almeida coup plan . Veciana worked with the Kennedy family and the Almeida family, but Veciana died
 Veciana’s story of meeting Oswald and Phillips in the lobby of the new Southland Building in Dallas has been controversial . Congressional investigator Gaeton Fonzi concluded such a meeting did take place .
 Veciana hinted that Phillips used the name Maurice Bishop . CIA official Ross Crozier later confirmed that to Congressional investigators . Veciana said Phillips used that name .
 Veciana revealed to researcher, Thom Hartmann, that he originally named his group Alpha 66 after Phillips 66 gas stations that were common in the early 1960s .
 David Atlee Phillips came from nearby Fort Worth, and by meeting Oswald in public—in the lobby of Dallas’s newest glittering office tower, Phillips must have realized he could have been seen with Oswald by someone who knew him .
 Such behavior seems illogical and inconsistent with Phillips’s long intelligence experience . Oswald was being used as an intelligence asset for an operation far from Dallas, Phillips says .
 It's hard to believe a CIA officer like Phillips would be in public with Oswald if he knew Oswald was going to be an assassin or a patsy for JFK’s assassination in Dallas . In addition to being a CIA agent, Phillips would have known Oswald was an assassin .
 The Phillips-Oswald—Veciana meeting makes sense if Phillips was using Oswald in the CIA’s anti-Castro operations . Oswald was one of the U.S. assets the Agency planned to move into Cuba before the coup .
 Phillips hoped Oswald’s pro-Castro media blitz would help him get into Cuba via Mexico City . Phillips wanted to get into the country via Mexico .
 Phillips was based in Mexico City, where he headed anti-Castro operations . Phillips was a key figure in the CIA's efforts to oust Castro Castro .
 Phillips played a major role in the CIA’s Cuban operations based in the United States . Phillips was part of the JFK—Almeida coup plan, handling Cuban exile groups like the DRE and Alpha 66, as well as generating anti-Castro propaganda .
 Some of Phillips’s most sensitive anti-Castro operations were kept secret from most others in the CIA, including Winston “Win” Scott, the CIA Chief of Station in Mexico City .
 Gaeton Fonzi notes that David Morales also worked closely with Phillips . David Morales was also a close friend of Phillips .
 Johnny Rosselli could learn from his close friend Morales what Phillips was working on . Morales and Phillips had a close relationship that allowed them to learn from each other's work .
 David Morales could easily have proposed to David Atlee Phillips that he meet Oswald in public and that Veciana be allowed to see Oswald for some reason . In 1963 David Morales admitted helping to assassinate JFK .
 Phillips wrote a never-published autobiographical manuscript, part fact and part fiction, which has been quoted in Vanity Fair and other publications . Years later Phillips wrote the book, which is part fact-and-part-fiction .
 Phillips confirmed that Oswald was part of the CIA’s effort to assassinate Fidel Castro . Phillips confirmed the CIA had tried to assassinate Castro .
 The CIA planned to have Fidel shot in his open jeep as he drove into Varadero Beach . Fidel Castro was shot by the CIA in an attempt to kill him in the open car .
 Phillips built a long and decorated CIA career as a propagandist using half-truths, distortions, and lies, so what he wrote must be taken with a grain of salt . On the other hand, Phillips was a decorated CIA agent who built a career in propaganda .
 Oswald did have the proper background to be an excellent patsy to take the blame for Castro’s death . However, Oswald did not have the necessary background to take responsibility for the death of Castro Castro .
 The result would have been that Helms and Phillips would withhold substantial amounts of crucial information from the press, the public, their superiors, and other agencies .
 Oswald appears to have been involved in the CIA’s attempts to kill Fidel Castro . Phillips and Veciana spoke out about Oswald's involvement in the assassination .
 Marcello was the godfather of Fidel Castro's assassination . He was also part of the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel Castro . Oswald and Marcella met in the early 1950s .
 "They were on the same side and doing work for the same agency. Essentially, they were ... essentially ... on the . same side"
 OSWALD's recent flurry of activity and upcoming attempt to get to Cuba through Mexico City made him think his years of undercover toil were about to pay off in a big way .
 FBI found telling notes Oswald wrote that Oswald wrote and that the Warren Commission left out of its Report because they clashed with the Commission’s view of Oswald as an ardent Communist . The FBI found the notes . Oswald's notes clashed with Commission's view that Oswald was a Communist .
 Warren Commission’s rarely seen twenty-six volumes of supporting material . Instead, they were included only in the Warren Commission's rarely seen 20,000 volumes of material .
 Oswald wrote that the U.S. and Russia “have too much to offer to each other to be tearing at each other’s throats in an endless cold war.” Oswald wrote in the notes that the United States and Russia have too little to offer each other .
 Oswald wrote “Notes for a speech by Lee Harvey Oswald” but never delivered the speech . According to the Warren Commission, Oswald wrote these notes . Oswald wrote the notes but never gave them to the public .
 Oswald could have given the speech only after he was no longer undercover and had been revealed as a U.S. asset, perhaps scoring a lucrative book and television deal like his childhood idol from I Led Three Lives . Oswald's oration was the kind of oration he would have given
 Oswald apparently traveled from New Orleans to Dallas, Texas, after meeting Phillips . After meeting Phillips, but before going to Mexico City, Oswald traveled to New Orleans .
 Oswald was manipulated into visiting Silvia Odio, thus linking him to both JFK’s assassination and another of the exile groups in the JFK—Almeida coup plan . Someone working with the Mafia may have manipulated Oswald into visiting Odio . The assassination was likely part of the
 Oswald’s Odio visit and the follow-up phone call don’t appear to have involved David Atlee Phillips . Phillips seems to undermine what he was trying to do with Oswald . The former CIA operative's visit to Odio appears to undermine Phillips' efforts .
 Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli worked to connect Oswald to several parts of the JFK—Almeida coup plan . The CIA and other agencies would have to cover up much information to protect the coup plan when Oswald surfaced as the main suspect .
 He named five individuals, but more have since emerged, including John Martino (whom the CIA admits was a CIA asset), David Ferrie, and David Atlee Phillips . The CIA admits it admitted to being an asset to the CIA .
 Newman named William Gaudet, a CIA asset who worked for INCA’s founder, as one of those he named . Newman: “Gaudet was an asset for the CIA. He worked for the INCA. He said he was a CIA agent .
 It's now clear that Gaudet was part of the ‘tight” surveillance of Oswald mentioned earlier . Oswald’s surveillance was a key part in the “tight’ surveillance .
 A former Senate investigator wrote that “before his death in 1981, Gaudet admitted witnessing Oswald’s distribution of pro-Castro leaflets in” New Orleans . The former senator died in 1981 at age of 65 .
 William Gaudet later saw Oswald in Mexico City, as he explained to Michael Kurtz . Oswald was Oswald's assassin, who had been killed in August 1944 .
 Gaudet’s testimony is further proof that Oswald was involved in U.S. intelligence activity in 1963 . Oswald was a major source of intelligence in the United States in the late 1960s .
 It also helps explain why he was never placed on FBI’s Security Index before Dallas .
 Oswald apparently visited both the Cuban and Soviet embassies in Mexico City in September 1963 . A massive Congressional report has been written about the trip .
 Oswald visited the Cuban Embassy on the same day as two other unusual young men, and all three tried to get Cuban entry visas . Oswald was one of three men who visited the embassy in Havana, Cuba, in 1961 .
 One tured out later to be working for intelligence in Nicaragua, one of the countries where Manuel Artime had an AMWORLD base and worked with the intelligence service .
 This young man worked for intelligence in Costa Rica, which was the other country where Artime had an AMWORLD base .
 The CIA was clearly attempting to slip multiple assets into Cuba through Mexico City at the same time . The operation was clearly an attempt to slip through the city .
 Oswald was under surveillance by U.S. intelligence in Mexico City, according to Win Scott, the CIA’s Mexico City Station Chief . Oswald was the subject of a CIA investigation into his assassination .
 Scott said the CIA’s hidden cameras photographed Oswald at the embassy, and he saw photos of Oswald there . Scott said he saw Oswald there.
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations found additional evidence of the existence of photos of Oswald in Mexico City . The committee also found more evidence of Oswald's whereabouts in Mexico .
 Only unrelated photos of someone else would be furnished to the Warren Commission and eventually made public . However, only unrelated photos would be shown to the commission .
 The CIA photo surveillance operation in Mexico City was under the control of David Atlee Phillips, who was no doubt acting on orders from Richard Helms .
 One reason for withholding the photos would be that Oswald was involved in a highly sensitive, covert operation run by Phillips and Helms . One reason is that the CIA knew Oswald was in Mexico was in the country .
 It was important for JFK’s murder that someone didn’t want Oswald to actually get to Cuba . JFK's murder was important to JFK's assassination that someone wanted Oswald to go to Cuba.
 We know that because five phony calls claiming to be from Oswald were made to the Russian and Cuban embassies while the real Oswald was in Mexico City . The calls were made while Oswald was at the embassy in Mexico .
 A Mexican police agency involved with Trafficante’s heroin network monitored the Cuban and Russian embassy calls for the CIA . A mobster (and active CIA asset) Richard Cain had formerly bugged a Communist embassy in Mexico City .
 Oswald’s visit was a flurry of odd cables flowing between the Mexico City CIA station and CIA headquarters in Washington . Oswald's visit happened at the time of his visit to Mexico City .
 One path carried accurate information about Oswald to Desmond FitzGerald and Richard Helms, while the other conveyed inaccurate information about him . The other path carried out accurate information to the CIA and the White House .
 The person managing both the accurate and inaccurate information about Oswald was Richard Helms’s assistant . Helms's assistant managed both accurate and the inaccurate information .
 Helms maintained that before JFK’s murder, the CIA hadn’t even noticed Oswald's embassy visits . Helms said in the 1970s that before the assassination the CIA had only noticed the visits . The CIA was never aware of Oswald's visits to the U.S
 Declassified files now show that claim to be false, as documented by historian and retired Major John Newman . Newman: The claim to have been made by the U.S. government is false .
 Oswald was one of several U.S. intelligence assets the CIA was trying to get into Cuba openly . The actions of Oswald and the CIA are consistent with Oswald’s being one of many United States intelligence assets .
 Oswald could have been planning to travel to Mexico City again, and on to Cuba, on November 22, 1963 . In fact, a Warren Commission memo, left out of its Final Report, showed exactly how Oswald was planning to go to Mexico .
 Oswald could have openly walked the streets of Havana or Varadero Beach talking to Cubans and low-level officials . Oswald was an American with a pro-Castro persona . Oswald would have been able to talk to Cuban officials in Havana .
 Oswald’s time in Russia would have made it possible to blame any problem he had in Cuba on the Russians, something CIA notes by William Harvey indicate was always essential for an assassination mission . Oswald spent most of his time in the Soviet Union during the Cuban Revolution .
 I agree with Kaiser that Oswald was trying to get into Cuba as part of an effort to eliminate Castro . Oswald was an attempt to kill Castro, Kaiser says .
 He didn't have the experience necessary for such a task, and he’d never killed anyone . He didn’t have the . experience necessary to such a . task . He'd never kill anyone .
 He could have had a supporting role in a Castro elimination plot, but he could have been an excellent fall guy . He would have made an excellent "fall guy"
 Oswald had been part of an operation against Fidel when he was in Mexico City . After his failure to get into Cuba, Oswald had probably been told by Banister, Ferrie, or Martino that he still was part of such an operation .
 Oswald, JFK’s assassination, and the JFK—Almeida coup plan were being forged in early October 1963 . Even as Lee Oswald prepared to return to Dallas from Mexico City, one more important link was being forged between Oswald and Almeida .
 The training camp outside New Orleans where David Ferrie reportedly took Oswald was a sort of minor-league training camp for Manual Artime’s AMWORLD portion of the JFK—Almeida coup plan . The camp is where Ferrie took Oswald .
 Declassified files show that some arms reported stolen from National Guard armories in the Texas area were actually being supplied to Cuban exile leaders . Manolo Ray’s JURE group, which JFK and RFK wanted for their coup plan .
 Other military personnel were taking advantage of that situation by stealing and selling arms and keeping the money, he says . "Other military personnel also took advantage of it," he said .
 In October 1963 the Treasury Department tried to stop the trafficking in stolen arms with an undercover sting . The sting was part of an attempt to stop arms trafficking in the United States .
 FBI and Treasury Department memos from that operation quote a Dallas gun dealer as giving a fairly accurate description of the upcoming JFK—Almeida coup plan .
 Writers for the Washington Post linked longtime gunrunner Jack Ruby to that same stolen-military-arms ring . The Washington Post also linked Ruby to the same stolen military arms ring .
 The gun dealer who accurately described the upcoming U.S. action against Cuba was the dealer who sold the bullets used in Oswald’s rifle on November 22, 1963 .
 Even the bullet found in Oswald's rifle after JFK’s assassination had been connected to the JEK—Almeida coup plan . That means even the bullet in Oswald’�s rifle had been linked to the coup plan.
 RFK was scheduled to be tried in New Orleans on federal charges on November 1, 1963, with one of RFK’s own Mafia prosecutors—John Diuguid— handling the trial . RFK's trial was held in 1963, when he was assassinated .
 Marcello would soon begin efforts to bribe a key juror . Anxious to avoid the deportation a conviction a conviction could bring, he would try to bribe the juror to avoid deportation .
 RFK knew that even if he was not convicted, RFK would launch a new investigation as soon as that trial ended . However, that was at best only a temporary solution, since the godfather knew that . RFK: "Even if he's not convicted" he would launch
 RFK was already focusing on serious tax charges against Marcello . Mafia chief knew he would have no respite while JFK was alive . RFK had already been focusing on tax charges, but knew he was going to be targeted .
 Carlos Marcello knew he had to act before the coup took place and removed his only opportunity to force a cover-up by top U.S. officials . Marcella removed the only chance to force an official cover up by top United States officials .
 Marcello had nothing to gain, and everything to lose, by allowing the JEK—Almeida coup plan to go forward . Marcella had nothing . to gain and nothing to lose by allowing it to happen .
 Robert Kennedy and aides such as Harry Williams had made it clear that as long as JFK was President, Cuba would never be a safe haven for Marcello, Trafficante, or any other Mafia boss .
 The date for the coup was firming up to be sometime in early December 1963, something Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli could have learned from their CIA allies in the JFK plot .
 If Marcello killed JFK before the coup, it would force Robert Kennedy, CIA Director McCone, military leaders like General Maxwell Taylor, and others to withhold critical information from investigators, the press, and the public to prevent a confrontation with the Soviets .
 Marcello relied on his trusted associates—the Chicago mob’s Rosselli and Trafficante in Tampa—to help him oversee the plot . The Chicago mob was involved in the plot to kill the mayor of Tampa, Florida .
 Marcello’s trial was set to begin on November 2, 1963, the day after JFK's assassination . JFK was killed during his long Chicago motorcade in 1963, a day after his trial began .
 The mob bosses’ year of careful planning meant that even their backup plan (Tampa during JFK’s November 18 motorcade) had a backup and that each city's Mafia family equally shared the risk .
 Mob bosses would use only experienced men they knew they could trust . That risk would be minimized by the mob bosses’ use of experienced men, he says .
 The Mafiosi had come up with one basic plan that could be applied in each of the three cities . The plan would be applied to each of them, including each other in each city .
 The opportunities were so close together that the bosses could use most of the same personnel for each attempt . Because of the opportunities, the bosses were able to get the most of them .
 Each of the three target cities had a key Mafia operative close to law enforcement who would monitor any leaks about—or investigations into—the JFK hit . The Mafia operative monitored the JFK assassination .
 In Chicago, the mob’s top “made’ man in law enforcement was Richard Cain, who was also chief investigator for the Cook County Sheriff . Cain was also Chief investigator for Cook County Sherriff .
 The CIA continued to deal with Cain in the fall of 1963, giving him a pipeline not only into law enforcement but into intelligence as well . Cain continued to be involved with the CIA in 1963 . Cain was a major informant for the CIA .
 Trafficante's man was Sergeant Jack de la Llana, who had formed and become director of Tampa Police Department's first criminal intelligence unit . Trafficante’s man in Tampa was Sgt. Jack de La Llana .
 Sergeant de la Llana exchanged information with the New Orleans Police Department about the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . This cooperation even extended to other states, as shown by the Sergeant .
 De la Llana was the perfect man for the Tampa godfather to have on the force, Chief Mullins says . Trafficante was working for Trafficante in 1963 when Trafficante first appeared in Tampa .
 Ruby's friendly contacts with Dallas Police were longstanding and ran deep . Ruby wasn’t a member of law enforcement, but his contacts with police were longstanding .
 According to government files, Ruby knew at least seven hundred of the twelve hundred Dallas policemen . Several officers and Ruby associates claimed that Ruby actually knew EVERY Dallas policeman .
 The mob bosses knew from earlier motorcades, like JFK’s spring 1963 trip to Chicago . Secret Service agents rode with the motorcade and were not on the ground except at the beginning and end of the route .
 This meant that if JFK was shot en route, no Secret Service would be stationed at the site of the shooting . No Secret Service was stationed at JFK's shooting site . This would have left the Secret Service on the loose .
 Secret Service agents would have to stay with the motorcade to protect the President on the way to the hospital . Even better for them, shooting JFK in a car would take them away from the crime scene .
 The Mafia's plan to kill JFK was very similar to the CIA’s plan to . kill Castro in the CIA—Mafia plots, and likely to . likely to Almeida's part of the coup plan . The Mafia plot was similar to that of the CIA's plan
 For top U.S. officials who knew about the coup or the C[A—Mafia plots, hearing how JFK had been shot would be an additional shock . Keeping the secrecy surrounding the coup plan a top priority would make maintaining the secrecy around the coup plot a priority .
 The Mafia's role in JFK's death would help obscure the Mafia’s role in his death . That cloak of secrecy would also help obscure JFK's murder . The Mafia was involved in the death of JFK .
 The Mafia may have taken the very plan the CIA had intended to use against Castro in his jeep and adapted it to kill JFK in an open limousine . The sad irony is that the Mafia took the CIA's plan to kill Castro in a jeep .
 More confirmation for the CIA’s approach to killing Castro comes from declassified CIA files and from Manuel Artoto's top lieutenant from AMWORLD .
 Quintero said the plan was to shoot Castro at Varadero Beach . He said it was a later version of an AMWORLD plot to kill Fidel .
 Killing JFK in public, in a car, would ensure that the CIA, Robert Kennedy, and other high officials recognized immediately on hearing the first reports of the tragedy the similarity between JFK’s death and the plans to eliminate Castro .
 Chief Brown provided the Senators, and the press, with a remarkable summary of how Tampa’s Trafficante conducted and got away with mob hits . Much of it reads almost like a script for what happened in Dallas the following month .
 Brown’s Senate testimony makes it clear that Trafficante, Marcello and Rosselli would do on a larger scale with JFK's assassination what they had already done successfully in the past . Trafficante and Marselli, as well as Trafficante would do what they did
 Brown testified about Trafficante's ties to Rosselli’s boss, Giancana, and to a French Connection heroin partner Michel Victor Mertz . Trafficante also had ties to the French Connection, according to the testimony .
 Trafficante had links to several murders, including many others he had ordered, court told . Trafficante was found guilty of ordering the murders of several people .
 Brown pointed out the “relative infrequency with which such professional murders are successfully prosecuted” and explained why . Brown said the prosecution of professional murders is rarer than successful .
 Police had solved only one of twenty-three Mafia murders in Tampa, Florida . The lone exception was not a typical Mafia hit, police say .
 Brown said it was very “difficult to obtain evidence sufficient for successful prosecution of Mafia members’s . Witnesses who might offer evidence have always been reluctant to do so fear of Mafia reprisals .
 One of the Trafficante hits described by Brown in his testimony is very similar to what happened to JFK and Oswald . The Trafficante hit is similar to that of JFK's assassination, Brown says .
 The main “suspect in this murder was himself murdered,” as happened with Oswald . Then the main suspect in this case was himself himself murdered .
 Historians have long known that the Kennedys initiated two separate back-channel attempts to negotiate with Fidel in the fall of 1963 . One of the attempts was made by TV journalist Lisa Howard and special UN envoy William Attwood, and the other by French journalist Jean Daniel .
 The JFK—Almeida coup plan helps explain the urgency of those efforts at that particular time . JFK: The JFK coup plan was a coup attempt to oust Almeida .
 Neither of the Kennedys’ secret peace efforts had produced any breakthroughs, and that would continue to be the case up until JFK’s assassination on November 22, 1963 .
 JFK had to work through William Attwood, who in turn talked to Fidel’s doctor, who dealt with Fidel . To maintain deniability in case the secret talks were exposed, JFK worked through Attwood and Attwood .
 JFK kept his own secrets from Attwood, not telling him that, barring some dramatic breakthrough in the secret talks, JFK and Bobby planned to allow Almeida to overthrow Fidel in December 1963 . Attwood: "I don't know what happened to Attwood when I met him,
 JFK asked French journalist Jean Daniel to talk to Fidel on his behalf . JFK was frustrated by the slow pace of the Attwood negotiations yet anxious to avoid a violent coup .
 Daniel would not get to see Fidel until November 21, the day before JFK’s trip to Dallas . JFK would not be able to meet Fidel until the next day .
 Fidel invited journalist to a follow-up lunch at Castro’s villa on November 22 at Varadero Beach . No real progress was made in their talk, but Fidel was intrigued enough by the message that he invited the journalist .
 Daniel could not securely communicate directly with JFK or Bobby about his talks with Castro . The Kennedys would have no way of knowing that Daniel was finally speaking with the Cuban leader . However, Daniel was able to speak with Castro, so the Kennesesys would not know .
 Commander Almeida and the Cuban exile leaders with their coup, hopefully leading to eventual free elections and democracy in Cuba . That could come about with a peacefully negotiated settlement if possible, but if not, they would try to bring it about by supporting the exiled leaders .
 President Kennedy, RFK, and other key officials in the Kennedy Administration were very concerned about Cuba and the 1964 election . President Kennedy and RFK were very worried about Cuba, the election .
 JFK— Almeida coup plan for December 1, 1963, was one factor in scheduling the coup plan . CIA Director John McCone and RFK’s top exile aide, Harry Williams, wrote a memo . Talks with other Kennedy aides show that John and Robert Kennedy .
 The Cuba situation would be resolved, one way or the other, before the official start of the campaign in January 1964 . That way, the Cuba situation was resolved—one way or other -- before January 1964, he says .
 CIA files and Harry Williams said that after December 1, Cuban officials planned to institute a draft, which would dilute the loyalty of Commander Almeida’s army . The draft would allow Cuban intelligence and other rival factions to infiltrate his ranks .
 Kennedy aide says coup by December 1 was necessary so U.S. troops wouldn't be fighting in Cuba during the Christmas holidays . Coup was also necessary so that United States air support for the coup would be over before the Pearl Harbor anniversary on December 7 .
 John and Robert Kennedy took steps to deal with just such a situation . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . The Kennedy family is proud of their legacy .
 Robert Kennedy had a secret subcommittee developing plans for what to do if a U.S. official was assassinated . Today, even most historians have no idea that in the days and weeks before JFK’s murder, Robert Kennedy .
 The development of “contingency plans” for dealing with the possible “assassination of American officials” grew out of planning for the coup . Many of the same officials, such as Colonel Alexander Haig, worked for Army Secretary Cyrus Vance and his aide Joseph
 This planning had begun in September 1963, but since some of the officials working on these Cuba Contingency plans didn't know about Almeida, they no doubt viewed the issue far differently, and with far less urgency, than those who did .
 Only three of the files this subcommittee generated have been declassified . Only three have been released .
 One of my sources was John H Crimmins, Coordinator of Cuban Affairs for the U.S. State Department .
 Crimmins worked on developing and writing the Cuba Contingency Plans but, like his boss Dean Rusk, had not been told about Commander Almeida .
 The other source was a Kennedy aide, who wishes to remain confidential, who saw the plans after they were drafted and who did know about Almeida's imminent coup .
 Members believed if Fidel found out about U.S. plans and decided to retaliate, he would risk assassinating an American official only outside the United States . Members believed that if . Fidel found . out about United States plans and . decided to . retaliate, they said .
 RFK and the officials working on the plans were considering how the U.S. should react if the United States ambassador to Panama was assassinated . Almeida's murder appeared to be linked somehow to Cuba and the upcoming coup .
 Robert Kennedy and the other officials didn't want JFK to be under pressure from the public, the press, or Congress to take hasty action against Cuba if early reports pointed toward Cuban involvement .
 A quick U.S. military attack on Cuba could provoke devastating retaliation from Russia . A quick United States military attack against Cuba would provoke devastating retaliatory Russian retaliation .
 Imagine the disaster if the United States started bombing Havana only to have evidence emerge proving the U.S. official had been killed not by Fidel but in a routine crime . Also imagine a disaster if evidence emerged proving that a U.N. official was killed in Havana was killed by a
 Kennedy aide indicated some of the conditions necessary for JFK to make an informed, reasoned response to the apparent assassination of a U.S. official in Latin America . Kennedy aide: "To avoid those problems, the Kennedy aide cautiously indicated some conditions"
 First, the U.S. would need to control and limit initial publicity to keep the news media from generating an outcry for an immediate military response against Cuba .
 Any links between the assassination and the coup plan would have to be hidden from the press . To protect Almeida, any possible links to the assassination would be kept secret from press .
 U.S. investigating agencies would need to take control of the investigation from local authorities as soon as possible, including gaining possession of important evidence .
 The autopsy would have to be conducted at a secure United States military facility to ensure that information couldn’t be leaked to the press .
 All of this would give JFK the time and information needed to make an appropriate response . JFK would be given time to respond .
 Some aspects of what many call the cover-up regarding JFK's assassination were actually planned weeks and months before JFK’s murder . The cover-ups were intended to manage a completely different situation, the author says .
 The thinking behind the Cuba Contingency plans, and the need to protect the secrecy of Almeida’s coup plan to preserve his life and to prevent a possible nuclear confrontation with the Soviet Union, is responsible for much of the secrecy that surrounds JFK's murder, even today
 U.S. officials would be receptive to the Mafia's fake “Castro did it” information after JFK’s murder . Officials like Alexander Haig had spent months working on scenarios involving possible retaliation by Fidel against United States officials, Haig says .
 Those inside and outside the CIA who would press the “Castro did it’s” line often point to remarks Fidel made to Associated Press reporter Daniel Harker in September 1963 .
 Castro then said, “We are prepared to fight them and answer in kind.” Harker wrote that Castro then told him to “answer in kind” Castro said . Castro said he was “prepared to fight’s and answer kind’
 Some claim that Castro’s remark was a threat to assassinate JFK . The comment was not noted as such when the article first appeared .
 Some men involved in the Castro assassination plots, such as Morales and Rosselli, confessed to killing JFK, the Cuban dictator's explanation makes sense . Those admissions weren't revealed until years after Castro talked to Congressional delegation .
 As several historians have pointed out, it would have made little sense for Fidel to do something that would risk having his country invaded in retaliation .
 He said Fidel Castro's comment had nothing to do with sparking the Cuba Contingency planning . He said he felt Castro had no role in JFK’s death .
 The Cuban American troops at Fort Benning were trained and ready, and one of the leaders of that group had been told about Commander Almeida . One of those leaders had been briefed on the commander of Cuban American forces .
 CIA memos confirm Harry Williams’s accounts of meeting with liberal exile leaders Manolo Ray and Eloy Menoyo to get them to fully commit to his operation . Harry Williams met with the exiled leaders to convince them to commit to the operation .
 The CIA memo about Williams’s meeting with Ray contains a cryptic reference to Commander Almeida .
 Manuel Artime and Tony Varona did know about Commander Almeida, but both men were proving problematic . Manuel Artimo, Manuel Varona and Tony Varaona were among those who knew about Almeidas .
 Artime increasingly tried to bypass Williams and go directly to Robert Kennedy, causing friction between Artime and Williams . Artime became increasingly frustrated with Williams' efforts to reach Kennedy .
 Key CIA officials were not only aware of Artime’s Mafia involvement, they also looked at using it as “cover” for the CIA supplying him weapons . Unknown to Williams, Artime was working on the CIA—Mafia plots, and key CIA officials knew of
 Tony Varona was leaking information about the coup to another Trafficante associate, former Cuban President Carlos Prio . At the same time, Varona had been leaking information to former Cuban president Carlos Prie .
 CIA memos show that Prio resented the fact that Williams, not he, was leading the coup plan . CIA memos also show that he resented that Williams was not leading the plan .
 Trafficante associate Bernard Barker helped CIA officer E Howard Hunt with the initial payment of $50,000 to Almeida . Hunt had promised $500,000, almost $3 million in today’s dollars, to help get the wife and children out of Cuba on a seemingly
 Rosselli had his own pipeline to information about the coup plan, via his increasingly close friend David Morales . Morales is a close friend of Rossellini's . Morales was a close ally of the former president .
 Morales was also involved in the CIA— Mafia plots and the related Castro assassination plot with disgruntled Cuban official Rolando Cubela . Morales also plotted with Cubela in the plot to kill Fidel Castro .
 Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli were ready for their first attempt to kill President Kennedy, during his upcoming motorcade through Chicago . They planned to kill him during his motorcade .
 The other elements they would need to put their plan into effect were experienced hit men, someone to be quickly blamed for the hit, and someone to make sure the fall guy was swiftly eliminated .
 Carlos Marcello arranged for two of the hit men he used to kill President Kennedy . The hit men were two men he arranged to kill the president . The president was killed in the assassination of President Kennedy in 1963 .
 In 1985 Marcello confided to his cellmate, FBI informant Jack Van Laningham, that “two dagos came from Italy” to act as gunmen in JFK’s assassination . Marcella confided that two dagos from Italy came to JFK's
 Marcello explained that the gunmen first came to Canada, then into Michigan . He said they first came into Michigan, then moved to Michigan .
 FBI secretly recorded Marcello’s remarks via a bugged transistor radio that Van Laningham had given him . The godfather made that revelation in the cell he shared with Van Lansingham .
 Van Laningham’s revelation from Marcello has never been published or revealed anywhere before its appearance in this book . The revelation was never published before it was made public or revealed elsewhere .
 Six years before Van Laningham told me about Marcello’s claim, author Charles Brandt published a book that helps support what Van Lanedham said . It's important to note that .
 Brandt's book was about a mob assassin and Teamster associate of Jimmy Hoffa named Frank Sheeran . Brandt’s book was based on a mob hitman and an associate of the Hoffa .
 Frank “The Irishman” Sheeran and the Inside Story of the Mafia, the Teamsters, and the Last Ride of Jimmy Hoffa. The Inside Story will be on CNN.com Live .
 "They would get smuggled in from Canada, like through Windsor, right across the water from Detroit," police say . They would get into the U.S. illegally from Canada .
 The Sicilian war orphans would think they had to take care of a matter and then they could stay in America... . they would then get in the getaway car and be taken somewhere and and nobody back in Sicily would miss them .
 Because they were orphans and had no family there would be no vendettas. Because they would not have a family, they would have no family . They would have been orphans and no family. They would be orphans .
 Marcello told Van Laningham that the two gunmen came into the U.S. through “Selfridge” but provided no other information about that locale . He said the gunmen came in the United States through "Selfridge" but gave no other details .
 It is an Air National Guard station just north of Detroit and across the bay from Canada . It is located on the border with Canada .
 Selfridge is only a few dozen miles from the restaurant where Jimmy Hoffa would later disappear .
 Sheeran said Marcello used the Windsor border crossing for his hit men from Italy . It is also not far from the border crossing used for hitmen from Italy. It is the same border crossing that sheeran says Marcella used .
 Bringing gunmen into the U.S. through Canada and then Michigan is significant for two reasons . The gunmen entered the United States through Canada, then Michigan, in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Part of a heroin smuggling route through Montreal used by Marcello’s French Connection associates . The heroin route was part of the route used by the French Connection .
 The Montreal heroin ring also ran an immigration and illegal-identity racket for “supplying false papers” — what would be called identity theft today . The ring ran an illegal immigration and identity theft racket .
 In addition to smuggling, the ring was also used for new Mafia recruits, immigrants fresh from Italy and Sicily who needed cover identities . The ring was used to smuggle immigrants from Sicily and Sicily .
 The illegalidentity part of the heroin ring was run by three Mafiosi, including two longtime associates of Michel Victor Mertz, Marcello’s heroin partner . The illegal identity part of that ring was also run by two MAFiosi .
 By bringing the two gunmen in through that route, they could easily be supplied with hard-totrace cover identities . The two gunmen could easily supply them with cover identities, the author says .
 It’s possible they were brought into the U.S. via Canada instead of someplace closer to Marcello's territory . Second, it's possible that they were used in the attempt to assassinate JFK in Chicago .
 Years before Van Laningham and Frank Sheeran made their revelations, biographer John H Davis described a similar scenario based on his extensive research into Marcello’s method of operating .
 Carlos Marcello didn’t tell Van Laningham exactly when the hit men came into the United States, so it’s unclear if they made it to Chicago or if they went straight to New Orleans after the Chicago attempt was called off .
 It’s also likely they weren’t the only shooters but simply the ones provided by Marcello . It's also likely the other shooters were provided by the player .
 Given the long period of careful planning, it’s likely the same was true for the gunmen . The gunmen made sure that even backup plans had backup plans .
 It would have made sense to have at least two teams of two shooters in case something unexpected happened to one or two of the shooters before JFK's assassination .
 Trafficante's enforcer Herminio Diaz, his heroin partner and acknowledged assassin Michel Victor Mertz, Chicago hit man Charles Nicoletti, and one or two of Rosselli’s highly trained Cuban exile sharpshooters have been suggested or rumored shooters .
 It’s important to stress that, as with any successful intelligence or criminal operation, the participants would have been informed on a need-to-know basis .
 Few aside from Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli would have known the whole plan . Few would have been more likely to know the whole thing .
 Other participants would have been told only what they needed to know, when they needed it, to prevent leaks in case any of them were arrested . This would have prevented leaks from other participants .
 Lee Oswald returned to Dallas from Mexico City on October 3, 1963 . Oswald's legitimate work for the U.S. intelligence agency continued . Oswald was killed in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 .
 Warren Commission transcripts show Senator Richard Russell saying that Oswald “came back in a car” from Mexico, although Oswald didn’t drive or even own a car . The official story in the Warren Report was that he returned by bus . Oswald didn't drive or own a
 Oswald was under surveillance by Naval Intelligence while he was also involved in an ongoing CIA operation . All those reports are consistent with Oswald’s being under surveillance, Naval Intelligence .
 Oswald’s pregnant wife and young daughter lived with a family friend, Ruth Paine . Paine lived with Oswald and his family in Dallas, Texas . Oswald's wife and daughter lived in Dallas with Paine and Paine's family .
 The Oswalds had been introduced to Paine earlier in the year by Lee’s friend George DeMohrenschildt, the staunch anti-Communist and admitted CIA asset . Paine was Paine's first meeting with the Oswalds .
 Oswald moved into the YMCA on October 3, 1963 . Oswald arrived in Dallas, Texas, in October 1963 . He moved in to the Dallas-area's YCA .
 The former Marine soon moved to a rooming house and attempted, without success, to get a job at a printing company . He moved to rooming houses and tried to find a job .
 H Lee—Oswald then moved to another rooming house, in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas . H Lee Oswald lived in a rooming home in Dallas, Texas .
 Marina’s friend Ruth Paine had heard about an opening there from a neighbor whose brother worked there . Marina had been offered a job at the centre of the world's most famous restaurants .
 Paine also received a call for Oswald, offering him a position at another firm at a much higher salary . Oswald offered Paine a new job at a higher salary at a new firm . Paine was offered the job by Oswald, but Oswald was offered another job by another firm .
 Presidential motorcades pass through Dealey Plaza, which was tradition for Franklin Roosevelt and for candidate John F Kennedy in 1960 .
 Oswald’s activities on weekday evenings and weekends that he did not visit the Paine home are largely undocumented, so it would have been easy for him to talk with individuals related to his intelligence work or his ongoing “tight” Naval Intelligence surveillance . Oswald's activities are largely
 Oswald’s only close friend in Dallas, George DeMohrenschildt, had left the country almost seven months earlier . Outside of Marina, it is not known who else Oswald could have been calling .
 Oswald’s intelligence status had to be very closely held to remain secret . Few federal agents in the field could be told about it . Oswald's intelligence status was kept secret, meaning few federal agents could tell it .
 Field agents would have been told little or nothing about where their routine reports about Oswald were going after they were filed with FBI superiors . Even though at times the FBI assisted with the Naval Intelligence surveillance of Oswald, field agents would not know where their reports were going .
 Oswald was apparently worried that a local Dallas FBI agent was going to blow his cover, which he had worked so hard to maintain for so many years, hoping he could make it pay off . Oswald was worried about a local FBI agent blowing his cover .
 Dallas FBI agent James Hosty had visited Marina Oswald on November 1 and again on November 5 . Hosty visited Oswald in Dallas, Texas, on November 4 and 5 . Oswald was killed in November 5, 1963 .
 Oswald personally dropped it off at the Dallas FBI office on November 12 . Oswald wrote a note to Hosty warning him away . Hosty wrote it to the FBI . Oswald dropped it at the FBI office .
 Hoover ordered the Dallas FBI office to destroy Oswald’s note . Oswald's note was destroyed by the FBI in Dallas, Texas . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 The note and its destruction were kept secret from the Warren Commission and the American public . The Warren Commission kept the note and the destruction of the note secret .
 The contents of the note and the circumstances of Oswald’s visit were the subject of three conflicting stories when Congress finally investigated the note in the mid-1970s . Oswald's visit to the U.S. was the first time Congress had investigated the letter .
 The secretary in the Dallas office testified that she recalled a phrase about “blowing up” the FBI office . The secretary said she recalled the phrase . The FBI office in Dallas, Texas, is a Dallas suburb .
 A written threat to blow up the Dallas FBI office would have provoked a swift response in 1963, as it would today . The threat was delivered in person by a former defector to Russia, according to a former FBI agent .
 Agent Hosty and his supervisor told different stories, with Hosty minimizing any threat or concern about the note . Hosty said the note was not a threat or a threat .
 Based on all the evidence, it’s likely that Oswald was simply trying to keep the local FBI agent from “blowing” the deep cover Oswald had carefully maintained for so long .
 Oswald sightings surfaced after JFK’s murder . Several odd sightings of someone later reported to be Oswald surfaced in the weeks following JFK's murder .
 Oswald caused a disruption at a firing range and visited a car dealership . Oswald also drove a demonstration vehicle at a high rate of speed . Oswald had no license or money to buy a car at a car dealer .
 Oswald often had incidents that called attention to himself . The incidents usually had Oswald doing something that called for attention . Oswald was known for his anti-Semitic tendencies .
 Oswald could have been the real Oswald, either doing something Ferrie or Banister asked him to do or looking ahead to the money he hoped to make after his “big reveal” following his mission to Cuba .
 Some of the incidents might have involved someone posing as Oswald . Others might have simply involved mistaken identities . The incidents may have been mistaken identities.
 The incidents have been investigated and written about for decades, with few definitive conclusions, so they are not detailed here . The incidents were investigated and published decades ago .
 The Secret Service noted a few of OSWALD's activities in a secret memo just three days after JFK’s murder . Thomas Arthur Vallee's activities bore a remarkable similarity to those of another ex-Marine .
 Oswald had visited a CIA-backed exile training camp and had met with a CIA official about killing Castro . Oswald had also met with an official at the camp . Oswald was the son of Oswald, a former CIA operative .
 Oswald initially stayed at the YMCA before moving to a rooming house and getting a job at a large downtown warehouse that would overlook JFK’s motorcade route . Oswald moved to a new city in the fall after moving to the city .
 Ex-Marine Thomas Vallee had done almost all the same things over the years . Over the same time span, he had done the same thing as Vallee did .
 Vallee was at a CIA-backed exile training camp and met with a CIA contact about killing Castro . Vallee met with the CIA contact on killing Castro at the camp .
 Vallee then moved to a new city, got a room at the YMCA, and then lived in a rooming house . Vallee now lives in a hotel room in a city in a different city .
 Like Oswald, Vallee then found a job at a large downtown warehouse overlooking a motorcade route for JFK . Only in Vallee's case it was JFK’s planned November 2, 1963, motorcade .
 Oswald and Vallee could have been subject to the same type of manipulation . Both men were likely to be subject to similar manipulation techniques .
 Thomas Vallee wanted to join the Marines so desperately that he lied about his age . Like Oswald, Vallee lied about age to get into the Marines . Vallee was a teenaged boy who wanted to be a Marine . He lied about being a Marine to get in the Marines,
 Vallee was awarded the Purple Heart and an oak leaf cluster for wounds suffered in the Korean War . Vallee served seven years in prison for his wounds .
 Like Oswald, Vallee was often depicted by authorities as a troubled loner . Vallee, who died in 1963, was often portrayed as a loner by authorities .
 Oswald's image might have served to hide covert activities that he didn’t want to share with his family . Also like Oswald, that image may have served as a cover-up for covert activities .
 According to journalist Edwin Black, Vallee later told him that he had spent part of his time in the Marines in Japan at the Camp Otsu U-2 base, one of several bases used by the CIA .
 Like Oswald, Vallee appears to have gotten special treatment in the Marines . He was never reprimanded by his Marine superiors .
 Oswald visited Manuel Artime’s exile training camp and meeting with David Atlee Phillips and exile Antonio Veciana, where the assassination of Castro was discussed . That evokes Oswald's visit to Manuel Artimes’ exiled training camp .
 Oswald returned to Dallas and Vallee returned to his hometown of Chicago . Both ex-Marines moved to new cities in the fall of 1963 .
 Both men lived at the local YMCA before moving to a rooming house . As the Secret Service noted, both men lived in a local YmCA .
 Vallee succeeded and began working at IPP Litho-Plate on West Jackson Boulevard in Chicago .
 Vallee’s job was at a seven-story building that overlooks what has been described as a ‘slow turn’ for JFK’�s upcoming November 2 motorcade through Chicago . Vallee's job is at a building that overlooked a “slow turn
 Also like Oswald, Vallee would be arrested on the day of JFK’s motorcade through his city, and he would have a weapon and ammunition with him . Vallee was arrested in the same way as Oswald, and would be carrying a weapon .
 It's clear that Thomas Vallee would have made an excellent fall guy if the mob bosses had assassinated JFK during the President’s visit to Chicago . It's also clear that Vallee could have been a good fall guy for Vallee .
 Just as Oswald worked for the far-right racist Guy Banister, Vallee also had a far right connection . Vallee worked for a far-left racist group in France .
 Trafficante and Marcello associate John Martino was a member of the John Birch Society’s speakers’ bureau . Trafficante was Trafficante's partner in the fall of 1963, Trafficante says .
 He was featured in the society's September 1963 newsletter as he toured the country promoting his book, I Was Castro’s Prisoner . The society's newsletter was published in September 1963 .
 Martino confessed his role in JFK’s murder and told associates what Oswald had been instructed to do on November 22 . Martino later confessed to the murder .
 How Vallee came to be working for the CIA, training Cuban exiles to assassinate Fidel Castro, has never been explained . Vallee was trained to assassinate Castro .
 Vallee had a former housemate who had been arrested for gun dealing . Vallee lived in Long Island in the summer of 1963 .
 Ex-Marine Vallee might have come to the attention of the exiles or their CIA handlers . Given the numerous ties between gunrunning, mobsters, and Cuban exiles, Vallee may have been the target of the CIA . The ex-marine Vallee is a former
 Vallee himself recognized that he had undertaken activities that would have made him look guilty if JFK had been killed in Chicago . Vallee's actions would have led him to look guilty in the wake of JFK's assassination .
 Vallee didn’t have the seeming pro-Castro connections that distinguished Oswald . But there was an attempt to link Oswald to Chicago via reports of a little-known trip that he made prior to the attempt to kill JFK .
 Oswald’s apparent trip to Chicago, in the weeks after his well-publicized New Orleans incident, is supported by evidence from several independent sources . The apparent trip was made in weeks after New Orleans, New Orleans .
 The head of the Ku Klux Klan told a reporter and editor Patsy Sims that he had met with Oswald in Atlanta . Oswald was the leader of the KKK in Atlanta, Georgia, in the 1920s .
 In her definitive history of the Klan, Sims writes that Oswald, in the summer of 1963, had called on Imperial Wizard James Venable in his office in Atlanta seeking the names of right-wing associates . Sims wrote that one of her sources told her that Oswald had asked for the names
 Klan leader Venable made the statement to Sims in the 1980s . It’s difficult to see why Venable would make up an Oswald encounter .
 In the 1960s, Klan leader Venable was close to an associate of Guy Banister, white supremacist Joseph Milteer, who lived in Georgia and visited Atlanta frequently . Venable led the Ku Klux Klan in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1960s .
 Milteer accurately described JFK’s assassination to an informant on a Miami police undercover tape . As detailed later, shortly after the Chicago attempt, almost two weeks BEFORE President Kennedy was murdered in Dallas, almost 2 weeks before JFK was murdered .
 Milteer had been seen meeting with Banister in New Orleans in the summer of 1963, when Oswald was reportedly working for Banister and with David Ferrie .
 David Ferrie’s long-distance phone records show several collect calls placed to Ferrie from the Atlanta suburb of Marietta from August 16 to August 20 . These calls might be related to Oswald's trips to the U.S. in the summer .
 The FBI received reports of Oswald's brief stopover in Atlanta from several individuals, including Hal Suit, the highly respected news director of Atlanta’s largest TV station . Hal Suit was a highly respected journalist .
 Oswald left behind a pistol at the Holiday Inn in Marietta after he checked out . Oswald was found to have checked out of a Holiday Inn at the time of the shooting . Oswald's gun was found in the hotel room .
 Oswald—or the person posing as Oswald—soon retrieved the pistol, but such an incident would tend to incriminate Oswald after JFK’s assassination . Oswald and the person posed as Oswald would have incriminated Oswald . Oswald or the person pretending to be Oswald retrieved the gun .
 President Kennedy had originally planned to visit Atlanta, hold a motorcade, and give a major speech in the late summer of 1963 . Local Democrats had urged him to cancel or scale back the appearance because of concerns about JFK’s stance on civil rights .
 Oswald planned to visit Atlanta en route to Chicago before JFK altered his plans . Oswald's plans had already been made for Oswald to visit the city .
 Oswald’s flurry of New Orleans publicity in midAugust. That helps date the visit after Oswald's flurry of publicity . Oswald's visit dates back to midAugust, when Oswald was in New Orleans .
 Oswald seems to have made sure that he would be remembered as being very interested in leftist causes . Oswald was known for his interest in the cause of leftist causes in his life .
 Historian Michael Kurtz witnessed Guy Banister with Oswald in 1963 . Both were debating students about integration at the time .
 A report sent to the U.S. Secret Service a week after JFK’s assassination said that Lee Oswald, suspected of assassinating the late President Kennedy, was seen distributing pamphlets entitled ‘Fair Play for Cuba,’ on St. Martin .
 Mr Jean Paul Tremblay, Investigator, Customs and Excise, Montreal stated on November 27, 1963 that he received one of the abovementioned pamphlets from a man on St. Charles Street . Mr Jean . Trembllay was an investigator at the time of the incident .
 Oswald was killed in August 1963 in Montreal, Montreal . Oswald is believed to have been Oswald's killer . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family .
 The point of the trip north by Oswald—or someone pretending to be him— was apparently to tie him to Vallee . Vallee was linked to a seemingly proCastro, Communist radical .
 Vallee was arrested for JFK's assassination in Chicago . Martino, Milteer, and Banister would need to make the link public only if Vallee were arrested .
 Government files and sources show nineteen parallels in all, which indicate that Lopez was being manipulated as the perfect fall guy if the JFK assassination was in Tampa or if an additional patsy was needed for Dallas . Government files show that Lopez may have been manipulated by the CIA .
 Oswald and Gilberto Lopez were both former defectors with a Russian connection in their background . They were both ex-defectors of the Soviet Union .
 Each had returned to the U.S. in 1962 from a Communist country . Each had been in the United States in 1962 .
 Both men had an unusual involvement with the small pro-Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee in 1963 . It became the subject of Congressional hearings and newspaper accounts .
 Both men got into fistfights over seemingly pro-Castro statements, though at other times they made anti-Castros statements . Both men were involved in fistfights during the Cuban Revolution .
 Both men were persons of interest to Naval Intelligence in 1963 . They were alleged by officials to be informants for the U.S. government .
 Oswald and Lopez were about the same age, and both had left their wives a few months earlier, when each man had moved to a new city . Both men were about to be married at the time .
 Both lived in a city with much anti-Castro activity and a strong mob presence . Both men lived in an area with a large mob presence and lived in the city of Los Blancos .
 Oswald and Lopez attempted to get into Cuba in the fall of 1963 by crossing the border at Nuevo Laredo, Texas, and proceeding to Mexico City, where they hoped to make an air connection to Cuba .
 Oswald and Lopez went at least part of the way by car, officials said . Neither man owned a car or had a driver’s license or a known associate who drove him . Officials said that neither Oswald nor Lopez had a car .
 CIA files show that each man was under Agency surveillance for at least part of his Mexico trip . The two men were under surveillance for part of their Mexico trip, files show .
 By November 1963, each would have had a job in the vicinity of an upcoming JFK motorcade .
 An unconfirmed newspaper account places him in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 . He went to Texas, where he is believed to have been killed in 1963 .
 Lopez crossed the border when it was reopened after JFK’s assassination and went to Mexico City, files show . CIA and FBI files show that Lopez then crossed into Mexico City . Lopez is believed to have been killed by the assassination of JFK's assassin .
 Unlike Oswald, Lopez would be able to get into Cuba . From there, unlike Oswald, he would be successful in Cuba . Lopez would have been able to enter Cuba .
 Oswald and Lopez were probably being manipulated by the same people, for the same purposes . Those parallels show that in the months before JFK’s murder, JFK and Lopez probably were being manipulated .
 Each man appeared to have some intelligence role, while neither realized that he was also subject to manipulation by the Mafia . Neither man realized that they were being manipulated by the mafia .
 Oswald visited Tampa shortly before the assassination . The Mafia also managed to link the two potential fall-guests . Oswald's visit was planted in Tampa .
 This meant that much of the activity that seemed to incriminate one of the men could also be used against the other . This was the case for the first time in a row over a decade .
 The Warren Commission got only fragments of information about Gilberto Lopez . It did learn enough to write in one memo that Lopez was on a “mission” of some sort at the time .
 The Warren Commission was never told about the attempt to assassinate JFK in Tampa, Florida . It apparently considered Lopez of only minor interest . However, the Warren Commission did not know about the assassination attempt .
 The CIA, FBI, and military intelligence withheld important information about Lopez from Congressional investigators in the 1970s . The CIA and FBI withheld information from congressional investigators .
 Memos from the House Select Committee on Assassinations show they knew they were being stonewalled by officials regarding Lopez . The committee was unable to get the information they wanted before their terms expired .
 In early 1963 Lopez lived south of Miami in the Florida Keys, but by the fall of 1963, he had moved to Tampa, Florida . Lopez: "I'm not afraid to be afraid to die. I'm scared to be scared to die"
 Most of the setting up of Oswald took place in Marcello’s territory . The unusual actions that appeared to link Lopez to JFK's assassination were likely the result of manipulation by Trafficante .
 David Ferrie’s close associate in Florida named Eladio del Valle is a likely candidate to replace Ferrie . A likely candidate would be Ferrie's close friend in Florida, delValle .
 Del Valle was a businessman and a Cuban exile involved in running narcotics for Santo Trafficante . He was partners with Rolando Masferrer, who ran narcotics for the cartel .
 Trafficante surely knew the hysteria that would be generated if a Cuban exile was paraded in front of TV cameras as the supposed assassin of JFK had been killed during his Tampa motorcade . Trafficante knows the hysteria would have been generated if the Cuban exile had been seen as JFK's assassin
 The same would be true if Lopez was found dead, either as a “suicide” after supposedly killing JFK or if someone like Jack Ruby shot him . Jack Ruby would have been more likely to have killed JFK .
 Trafficante knew that the United States was poised and ready to do just that because so many of his associates had penetrated the JEK—Almeida coup plan . The pressure on U.S. officials to invade Cuba in retaliation would have been overwhelming, Trafficante said .
 The massive weight of the evidence shows that Oswald was knowingly involved with U.S. intelligence, not necessarily true for Gilberto Lopez . Lopez was not necessarily involved in the same way as Oswald .
 A former chief of the Florida Intelligence Unit told me that Lopez was an informant for a U.S. agency . Lopez was arrested in 2007 in Miami, Florida, on suspicion of being an informant .
 He might have known that a friend or associate was reporting his information to the agency . But he might have been so unwittingly and not have known he was being reported .
 Lopez could have played on his hopes of getting a valid passport or for other reasons . A friend or associate could have manipulated Lopez by playing on him getting a passport . Lopez could be manipulated by friends or family members .
 He was the right person in the right place at the right time to be the perfect patsy for an attempt to kill JFK during his motorcade in Tampa, Florida . JFK was the target of an assassination attempt .
 U.S. officials could give in to a public outcry to retaliate against Cuba, which would serve to limit the murder investigation of JFK at a crucial time as the United States went to war .
 If blamed for JFK’s murder, Oswald and Lopez would have been especially good at triggering “the World War III pretext for a national security cover-up,” but Vallee less so . Vallee is less so than the two men who were responsible for JFK's
 Rosselli’s good friend and coconspirator David Morales was one more potential ‘fall guy’ who would appear to be in place in Chicago and Dallas shortly before the attempts to kill JFK in those cities .
 CIA documents say that a mysterious man from Cuba was reported in the Chicago area just prior to JFK’s planned motorcade there . JFK's motorcade was scheduled to take place in Chicago, Illinois .
 The Cuban was named Miguel Casas Saez, aka Angel Dominguez Martinez . He always seemed to be one tantalizing step ahead of the authorities .
 JFK was in Florida in the weeks before JFK’s Tampa motorcade . He was conveniently reported to be in Florida at the time of the Florida trip .
 CIA reports say Saez was in Dallas when JFK was shot . CIA reports said he was there at the time of JFK's assassination .
 Cubana Airlines plane held for him for five hours . He then fled to Mexico City, where he then fled . Cubana plane was held for four hours .
 Saez supposedly rode in the cockpit so the passengers wouldn't see him . Saez allegedly rode in cockpit so passengers wouldn’t see him. Saez was supposed to ride in cockpit .
 Thirdhand accounts by David Morales’s Cuban exile informants (code-named AMOTs) said the formerly poor Saez suddenly had money and American clothes after he returned to Cuba from Dallas .
 He had taken a Russian-language course and “speaks Russian quite well,” according to a CIA memo .
 Saez would have been able to talk with any of the thousands of Russian advisors and technicians still in Cuba in 1963 .
 The possibility that Saez and Lopez were Castro agents was a huge concern for the CIA’s powerful Chief of Counterintelligence, James Angleton . Later accounts show that the possibility that the . possibility that . Saez . Lopez was a Castro agent .
 It's unclear now whether Saez was a real person or simply a creation of David Morales’s informants . The CIA, the FBI, and other agencies thought he was real in 1963 and 1964 .
 The Saez allegations concerned U.S. officials in the crucial early period after JFK’s death, they eventually fell apart . However, though the allegations concerned the United States officials, they ultimately fell apart.
 When the initial report of the Cubana plane being held was finally declassified, it didn’t mention Saez at all . Saez was the first person to be held in the plane held in Cuba .
 The most incriminating information in CIA reports was all thirdhand, from sources of questionable reliability whose names are still withheld today . CIA reports were all from thirdhand sources of intelligence .
 David Morales ran covert operations at the huge Miami CIA station . Morales was in the perfect position to feed the alarming reports into the CIA’s massive data collection system .
 Morales would have known how high U.S. officials with access to the secret Saez reports would react after JFK’s murder . Morales would know how high officials would react .
 If Saez was a real person, he might have simply been a Cuban on a low-level smuggling mission to the United States . David Morales or his associates may have manipulated Saez's travels to the U.S. to look suspicious .
 Having someone like Saez and Lopez in Dallas would have been necessary for the mob bosses if evidence emerged soon after JFK’s murder that the President had been shot by more than one person or if something had happened to Oswald .
 Still more information falsely implicating Fidel in JFK’s murder would emerge in the days, weeks, and months after the assassination . Almost all of it was linked to associates of Trafficante, David Morales, Johnny Rosselli, or Bernard Barker .
 The Mafia chiefs knew allegations were crucial to maintaining “the World War III pretext for a national security cover-up” that would protect Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli from close scrutiny . The mafia chiefs knew those allegations were key to maintaining the “World
 Ruby had grown up in Chicago, had moved back for a time in the early 1950s . Ruby had close relatives and many friends in the city, and had close family and friends in Chicago .
 Journalist Seth Kantor says Ruby had “met in Dallas with two Chicago detectives to provide them information,’ thus beginning an informant relationship with Chicago law enforcement that could prove useful . Two months before the Chicago attempt, Ruby had met with two detectives in Dallas .
 Ruby had contacts with people connected to Chicago in the weeks and months prior to the Chicago assassination attempt . Ruby had other contacts with Chicago people before the assassination attempt, including with the mayor of Chicago .
 On October 7, 1963, Ruby had met in Dallas with Lawrence Meyers, whom David Ferrie had called on September 24 . Meyers was Meyers' partner in Dallas, Texas, and Meyers had met just three weeks earlier .
 Meyers would be in Dallas meeting with Ruby the night before JFK’s assassination . Meyers met with Ruby at the restaurant of Joe Campisi, Marcello's Dallas lieutenant . The meeting took place at Campisi's restaurant .
 Ruby received an envelope with approximately $7,000 from an associate of Jimmy Hoffa in October 1963 . Ruby received the money in preparation for the attempt to kill JFK in Chicago . Ruby was involved in the assassination attempt .
 The payoff occurred in Chicago just weeks after Ruby met with Johnny Rosselli in Miami . The payoff took place in Chicago weeks after the meeting .
 Jim Allison witnessed the payoff, along with his wife . Jim Allison, who witnessed it, says it was a good thing for him to do .
 Jim Allison was a respected businessman who in 1963 was in the public relations field . In 1963 he was a successful public relations executive . Allison was a well-known businessman and public relations expert .
 Gordon Hardy introduced Allison to Jimmy Hoffa in Chicago . Hardy was in Hoffa’s large suite at the Bismarck Hotel . A Gordon Hardy was the man who introduced Allison .
 Allison came to realize that Hardy also had Mafia ties, but Hardy came to view Allison as someone he could trust . Allison's relationship with Hardy was revealed to be a friendship .
 Jim Allison was in Chicago on business on the weekend of October 27, 1963 . Hardy told Allison he could get him tickets to see the Chicago Bears play the Philadelphia Eagles . Hardy said Allison could see the Bears play Eagles in Chicago .
 He told Allison to meet him on Sunday morning at the coffee shop at the Bismarck Hotel . Allison was invited to meet with him in a coffee shop .
 Allison Allison was having a late breakfast at the coffee shop when Hardy showed up with the tickets . Hardy was having the tickets when he showed up at a coffee shop with Allison .
 Hardy was talking to Allison Allison at the coffee shop . Allison: "A little guy came in" and caught Hardy’s eye . Hardy: "It's not a bad thing to see"
 Hardy asked Allison to excuse him, saying he had to give the guy money to pay for his breakfast . Hardy said he had no choice but to give him the money to buy his own breakfast .
 Hardy smiled as he pulled out a number-10 business envelope and—feeling Allison was a friend he could trust—gave Allison a look at the inch-thick stack of $100 bills inside . Hardy smiled and gave Allison the $100 bill .
 Allison soon left the coffee shop, went to the football game, and didn’t think anything more about the payoff until three weeks later . Allison says she didn't think about the reward until she found out about it in a coffee shop .
 When he saw Ruby shoot Oswald live on TV, Allison realized "it was the man at the coffee shop" Allison had seen receiving the envelope with money from the Hoffa associate . Allison: "It's the man I saw receiving the money"
 Allison was reluctant to tell the authorities, because he’d just seen someone murdered on live TV in a police station . Hardy apparently knew Allison's friend Hardy, who was killed in the shooting . Hardy was killed by Hardy's friend, Allison says .
 It is unlikely Hardy had any idea what the money he had given Ruby was for or that Ruby would soon become so notorious . Hardy met Ruby in front of witnesses, otherwise he wouldn't have met him .
 Hardy had probably been asked by Hoffa or one of his men to give this man Ruby from Dallas an envelope stuffed with money . Hardy had been asked to give the man an envelope .
 Neither the Warren Commission nor the House Select Committee on Assassinations could find any record of Ruby’s being in Dallas on October 27, 1963 . Ruby was one of the few days in the months before JFK's assassination .
 Ruby had called a number in Chicago the previous day, after he had called Los Angeles—Johnny Rosselli’s home base . Ruby called the number the next day, the day after he called the man in Chicago . Ruby had also called a Chicago number .
 The Chicago number belonged to an associate of Allen Dorfman, a corrupt Teamster official and mobster . Dorfman was also a member of the Chicago mobster and Teamster officials .
 Ruby kept late hours, and it would have been easy for him to take a commercial flight under an assumed name to Chicago early in the morning after his club had closed . Ruby's late hours would have allowed him to fly to Chicago under assumed name .
 FBI and Justice Department would get reports about a rumored payoff to Jack Ruby prior to JFK’s death . Teamster official Allen Dorfman was linked to the money, and those reports linked him to the man who killed JFK .
 When Ruby returned to Dallas, he bought a safe for his office, perhaps to keep the money, because he didn't put it in his bank account . Ruby: "When I got back in the U.S. I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm glad
 A simple test of putting an inch-thick stack of bills into a number-10 business envelope shows it would have held about $7,000 in $100 bills . A small stack of $10 bills in a business envelope would have been worth more .
 Ruby was seen by “the loan officer at” his Dallas bank on the day of JFK’s assassination . According to Seth Kantor, the loan officer saw Ruby on the afternoon of JFK's assassination .
 Ruby didn’t put the money in the bank, however; bank records show that Ruby’s only bank transaction that day was a withdrawal for $31.87 .
 Carlos Marcello's federal trial could result in his deportation again, a nightmare that he would do almost anything to avoid . The trial is set to begin in New Orleans and could lead to him being deported .
 Marcello was clearly guilty of the charges Robert Kennedy had brought against him . His principal strategy was to “terrorize and possibly eliminate” the key witness against him, biographer says .
 Robert would keep bringing new charges against him as long as JFK remained president . Marcello knew that even if he was successful in using that strategy, Robert would continue to bring new charges .
 By Friday, November 1, David Ferrie and Carlos Marcello were no doubt ready to see JFK killed the following day, cutting off the major source of Bobby Kennedy’s power .
 Carlos Marcello was joined in the courtroom by David Ferrie, who had just returned from Guatemala . David Frie was just back from Guatemala when he was arrested in Guatemala .
 Marcello had been plotting JFK's death for just over a year at that point, and now his goal was just one day away . JFK's assassination was one of the most high-profile killings in American history .
 For John F Kennedy to die the day after Marcello’s trial started would no doubt be sweet revenge for all the prosecutions—which he viewed as persecutions—and the harrowing ordeal of his humiliating deportation . For John . F Kennedy, the death would no longer be
 The Secret Service had learned of an assassination threat in the city . The President's visit to Chicago was cancelled on such short notice that agents were already at the airport to meet him .
 The plot involved four men, two of whom were briefly detained and released and two who were never apprehended . According to Abraham Bolden, the plot was confirmed by law-enforcement sources .
 There was still an active threat involving potential Presidential assassins on the loose . Because two of the men had never been caught, there was still a threat of assassination .
 Two of the suspects had Hispanic names --“Rodriguez” and “Gonzales” -- indicating a possible Cuban connection . The suspects' names are believed to be those of Hispanic men .
 Five years later, former Senate investigator Bud Fensterwald found several newsmen at the Chicago Daily News who knew about the four-man threat .
 Four men planned an assassination attempt from one of the overpasses from O’Hare into town . JFK's scheduled visit to Chicago was scheduled for November 2, 1963 . Four men in town planned assassination attempt, newsmen said .
 A fifth man, ex-Marine Thomas Vallee, whose job overlooked JFK’s motorcade route, was arrested at 9m., two hours before JFK was scheduled to arrive .
 In his car he had an M-1 rifle and three thousand rounds of ammunition . He also had a gun and ammunition in his car, police say .
 Knowing of at least two potential assassins still at large, JFK and Bobby apparently decided to cancel JFK’s entire trip . Knowing of two potential assassinations, JFK reportedly canceled his entire trip to Washington .
 The government decided to keep any mention of the assassination threat out of the press . The press complied, even though several newsmen had heard about the four-man threat .
 If the four men turned out to be Cuban agents retaliating for the JEFK—Almeida coup plan, then the plan—and Almeida—could be exposed . If the threat was made public, and the men were Cuban agents, it could expose the plan .
 There is no evidence that those making the Cuba Contingency Plans, like my State Department source John Crimmins, were told about the Chicago threat . Remarkably, there is not evidence that there were any warnings .
 Information about the Chicago threat appears to have been limited to higher officials, especially those in the Secret Service and FBI . The Secret Service was not directly involved in the Cuban Contingency planning .
 JFK’S Press Secretary Pierre Salinger explained to me that JFK would NOT cancel the motorcade because of a crisis in Vietnam . He had to quickly issue two different phony excuses for the cancellation of the event .
 The initial reason given for JFK’s sudden cancellation was a cold, although that was quickly changed to the need for JFK to stay in Washington to deal with the aftermath of the assassination of Vietnamese President Diem . The first reason for JFK's sudden cancellation of the trip was initially a
 News services had already run a story from Salinger saying that special equipment had been installed in Chicago so that JFK could monitor the events during his visit .
 The Kennedys had done this kind of news management on a smaller scale in the past, involving incidents as diverse as leaks about the Bay of Pigs and reports of JFK's sexual indiscretions .
 CIA suppressed news stories related to Cuban operations . Agency turned over photos of several covert Cuban exile operatives after their boat had problems . Agency made sure ‘two local newspapers suppressed’ and turned over .
 Suppressing a news story on the scale of the Chicago threat against JFK took a new level of coordination among Robert Kennedy and several agencies . The Cuban aspects of the threat seemed to justify it. Suppressing the story on a scale of a Chicago threat on JFK would have been unprecedented .
 Not until years later would the public learn that Vallee had recent ties to a Cuban exile group training to assassinate Fidel Castro . Vallee's ties to an exile group trained to kill Fidel Castro would not be known for years .
 Vallee also had ties to the John Birch Society, known for its extreme stance against civil rights, Martin Luther King Jr., and JFK, especially his seemingly soft stance on Cuba . Vallee was also known for his soft stance against the civil rights movement .
 CIA and INS had also received reports of a possible Cuban agent named Miguel Casas Saez in Chicago . They were unable to track him down .
 Two of the men sought in the Chicago incident had Hispanic names . A later CIA memo says the plot allegedly involved “Cuban dissidents,” which meant exiles . In addition, two of those sought in Chicago incident were Hispanic .
 JFK and Bobby kept any mention of the four-man Chicago plot out of the press . Cuban connections are why Bobby and JFK kept the real reason for JFK’s sudden cancellation, out of press .
 Former Chicago Secret Service Agent Abraham Bolden confirmed the fourman Chicago threat . Bolden told Congressional investigators and Fensterwald that it was handled differently from any other threat against President .
 Chicago Secret Service Chief “called all agents into his office and showed them a memo from Washington to the effect that the Secret Service was to discuss no aspect of the assassination and investigation with anyone from any other federal agency now or any time in the future . Bolden said that “
 Bolden thought this memo was directed at the FBI, who “wanted to get the role of Presidential protection away from” the Secret Service, Bolden said . Bolden: “The memo was aimed at getting Presidential protection from the FBI”
 Former Chicago FBI agent Thomas B Coll recalls how some people were picked up . Coll: "Some people picked up. Decades later, some people are still alive"
 The investigation of the Chicago assassination threat went along two paths that began more than forty-eight hours before JFK was set to arrive . The investigation began in the days before JFK arrived in Chicago .
 The FBI and Chicago Secret Service are investigating a four-man assassin team in the city . The tip led them to a tip the FBI passed along with the Secret Service about a possible assassin team .
 Several Chicago Secret Service agents kept watch on two of the four-man assassin team . Several Chicago police officers were in attendance at the assassination attempt .
 Agents had been able to pick up the trail of only two of the four men . They had been watching the rooming house where they were staying .
 When the two men left, one Secret Service agent followed them in an unmarked car . The two men were followed by an unmarked Secret Service car in a Secret Service vehicle .
 The Secret Service agent's car suddenly reversed direction on a narrow street and began doubling back, so the two men wound up going past the Secret Service car . However, the car with the two . men reversed direction and went past Secret Service .
 They overheard the agent’s radio and realized they were under surveillance . The agents overheard the agents’ radio and then realized they had been watching them .
 The Secret Service felt it had no choice but to go ahead and detain the men . With its surreptitious surveillance blown, the Secret Service was forced to detain them .
 Black writes that the two men were taken into custody in the very early Friday hours and brought to the Secret Service headquarters . The two men are believed to have been involved in the incident .
 The lack of weapons and the premature ending of the surveillance before the two men had committed any crime presented a problem for the Chicago agents . Agents say the lack of any weapons and premature ending the surveillance was a problem .
 The only information about the two men being a threat came from the FBI . The FBI was loath to share informants with other federal agencies .
 The two men were detained by the Secret Service . No doubt checks on them were run in an attempt to find an outstanding warrant or other reason to hold them .
 Richard Cain is the Chief Investigator for the Chicago/Cook County Sheriff’s Department . Cain was in a perfect position to monitor or influence law enforcement’�s reaction to the Chicago plot .
 A “made” member of the Mafia, Cain had also worked on the ClA—Mafia plots for Rosselli, Trafficante, and Marcello . Cain was also a "made" Mafia member .
 Cain would have known about the two suspects detained and lookouts for the two still at large, showing that the secrecy of the assassination plot had been blown . Cain would also have known that the two lookouts were looking for the other two suspects .
 Cain’s position also would have allowed him to follow a second important part of the Chicago plot . Cain would have been able to use his position to follow the plot, which would allow him to escape the plot .
 The second path of the Chicago investigation focused on ex-Marine Thomas Vallee . Former Marine Vallee was found dead at a Chicago home in 2011 .
 Secret Service agents conducted a “pretext interview of Vallee’s . He had two M-1 rifles in his possession, along with .22 caliber revolver and an estimated 1,000 rounds of ammunition . That same day, the Secret Service .
 Unlike the other ex-Marine fall guy, Vallee was serious about guns . Vallee had a background on guns . Oswald was a Marine, not a Marine .
 Secret Service agents returned to the office and reported their concerns to Martineau . The Secret Service agent reported the incident to the Secret Service office .
 One day after the Chicago agents’ pretext interview of Vallee, Vallee’s landlady called the Service office and said that Vallee was not going to work on Saturday,” the testimony of Agent Edward Tucker to Congressional investigators .
 Thomas Vallee was heading into JFK's motorcade the morning of November 2, before JFK’s motorcade was canceled .
 According to Congressional investigators, he had put one of his M-1 rifles and his pistol in the trunk of his car . He also had three thousand rounds of ammunition, investigators say .
 Vallee wore a shirt with an open collar and a jacket similar to what at least one member of the four-man assassin team was wearing . Vallee is believed to be one of the assassin team members .
 Police records show that Vallee was arrested around 9m., about two hours before JFK’s scheduled touchdown at O’ Hare . According to Edwin Black, police records show .
 Chicago police found the M-1 rifle and three thousand rounds of ammunition in the suspect's car . That was all the pretext the Chicago police needed to search his car .
 By Saturday night, November 2, 1963, all the suspects who were in custody had been released . Vallee and the two who were part of the four-man team were released from custody .
 Chicago police sources say no evidence had been found to justify holding the men, they were released . Edwin Black, who had several police sources, says the men were released when no evidence was found .
 Vallee was apparently never even brought to the Secret Service office for an interview, then or in the coming weeks . The Secret Service never even interviewed Vallee .
 The Secret Service didn’t even talk to ex-Marine Vallee in the days and weeks after the Dallas assassination was blamed on Oswald, even though Secret Service records show that the agency maintained an interest in Vallee for at least seven years .
 Clearly there was more to Vallee and the Chicago attempt than the records released so far reveal . Clearly there is more to be done with Vallee than the papers have revealed .
 After the Chicago portion of the plot, Marcello’s two shooters from Europe headed south . The two shooters headed south after the Chicago part of the plan was canceled .
 Marcello explained to his cellmate Jack Van Laningham in a conversation secretly recorded on FBI undercover audiotape . The two hit men left Michigan and came to his huge, sixty-fourhundred-acre Churchill Farms estate .
 The estate had its own airfield, so they could have been flown directly there, perhaps by pilot David Ferrie . The estate also had a private airfield .
 It’s long been documented that Marcello and Ferrie spent the weekend of November 9 and 10 working on strategy at the secluded farmhouse in the middle of the vast Churchill Farms property .
 Marcello’s federal trial continued in New Orleans, so the two later claimed to government investigators that they were working on trial strategy . The two later said to investigators they were going to work on trial strategies .
 Marcello's main strategy involved bribing a key juror to ensure his acquittal, or a hung jury . Ferrie was not involved with that, and Marcella had top attorneys to handle that . Ferrell was not in that role .
 Ferrie usually met with Marcello in the godfather’s office at the Town and Country Motel, as he had done several times in October . Their meetings at Churchill Farms were also unusual because Ferrie normally met with him at the Motel .
 Marcello admitted to Van Laningham that two rifles were obtained from a New Orleans gunsmith so the two European hit men could conduct target practice, safe from the view of law enforcement . Two rifles were purchased from a gunsmith to keep the hit men safe from law enforcement,
 Because of the ongoing trial, the government had to be careful not to intrude on Marcello’s privacy . The trial is ongoing .
 One year earlier Marcello had revealed his intention to kill JFK to FBI informant Ed Becker . That created the perfect situation to help prepare the two hit men for the upcoming hit against JFK .
 David Ferrie admitted that he’d purchased a .38 pistol and deposited the $7,000 mentioned earlier into his bank account . Ferrie also said he'd deposited the money mentioned earlier in the conversation .
 On November 7 and 8, 1963, Jack Ruby talked to two of Hoffa’s associates in lengthy telephone conversations . Jack Ruby called Hoffa's associates on the day of the murders .
 Ruby's recent visitor from Chicago, Lawrence Meyers, was in New Orleans on November 9 . Ferrie had called Meyers just over a month earlier . Meyers is Ferrie's most recent visitor .
 It seems unlikely Meyers was anything more than a low-level message courier who knew nothing about the overall operation . Meyers is believed to have been a message courier .
 Jack Ruby’s volume of long-distance phone calls continued to explode in November . Ruby's volume of calls to the U.S. continues to rise .
 Ruby’s cover story—at the time and later accepted by the Warren Commission—was that the calls were simply about a union problem involving his performers . Ruby's cover story: The calls were just about union problems involving his workers .
 Many of his calls were to an incredible number of Mafia and Hoffa associates . However, many of these were to the Mafia and Hoffman associates .
 Those in the middle knew nothing of the assassination plans . They served as intermediaries and cutouts, as no doubt coded phrases were passed from Ruby .
 Ruby could be helpful to Marcello not just if the President was killed in Dallas but also if the hit was in Tampa . Ruby could also be helpful if the president was hit in Tampa, Florida .
 Ruby reportedly made trips to Tampa to recruit strippers for his club . Ruby had been stationed in Tampa during World War II and was stationed there during WWII . He was reportedly stationed in the area during that time .
 Undercover Miami Police tapes recorded white supremacist Joseph Milteer talking about JFK’s murder less than two weeks before assassination in Dallas .
 Milteer said “there was a lot of money” involved in the plot, not only from far-right extremists but from men who could afford to contribute, he said . The only one he mentioned by name was a Louisiana political boss tied to both Carlos Marcello
 The Miami Police told the Secret Service and FBI about the tapes and plot . Miami Police said the tapes were taped and the plot was a hoax . The Secret Service said the tape was taped in Miami .
 The FBI assigned Atlanta agent Don Adams to the case on November 13 . He went to the southern Georgia town of Quitman, where Milteer lived .
 Adams told me that his FBI superiors never told him about the Miami police tapes of Milteer . Adams later learned that they withheld other relevant information from him as well .
 Milteer was not arrested before JFK’s Tampa motorcade, before Dallas, or even after JEK’S murder . He was arrested in Tampa, Tampa and Dallas .
 Michael L Kurtz published accounts of reliable witnesses who could tie Milteer directly to Guy Banister and other associates of Carlos Marcello in 2006 . The audiotapes have been known to investigators for decades .
 Banister, Milteer, and Marcello also shared a connection to the illegal arms trade . In 1963 the major buyers of illegal weapons from organized crime included Cuban exile groups and white supremacists . The men also shared racist views of the Kennedys .
 Milteer traveled extensively and was in touch with the most violent racist groups active in 1963, as well as those trafficking in arms .
 Milteer would continue to make accurate remarks to Somersett about JFK’s murder in the coming days, showing he was aware of—and possibly involved in—the plot .
 Milteer had inherited $200,000 from his father . His determination to kill JFK appears to be motivated by his racist ideology more than money .
 John and Robert Kennedy were told about Milteer’s threat before JFK made his trip to Florida . The threat was a threat to JFK's life .
 JFK and RFK were dealing with pressing Cuban issues on several fronts, including foreign crises and domestic problems . RFK: By mid-November 1963, JFK and JFK had a number of pressing issues to deal with .
 A November 8, 1963, Los Angeles Times article slammed JFK for doing nothing about Cuba . It was headlined “Kennedy Ducking Cuba Problem, GOP Says”
 President Kennedy was doing a great deal regarding Cuba, but none of it was in the public eye . President Kennedy did much more than a lot of it in the 1960s .
 JFK was making his final attempts to reach a peaceful solution with Castro . He continued his efforts to overthrow the Cuban leader . JFK continued his attempts to overthrow Castro .
 Commander Almeida indicated to Harry Williams that he wanted JFK’s personal assurance that the President would fully support the coup once it began . The coup was planned for December 1, 1963, when the coup began .
 The plan was that JFK would deliver a speech that would reassure Commander Almeida that he had JFK’s personal backing . Several lines of which would specifically reassure Commander . Almeidia .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Sy Hersh wrote that CIA officer Seymour Bolten told a Congressional investigator that he had personally delivered the key paragraph written for JFK’s speech .
 Declassified files withheld from Congress and not seen by Hersh confirm that Bolten’s supervisor, FitzGerald, was a key participant of AMWORLD and the JFK—Almeida coup plan . The JFK coup plan was hatched by Bolten and Almeida,
 John and Robert Kennedy decided against sharing information about the Chicago threat with the entire subcommittee . The Kennedy brothers were still digesting the fallout from the canceled Chicago motorcade .
 Telling all subcommittee members would have meant their supervisors, aides, and secretaries could also find out, which could compromise the security of the impending coup plan .
 Most of those working on the Cuba Contingency planning, and other key personnel, hadn’t been told crucial information about the assassination threat in Chicago . So most of those on the Cuban Contingencies planning, including key personnel .
 Robert Kennedy was set to meet with coup plan exile leaders Harry Williams and Manuel Artime in Washington on November 17, 1963, the day before JFK’s important speech for Almeida . JFK was scheduled to speak with the exiled leaders in Washington, D.C. on November
 No hint of the coup plan could emerge from any investigation of the Chicago threat, or any threats that might emerge during JFK’s upcoming trips to Tampa and Miami on November 18, 1963 .
 President Kennedy and his aides were putting the finishing touches on the image that JFK wanted to project to assure Commander Almeida of his support . JFK and aides were in Florida on November 17, in Florida, to put the image together .
 JFK had been at the Kennedy Palm Beach estate with Richard Goodwin and other aides creating the final draft of his important Miami speech . That weekend, JFK was creating a final draft for the speech .
 JFK already had the passage the CIA had carefully crafted for Commander Almeida . JFK had already been given the passage by the CIA .
 The aides working on JFK's speech didn't know about Almeida or that the CIA had written a small portion of JFK’s remarks .
 JFK's recent activities had been orchestrated to send a show of strength to Almeida and his allies in Cuba . JFK’s recent activities were intended to send out a message of strength, JFK said .
 Florida newspapers featured major front-page coverage of JFK viewing the launch of a Polaris missile from a submarine . JFK was in Florida at the time of the launch .
 JFK was scheduled to meet with Strike Force Command and other military brass, including some brought in from Washington . JFK is scheduled to have a private—though widely publicized—meeting with the head of strike force Command .
 JFK's special lines in JFK’s speech were designed to reassure Almeida that JFK would back him and the coup all the way, even with U.S. military force .
 The Senate Church Committee says Lopez was waiting for a telephone call from Cuba . Lopez was at a get-together at the home of a member of the Tampa Chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee .
 The released records give so many different reasons why Lopez claimed he wanted to return to Cuba that it's hard to pin down the real reason . Lopez: "I want to go back to Cuba. I want to be back in Cuba"
 Lopez’s trip would be unusual because he didn’t own a car or drive . Lopez would embark on a long journey by car to Texas . After JFK's Tampa motorcade, Lopez would travel to Texas by car .
 Lopez would then be driven by a still-unidentified person to Mexico City, where he would catch a flight to Havana . Lopez was then driven by an unidentified person to the airport in Mexico City . Lopez is believed to be in Havana, Cuba, on his way to the island of
 Lopez also had no passport and little money, so someone who could help him get to Cuba could have used that as a way to manipulate him . Lopez was not able to drive and had little money and no passport .
 Oswald's killing could have been a U.S. intelligence agency, Mafia, or a United States intelligence agency . Oswald was killed by a bomb blast in Dallas, Texas, in August 1963 .
 A 2003 newspaper report pointed out how Lopez might have come to the attention of the Mafia . A report concluded that “Gilberto Policarpo Lopez movements and activities suggest that he was a possible participant in Trafficante’s activities, though on a very low level .
 The small Ybor City enclave in Tampa was frequented by Santo Trafficante . It was home to his favorite restaurant, which he called the restaurant .
 The man’s last name was Rodriguez, one of the names that had surfaced in the Chicago threat investigation . The man's last name is Rodriguez, a name that surfaced in a Chicago threat probe .
 Tampa Police Chief Mullins was never told about the Chicago threat . Neither he nor a Tampa official nor police chief were told of the threat . Tampa police chief Brown was recently replaced by Mullins .
 Oswald met Oswald at an FPCC meeting in Tampa with several other people present, just before JFK’s motorcade, a Florida law-enforcement source said . The source said that an “informant said that he’d met Oswald in Tampa, Florida .
 The informant remembered Oswald’s appearance, but not his name, so if it was Oswald, he may have been using an alias . The informant said he remembered Oswald's appearance but didn't his name .
 The point is not whether the real Oswald was in Tampa or not on November 17, 1963 . What is important is that someone wanted authorities to think he was, or might have been . The Tampa assassination attempt was an attempt to kill Oswald .
 Before JFK’s motorcade, Tampa officials would issue a lookout describing a potential assassin that actually matched Oswald much more closely than the first description issued after JFK's murder in Dallas . Officials would issue the lookout before JFK's motorcade .
 Officials discovered another plot to assassinate JFK during his long Tampa motorcade on November 18 . JFK was assassinated during his motorcade in Tampa, Florida, three weeks after Chicago .
 Officials uncovered the plot less than twenty-four hours before JFK’s arrival . JFK was advised to cancel his visit, since at least two potential assassins were on the loose .
 Tampa Police Chief Mullins told the President and his staff to cancel JFK’s visit . Tampa police chief Mullins said he also advised the President to cancel the visit . JFK's visit was canceled .
 President Kennedy was not a viable option for another sudden cancellation of his inauguration . President Kennedy died in 1963 at the age of 65 .
 RFK and RFK had been able to keep the real reason for the cancellation out of the press . Another major motorcade cancelled at the last minute would surely raise questions they couldn’t answer .
 JFK was set to give his important speech that night in Miami, with the important lines of assurance for Commander Almeida . In addition, JFK was due to give an important speech in Miami that night .
 The Tampa threat was verified not only by Chief Mullins and a former head of the Florida Intelligence Unit, but also from newspaper accounts, official files and official files .
 Congressional investigators weren’t told the threat was active in Tampa, Florida . That was the same basic scenario as Chicago and Dallas; however, those Congressional investigators were told .
 Chief Mullins confirmed that the police were told about the threat by the Secret Service prior to JFK’s motorcade through Tampa . The Secret Service had their own source as well .
 Secret Service agent Sam Kinney said he learned later that ‘organized crime’ was behind the threat . Kinney: "Organized crime" was behind "organized crime"
 The former head of the Florida Intelligence Unit said he was certain there was going to be a hit on JFK in Tampa . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 The strain of dealing with the threat was why Kennedy appeared “handsome, tan, and smiling” in front of the crowds but “tired and ill” backstage, an official says . The official accompanied the Presidential party and said .
 JFK went out of his way to present a fearless image in Tampa in spite of the threat . JFK presented himself as a fearless man despite the threat of assassination .
 JFK “surged out into the crowd, which immediately engulfed him. After finishing one of his speeches, JFK ‘surged’ out into a crowd, the crowd . JFK "surged" into the crowds, which engulfed him .
 The Secret Service men with him went crazy,” according to a report in a local newspaper . “The Secret Service went crazy," the report says .
 President Obama made a statement in response to a possible threat to his home . He did so in case word of the threat leaked to the public, to show he wasn’t afraid .
 Chief Mullins and other officials were especially concerned about Tampa’s tallest building, the Floridan Hotel, which overlook a hard left turn for JFK’�s motorcade . The Floridan hotel is located in Tampa .
 In 1963 one could easily register under a false name . Many travelers paid with cash . Every guest room window in the Floridan could be opened .
 The hotel was just one short block away from the intersection where JFK’s limo would have to come to almost a full stop to make its turn . JFK's limo was one of the first limo to arrive at JFK's hotel .
 For a sniper perched in one of the hotel windows, sitting back in the shadows, assassinating the President would have been all too easy . The President was assassinated by a sniper sitting in the hotel window .
 Chief Mullins and the Secret Service didn’t know if the two suspects at large were southern white supremacists, disgruntled anti-Castro exiles, or Cuban agents . The two suspects are at large .
 Officials in Tampa had plenty of reasons to urge JFK to cancel his entire motorcade . Even without knowing about Marcello’s two hit men from Europe, officials in Tampa called for the cancellation of the motorcade.
 It wasn't bulletproof anyway, and using it would send the wrong message to Commander Almeida . It wasn’t bulletproof, and sending it off would be the wrong thing .
 JFK rode the Lincoln in which he rode in Tampa was the same one he would later use in Dallas . JFK would later ride the Lincoln that he later rode in Dallas, Texas . JFK's Lincoln was the Lincoln he used in Tampa .
 Just as in Chicago, a complete press blackout about the threat was informally ordered . The media blackout was also ordered in Chicago .
 A tight lid of secrecy was clamped down on all information about the threat . The threat has been described as a terrorist threat in the past .
 Two small articles appeared right after JFK’s death, but even then the story was quickly suppressed, and they received no follow-up . The story of JFK's assassination was suppressed .
 Chief Mullins didn't speak for publication about the threat again until I interviewed him in the mid-1990s . Mullins was quoted in those articles, but by the following day saying nothing . He didn’t speak again until he was interviewed in mid-90s .
 The Review Board’s Final Report: The Secret Service destroyed Presidential protection survey reports for some of President Kennedy's trips in the fall of 1963, including Tampa . In 1995, the Review Board reported that the Secret Service had destroyed presidential protection surveys .
 The 1992 JFK Act that created the Review Board had required agencies to preserve all relevant records . That destruction apparently broke the law, since the 1992 law required agencies preserve relevant documents .
 Commander Almeida was still alive in Cuba when the Secret Service destroyed records for JFK’s Tampa trip in 1995 . The Secret Service may have had a possible national security reason for its actions .
 After JFK’s death, the Tampa threat still could not be exposed to the general public since there was still the chance that Oswald or other suspects might prove to have connections to Castro or the coup plan . The Tampa threat was still not exposed until after JFK's death .
 The public’s faith in the Secret Service, already at a low ebb after Dallas, would have been shaken to the core if it was revealed that the agency had covered up an assassination attempt in Tampa .
 JFK gave several speeches in Tampa, including one at the International Inn . Four days later, Trafficante would publicly toast JFK’s death .
 JFK concluded his trip to Tampa, Florida, after a motorcycle stop . A member of the Tampa Police motorcycle detail told the St. Louis Post-Dispatch that JFK's motorbike ride was part of his motorcycle ride .
 Mullins introduced each of us to the President, who was no doubt grateful that he had survived the motorcade unharmed . Mullins said he was "grateful" that Mullins had survived his trip .
 The ex-chief of the Florida Intelligence Unit told me that Santo Trafficante had called off the attempt to kill JFK shortly before the President’s arrival .
 Chief Mullins said his department provided much information to the FBI at the time of the Tampa threat . Mullins: Tampa police chief provided much of the information to FBI .
 Documents have never surfaced in declassified FBI files . However, those documents have never been found in FBI records .
 Chief Mullins didn't know at the time that Gilberto Lopez had indeed headed to Texas . Two more men investigated for JFK's murder were also headed from Florida to Dallas in the coming days .
 President flew to Miami and gave his most important speech, with lines directed at Commander Almeida and his allies in Cuba .
 Those carefully crafted sentences were also designed to not upset JFK’s back-channel negotiations with Fidel Fidel Castro . The sentences were carefully crafted so they would not upset the back channel negotiations .
 What now divides Cuba from my country is the fact that a small band of conspirators has stripped the Cuban people of their freedom and handed over the sovereignty of the Cuban nation to forces beyond the hemisphere .
 "Once this barrier is removed, we will be ready and anxious to work with the Cuban people," says President Obama .
 Following day several newspapers trumpeted those lines almost too clearly . The following day several papers trumpeted that .
 Commander Almeida was satisfied with JFK’s remarks in Miami and communicated that to Harry Williams . Harry Williams was pleased with JFK's remarks and was happy with his comments . Harry was happy to hear that JFK had made the remarks .
 Robert Kennedy had final meetings in Washington with Manuel Artime and Harry Williams before coup . Declassified files show that in the days following Almeida’s response to JFK's speech, Robert Kennedy held final meetings with Artime .
 Robert Kennedy arranged for Harry Williams to have a crucial meeting with CIA officials on the morning of November 22, 1963 . The meeting was later confirmed by the Washington Post .
 JFK expressed relief at surviving the trip to his close aide David Powers . JFK expressed his relief at returning to Washington to close aide Powers .
 JFK’s Tampa motorcade and Miami speech were the last two days of JFK's trip to the U.S. JFK was in Miami and Tampa, Florida . JFK was the first president to make a trip to Texas .
 Officials knew of no active threat in Texas as there had been in Chicago and Tampa . No active threat was found in Texas, officials say .
 Dallas didn't have a large Cuban exile population to worry about, as did Tampa and Chicago . Tampa, Chicago and Tampa also have large Cuban expats .
 Two men and a woman followed the presidential caravan to Dallas, Texas . Two men, a woman, and a man followed the caravan .
 The woman was Rose Cheramie, a member of the lowest rung of the Mertz—Marcello—Trafficante heroin network . She was a heroin addict who was found dead at a hospital .
 Cheramie was a sometime B-girl, prostitute, and heroin courier for Ruby . She worked as a prostitute and drug courier with Ruby .
 On November 21, 1963, Rose Cheramie was dumped on the side of the road by two men she was riding with from Florida . She was dumped by the men on a highway in Florida . The incident occurred in 1963 .
 She was eventually taken into custody by Louisiana State Police Lieutenant Francis Fruge, who drove her to East Louisiana State Hospital . She was treated for heroin withdrawal .
 Cheramie said “word was out in the New Orleans underworld that the contract on Kennedy had been let,” and Dr. Weiss, Weiss, said .
 Cheramie would later be proven an accurate informant regarding Marcello’s part in the French Connection ring, but at this time no one was taking her seriously . Cheramies would later prove she was an informant in the ring .
 It's ironic that a woman who was one of the lowest members of Marcello's crime empire came so close to exposing part of the godfather’s plot, which could have saved JFK's life . The woman came close to uncovering part of a plot that could have
 The man at the highest levels of that heroin network, Michel Victor Mertz, had been traveling in America in 1963, sometimes under his own name and sometimes under the name of “Jean Souetre,” an old associate from a mission . The mission that Mert
 Mertz won the French Legion of Honor for killing twenty Nazis for the French Resistance in World War II . He sometimes did work for French Intelligence to avoid prosecution for his crimes .
 Jean Souetre was the alias Mertz used in Dallas on November 22, 1963, and in the days before, was the name of a fugitive French officer who in 1962 had participated in the attempted assassination of French President Charles de Gaulle . Souetrz was a fugitive
 Souetre's group was able to hit de Gaulle’s car with numerous bullets . This attempt was more serious than the one Mertz had foiled a year earlier . This time, the attempt was even more serious .
 The French President survived, and the incident inspired Frederick Forsyth’s novel The Day of the Jackal . The French president survived . The incident inspired a novel by Forsyth .
 Souetre was one of several men imprisoned for the attempt, though he later escaped . He later escaped from prison, but was imprisoned again .
 Jean Souetre himself did not travel to America in the 1960s, and on November 22, 1963, he was in Barcelona, Spain, and has witnesses to prove it . The real Jean was in Spain in November 1963, and witnesses to the events prove that .
 INS records show that Mertz traveled frequently to America in 1963 and before as part of his heroinsmuggling activities . On the other hand, INS records provided to the French government show that he traveled to America frequently .
 Souetre had even been the subject of a memo by Richard Helms in the summer of 1963 . Richard . Helms had also written a memo about Souete .
 Mertz was using the identity of a wanted French Presidential assassin, recently tied to the CIA . The alias surfaced as being in Dallas when JFK was shot in Dallas .
 Richard Helms had shown RFK and JFK a Cuban rifle from a “three-ton Cuban arms cache left by terrorists on a Venezuelan beach,’s historian Michael Beschloss says .
 Helms was no fan of JFK and RFK’s secret peace feelers with Castro . This was probably his attempt to short-circuit any peace negotiations and cover himself if his unauthorized CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel were uncovered .
 Even veteran CIA officer Joseph B Smith would write in his memoirs that he “was not too impressed with this evidence of the Venezuelan guerrillas’ intended use of the arms’s . The arms were found in the hands of Venezuelan rebels .
 Smith’s memoirs were written decades before the JFK—Almeida coup plan was first exposed . FitzGerald said in 1964 that the CIA official had a remark he heard in 1964 from a CIA official .
 Even within the CIA, littke more than a handful of people knew about Commander Almeida . FitzGerald was one of them .
 Robert Kennedy celebrated his thirty-eighth birthday on November 20, 1963, and shortly after that had his last meeting with Harry Williams . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 RFK arranged for Williams to meet with CIA officials for a final planning meeting for the Almeida coup . RFK had arranged for the meeting on Friday, November 22, to take place .
 Williams would leave for Miami that night . After a session that would stretch from morning to afternoon, Williams would head to Miami .
 He would be flown to the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo on November 23 . From there, he would slip into Castro’s Cuba, to meet personally with Almeida and await the coup on December 1 .
 The ten days from November 22 to December 1 would essentially be the countdown for the JFK—Almeida coup plan . The 10 days would be the ten days between November 22 and December 1 . Almeida's coup plan would be essentially the countdown to a coup .
 Once Harry Williams was inside Cuba around November 26, there might be no turning back for JFK and RFK . Secure communication with Williams at that point might be impossible .
 RFK appears to have been close to telling some Cabinet officials about Commander Almeida's coup plans . The coup plans have been working on for months, RFK says .
 JFK was getting ready to leave for Texas the next day, while Rusk and several other cabinet members would be flying to the Far East on the same day . JFK was flying to Texas that day .
 Early the following week, around November 25, would be the soonest all the administration’s top officials could be gathered . Early the next week would be around November .
 The coup would have been less than a week away from Almeida's death . That may well have been the meeting at which officials like Rusk and McNamara would finally be told about the coup . That meeting may have been at the time of the coup, which was less than
 JFK and RFK had been hoping for a breakthrough with their peace feelers, but progress was slow . RFK and JFK had hoped for a peace deal, but the peace talks were slow .
 Even this was just to have “preliminary talks . . for the discussion of an agenda” for actual negotiations . The talks were just a few preliminary talks .
 The ball was left “in Castro’s court,” but the slow pace must have frustrated JFK and RFK, especially with the December 1 coup date looming . The ball had been left "in Castro's court," but the pace was too slow .
 Kennedy brothers had no way of knowing that their secret peace initiative was finally starting to produce results . The Kennedy brothers were unaware of their secret initiative .
 French journalist Jean Daniel finally had the meeting with Castro he’d been waiting for since late October . Jean Daniel met Castro in Cuba for the first time since October .
 Arthur Schlesinger was surprised by a visit from Fidel Castro at 10:00 a.m. The journalist was scheduled to leave Cuba the night before he was due to leave the country .
 Daniel conveyed Kennedy’s wishes from late October about his desire for dialogue . Daniel and Castro talked until 4:00m.m. Daniel said Kennedy expressed his desire to dialogue .
 The two men arranged to have lunch again, to continue their discussion . On November 22, 1963, they met again for lunch .
 The date of the lunch was to be Castro’s “villa at the beach,” at Varadero . It was near the home of CIA asset Rolando Cubela, who was a CIA asset . The date is ironic .
 Robert Kennedy was continuing his unrelenting attack on organized crime . He was continuing to attack organized crime in the courts and the press .
 RFK had supported the Times investigation by providing crucial information about RFK . RFK provided crucial information and quotes to the Times .
 RFK was getting ready to run the Mafia out of Las Vegas, the mob’s relatively secure stronghold . RFK planned to run out the mob out of the city . The articles revealed that RFK had planned to take over the Mafia .
 A separate Times story that week would have also pleased RFK, as it spotlighted the Mafia ties of one of JFK's potential rivals, when it reported that “Sen. Kennedy’s potential rivals” had Mafia ties .
 RFK’s Times series capped an autumn full of anti-Mafia publicity, which had begun with the nation being riveted by a new series of televised crime hearings .
 Mobster Joe Valachi cooperated with authorities only because he was facing a death sentence . Valachi was the star of those hearings . He cooperated only because of the death penalty .
 RFK’s goal was to galvanize the public against the Mafia using the Valachi Hearings . The hearings were held by the Kennedys’ old friend Senator John McClellan . RFK was trying to use the hearings as a way to get the public to
 The focus of the hearings was “Organized Crime and Illicit Traffic in Narcotics,” striking at the heart of Trafficante and Marcello’s lucrative French Connection . The hearings were held in New York .
 RFK briefed on the progress of the Marcello trial in New Orleans . RFK was told “a favorable verdict was expected in a couple of days’s time .
 For Friday 22, Kennedy had scheduled a top-level meeting on organized crime to be attended by his staff and U.S. attorneys from all over the nation . Kennedy had planned to meet with his personal staff and United States attorneys from across the country .
 He was looking forward to giving them the good news from New Orleans as soon as it came in, he said .
 Carlos Marcello had bribed a key juror and already knew he would be acquitted on Friday . However, as Davis and a later court case extensively documented, he had already known he would get acquitted .
 Being in court that day would give Marcello an ironclad alibi for JFK’s murder . It would allow him to plan a celebration for that evening, ostensibly to celebrate his acquittal .
 Richard Helms was busy with the CIA’s portion of the JEK—Almeida coup plan, which included the efforts to get United States “assets into Cuba” before the coup .
 CIA memo: FitzGerald approved telling Cubela he would be given a cache inside Cuba . But on that same date, a CIA memo says “FitzGerald’s approval was revoked .
 CIA officer asked Cubela to postpone his return to Cuba in order to attend a meeting on November 22 in Paris . Cubela was in Paris when the CIA asked him to attend the meeting . CIA officer called Cubela on November 20, 1963 .
 Cubela would be meeting with his CIA case officer at the very time JFK was assassinated . The CIA man was trying to give the reluctant Cubela a CIA-devised poison pen to use to kill Fidel .
 David Morales could have orchestrated that fateful timing, knowing the cover-ups it would generate within the Agency after JFK’s murder . David Morales, a former CIA operative, could also have orchestrated the timing of JFK's murder .
 JFK’s motorcade route was first announced and published in the Dallas newspapers only on November 19, 1963 . JFK's motorcade was first published in Dallas newspapers on that date .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations looked into that story and found it to be false . The committee found that story was false .
 It was necessary to keep the entire motorcade from having to drive across a concrete median to reach the Stemmons Freeway . The motorcade was forced to use the median .
 Yet another myth about JFK’s murder in Dallas is that somehow, the Secret Service was negligent or complicit, because they didn’t search all the buildings along the motorcade route . The Secret Service didn't search all of the buildings on the route .
 Sorrells would have been worried about that because of the recent threats in Chicago and Tampa . As we now know, the threats in Tampa and Chicago were likely to have been made .
 The motorcade route has been known for years,” and not just a few days,“," says CNN.com's John Sutter . “When the motorcade routes have been known, it’s important to be known,’ he says .
 After JFK’s November 22, 1963, motorcade in Dallas, Dallas, there would not be another opportunity to apply their plan . The plan would be applied before JFK's upcoming coup in Cuba on December 1, 1963 .
 Without the intense secrecy surrounding the impending coup, whose exposure could trigger “World War III,” they might not be able to trigger a national security cover-up by high U.S. officials .
 The press secrecy surrounding the Tampa and Chicago attempts had held meant that local officials in Dallas would likely have little idea about the close calls JFK had experienced in recent weeks, making the job of mob bosses easier .
 The two European shooters had been training at Marcello’s huge, secluded Churchill Farms estate outside New Orleans . The two Europeans were likely never sent to Tampa .
 The gunmen were taken to Dallas by Joe Campisi, Sr., Marcello’s number-two underboss in that city . Campisi Sr. was Marcella's number-second underboss . The gunmen are believed to be in Dallas .
 Marcello explained to his cellmate Jack Van Laningham the key role Campisi played in his plot . Campisi was convicted of attempted murder in 1992 . Marcelli told his cellmates he planned to kill Campisi .
 Campisi hid the two hitmen at his restaurant until it was time for them to go to Dealey Plaza . JFK’s motorcade was scheduled to pass through that parklike part of downtown Dallas . The hitmen were killed in Dallas .
 The shooters’ presence in Dallas prior to JFK’s arrival in the city might help explain an unusual police incident that the FBI withheld from the Warren Commission . The FBI withheld the incident from the commission . The shooters were killed in Dallas .
 Marcello’s biographer, John H Davis, wrote that on the morning of Wednesday, November 20, 1963, two police officers on routine patrol entered Dealey Plaza... and noticed several men standing behind a wooden fence on the grassy knoll .
 The men were engaged in what appeared to be mock target practice . Men were aiming rifles over the fence in the direction of the Plaza .
 Two police officers immediately made for the fence, but by the time they got there the riflemen had disappeared . They had left in a car that had been parked nearby .
 The two patrol officers did not give much thought to the incident at the time, but after the assassination, they reported the incident to the FBI . The FBI issued a report of it on November 26 .
 The substance of the report was never mentioned in the FBI’s investigation of the assassination . For reasons that have never been satisfactorily explained, the report itself disappeared until 1978 .
 It was not that unusual in Dallas at that time for men to bring rifles to work in such areas, to show, trade, or sell . Men brought rifles to Dallas to show and trade .
 The FBI had lost track of French assassin and heroin trafficker Michel Victor Mertz in Dallas shortly before JFK's murder . J Edgar Hoover withheld that report from the Warren Commission .
 The FBI hadn’t informed the Secret Service about the matter prior to JFK’s arrival . Even worse, the FBI had not informed Secret Service prior to the arrival .
 Mertz was apparently stalking JFK, who was in Fort Worth the morning of November 22, before heading to Dallas for his afternoon visit .
 Oswald was living in a rooming house in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas, Texas, while his wife, Marina, and their children still lived with Ruth Paine . Oswald and his family were still living with Paine, who later moved to Dallas .
 Oswald usually went home to Marina only on weekends . He told Frazier that he wanted a ride to visit Marina that evening . Oswald usually didn't go home on weekends, though he hadn't on the previous weekend .
 Oswald told Frazier he wanted to get some curtain rods, Frazier says . Frazier says Oswald told him he was going to get curtain rods . Frazier: Oswald wanted curtain rods for curtain rods when he was killed .
 Oswald planned to spend the night at Ruth Paine’s and then ride to work with Frazier on Friday . Oswald was scheduled to spend night at Paine's and then work Friday night .
 Oswald was planning to leave work the next day in order to meet his contact at the Texas Theatre, John Martino said . Oswald thought he was going to go to the theater to meet the contact, Martino claimed .
 Warren Commission counsel David Belin outlined in a memo how Oswald could have traveled to Mexico on November 22, using bus connections and the amount of money he had . Belin: Oswald's bus connections, bus connections could have been used to get to Mexico .
 Oswald shot the President of the United States on public transport . Oswald's motive was to escape on public transportation after the President was shot . Oswald was a far-left-leaning figure in the U.S. Oswald shot President John Kennedy in the head in 1963 .
 Oswald would leave his wedding ring in a cup on the dresser and $170 in a wallet in a dresser drawer . Oswald would also leave a wallet and a cup in a drawer on his dresser . Oswald's wedding ring was found in the cup . Oswald left $170 and
 Oswald knew he was leaving Dallas and wouldn't be back any time soon . Clearly, Oswald knew that he wasn't going to be back in Dallas .
 Oswald would bring a package with him that morning, wrapped in brown paper . Oswald would probably bring with him a package of brown paper, but it wasn't curtain rods .
 Oswald is said to have kept the rifle wrapped in a blanket in the garage of Ruth Paine’s garage . However, it was physically impossible for the package to have contained the rifle .
 Wesley Frazier’s sister saw Oswald walking across the lawn carrying something in a long paper bag . When Oswald went to work the next morning, his sister saw him carrying the bag . Frazier's sister says she saw Oswald carrying something the following morning .
 Oswald was holding the top of the package, which didn’t touch the ground, she testified . She later testified she was holding Oswald’s top, which touched the ground . Oswald was killed in November 1963 in Dallas .
 Even a disassembled Mannlicher-Carcano was too long at 34. inches to hold in that fashion without actually dragging the ground . However, the disassembled car was too short to hold itself in place .
 It’s impossible for a normal human to hold a package like that, which is as long as a disassembled Mannlicher . It's impossible for the normal person to hold such a package, so it's impossible .
 An ordinary yardstick is only 1. inches longer than a disassembled Mannlicher . That is easy to demonstrate with a yardstick, which is only one inch longer than the length of an ordinary .
 Oswald can't cup it in your hand, and tuck it under your shoulder, as Oswald did with the package . You simply can’t cup your hand in a cup of water, or tuck your shoulder under your arm . Oswald did this in the first place in the
 For Oswald’s body, the maximum length the package could have been was about 23 inches, not the 34. inches of the disassembled Mannlicher . The maximum length of the package was 23 inches . For Oswald's body, it was only about 34 inches .
 The sworn accounts of Frazier and his sister are important, since that means Oswald didn't take the Mannlicher-Carcano to the Depository that day . Oswald's sister says Frazier and her sister were not in the car .
 Oswald walked ahead of Frazier, who didn't see Oswald enter the building . Oswald entered the building at the time of the shooting, Frazier says . Frazier says he saw Oswald walk ahead of him .
 No one saw Oswald enter the building except for Jack Dougherty, who remembered Oswald but said he wasn't holding a package . Oswald was not carrying a package, Dougherty said .
 There is an unconfirmed report from a mob associate that some type of demonstration or incident relating to Cuba was planned for Dealey Plaza that day . There is also a report from an associate that the incident was planned .
 Oswald may have been told that a pro-Cuba banner would be unfurled from a Depository window, or otherwise displayed, would embarrass JFK . Oswald may be told that the pro-Castro message would be displayed in the Depository .
 Banister or Ferrie would have been able to tell Oswald such an incident would create news stories like he'd had in New Orleans that would supposedly cause the Cuban Embassy to welcome him when he tried to enter Cuba .
 Oswald brought in his package that morning, he could have thought it was to help with such a banner or demonstration . Oswald's package could have been for a demonstration or a banner .
 Whatever was in the package, it wasn't the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle . However, the most important thing to remember is that whatever was in it wasn’t the rifle .
 Oswald’s interrogations, his media appearances, and his private talks. This was true in Oswald's interrogations and media appearances . Oswald's private talks were true in his interrogations . Oswald was never in doubt about the truth of the truth, he says .
 Jack Ruby was in Houston on the afternoon of November 21, a couple of hours before JFK was scheduled to arrive there . The FBI received numerous credible reports from witnesses that Ruby was there that afternoon .
 Ruby was sighted one block from the Rice Hotel, where President Kennedy would deliver a speech, before flying to Fort Worth, where JFK and Jackie Kennedy would spend the night . Ruby was seen one block away from where JFK would give a speech at Rice Hotel .
 According to one account, Ruby didn't leave Houston until after JFK’s arrival . Ruby didn’t leave Houston, Texas, until JFK arrived, according to reports .
 If Ruby was in Houston, he might have been there to observe security preparations for JFK, or to meet someone else involved in the plot, or both . Ruby might be in Houston to observe JFK security preparations .
 On that same day, Seth Kantor notes that “Ruby’s Carousel checking account” had $246.65 in it, about the usual amount . Kantor: "Ruby's Carousel Checking Account” was $246 .
 Ruby had dinner at Campisi’s Egyptian Restaurant with one of his friends and business associates, Ralph Paul .
 It was Paul who apparently fronted the money from Marcello’s organization to Ruby and who theoretically owned 50% of the Carousel Club . Paul is believed to be the owner of the club .
 Congressional investigators determined that the married Tippit had been carrying on a long-term affair with a waitress at Austin's .
 Author Henry Hurt talked to the woman, who confirmed that she thought she was pregnant by Tippit . The woman confirmed that, at the time of the time, she thought it was true .
 This would have made Tippit subject to pressure or blackmail by one of Paul’s associates, like Ruby . Ruby would have been able to blackmail or blackmail him . Ruby is a former FBI agent who worked for Paul Paul .
 Joe Campisi Sr. verified Ruby’s presence at his restaurant that night, though he later claimed to Congressional investigators he had not been there that day . Campisi later claimed he did not attend that night .
 Given the fact that Marcello has stated that Campisi was hiding the shooters at his restaurant that night, it’s clear why Campisi would deny having been there . Campisi has denied having been at the restaurant .
 Ruby's visit to Campisi’s in a whole new light, since it would have given Ruby an opportunity to make plans with Campisi for the following day, in one of the restaurant's secure back offices .
 Ruby would later call Campisi one of his “three best friends,” but theirs was much more of a business relationship . Campisi called the shots, with Ruby calling the shots .
 After leaving Campisi’s, Ruby spent time at the Carousel Club and the Bon Vivant Room in the Cabana Hotel .
 As noted earlier, Meyers was a low-level mob messenger or courier . Meyers also had contact with David Ferrie, who also worked with Ferrie .
 JFK and Jackie arrived at their Fort Worth hotel, many in their Secret Service detail took time to relax .
 No threat or warning had emerged for the next day’s Dallas visit . After the recent stress of the Chicago and Tampa threats, it's not surprising that agents would be ready for some relaxation .
 According to Bob Schieffer, waitresses wore only “underwear” while serving drinks . Another report says they wore bikinis while serving .
 Owner of Cellar Cellar club, Pat Kirkwood, knew both Jack Ruby and mob associate Lewis McWillie .
 Kirkwood claimed in a filmed interview for Jack Anderson in 1988 that several strippers who worked for Jack Ruby had come to the club late that night . Kirkwood indicated that Jack Ruby might have sent the strippers over on purpose .
 Warren Commission documents confirm that some of Ruby’s strippers knew Kirkwood . Kirkwood was the subject of the Warren Commission investigation into his murder .
 Secret Service agents were out late the night before Kennedy’s visit, Ruby said . Whether or not the women were sent by Ruby on purpose, the fact that Secret . Service agents . were out so late that night was important information for someone like Ruby .
 The Mafia’s plan for Dallas hadn’t leaked, as it had in Chicago and Tampa . Their presence indicated that the Mafia's plan had not leaked, the police say .
 None of the Secret Service limo drivers were involved, though several high-profile agents from the next day’s events were . None of them were involved .
 The agents’ recent accounts of their exploits in Dallas usually leave out or gloss over this well-documented incident . Agents’ accounts of the incident in Dallas often gloss over the incident . The agents' accounts of this incident are often left out of the story .
 The agents’ names are all listed in the Warren Commission volumes, along with their time spent at the club and drinks they say they consumed . I’ve decided not to name them .
 The agents left at various times, but the last agent didn’t leave until 5m., even though they had to report for duty at 8m. The last agent left at 5m. - even though the agents had to leave at 8pm .
 RFK-arranged meeting with CIA officials in Washington, DC, at an Agency safe house . Harry Williams met with CIA agents at a safe house in Washington DC .
 Williams was the Cuban exile leader closest to JFK’s administration . Haynes confirmed in his article that Williams was a leader close to JFK's administration .
 Helms and Desmond FitzGerald are reported to have attended at least a brief part of the long meeting .
 Lyman Kirkpatrick asked many probing questions about the coup plan with Almeida, Harry Williams said . Harry Williams: Lyman asked many questions about coup plan . Almeidia: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure that I'm not going to
 Kirkpatrick was anxious to make sure the operation didn't become another Bay of Pigs disaster for the U.S.
 Williams would break for lunch around noon, Eastern time, with Williams eating separately from CIA men . Williams would eat separately from the CIA men at lunch .
 McCone’s memo was withheld from the Warren Commission and from all of the government investigating committees of the 1970s . McCone's memo withheld from all government committees of that era .
 It wasn't declassified until 1993, when it slipped through in a mass release of files, and wasn’t published until 2005 . The book was published in 2005 .
 Robert Kennedy was in a meeting about organized crime with forty of his attorneys from the Racketeering division . The Justice Department is investigating organized crime in the United States .
 RFK was told that the verdict in the Marcello case in New Orleans could come as early as that day . RFK says the verdict could come within hours of the verdict .
 The last subject before they broke for lunch was Sam Giancana and corruption in Chicago . The last thing they discussed before lunch was the mayor's resignation .
 To cover as many important facts as possible as possible, I will describe brief passages in approximate chronological order . To cover many of the important facts of the day, we will use this as a guide to the day .
 Where times are given, they should be considered approximate, as are dates when events happened very late at night or very early in the morning . When times are shown, dates are considered to be very early or very late .
 Most of the key events occurred in Texas . Central time is used for most of the events in the United States .
 Some meetings or incidents that we’ve covered extensively in earlier chapters are mentioned only briefly here . They’re mentioned only to place them in the context of other important events .
 Most witness accounts in Dealey Plaza are from early, official Dallas Police, FBI, and Secret Service reports, supplemented by interviews conducted by noted journalists . Most of the accounts are based on early, early reports from the Dallas Police and FBI .
 I’ve chosen to focus on reliable accounts that the Warren Commission largely overlooked or ignored, because they ran counter to the Commission’s conclusions . The Warren Commission was largely ignored or ignored by the Commission .
 There are far more such accounts that can be noted here, but the Annotated Bibliography provides numerous sources to find them .
 JFK added, “Last night would have been a hell of a night to assassinate a president.” JFK said . JFK added that last night “would have been [a hell of] night to kill a president’s president”
 "We were all getting jostled," JFK said . "I mean it—the rain and the night and we were all jostling," he said .
 JFK was talking about assassination because of the recent threats he dealt with in Tampa and that made him cancel his Chicago trip . It’s now clear that JFK canceled his trip to Chicago .
 On the presidential wavelength of the Secret Service radio net, JFK and Jackie were referred to by their code names, Lancer and Lace . The Secret Service called the two women the Lancers and Laces .
 Oswald was downstairs, around the lunch room, at this time, witnesses say . JFK’s motorcade left Love Field at 12:00 a.m. Oswald was in his lunch room when JFK was killed .
 Dealey Plaza is a funnel-shaped area composed of Houston Street at the top (the wide part of the funnel) with Elm Street as the left (the left) and Commerce Street (the right) side (the middle) Dealey's Plaza is located in the middle of the
 Elm Street extension runs straight into a parking lot and railroad tracks that flow into a railroad yard . Just in front of the Depository is the Elm Street Extension, which runs straight .
 At 11:55, an important witness named Lee Bowers was in the tower in the railroad yard behind the grassy knoll . At 11.55, he was at the tower, in the rail yard behind a grassed knoll in the area .
 He saw a dirty 1959 Oldsmobile station wagon enter the parking lot behind the picket fence . The station wagon was parked in the lot at the time of the incident .
 The driver, a middle-aged white male with partially gray hair, drove around slowly, then left . The driver left the scene in a hurry .
 The car had out-of-state plates and a sticker touting Republican Senator Barry Goldwater in the rear window . The car was driven by a woman with out of state plates and out of-state license plates . The woman was arrested for DUI .
 Warren Commission Volume 24: "At about 12:15 another car came into the area with a white man about 25 to 35 years old driving" Warren says he saw a man in a white car with a large white man driving . Warren says the incident occurred on November 22 .
 Just a few minutes after this car left at 12:20m., another car pulled in . The incident happened at 12.20m. ET on Monday .
 This car was a 1961 Chevrolet Impala . It was dirty up to the windows . The Impala was white and dirty .
 One of the men was described as wearing a very light-colored shirt, white or blue, open at the collar, unbuttoned about halfway, with a regular T-shirt beneath it . The suspect is described as a white or a light blue shirt, open .
 Oswald claims he ate his lunch in the first-floor lunch room, alone, except for a black man named Junior who walked through with a short black man . Oswald claims to have eaten his lunch on the first floor of the lunch room .
 Both of the men were later identified, and were in the lunch room at times between noon and 12:25 . Both men were identified .
 The short man, Harold Norman, later said “there was someone else in there,” but he couldn’t remember who . Norman later said he couldn't remember who else in the room .
 Oswald made a point of eating his lunch in the first floor lunch room . The lunch room was used by minority and disabled employees in that time of segregation . Oswald ate in the lunch room, used by minorities and disabled .
 Such an act helped to burnish his reputation as having far-left sympathies in a very conservative city .
 Oswald remained in close proximity to the first-floor pay telephone around lunch time, as JFK’s motorcade drew closer to Dealey Plaza . Also, by witness statements and his own admission, Oswald remained close to the phone .
 Oswald had no one to call but Marina, which raises the question of who else Oswald was calling . According to the Warren Report, Marina was the only person to call Oswald . Marina was Marina .
 Oswald might have been waiting to make or receive one or more phone calls regarding what he thought was his “mission” to Mexico City . Gilberto Lopez had been waiting for a phone call about going to Cuba on November 17 .
 Oswald himself later said that when he finished his lunch, he went up to the second floor, to get a Coke . Oswald himself said he had a Coke at the end of his lunch . Oswald later said he went upstairs for a drink .
 Jack Ruby was at the Dallas Morning News building, where he had been since approximately 11:45m. Ruby had been at the building since 11.45m . Ruby was in the building at the time of the incident .
 Ruby was seen sitting on the second floor, in the only chair from which he could see the site where Kennedy would be killed . Ruby sat in the chair in which he saw the site of Kennedy's death . Ruby was also seen sitting in the same chair as Kennedy was killed .
 Both shortly before and after the shooting, Ruby was not seen in the offices, meaning that he could have slipped away for a time . However, both shortly before or after the incident, Ruby has not been seen at work .
 JFK’s motorcade was passing by the Dallas Morning News offices . JFK's motorcade went through Dealey Plaza in Dallas, Texas .
 Only two people said they saw Ruby during the time he was missing from the newspaper offices . Ruby was last seen at the time of his disappearance from the office .
 Two men who worked for the city and county saw a man in the sixth-floor window . He was staring and "transfixed" at the area of the grassy knoll, not at the motorcade, they say .
 Later, “there was a nun, a sister, with a bunch of schoolchildren . . right by the car.” The nun, sister, says . Later, she says, ‘There were a nun and a sister’s . schoolchildren with a nun
 Arnold then went on the other side of the fence, on the grassy side of a knoll . Arnold then walked around the knoll and went to the grass side of it . Arnold went on to visit the other knoll, then went to a grassy knoll on the
 Warren Commission files confirm that no Secret Service agents were on the knoll, or in Dealey Plaza at all . Warren Commission file: No Secret Service agent was in the area at the time .
 Lee Bowers, in the railroad tower overlooking the parking lot behind the grassy knoll’s fence, said he noticed two men behind the stockade fence . Bowers said he saw two men looking up toward Main and Houston .
 One of the men was “middle-aged” and “fairly heavyset,” wearing a white shirt and dark trousers . Another was ‘fairly heavy-haired’ and ‘humped’ in the area .
 JFK’s driver, Secret Service agent William Greer, testified that “when they got to Houston from Main Street, he felt relieved. He felt relieved”
 For almost a minute, anyone in that perch would have a totally unobstructed shot at a slow-moving car . The target getting larger with each passing second . Anyone in that position would have an unobstructed view of the car .
 JFK's throat wound was an entrance wound to his throat . Carrico would later describe the small wound in JFK’s throat as ‘a small entrance wound’
 Kennedy aide David Powers, in the same limo as Kinney, was sure that the shot came from the right front . Another Kennedy aide Kenneth O’Donnell, who was in the limo with Powers, was also sure . O'Donnell: "Kennedy aide, Kenneth
 Soldier Gordon Arnold, on the grassy knoll, said “the shot came from behind me, only inches over my left shoulder.” Arnold said . Arnold was killed by a single bullet fired from a helicopter .
 JEK’s Limo accelerated to a speed of around 11 miles an hour after making the turn onto Elm, slowed down . The car was traveling at 11 miles per hour when it hit Elm .
 Powers told a researcher that he felt they were riding into an ambush, which explains why JFK’s limo initially slowed so much . Powers told my researcher that JFK felt he was riding into a ambush . Powers said he felt the limo was going to be ambushed .
 John Connally turned to the right, because he thought the sound came from over his right shoulder . Connally thought the noise was coming from over the right shoulder, but it came from a different direction .
 Not seeing JFK out of the corner of his eye, Connally started to tum back toward his left . Connally was in the middle of the conversation when JFK was assassinated .
 Connally can be seen in Zapruder film holding his Stetson hat well after JFK has already been hit in the throat . Connally’s wrist would have been shattered at that point if both men had been hit by the same bullet .
 JFK’s limo continued to slow as the driver looked toward the back seat . JFK's limo continues to slow while the driver looks at the back of the car .
 David Powers is adamant that “the same bullet that hit JFK did not hit John Connally,” meaning one of these shots probably hit Connally . Powers says one of the shots was likely to have hit JFK's life .
 Secret Service agent saw "what appeared to be a nick in the back of President Kennedy’s coat below the shoulder," agent says .
 At some point, a shot was fired that missed JFK’s limo entirely and struck a curb on Main Street near the bridge that forms the triple underpass with Elm, Main, and Commerce . JFK's limo was hit by a shot fired at some point but struck a
 The shot knocked up a chip of concrete that struck an onlooker, James Teague . Teague was struck by the shot, which struck him .
 Lee Bowers, in the railroad tower behind the grassy-knoll parking lot, noticed a flash of “light or smoke” from the two men behind the fence . Bowers: "Light or smoke" from the men was seen on the knoll .
 Bowers said he thought one of the men might have been standing on the bumper of a car backed up to the fence . Bowers says he thought the man was standing on a bumper of the car .
 This shot blew away a large portion of the President’s skull, rendering him braindead, though his heart continued to beat . The President's skull was blown away by the shot, rendering his brain dead .
 Officer Hargis, riding on a motorcycle behind and slightly to the left of Kennedy, was splattered with blood and brain matter . Officer Kennedy was hit by Kennedy's car and was killed in the crash . Officer was riding on motorcycle behind Kennedy's bike when he was hit .
 Powers and O’Donnell are certain that shot came from the front, from the fence on the grassy knoll . Powers, O'Donnell say they are certain the shot was fired from the back of the fence . Powers: "It's a good sign that the shooter was
 It's possible that a shot was fired from above and behind at almost exactly the same time, hitting Kennedy in the back . Kennedy was hit by a shot fired from both sides of the line of fire at the time .
 Price saw a man (about twenty-five, with long dark hair) running full-speed away from the fence and toward the railroad yard . Price saw the man running full speed . Price said the man was about 25 years old .
 He was wearing a white dress shirt, no tie, and khaki-colored trousers . The incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Sheriff Bill Decker, riding with Curry and Sorrells, radioed for all available men to head for the railroad yard behind the fence on the grassy knoll . All available men were headed to the rail yard .
 Photos clearly show that most of the crowd surged toward the grassy-knoll area, including many Dallas deputies . The crowd surged into the grass-koll area . Dallas County Sheriff's Office says it is investigating the incident .
 He'd seen a flock of pigeons fly from the roof, and he wanted to check it out for a sniper . He wanted to see a sniper check out the roof .
 The elevators were not working when Baker and Truly got to them, so they took the stairs to the second floor . The elevator was not working at the time .
 Baker asked Truly if he knew the man; Truly said that Oswald worked for him . Truly said he knew Oswald, who worked for Baker . Truly told Baker that Oswald was Oswald's former employer .
 Officer Baker’s initial report stated that Oswald had been “drinking a Coke,” though for some reason, those words were later scratched out . Oswald was shot by Oswald in the head in the early hours of September 4 .
 Oswald raced down the stairs from the "sniper's nest" and bought a Coke, in the seventy-five to ninety seconds since the last shot . Oswald is unlikely to have raced down all seventy-two steps of the eight flights of stairs .
 The “sniper’s nest” was on the opposite comer of the building from the stairs, making Oswald's alleged feat even more difficult . Oswald was shot in the head with a bullet to the head .
 Dallas Deputy Seymour Weitzman ran to the knoll after hearing the shots . Dallas deputy says he heard the shots and ran to a knoll in Dallas .
 Several law enforcement personnel encountered someone behind the picket fence claiming to be a Secret Service agent . No real Secret Service agents were stationed there, or anywhere on the ground in Dealey Plaza . The man was one of several law enforcement officers who encountered the man .
 Officer Smith noticed “the lingering smell of gunpowder,” as did many of the witnesses on or near the knoll . Officer Smith was behind the fence when he found the scene .
 Smith noticed a man near one of the cars, and, as he later testified to the Warren Commission, Smith pulled his pistol on him . Smith noticed the man near the cars and pulled his gun on him as he testified to him .
 Smith later explained that the credentials “satisfied me and the deputy sheriff’s who had joined him” Smith explained that he was satisfied with the credentials of the sheriff .
 The Deputy, Seymour Weitzman, confirmed in his Warren Commission testimony that he had also met the fake Secret Service agent . The Deputy said he also met a fake agent .
 Officer Smith later explained his regret at allowing the phony agent to leave, because—instead of looking like a typically clean-cut, suit-and-tie Secret Service agent—this man “had on a sports shirt and sports pants,” he said .
 "He had dirty fingernails and hands that looked like an auto mechanic’s hands," she said . But he also had greasy hands, indicating they were greasy, she added .
 Officer Smith searched the interior of a four-door, off-white 1960 or 1961 Chevrolet sedan parked by the fence . The trunk was searched, but not the trunk, but the interior was searched .
 Deputy Seymour Weitzman also told the Warren Commission he saw “Secret Service, as well” behind the fence . Deputy Seymour
 Weitzman later said the man who he thought was Secret Service showed him ID and said that he had everything under control . The man who thought he was the Secret Service later said he was fine .
 Three other witnesses, Jean Hill, soldier Gordon Armold, and Malcolm Summers, also saw what they thought were Secret Service agents .
 All Secret Service agents in the area of Dealey Plaza were riding in the motorcade and went to the hospital with the President . None of the agents were stationed on the ground during the incident .
 Deputy Seymour Weitzman ‘had a nervous breakdown’ soon after the arrest of the Watergate burglars . Canfield talked to retired Deputy Seymour . He said he’d had a ‘nervous breakdown” soon after his arrest .
 Canfield then “showed him a photo of Sturgis and Barker” because the government had investigated reports—later proved false, that Fiorini and Hunt had been photographed in Dealey Plaza after JFK’s murder .
 Weitzman even said he’d be willing “to make a tape recorded statement for official investigators,” and he recorded a statement for Canfield, in which he reaffirmed the Barker identification .
 Michael Canfield was party to a lawsuit involving E Howard Hunt in which he and his coauthor obtained a sworn deposition from Barker . Canfield and Canfield obtained the deposition .
 When their attorney asked Barker where he was on November 22, 1963, Barker initially remarked, “This is a question that came up during the Watergate Hearing,” but review of Barker’s Watergate testimony reveals no such questioning . Barker said he was not asked about where he
 Barker claimed to be at home watching television at the time of the assassination . Barker said no one but his family and friends could vouch for him that day .
 If Barker “saw .. . how the whole thing happened,” he didn’t see it on live TV, or even on the news later that night . The motorcade wasn't broadcast live, even in Dallas, Texas .
 The Zapruder film, so well known today, wasn’t shown on TV at all until almost twelve years after JFK’s murder . At the time of the deposition, the film had appeared on TV only a handful of times .
 Deputy Weitzman and Officer Smith were soon joined by three railroad employees who had watched the motorcade from an overpass approximately fifty feet in front of the Presidential limousine . Behind the picket fence on the grassy .
 The railroad men also saw all the footprints on the ground and two muddy footprints on a station wagon parked there . The trainmen say they also saw muddy footprints in the bumper of the station wagon .
 Around this time, a car was reported speeding through downtown Dallas, bearing a stolen Georgia license plate . Police say the stolen Georgia plate was stolen from a Georgia car .
 He described the man as in his early thirties, 5' 8"" to 5' 10""", dark hair and average weight . He described him as 5'8" to 5" 10" tall .
 Deputy Roger Craig also saw the incident and said “T heard a shrill whistle and I turned around and saw a white male running down the hill from the direction of the” Depository . A light colored Rambler Station wagon pulled over and the man “who had
 Deputy Craig “reported this incident at once to a Secret Service officer, whose name I do not know” — though again, no real Secret Service agents were in the area . Deputy Craig reported the incident to the Secret Service, but no real agents were there .
 Craig saw Oswald at police headquarters later and thought that he had been the running man . Craig thought that Oswald had been Oswald's accomplice . Craig later saw Oswald again at headquarters .
 Some witnesses in Dealey Plaza soon started talking to authorities . Many of those on or near the grassy knoll said the shots came from there .
 Jean Hill was one of the closest witnesses to JFK when the shooting started . Hill was a witness to JFK's assassination . Hill: "It's a miracle that he survived" Hill says JFK survived the shooting .
 Six witnesses, including three in the motorcade, said they smelled gunpowder around the knoll . Six witnesses said they heard gunpowder being fired at the scene of the shooting .
 Those in the motorcade were Senator Ralph Yarborough, Congressman Ray Roberts, and the Dallas mayor’s wife . Two police officers and a civilian who were on the ground near the knoll .
 Witnesses reported two, three, four, even five or more shots, witnesses said . The number of shots witnesses reported reported varied widely . Witnesses said they saw multiple shots fired at the scene .
 Witnesses say they heard only two shots, perhaps indicating the number fired from there . Several witnesses near the knoll said they heard no more than two shots . Witnesses say the number of shots fired was not large enough .
 In an interesting parallel, investigator Josiah Thompson found that, “with no exceptions, all those witnesses who were deep inside the Depository (either at work or in hallways) report hearing fewer than three shots”
 The Depository had not attracted as much notice as the area behind the grassy knoll . However, the Depository was not sealed off until twenty-eight minutes after the shooting .
 A witness named Howard Brennan, whose statements to authorities would be very inconsistent, later became the star witness in making the case against Oswald . Howard Brennan was a witness to Oswald's trial .
 He initially appeared to have gone toward the knoll after the shots, but he later claimed to have seen Oswald fire a shot from the Depository . He later claimed he saw Oswald shoot a shot in the head .
 Brennan couldn't identify Oswald in a lineup on the night of November 22, even though a month later he said he could, and then, three weeks after that, said he wasn't sure . Brennan couldn’t identify Oswald even though he said a month after that he could .
 Finally, Brennan told the Warren Commission he was sure he had seen Oswald in the Depository window, even though Brennan’s vision was questionable . Brennan said he thought Oswald was in the window .
 The initial lookout for a suspect, apparently based on Brennan’s description of the man in the window, was for a man older and heavier than Oswald . Oswald was shot in the head in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Dallas Times Herald photographer Bob Jackson won Pulitzer Prize for photo of Ruby shooting Oswald . Ruby shot Oswald in Dallas, Texas, in August 1963 .
 Couch said he saw about a foot of rifle being pulled back into the window . Couch said the rifle was pulled back in the window of a window in his home . Couch: "I'm not sure what happened to the rifle"
 Neither Couch nor Jackson immediately contacted police about what he had seen . Even a Warren Commission counsel considered this unusual, especially for a newsman .
 Oswald walked out of the building without being noticed within minutes of the shooting . If Oswald could leave without being seen, anyone else could, too, too .
 Oswald walked north one block, then turned right and went east on Pacific . According to most accounts, Oswald went west on Pacific, then east on the street . Oswald is believed to have been shot in the head by police .
 He paused in front of the Blue Front Inn, seven blocks east of the assassination site . He swung back to Elm Street and paused again .
 Oswald asked for a transfer and got off the bus at the same time as another passenger . Oswald was killed when the bus became stalled in traffic . Oswald's death was the first of three people to be killed in the line of duty .
 He paused in front of the Greyhound bus terminal, three blocks from where he had left the bus . He paused three blocks away from the bus terminal .
 One of the men arrested at the Dal-Tex was a young man wearing a black leather jacket and black gloves .
 Eugene Hale Brading (aka Jim Braden) was arrested at the Dal-Tex . The other man arrested was Eugene Hale . Brading is known for his role in the crime .
 Brading was on parole at the time, and some authors have alleged that he was a courier for the Mafia . Brading is believed to have been on parole when he was murdered .
 Brading sometimes did business from the seventeenth floor of the Pierre Marquette Building in New Orleans . Ferrie worked out of’s office on the same floor .
 Some of Braden’s activities the day before the assassination parallel those of Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby was killed in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Brading would be released within hours . After giving police only his ‘Jim Braden’ alias, Brading was released . Police say he gave police only Jim Braden alias, and his alias .
 At least twelve men, possibly more, were detained by police, then released . In all, at least 12 men were detained and released, police say .
 Tippit, who had been parked at a Texaco service “station watching traffic . . suddenly sped off towards Oak Cliff,” according to “three attendants” at the station interviewed by former FBI agent William Turner .
 At Parkland Hospital, JFK was rushed into the trauma room, where faint signs of life were detected .
 The first doctor to see Kennedy before his clothes were removed, Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was the only one to see him before he had his clothes removed .
 Charles J Carrico, noticed a small, round bullet-entry wound in his throat, above his shirt and tie . Charles J. Carrici, noticed the wound and said it was from a bullet hole in the throat .
 At the small, round bullet-entry wound in his throat, a neat tracheotomy incision was made . The victim was taken to hospital with a gunshot wound to his throat .
 Emergency room doctors had no immediate need to turn Kennedy’s body over, so they didn’t notice the wound in his back . Kennedy was pronounced dead at the hospital .
 JFK’s limo was left unattended in the parking lot and was soon surrounded by people . JFK's limo is left in a parking lot unattended and surrounded by crowds .
 J Edgar Hoover called Robert Kennedy, who was having lunch at his home in Virginia, to tell him that “the President has been shot.” The President was shot in the head at the time .
 Two men working at a record shop in Oak Cliff said Tippit hurried into the shop and made a call . He apparently got no answer, hung up after about a minute and rushed from the store .
 Dallas reporter Earl Golz interviewed two men whose shop was one block from the Texas Theatre (where Oswald would be apprehended) and seven blocks from where Tippit would be killed .
 Doctors had done everything humanly possible to save the President, but to no avail . Despite the extreme severity of the President’s head wound, doctors had no chance of meaningful survival .
 John F Kennedy received the last rites of the Catholic Church . He was pronounced dead at Parkland Hospital .
 House Select Committee looked into that as well and found there was not a motorcade planned for Miami . House Select committee also looked into the issue of the motorcade in Miami .
 After retiring from the CIA, he would later be convicted as one of the Watergate burglars . He would later retire and serve in prison .
 In contrast to Hunt, Kennedy aides like Harry Williams had only positive things to say about McCord . McCord was a major contributor to the Kennedy administration .
 The identities of the actual tramps were later released by the Dallas Police . The identities were later confirmed by photos of the men in Dallas .
 While they had a perfect alibi for JFK’s murder, it was ironic that they also had no way of knowing what had happened in Dallas .
 It would be up to Guy Banister, who was not in court, to monitor the news and field reports from Dallas .
 JFK's death would not be announced for another thirty minutes, but by 1:00 m. JFK’s death would have been announced by the time of 1:30 m. ET .
 We may never know how much of the mission was real, and how much had been simply made up or exaggerated by men like Ferrie and Banister . The mission may never be known, but we may never find out how much it was real .
 It most likely involved leaving work after lunch and going to a prearranged meeting at the Texas Theatre . It was likely part of getting to Mexico and on to Cuba .
 Oswald would have accepted the risks involved in defecting to Russia at the height of the Cold War . He would have known the value of following orders and the danger of his current situation .
 Oswald ran from Oswald's rooming house in Oak Cliff, Dallas . Housekeeper Earlene Roberts saw Oswald run inside Oswald’s rooming home .
 At 1:02, Roberts saw a Dallas Police car pull slowly up to the rooming house, park directly in front of it, sound its horn twice, and then slowly pull away . Roberts saw the police car pull up and sound horn twice before pulling away .
 Tippit's uniform jacket “was on a hanger in the car’s window,” she could have mistaken that for a second . However, ex-FBI agent William Turner points out that the jacket was in a second place on the car .
 Oswald had probably changed shirts, to a long-sleeved rust-brown shirt with a white T-shirt beneath it . Oswald had changed shirts to a rust brown shirt .
 The housekeeper last saw him waiting at a stop for a bus that would take him back downtown . He was last seen waiting for the bus to take him home from downtown .
 Two witnesses at the Texas Theatre, Butch Burroughs and Jack Davis, said they observed Oswald inside the theater as early as 1:15, according to researcher Larry Harris . Two witnesses said they saw Oswald in the theater at the time .
 Oswald, the ex-serviceman tured killer, pulled out his pistol, shot the officer, and fled . Oswald then pulled out the pistol and fled, shooting the officer in the head . Oswald, an ex-Serviceman, was killed in the attack .
 Another witness saw a man with a long coat, ending just about at his hands, looking at Tippit's body, then running to his car and driving off . Another witness said he saw the man looking at the body and then running off .
 Most witnesses say that the man who talked with Tippit had been walking west, not away from Oswald's rooming house . Also, most witnesses say he was walking toward Oswald’s house, not toward it .
 Numerous problems with the evidence in the Tippit slaying have been noted for decades . Numerous problems in the case have been pointed out for years .
 The shooter took the time to empty four spent shells from his revolver at the crime scene . Instead of fleeing, the shooter took his revolver's spent shells to empty .
 Two of the shells were made by Remington-Peters and two by Winchester-Western . The shells are made from Remington Peters and two of the shell shells made by Winchester Western .
 Of the four bullets taken from Tippit's body, just one was Remington Peters and three were made by Winchester-Western . Three of the bullets were made from Remington-Western, three of which were Remington .
 There were also problems with the chain of custody of the shells, as well as the initial descriptions of the gun itself and a discarded jacket .
 Witnesses sometimes changed their stories, possibly because they were intimidated or threatened . Witnesses sometimes change their stories because of intimidation or threats, witnesses say .
 Witness Acquilla Clemons was told she might get hurt if she told anyone else what she saw . Clemons never spoke to the Warren Commission about it .
 The chief suspect in the Reynolds shooting was a heroin addict named Darrell Wayne Gamer . Gamer was the chief suspect of the shooting . Gamer is an addict who is addicted to heroin .
 Garner drunkenly boasted of the shooting and confessed to being at the scene . He was released when provided with an alibi by Nancy Mooney, a former employee of Jack Ruby . Garner was released after he was found guilty of murder .
 Another witness, Domingo Benavides, was anonymously threatened after Tippit killing . His brother Edward was murdered by an unknown assailant soon afterward, court documents say .
 Carlos Marcello’s men in Dallas were very capable of having key witnesses intimidated or attacked, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 The Warren Commission did not hear from Clemons, Clemons and two other witnesses . Clemons was the only witness to testify in the Warren Commission .
 According to researcher Larry Harris, “Frank Wright, who lived on the next block . . heard gunshots, went out to see what was happening and saw a man Standing near a police car.”
 He insisted the man jumped in a gray car parked beyond Tippit’s car “and sped away west on Tenth Street.” The man ran and jumped in the gray car, police say .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations said, “This action, which is commonly described as a coup de grace, is more indicative of an execution,” something one might expect of an experienced hit man . The committee said, "This action ... is more likely to be indicative
 The key witness for the Warren Commission regarding Oswald and the Tippit slaying was Helen Markham . Markham was a key witness in the investigation into Oswald's role in the killing .
 Even the Dallas Assistant District Attorney at the time, William Alexander, later told Anthony Summers that when it came to the Tippit slaying, “Oswald’s movements did not add up then and they do not now.” Even the assistant district attorney at the
 Jack Anderson, one of America’s top investigative journalists in the 1970s, obtained information from Johnny Rosselli on several occasions . Jack Anderson later obtained information . Rossella was a top investigative journalist in the 70s .
 Ruby apparently tried to persuade one of his many police contacts to kill Oswald . Ruby had to do the job himself . Ruby was killed by Oswald himself .
 Ruby met with one of Tippit's police-officer friends for more than an hour the night of his death . Ruby met the officer's friend the night before he died, Ruby says .
 Thousands of pages have been written just about the Tippit slaying . We cannot cover here all of the evidence and the many problems with the theory of Oswald as a “lone assassin” of Tippits .
 The officer might have been shot by someone nearby who was unconnected with Oswald . Oswald was shot by a person who was not connected to Oswald .
 Oswald might have already been inside the Texas Theatre at the time of Tippit’s death, meaning the officer had been shot by someone else . Oswald may have been already inside the theater when the shooting occurred, meaning someone else shot the officer .
 At 1:22, officers on the scene of the Tippit shooting broadcast a description of the assailant, describing him as a white male about 30 years old, 5' 8"", “black wavy hair,” slender build, wearing a white jacket, white shirt
 Another call came in, erroneously reporting that the suspect was at a library, where police converged . Police converged on the scene . The suspect was believed to be in a library .
 Police were called to the Texas Theatre, and the Abundant Life Temple was never searched . Suddenly, police were called .
 Reportedly, the Temple had recently been the site of activity by Cuban exiles . The Temple is located in the heart of Havana, Cuba .
 Warren Commission version: The owner of a shoe store six blocks away from the slaying site heard a report on the radio about the shooting . According to the Warren Commission, Johnny Calvin Brewer, the owner of the shoe store heard a radio report . Brewer says Brewer heard the radio report about the
 He looked up to see a man hide from a passing police car by stepping into his doorway . The man was hiding from the passing car by hiding in the doorway of his home .
 Witness Jack Davis said Oswald sat next to him for a few minutes; then Oswald got up and went to the lobby, as though looking for someone . Davis said that once in the theater, Oswald moved to sit next to another person for several minutes .
 Some historians say Oswald got worried when he couldn't find his contact, so he walked out to the lobby and looked around . An alternate version proposed by some historians says that Oswald walked around looking for his contact .
 Oswald saw a police car go by and ducked into the doorway of the shoe store . Oswald then went back into the theater to await his contact’s arrival . Oswald was waiting for his contact to arrive .
 Police broadcast an alarm at 1:45 to converge on the Texas Theatre . In any event, police broadcast the alarm . The Texas Theatre is located in Texas .
 Oswald was found in a shoe store in the shoe store . Oswald was arrested at approximately 1:48, police arrived at the theater . The store owner pointed out Oswald to the officers .
 Oswald was shot by a police officer at a theater in Dallas, Texas . Oswald had been in the theater at the time of the shooting . Oswald was the only person to be shot at the theater .
 Other evidence calls into question what ID Oswald had on him at the time, and whether an additional wallet was found at the Tippit slaying scene . Oswald's ID was found on Oswald's wallet at the scene .
 Oswald used the “matching half” technique before . Later, dollar bills torn in half would be found in Oswald’s room, indicating he had used it before .
 Antonio Veciana told his research associate how one of his CIA contacts used the technique of a torn-in-half dollar bill to identify his contact . Veciana said the CIA officer who recruited David Atlee Phillips for the CIA used the same technique to identify him .
 CIA memos show they were using that technique in 1963, as part of the AMWORLD portion of the JFK—Almeida coup plan . CIA memos say that technique was used in the assassination of JFK .
 The “matching half” technique was also used by the heroin ring Michel Victor Mertz shared with Marcello and Trafficante . The technique was used in a major bust in Laredo at the time of Oswald’s return from Mexico .
 Oswald was supposed to meet his “contact” at the Texas Theatre, and then later be eliminated . Recall that John Martino said that Oswald was meant to meet "contact" at the theater .
 Martino himself was emblematic of how the mob manipulated Oswald, since he was both a CIA asset and a mob functionary for Santo Trafficante . Martino also knew Carlos Marcello, who was a key figure in the mob .
 The use of movie theaters as clandestine meeting places for CIA missions was confirmed years later by David Atlee Phillips, the CIA officer Oswald had allegedly met with less than three months before the assassination .
 Phillips described his own use of just such a technique, where he would meet a contact at a movie theater, whom he'd know because he’d know . Phillips would carry with him a previously arranged item and recognized a prearranged coded phrase .
 He had $13.87 on him and may also have had David Ferrie’s library card, as explained shortly . He also may have had a library card .
 At 2:30, a police call went out to look for a 1957 Chevy sedan . The car was last seen in the vicinity of the Tippit slaying . Police are looking for the car last seen at the scene of the slaying .
 The alert said that the car’s occupants should be checked for illegal weapons . The alert was issued after a car was found with illegal weapons in it .
 In a sea bag they found a tiny Minox spy camera, three other cameras, a 15-power telescope, two pairs of field glasses, a compass, and a pedometer .
 Oswald had spent the previous night at the home of Ruth Hyde Paine, where Oswald’s wife, Marina, lived . Oswald's wife Marina was also in the house at the time of Oswald's death .
 Marina noticed what appeared to be Oswald’s rifle wrapped in a blanket in the garage . Marina had noticed the rifle had been found wrapped in the blanket . Oswald's rifle was later found in a garage .
 The case against the ex-serviceman who kept his rifle wrapped in a blanket and shot a patrolman on the street seemed cinched, except for one more important piece of evidence . The former serviceman's rifle was wrapped in the blanket .
 The “magic bullet” was found at Parkland Hospital around 1:45, just before Oswald was arrested at the Texas Theatre . Oswald's arrest was the first time Oswald had been charged with a single presidential assassination .
 This was the almost pristine bullet that supposedly caused JFK’s back and throat wounds and all of Connally's bone-shattering injuries . The bullet was supposedly used to kill JFK and Connally .
 Henry Hurt, citing medical reports, says Connally's fifth rib "literally shattered’ his fifth rib, leaving five inches of it ‘pulverized,’” and then ‘struck Connally’s right wrist’ and “sh
 The "magic bullet" then buried itself in Connally’s thigh, from which it supposedly later fell out, emerging in almost perfect condition . The “magic bullet” then supposedly fell out from the thigh, according to the story .
 Chapter Two noted numerous problems that showed why the single bullet theory was physically impossible, and the bullet was mostly likely planted for a Parkland employee to find . Chapter Two also noted that the bullet likely was planted for Parkland employees to find.
 Jack Ruby was at Parkland Hospital, where he spoke with noted journalist Seth Kantor . Ruby spoke with Kantor before he was found .
 Another witness saw also Ruby at Parkland around that time, though for some reason Ruby later denied being there . Another witness said he saw Ruby at the school .
 The police and the Warren Commission seemed determined to pin Tippit’s murder on Oswald . Oswald was the obvious suspect they had in custody, Oswald . The Warren Commission decided to pin the murder to Oswald .
 Police lineups regarding Oswald and the Tippit slaying have been described as “a travesty’s” According to author Larry Harris, the police lineups were described as a “travesty”
 White House press aide Malcolm Kilduff in Dallas officially announced that JFK was dead . At 1:33 P.M. ET, a White House spokesman in Dallas announced the death of JFK .
 Walter Cronkite told a national television audience the tragic news at 1:38m . Five minutes later, at 1,38m, at . 38m, Cronkites said the news was the result of a plane crash .
 Cronkite abruptly stopped describing the young suspect when he was handed a memo that confirmed JFK’s death . The young suspect was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 Cronkite’s emotional words reporting that the President was dead is an oft-repeated clip, but overlooked by most is that . The remark about the young man in custody didn't refer to the twenty-year-old Oswald's capture at the Texas Theatre . Cronk
 Police weren't called to the theater until 1:45, and the first officers didn’t arrive until after 1:48m . The newsman made his fateful pronouncement about JFK at 1:37m . It couldn't have, since it happened at 1.37m
 After reading it, the shocked judge announced that JFK had been shot and might be dead . The judge said that JFK might have been shot .
 Marcello and David Ferrie were in Dallas for an hour to find out more about what had happened in Dallas . It was the first time they had been given the chance to hear from the victims .
 Guy Banister was not in his office that day during regular business hours, so he was probably available to tell them whatever he’d learned .
 Oswald still alive and in police custody presented a huge potential problem . While all three would have been happy at JFK’s death, the fact that Oswald was still alive was a huge problem .
 Robert Kennedy’s lead Justice Department prosecutor on the case said David Ferrie wasn’t in court when everyone else returned . Ferrie had been in the courtroom with Marcello's team before the break, John Diuguid said .
 Marcello had also made sure the key witness against him was threatened during the trial . Just to make sure he avoided conviction, he had also threatened a key witness with the threat .
 Jury found Marcello “not guilty’s on both counts of perjury and conspiracy . Jury also found him not guilty of perjury, conspiracy and perjury .
 If Marcello didn’t want to face far more serious charges than those he had just escaped, he had important loose ends left to deal with . He had a long list of questions to answer, including whether he could be charged with murder .
 In Washington, DC, Harry Williams had returned from lunch to resume his meeting with the CIA officials . Harry Williams was in Washington, D.C. to meet with CIA officials.
 CIA Director John McCone had lunch with Richard Helms, Lyman Kirkpatrick, and two other officials . According to McCone’s desk calendar, the CIA Director had lunch that day .
 By the time Williams’s meeting resumed, everyone had heard that JFK had been shot . Williams' meeting resumed after the shooting .
 Williams told me that the highest official at the meeting at this time, apparently Lyman Kirkpatrick, began eyeing him with suspicion, as if some aspect of JFK’s death made the CIA official think a Cuban exile was involved . Williams: The highest official in the meeting began eyeing
 Williams said he was trying to play it cool, but perhaps Kirkpatrick took his demeanor the wrong way . Williams says he felt he was playing it cool when Kirkpatrick reacted to his demeanor . Williams: "I'm not sure what happened to me"
 Williams retumed to his room at Washington’s Ebbitt Hotel . Within minutes, the meeting broke up with all plans on hold, and Williams returned to his hotel room .
 Someone in the Presidential party in Dallas called Robert Kennedy at his Hickory Hill estate in Virginia, to tell him his brother was dead . Robert Kennedy's brother was killed in Dallas, Texas .
 RFK’s house was flooded with calls from LBJ, Hoover, LBJ . RFK was RFK's first president to be elected in 1964 .
 RFK made an intriguing call to CIA headquarters, according to journalists George Bailey and Seymour Freidin . CIA Director John McCone was en route to RFK's estate when RFK called the CIA .
 John McCone arrived at RFK’s estate, probably between 2:45 and 3:00 . Robert “went out on the lawn with him,” says Mahoney . John and RFK were in the early hours of the day .
 Of course, neither McCone or RFK knew about the ongoing ClA—Mafia plots, or the assassination side of the Cubela and QJWIN operations .
 RFK’s question likely referred to some aspect of the JFK—Almeida coup plan that both men knew about, including the AMWORLD portion with exile leader Manuel Artime . JFK and Almeida knew each other well .
 McCone met with officials who knew about the JFK—Almeida coup plan, including Richard Helms and Lyman Kirkpatrick . By 5:00, McCone was back at CIA Headquarters .
 Helms told neither man that he had continued the CIA— Mafia plots to kill Fidel, or that a CIA officer had been meeting with Roland Cubela about Fidel’s assassination at the very moment JFK was shot .
 Church Committee: Explosives and rifles with telescopic sights will be provided . Report: Case officer “tells AMLASH’s case officer” that explosives and rifles are provided .
 The case officer also offers AMLASH the poison pen device but AMMASH is dissatisfied with it . The case officers also offer a poison pen for the case .
 French journalist Jean Daniel was having lunch with Fidel Castro, discussing JFK’s proposal for talks between the two countries . Jean Daniel and Fidel Castro were having lunch in Havana .
 Hoffa’s mood changed after he got a call from a Teamster official in Washington . Hoffa's mood changed when he heard about the call from the Teamster .
 Hoffa was furious that two Teamster leaders at the union’s Washington headquarters had closed the office, lowered its flag to half-mast, and sent condolences to the President's widow . Hoffa says he was angry that the office had closed, lowered the flag, sent condolences
 Hoffa yelled at his secretary for crying, hung up on the people in Washington, and left the building . Hoffa was angry at the people, but then hung up and left .
 The Teamster organizer was an associate of Frank Chavez, a deadly henchman for Jimmy Hoffa . Frank Chavez was a member of the Teamster Organized Workers' Union .
 FBI reports also linked Chavez to Jack Ruby, and Chavez would later make a documented attempt to kill Robert Kennedy .
 Haynes Johnson had joined Harry Williams in his room at the Ebbitt Hotel in Washington, DC .
 Williams had been helping Johnson with his forthcoming book on the Bay of Pigs . Williams was helping Johnson prepare a book about the Bay .
 Haynes was also working closely with Manuel Artime on the book, even though at the time there was friction between Artime and Williams . Haynes also worked closely with Artime .
 Haynes was friends with RFK and Williams, but hadn't been told about the JFK— Almeida coup plan . Haynes had been friends with Williams and RFK .
 In the hotel room, Williams was on the phone with Robert Kennedy, who told him that the JEK—Almeida coup plan was now on hold . Williams wouldn’t be leaving for Guantanamo the next day . Kennedy told Williams that the plan had been put on hold
 RFK then asked to speak to Haynes, who was also a friend of RFK’s . Hearing that Haynes was also in the room, RFK asked him to speak with him .
 RFK never said anything about it—or said anything similar—to Williams, Williams . Haynes didn’t mention RFK’s comment to Harry, and RFK said nothing to Williams .
 RFK said, “One of your guys did it’—killed JFK—to Haynes Johnson, not to Williams . It's important to stress that both Haynes and Williams agree that both agree that RFK told Haynes that . RFK .
 Haynes confirmed that to me in 1992, 1992, and again in May 2007, and it's in his detailed 1983 Washington Post article . Haynes told me that in 1992 and 2007, Haynes has confirmed that .
 Williams said RFK never voiced any suspicion like that to him that day or any other . RFK said he never voiced that to Williams or anyone else . Williams says RFK was never in doubt about his innocence .
 A close Kennedy associate— who knew RFK, Haynes, and Williams— backed up Williams’s statement . The Kennedy associate said RFK and Haynes were close friends and friends .
 Evidence indicates RFK’s comment related to Manuel Artime's operations, which we now know had ties to associates of Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, and Johnny Rosselli .
 RFK would make the comment to Haynes and not Williams, due to the friction that had developed between Williams and Artime . That would also explain why RFK said "your guys" was not Williams .
 Haynes Johnson would later write that within a year or so after JFK’s death, he heard that Artime was involved in the drug trade . The drug trade was later confirmed by U.S. officials, later confirmed .
 Haynes also wrote about one of Artime's protégés during Watergate, who became a major Miami drug lord when Trafficante was still powerful there .
 Hoover probably knew the FBI had assisted Naval Intelligence with its tight surveillance on Oswald . Hoover knew the latter because of the FBI's cooperation with Naval Intelligence . Hoover also knew that Naval Intelligence had been monitoring Oswald .
 Oswald had been under observation, FBI agent James Hosty allegedly told Dallas Police "officer Jack Revill" on November 22 . Hosty, the Dallas FBI agent assigned to Oswald, allegedly said Oswald was under observation . Oswald was killed in the assassination of President Kennedy in Dallas .
 Oswald’s August 21, 1963, interview with WDSU-TV in New Orleans . NBC news anchor Chet Huntley introduced the audio portion of Oswald's interview . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family . Oswald died in August 1963 .
 By 7:43, NBC was running the video portion of the interview as well, allowing millions of viewers to see and hear Oswald state, “I would definitely say that I am a Marxist” and then outline the aims of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee .
 Santo Trafficante had a documented celebration the day that JFK was assassinated . Like Carlos Marcello, the celebration was documented .
 Trafficante had earlier arranged to meet his lawyer, Frank Ragano, and Ragano’s girlfriend, Nancy Young, for dinner . Trafficante's lawyer and Nancy Young met at Tampa's International Inn for dinner at the hotel .
 JFK had delivered a speech there just four days earlier . Trafficante and Ragano realized that in the same hotel lobby, Kennedy had shaken hands and waved at admirers .
 Ragano found the normally crowded restaurant almost empty that Friday night . Ragano: "I'm not surprised to find it empty" Ragano says the restaurant was almost empty .
 Trafficante drank Chivas Regal and proclaimed, “This is like lifting a load of stones off my shoulders . . Now they’ ll get off my back, off Carlos’s back, and off back,’ he said .
 I’m glad for sake because Johnson is sure as hell going to remove Bobby Bobby . Johnson will remove Bobby from the team .
 Ragano didn’t realize Trafficante knew about the JFK—Almeida coup plan and that the U.S. government had been making plans to invade Cuba for months, he says . Ragano says Trafficante didn't realize that the United States government was planning to invade
 According to FBI reports, “in December 1963” an FBI source “witnessed a meeting between Santo Trafficante, Frank Ragano,” and another Tampa mobster . The FBI says the meeting took place between Trafficante and Ragano in 1963 .
 The mobster he named was a business partner of one of Trafficante’s closest relatives . Trafficante says the mobster was his business partner, a relative of Trafficantes .
 Source: Club in Tampa where the meeting occurred was well known for being linked to the Mafia . Also, the source said the club in Tampa was known for its links to the mafia .
 Confirmation for the meeting comes from the FBI file, which says independent of the inmate, the FBI “had already received information regarding an incident similar to that reported by” the inmate .
 Hoover soon began to exert pressure on senior FBI officials to complete their investigation and issue a factual report supporting the conclusion that Oswald was the lone assassin . Hoover began exerting pressure on the FBI to complete the investigation .
 Proving Oswald the “lone assassin” kept it a local and not a federal prosecution . It kept it out of the hands of Robert Kennedy’s Justice Department .
 Hoover's early decision to pronounce Oswald a lone assassin signaled to many agents in the field how their investigation should proceed . Hoover’s decision to say Oswald was Oswald's lone assassin may have signaled to agents how to proceed .
 There was a shift from agents pursuing every lead vigorously, to focusing on Oswald’s guilt and claiming he had acted alone . There was also a shift in focus on Oswald's guilt and saying he acted alone in the assassination .
 There was no large manhunt in Dallas for other conspirators . Because of the quick decision that there wasn’t a conspiracy, there was no manhunt for others .
 Roads and airports weren’t closed, making escaping the city far less difficult for those involved in the assassination . Roads, airports weren't closed .
 There are unconfirmed reports of various private planes taking off from small airports around Dallas, but nothing conclusive . Unconfirmed reports that private planes are taking off at small airports .
 The mood at Guy Banister’s office had been joyous earlier on November 22 . The mood was joyous at the end of the day .
 Banister's mistress, Delphine Roberts, was in the office that day, his temporary secretary said . The secretary said Banister wasn't there “at all that day”
 Banister finally made it in to the office after visiting a neighborhood bar . After the secretary left, Banister made it back to his office .
 He was preceded by Jack Martin, a privatedetective associate and drinking buddy of Banister's .
 Martin arrived first and went to a filing cabinet, according to Delphine Roberts . Martin arrived at the scene and went into a file cabinet, Roberts says .
 Banister struck Martin on the head several times, causing him to bleed . Banister then pulled out a pistol and struck Martin with it, striking him several times . Martin was shot in the head by Banister, who then fled the scene .
 Martin called an assistant District Attorney to say Ferrie was a longtime colleague and tutor of Lee Oswald . Martin later called the assistant DA to say that Ferrie had taught Oswald .
 Martin had fallen out with Ferrie over a fraudulent ecclesiastical order (the Holy Apostolic Catholic Church of North America) and was an alcoholic, there was some doubt at the time .
 Martin’s actions would set off a chain of events that led to Ferrie's arrest by Monday, November 25 . Ferrie was arrested on November 25 for allegedly shooting a man in the head . Martin was charged with attempted murder in connection with the incident .
 David Ferrie’s library card was apparently found on Oswald at the time of his arrest . Ferrie's library card found at time of arrest . Oswald was arrested in September of Oswald's assassination .
 Gill would stop by Ferrie’s residence and leave word that “Ferrie should contact him, Gill, and he would represent him as his attorney. On Sunday, November 24, Gill would visit Ferrie's residence . Gill would tell Ferrie to contact him and he
 House Select Committee on Assassinations: "Oswald’s former landlady in New Orleans, Mrs. Mrs. Swald, a former New Orleans Landlord, was a friend of the late President Obama .
 The Secret Service would ask Ferrie whether he had ever loaned Oswald's library card . Ferrie would be asked if he had loaned him his library card in the future .
 Ferrie didn’t want the authorities to connect him to Oswald in any way, so he took two young men with him on a sudden trip to Texas . Ferrie wanted to avoid being linked to Oswald .
 David Ferrie’s travels and actions on the two-day trip were considered so bizarre and unusual by investigators that it could be possible that his goal was to retrieve his library card . Ferrie's actions were so bizarre that investigators believe he may have been trying to get his library
 Ferrie needed the card, so that he could produce it if he was ever asked for it by investigators in New Orleans . Ferrie says he needed it so he could prove his innocence to investigators in the case .
 Ferrie told the staff of New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison that “he had some business for Gill to take care of” when he suddenly went to Texas . Shortly before his death, Ferrie said he had “some business” for Gill, the district attorney .
 Ferrie told the FBI that “he had been in New Orleans until at least 9:00m. on November 22, celebrating Marcello’s trial victory at the Royal Orleans’ hotel . Ferrie: “He had been . in New . Orleans until
 Ferrie suddenly decided to drive to Houston through a heavy rainstorm, accompanied by two young men . Ferrie: "I'm not afraid to drive. I'm scared to drive"
 Ferrie "spent a great deal of time at a pay telephone, making and receiving calls,” Summers says . Ferrie and Summers visited a Houston ice-skating rink .
 In the early morning hours of November 23, Ferrie checked in to the Alamotel in Houston, Texas . The hotel is owned by Carlos Marcello, the owner of the hotel where he died .
 While still registered at the Houston Alamotel, Ferrie drove to Galveston and checked into another motel there . Ferrie checked into a second motel in the city of Houston .
 Jack Ruby made several calls to Galveston around the time of Ferrie’s arrival there . Jack Ruby called Ferrie in the days leading up to Ferrie's death .
 Congressional investigators couldn’t understand why hotels in Houston and Galveston both listed Ferrie as staying there during the same twelve-hour period . Investigators couldn't understand why they both listed the same hotels as hotels .
 David Ferrie's library card may have been picked up by someone in Galveston or Houston . Ferrie may have brought his library card to the library .
 There were men in each city who had just come from Dallas, shortly before Ferrie’s arrival . For example, there were men who had recently moved from Dallas .
 Two men were arrested in Dealey Plaza just after JFK’s assassination . One was an associate of Jack Ruby, and the other was alleged mob associate Eugene Hale Brading .
 I’m not asserting that either of those two men delivered Ferrie’s card but simply explaining how it could have been done . I don’t assert that Ferrie delivered the card but explain how it was done .
 BANISTER might have been able to use his law-enforcement or intelligence contacts to get someone on the Dallas Police force to pull the card .
 Banister could have evoked Ferrie's work for the CIA and with Varona’s anti-Castro Cuban group, giving rise to the “for the good of the country” excuse offered to Dallas reporters to stop their reporting on Ferrie .
 Marcello’s associates might have been able to use their Dallas Police contacts to get the card . Alternately, the card could have been used to get it from the Dallas Police Department .
 Mobster Joe Civello ran Dallas for Marcello . Dallas Police Sergeant Patrick Dean boasted to Peter Dale Scott about his “longtime relationship” with Civello .
 Dean would be in charge of security in the Dallas basement when Oswald was murdered . He would later fail a lie detector test about Ruby’s access to the basement, Scott says .
 Defense Condition 3, more commonly known as Def Con 3, is the equivalent of loading and locking your weapon, and then placing your finger on the trigger . After JFK’s murder in Dallas, “the Pentagon ordered us to Defense Condition . 3”
 Hosty wrote that at the time of Oswald’s arrest, “fully armed warplanes were sent screaming toward Cuba.” Hosty says . Hosty: “At the time [Oswaldo] was arrested, fully armed [weapons] were deployed to Cuba
 Just before they entered Cuban airspace, they were hastily called back . They were called back just before entering Cuban airspace .
 JFK visited the base four days earlier, for a secret session with the Strike Force Commander and other leaders . That was the very base that JFK had visited just four days before . JFK visited that base just days earlier .
 On Friday afternoon and evening, national security concerns about JFK’s assassination reverberated throughout the U.S. government . Information, misinformation, and possible disinformation about Oswald started to be uncovered .
 It appeared that someone had fed disinformation about Oswald to the FBI and military intelligence, which served to incriminate him and focus attention on Cuba . Oswald's story was believed to have been a cover story for the CIA .
 JACK RUBY stalked Oswald at the police station, while continuing to try to find a policeman willing to silence Oswald for him . Oswald was killed by the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln in June 1917 .
 Ruby's association with hundreds of policemen made him well suited to the task . Ruby’s association with . hundreds of police made him . well suited for the task.
 Ruby admitted he was packing a pistol when he went to police headquarters that night . Ruby admitted later that he was carrying a pistol at the police station .
 Ruby was seen on the third floor of police headquarters by a reporter for the Dallas Morning News . Ruby was last seen at 6:00 a.m. Tuesday . Ruby is believed to be a suspect in the Dallas Police Department .
 Ruby spoke to Detective August Eberhardt at Dallas Police headquarters . Ruby spoke at 7:00 a.m. on the thirdfloor hallway of the Dallas Police Department .
 Ruby tried to open the door to Captain Fritz’s office, where Oswald was being interrogated . Oswald was later interrogated by Captain Fritz . Ruby was killed in November 1945 .
 If Ruby had managed to get into Fritz's office while Oswald was there, it’s likely he would have done what he did finally do on Sunday . Ruby shot Oswald in the head with a bullet to the head . Oswald was killed by a single bullet fired at the White House
 Marcello called the home of Gordon McLendon, owner of KLIF radio, who was close to David Atlee Phillips and had a connection to him . He called McLendon's home of McLendon to find out where he was killed .
 Ruby then called a radio DJ, offering to help him set up a telephone interview with District Attorney Henry Wade . Ruby called the DJ to set up the interview .
 Around 9:50m., Ruby dropped by Temple Searith Israel, where he seemed depressed when he talked with Rabbi Hillel Silverman .
 During Oswald’s interrogation, one of the officers got a phone call from Ruby, who offered to bring them sandwiches . Ruby offered the sandwiches to the officers at the time of the interrogation .
 By 11:30, Ruby was back at the police station, and a policeman spotted him among the throngs of reporters . Ruby was spotted by a policeman among the reporters at the station .
 After midnight, Ruby would get a chance to see Oswald, but he would be too far away to have a clear shot . Ruby would be able to get a photo of Oswald after midnight, but was too far from Oswald .
 Ruby was packing his pistol, and carrying some sandwiches, when he attended a thirdfloor briefing at Dallas Police headquarters . Ruby was carrying sandwiches and a pistol when he went to the briefing .
 Oswald would be shown to newsmen at a press conference in the basement . Oswald was shown to reporters at the basement of the police station . Chief Curry and District Attorney Henry Wade announced the case .
 Ruby attended the chaotic press conference in a basement assembly room . Oswald was shown to reporters to counter stories that he had been beaten . Ruby attended .
 Oswald correctly stated in a press conference that he had not been charged with shooting the President . Oswald said in response to a question that he “didn’t shoot anybody, no” and correctly stated that he did not .
 Oswald also asked for someone to “come forward to give me legal assistance,” possibly an appeal to one of his contacts, like Banister or Phillips, to clear him with the authorities . Oswald also called on someone to give him legal assistance .
 Oswald never saw a lawyer while he was in custody . Two lawyers connected to Marcello received calls about representing Oswald . Oswald was never seen a lawyer .
 Chief Curry later said that “one would think Oswald had been trained in interrogation techniques and resisting interrogation techniques,” and that Curry believed Oswald could have been some type of agent . Chief Curry said he believed Oswald was trained to resist interrogation techniques .
 Curry’s remark was based on the way Oswald handled himself during the twelve hours of interrogation that weekend, none of which were recorded or stenographically transcribed . None of the interrogation tapes were made or stenographed .
 Assistant DA Alexander said he “was amazed that a person so young would have had the self-control he had’t had.” The DA said he was “amazed’ that he was amazed that he had had self control .
 Oswald had withstood KGB pressure and scrutiny in Russia for years . For someone like Oswald, dealing with the Dallas Police for a couple of days would have presented few problems . Oswald would have faced few problems dealing with police for a few days .
 Ruby was described by Rosselli himself as ‘one of our boys,’ according to the author . Ruby stalked, murdered, and thereby silenced Oswald, writes Richard D. Honey .
 Ruby continued trying to fulfill his obligation to Carlos Marcello throughout the weekend . Ruby continued to try and find a way to get back in touch with Marcella .
 After the press conference, Ruby went to the radio station, and left around 2:00 p.m., to meet a Dallas Police officer and his girlfriend, a dancer for Ruby, at Simpson’s Garage .
 The police officer said Ruby's meeting with Ruby lasted two to three hours . Ruby is accused of lying to police about the time he met with him .
 Carlos Marcello supplied the two shooters who were shot in Dallas . The two returned to Joe Campisi's restaurant shortly after the shooting, where they remained until he helped them leave .
 Marcello and Trafficante were probably not the only men in Dallas who had been working in Dealey Plaza . Bernard Barker and Bernard Barker were likely to have been working for Trafficante . Trafficante is believed to have worked for the three men .
 JFK’s murder could take place in any of three cities, including Dallas . Just as they’d carefully planned JFK's murder, they probably had additional personnel assisting in Dallas . They probably had extra personnel assisting with JFK‘s murder in Dallas, Texas .
 There is an unconfirmed report of Rosselli being in Tampa on November 20, before flying to New Orleans the next day . There is also a report that he is in Tampa, Florida, and New Orleans, Louisiana .
 Plumlee told former FBI agent William Turner that Rosselli stayed in Tampa the night of November 20, before being flown in a private plane to New Orleans on November 21 . Plumlee said the FBI agent was flown in the private plane in New Orleans .
 He says the group then traveled to Houston, Houston, before going on to Dallas on the moming of November 22 .
 Plumlee says the flight was authorized by “military intelligence” with “the CIA” in a supporting role, and it was apparently related to the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Castro . Plumlee: The flight was approved by military intelligence .
 Plumlee did talk to government investigators in the mid-1970s, some have criticized his credibility . Plumlee's credibility has been questioned .
 Three additional mob associates independently placed Johnny Rosselli in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . The mobster was found in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 . He was killed in Dallas .
 Most of the accounts also include Chicago hit man Charles Nicoletti, whom the Associated Press said had joined the ClA—Mafia plots in 1963 .
 None of the accounts meet my usual standards for reliability and independent corroboration, so I consider those accounts only suggestive . Unfortunately, none of these accounts meet usual standards of reliability .
 No solid alibi for either Rosselli or Nicoletti has emerged for November 22, despite the fact that these allegations have been public for years . It is worth noting that no solid alibibes have emerged for both men .
 Trafficante bodyguard and henchman Herminio Diaz was in Dallas on November 22 and took part in JFK’s murder, Cuban officials say . Diaz was Trafficante's bodyguard in Dallas, Texas, according to Cuban officials . Diaz is believed to be Diaz's hen
 Diaz was linked to a ClA—Mafia plot to kill Fidel just over two weeks after JFK’s murder . Diaz had recently become a CIA asset and would be linked to the plot . Diaz was recently an asset to the CIA .
 Diaz had a dark complexion, which could explain some of the witness statements from Dealey Plaza . Diaz's dark complexion could explain witness statements .
 There is no independent corroboration or evidence for Diaz's involvement in JFK's murder, aside from the statement of a captured Cuban exile named Tony Cuesta .
 Cuban exile also named Eladio del Valle as being part of the JFK plot . Trafficante and Roland Masferrer were involved in drug trafficking, the exile says .
 As noted earlier, in 1967 del Valle would be brutally murdered the same night that David Ferrie died . The murder occurred the same day that Ferrie's death .
 If Oswald had truly been a Communist, doing it for ideological reason, he avoided claiming credit or making his ideological points when he had the chance at his Friday-night press conference . Oswald avoided making ideological points at the Friday night press conference in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald killed Kennedy and then tried to escape by bus and cab to get to rooming house where he had no car or driver’s license . If Oswald hoped to get away, killing Kennedy and escaping by bus or cab also makes no sense .
 Oswald would have known that once he left work, he would quickly be fingered for the crime, and he had no way to get out of Dallas without taking public transportation . Oswald knew he would be arrested for the murder, and would have no way of getting out of the city .
 The thought of the Mafia having an inexperienced hit man flee a major assassination using public transportation is ludicrous . The thought that the Mafia had a hit man fleeing an assassination on public transport is ludicrous.
 Oswald blew his chance to expose the United States to the world by keeping quiet about U.S. anti-Castro efforts at his Friday-night press conference . If Oswald had suddenly turned against the US, he blew up his chance of exposing the US to the the world .
 Oswald had been told his cover must be maintained at all costs to avoid blowing an important operation, one that could cost lives if exposed . Oswald was a low-level part of some U.S. effort against Castro, author says .
 Oswald was finally charged with killing JFK at 1:30m. ; he had been charged earlier with killing Tippit earlier . Oswald was charged with JFK's murder at 1.30m; he had already been charged with Tippits' murder at 7:30pm .
 The murderous ex-serviceman in Rosselli’s film even kept one of his long-barreled weapons hidden away, wrapped in a blanket, just like Oswald is said to have done .
 It was also possible to enter the Depository shortly before the motorcade through the back door in the loading dock area .
 Robert Kennedy went to Bethesda Naval Medical Center along with Jackie and a caravan that included the hearse with JFK’s body . JFK's body was found in a hearse . Jackie and Jackie went to the medical center along with JFK's family .
 RFK heard Jackie’s account of the shooting . RFK was on a twenty-minute ride to JFK's White House . Jackie's account was relayed by RFK .
 At Bethesda, the man really calling the shots was Robert Kennedy, from the family suite on the hospital’s seventeenth floor . Robert Kennedy called the shots at the hospital from his family suite at the time of his death .
 Robert was part of a group that included Jackie as well as JFK aides Dave Powers and Kenneth O’Donnell . Robert was one of the JFK aides to JFK .
 RFK was no doubt shocked when he heard what Powers and O’Donnell had seen from their vantage point in the motorcade, in the limo directly behind JFK’s . JFK was in a limo at the time .
 As Powers told a research associate, Powers and O’Donnell saw shots from the front, from the grassy knoll . Powers told his research associate—and as Powers told my research associate — they clearly saw shots . O'Neill confirmed to former House Speaker Powers that he saw
 Powers and O’Donnell had known and worked with RFK for years . Attorney General would have trusted their observations . RFK was assassinated in November 1968 .
 White House physician Admiral George Burkley said he believed JFK was killed by more than one gunman . Admiral Burkley was the only doctor at Bethesda who had also seen JFK at Parkland .
 Entire books have been written about JFK’s autopsy, which several government commissions studied over the course of thirty-five years . Controversy remains over JFK's autopsy .
 Location and size of wounds on some autopsy X-rays and photos don’t match what others show, or what some at Parkland or Bethesda observed . The location of wounds in some autopsy photos and X-ray photos don't match that of others .
 Even worse, crucial evidence is missing, including photos and tissue samples to JFK’s brain . JFK's brain is missing from the JFK brain .
 At the root of these controversies is the fact that Robert Kennedy controlled the autopsy, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Kennedy controlled his autopsy, and the autopsy was conducted by Robert Kennedy . Sutter: At the bottom of the controversies is that Kennedy controlled autopsy .
 Doctors didn't realize JFK had been shot in the throat, since a tracheotomy incision obscured that wound . All agree that the doctors didn’t realize JFK was shot .
 Doctors initially assumed JFK had been shot once in the back and once in head, Connally had been hit by a separate shot . The Bethesda doctors did find JFK’s small back wound, so they initially assumed that Connally was hit by separate shots .
 James Humes burmed his first draft of the autopsy report on Sunday, November 24 . Humes learns about the throat wound, and he burmed it on Nov. 24 . The autopsy report will be released on Friday .
 Much has been disputed over JFK's death, including what his autopsy doctors did or didn’t do . Much remains controversial over the years and remains controversial .
 The national security implications of the autopsy were the subject of much of the controversy . Accounting for much of that controversy were the national security aspects .
 The President’s assassination was a nightmare scenario beyond anything contemplated for the Cuba Contingency Plans that Alexander Haig and others had been working on . The President's assassination was the worst nightmare scenario for the U.S. military .
 Oswald was still alive, so the results of JFK’s official autopsy would have to be part of a public trial . Many indications a hasty “national security” autopsy was performed before the ‘official’ autopsy . Oswald was alive, and there are many indications
 Robert Kennedy’s concerns about the exposure of the Almeida coup plan would have been shared by other officials in the know . Joint Chiefs Chairman General Maxwell Taylor had ultimate authority over a military facility like Bethesda .
 RFK’s subcommittee made the Cuba Contingency Plans . One of the main points of the plan was to avoid a situation in which the premature release of information could back the President into a corner .
 The thinking behind that planning appears to have been implemented to deal with JFK’s death . JFK's death appears to be the reason for the planning .
 Some have tried to claim that shadowy generals, the CIA, or J Edgar Hoover ran the autopsy without Robert Kennedy’s knowledge, but much evidence shows that . The autopsy was conducted by the CIA and the CIA at the request of Robert Kennedy .
 Several of the people at the autopsy made it clear that JFK’s personal physician, Admiral Burkley, wielded a heavy hand . The autopsy was conducted on RFK's behalf .
 Admiral Burkley said, “I am JFK’s personal physician.” Radiology technician took X-rays in the autopsy room with a portable X-ray machine .
 Commandant of the Bethesda facility, Admiral Calvin Galloway, was present in the autopsy room . Burkley sometimes conveyed RFK’s wishes through Galloway .
 Burkley himself stated in his oral history at the JFK Library that “during the autopsy I supervised everything that was done .. . and kept in constant contact with Mrs. Mrs. Burkley’s family . Burkley: “During the autopsy, I supervised . everything that
 RFK also had someone assisting him dealing with Burkley and the autopsy room . RFK had an individual who interviewed him in 1992 about Burkley's death .
 The presence of this sensitive, confidential source at the autopsy has been confirmed by a Kennedy-authorized account, and his credibility is not only clear based on the public record, but has been vouched for by numerous associates .
 Dean Rusk, Harry Williams, and RFK’s trusted FBI liaison Courtney Evans attended the memorial service . RFK was assassinated in November 1968 .
 RFK's source who assisted RFK at the autopsy was fully knowledgeable of the JFK—Almeida coup plan . JFK's source also knew about the Cuba Contingency Plans designed to protect it, he says .
 The bottom line is that whatever went on at the autopsy most likely happened with the full knowledge, and probably at the ultimate direction, of Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy's autopsy likely took place with full knowledge of what went on, the author says .
 JFK's brain, JFK’s brain, wound up under RFK's control . RFK controlled the most important missing evidence in JFK's assassination . JFK's missing brain wound up in RFK custody . JFK was assassinated in November 1968 .
 Even such a basic fact as the time when the autopsy started has caused much debate and uncertainty over the past four decades . The time of the autopsy was not known when it started .
 There was a delay of at least forty minutes, and possibly as much as an hour, between the arrival of JFK’s body at the facility and the start of the autopsy . JFK's body was brought to the facility at the time of his death .
 There were two ambulances -- one was a decoy meant to throw off reporters and sightseers who might have made it onto the base . One of the ambulances was supposed to be thrown off by reporters . The other was meant to be decoyed off by the decoy
 The men who were to guard the ambulance with JFK’s body had lost sight of the ambulance as it sped away . However, author David Lifton found that the men who had been guarding the ambulance lost sight .
 Much confusion on their part followed, before they arrived at the rear of the facility and found the ambulance at last .
 Secret Service Agent Kellerman says the autopsy started at 7:30, while the casket team’s report says JFK's casket was not carried in until 8:00m.
 JFK’s body looked at Parkland and at the start of his autopsy in Bethesda, Maryland . JFK's autopsy took place at the same time as his autopsy at the beginning of his death .
 JFK’s throat wound is where the tracheotomy incision had been made . JFK's throat wound was the most obvious example of the incision made .
 Photos of JFK’s body at the start of the autopsy show a very ragged incision, spread open in the middle, that was at least two or three times larger . JFK's body was spread open, spread in the center of the incision .
 JFK’s official autopsy report said the incision was 6. centimeters when the autopsy began, while the lead autopsy physician, Dr. Dr. John Sutter, said it was only 6.cm when it began . JFK's official autopsy was published on November 11 .
 The throat incision was not enlarged during the official autopsy, because, as an assisting autopsy physician, Dr. Dr. Paul, said, as a medical assistant, the throat was enlarged during autopsy .
 Earlier unofficial national security autopsy would have been conducted with only a few people present . The official autopsy was jammed with officers and other personnel . The unofficial autopsy was jam-jammed with police and other officials .
 JFK’s back wound was supposedly caused by the complete “magic bullet” found at Parkland on a stretcher . No bullet was found at the autopsy .
 Osborne told Congressional investigators he saw “an intact bullet roll . . onto the autopsy table” when JFK was removed from his casket . Osborne was a Captain and later an Admiral and the Deputy Surgeon General . Osborne said he saw a bullet roll when JFK's casket was
 Osborne’s account is confirmed to a degree by the account of X-ray technician Custer . Custer said that “a pretty good-sized bullet” fell out of JFK's “upper back,” where his back wound was located .
 Lifton: "Stover confirmed there was a bullet in the Bethesda morgue" from JFK’s body . Lifton says the bullet was found in the morgue .
 Stover thought it was the bullet found on the stretcher at Parkland . However, Stover said the bullet was found on a stretcher .
 The bullet was at the FBI laboratory, many miles away from the scene of the shooting . But it wasn't, since that bullet was found in the FBI lab . It wasn't the bullet, since it was found at a lab many miles from the site .
 A brief national security autopsy before the official one, as well as national security concerns, could also account for the many problems surrounding the autopsy photographs and X-rays .
 The images show the damage to the President’s head do not show the pattern of damage observed by either the medical professionals at Parkland Hospital in Dallas or by numerous witnesses at the military autopsy at Bethesda Naval Hospital .
 Agent James Sibert doesn't believe in the "magic bullet" theory that was later proposed . Along with his colleague at the autopsy, Agent Sibert, he doesn’t believe the “magic bullet” theory .
 Measurements of bullet holes in JFK’s jacket and shirt show they were almost six inches below the tops of the collars, well below the neck .
 JFK's statement was just one more indication of JFK’s mindset following the Chicago and Tampa assassination attempts . This statement was part of JFK's mindset after the Chicago, Tampa and Tampa attempts .
 When the events of the autopsy are considered in terms of the cloak of secrecy those attempts generated for national security reasons, it starts to provide a rationale for many, if not all, of the discrepancies in the autopsy .
 JFK's body and funeral arrangements were put in the hands of Cyrus Vance’s two trusted aides, Alexander Haig and Joseph Califano . The funeral arrangements for JFK were handled by Cyrus Vance and Cyrus Haig .
 Califano wrote that after JFK’s murder, he went to the Pentagon and met Vance, who put him in charge of arranging JFK's burial at Arlington National Cemetery . He wrote that Vance told him to meet RFK there the next day .
 Califano and Haig have always been careful to distance themselves from the most sensitive parts of Vance’s work . Neither admitted to knowing about the JFK—Almeida coup plan, nor knew about the plan .
 Harry Williams confirmed that Al Haig did know about Commander Almeida . Harry Williams confirms that Commander Al Meida knew about the Commander of the British Army .
 Vance’s use of Califano and Haig is logical even if Califano had not yet been told about the JEFK—Almeida coup plan . Vance knew he could count on both men to follow orders if national security problems arose .
 On November 22, my confidential Naval Intelligence source was Called back to his office . On November 23, the source was called back to the office .
 National security was no doubt the overriding concern in the document destruction ordered by my source’s superiors . It would also help to avoid embarrassment to those higher in the chain of command who had been aware of Oswald's special status . Oswald was ordered to destroy the document .
 CHICAGO BRIEFLY became a focus of the assassination investigation very early on the morning of Saturday, November 23 .
 Oswald allegedly ordered the MannlicherCarcano using the “Hidell” alias . The coupon with which Oswald had allegedly ordered was discovered at Klein’s Sporting Goods in Chicago .
 A CIA memo stated that Richard Cain, an Agency asset, was “deeply involved in the President Kennedy assassination case,” but other details of his involvement are lacking . Other details of Cain's involvement in the case are not known .
 Cain was also in a position to see if word of the recent Chicago threat might surface in the news media, and to plant false information to deceive authorities and the media, such as claiming that Oswald had received support from the small Fair Play for Cuba Committee chapter in Chicago .
 At 9:00 A.M. on November 23, 1963, CIA Director John McCone talked to Robert Kennedy . JFK was assassinated in November 1963 .
 McCone was set to meet with new President Lyndon Johnson at 12:30 to start briefing him on the most pressing intelligence matters . McCone and RFK must have discussed what he was going to tell LBJ about the coup plan with Almeida .
 At that point, LBJ had had no involvement in the plan and probably didn't even know it existed . LBJ probably didn’t even know the plan existed .
 As President and Commander-in-Chief, he would have to be brought up to speed, and quickly . Now, as President, he must have to learn quickly and quickly.
 McCone was about to find out a bit more about the AMLASH operation with Cuban official Rolando Cubela .
 According to Evan Thomas, Desmond FitzGerald finally told “Walt Elder, the executive assistant to McCone, that he had met with Cubela in October and that one of his agents had been meeting with the Cuban turncoat the very moment Kennedy had been shot .
 Even without knowing about the scoped rifles, Elder was struck by FitzGerald’s discomfort, he said . “Elder was struck” by his discomfort, Elder said .
 The normally smooth operator was ‘shaking his head and wringing his hands.’ He said: ‘Shaking head, wringing hands. He was shaking his head. ‘I was shaking my hands. I was wringing my hands,’ he said
 Just two days later, FitzGerald would tell Cubela’s case officer to delete a reference to the poison pen in a memo . The case officer would continue to be in the dark about the assassination side of the Cubela operation .
 John McCone met with RFK on the morming of November 23, November 23 . RFK met with President Lyndon B. Johnson .
 It's important to look at what McCone could have told LBJ in those early hours . It would shape LBJ’s opinions and U.S. policy in the coming days, months and years .
 CIA Director McCone was limited in what he could reveal to LBJ because Richard Helms hadn’t told McCone some crucial operations . McCone’s CIA Director was limited to what he was able to reveal to the President .
 McCone probably told LBJ the broad outlines of JFK’s coup plan with Commander Almeida . McCone was likely to tell LBJ of JFK's plan .
 LBJ also could have informed LBJ about AMTRUNK, the so-far ineffective plan to try to find other Cuban military leaders willing to stage revolt against Castro .
 McCone might have known what his aide had just learned about FitzGerald and Cubela . If not, McCone probably told LBJ the following day .
 Anything McCone told LBJ about Cubela would have been incomplete, since McCone didn't know about the assassination side of the operation . However, anything McCone said about the Cubela operation would be incomplete, he says .
 Neither LBJ nor McCone would have known that the CIA—Mafia plots were continuing, or that CIA officer David Morales had been working with mobster like Johnny Rosselli .
 Major Cuban exile leader Manuel Artime was part of the CI[A—Mafia plots . They also didn’t know that major Cuban ex-Cubans were part of a plot .
 McCone reportedly conveyed the news to LBJ on either November 23 or at their meeting on November 24 . All that information would shape much of LBJ’s outlook about the assassination .
 Oswald had visited Mexico City in September and talked to a Soviet vice consul, a KGB expert in assassination and sabotage . Peter Dale Scott adds that a CIA memo written that day reported that Oswald had talked to the vice-consul whom the CIA knew as an assassination expert .
 Almost all reports had connections to associates of Santo Trafficante, Carlos Marcello, Johnny Rosselli, or David Morales . However, it later emerged from CIA and FBI files that almost all of those reports had links to associates .
 The reports we know about, the ones that were eventually declassified, were eventually released . And those are just the reports that have been declassified .
 There are indications that other versions of the same stories may be among the JFK assassination files still being withheld .
 Oswald had been seen in Havana in the company of Cuban intelligence officers several days before the events in Dallas, Cuba . Oswald was seen in the city of Havana in Havana, Cuba, in the days before Dallas, Texas, events .
 As long as he lived, Haig—later Reagan’s Secretary of State—expressed the belief that Castro was behind JFK's assassination, as does Califano today . Haig and Califano believe that Castro is behind the assassination .
 Neither man realized that stories like the one they saw were later discredited, but also linked to the Mafia . Neither did they realize that the stories were later later discredited .
 CIA cable that weekend tried to urge caution in dealing with such reports, but it went unheeded, at least initially . CIA cable: "One CIA cable" was urging caution, but the cable didn't go far enough .
 JFK's murder has frozen US-Cuba relations since the time of JFK’s murder . That mistaken impression has helped to essentially freeze US-Cuban relations since JFK's assassination .
 At the time, it served to divert attention and suspicion away from the Mafia . However, at the time it also served to . divert attention away from . the Mafia.
 Marcello and Trafficante would have their associates like John Martino continue to spread false “Castro killed JFK” stories that hinted at the JFK—Almeida coup plan, as a way to keep the pressure on U.S. officials to stifle any truly
 Gilberto Lopez and Miguel Casas Saez also fed the “Castro killed JFK” beliefs shared by LBJ, McCone, and CIA Counter-Intelligence Chief James Angleton .
 Both were reported to have been in Dallas during JFK’s assassination . Both were later reported to be in Dallas when JFK was assassinated .
 He wouldn't check into his Mexico City hotel until Monday, November 25 . His whereabouts on November 23 and 24 are unknown .
 It's almost as if someone was keeping Oswald on ice, just in case some type of evidence emerged proving that more than one gunman was involved in Dallas, or in case Oswald needed an accomplice to make the scenario of his guilt believable .
 Lopez may have been an unwitting asset for some U.S. agency, while he was focused only on getting back to his native Cuba . Lopez may well have been the unwitting asset of some United States agency .
 Oswald was manipulated by those with intelligence connections who were also working for the Mafia . The same could have been true for Lopez, who was also manipulated by the Mafia, he says .
 The actions of Miguel Casas Saez also appear to have been manipulated by someone wanting him to look suspicious . The actions appear to be a result of someone wanting to make him look suspicious, according to reports .
 Some reports say that Saez flew out of Dallas on a private plane and made a mysterious airport rendezvous in Mexico City . He then transferred directly to a Cubana Airlines plane without going through Customs or Immigration .
 The plane had supposedly been waiting for him for five hours, and he then rode in the cockpit . He then avoided identification by the passengers .
 The reports made Saez sound like a Cuban assassin, being given special treatment after fleeing Dallas . Saez is accused of being treated differently for fleeing the city .
 House Select Committee looked into that account and found that it wasn't true . However, the House of Representatives looked into the account .
 Saez reportedly left Dallas with two friends after JFK was shot and crossed the border to Nuevo Laredo . Other reports say Saez left Dallas to cross the border with friends . Saez is believed to have left Dallas after JFK died .
 Many of the reports about Saez originated with David Morales’s AMOT informants, the whole scenario is suspect, which is what the CIA and FBI eventually concluded . The CIA and the FBI ultimately concluded that Saez was a suspect .
 Either or both men would have made excellent patsies for JFK’s death if anything had happened to Oswald or if someone else was needed to shoulder some of the blame . Still, either or not Oswald would have been better patsy for JFK .
 At the same time, each may also have been serving some legitimate role for U.S. intelligence .
 Oswald operation Oswald was involved with had been subject to a massive intelligence failure . Oswald's CIA operation was subject to massive intelligence failures, says Richard Helms .
 John Whitten was Helms’s Covert Operations Chief for all of Mexico and Central America . Whitten worked for Helms in Mexico, Central America and Mexico .
 Richard Helms was the CIA’s Deputy Director for Plans, essentially its highest operational official . Helms is responsible for the CIA's highest operational operations . Helm was responsible for most of the CIA operations .
 On November 23, 1963, Helms had to take control of all the CIA’s material on Oswald, both for national security reasons and probably to protect his own career . Helms took control of the material, probably for national reasons and to protect himself .
 Leake gathered all of the Oswald files, Kurtz writes . Kurtz says other employees of the New Orleans office gathered the files .
 They proved so voluminous that Leake had to rent a trailer to transport them to Langley . Leake rented a trailer for transporting them to the Langley area .
 Leake drove the truck pulling the rental trailer filled with the files on Oswald to CIA headquarters . Stopping only to eat, use the restroom, and fill up with gas, Leake said .
 CIA dreaded the release of any information that would connect Oswald with Oswald . Leake explained that ... the CIA dreaded releasing any information linking Oswald with it .
 Leake’s description of the Oswald files as “voluminous” makes sense, given the information from our independent source about the “tight surveillance” of Oswald, something not known to Kurtz at the time .
 No routine reports have ever surfaced about Oswald’s pro-Castro activities in New Orleans during August 1963, despite CIA interest in both defectors and the Fair Play for Cuba Committee .
 JFK took time out from his family and official duties for a private meeting with Harry Williams . Harry Williams told us the meeting occurred within two days of JFK’s death .
 Almeida was still in Cuba, and his family was still outside of Cuba under U.S. surveillance . But any plans for a coup were now on hold, and any plans to take place were on hold .
 RFK "didn’t say much" now that RFK no longer essentially ran Cuban operations for the U.S. Williams: "things are going to change,” now that “things have changed”
 Williams said he already knew that RFK and “Johnson . . . hate each other’s guts” so RFK would no doubt be very different, if they continued at all . Williams: RFK's role and the plans would likely be different .
 Saturday-morming newspapers were conveying just the opposite impression by establishing the basic ‘lone assassin” scenario that some people still believe today . Yet the Saturday- morming papers were conveied just the contrary impression .
 Oswald was found less than twelve hours after the shooting . Oswald was an unusual former defector like Oswald . Oswald is believed to have defected to the U.S. from Russia .
 Investigations that touched on covert matters would have to be conducted in secret . President Johnson would not want to back President Johnson into a corner regarding possible retaliation against Cuba or Soviet Union .
 Journalists asked to withhold information from the public didn’t have to be made aware of the JFK—Almeida coup plan, or the Cuba Contingency Plans to protect it .
 The phrase, “for the good of the country,” would be used to stop Dave Powers and Kenneth O’Donnell from revealing they had seen shots from the grassy knoll . The phrase was probably used to silence others as well .
 It's unclear if Ferrie’s name was surfacing because Oswald apparently had his library card, or because of the Jack Martin allegations, or for some other reason .
 Ferrie was working for the CIA in 1963, according to CIA officer Leake’s statements . Ferrie's "for the good of the country" comment helps to confirm that he was a CIA agent in 1963 . Leake's statements confirm that Ferrie worked for CIA in
 Carlos Marcello would have known that his carefully orchestrated plan could still unravel . With Ferrie on the run, and Oswald still alive, Oswald would have been able to find Ferrie and Oswald .
 The pressure on journalists in Dallas came from Washington, but it also came from conditions on the scene . Not all of the pressure came from D.C. journalists in the area, it came from the weather .
 Journalists and networks in Dallas for “scoops’ coverage that was often shallow or wrong . Stories that avoided lengthy in-depth investigations might have uncovered what had really happened in Dallas .
 Just being involved in reporting on the assassination gave a huge boost to the careers of broadcasters . However, just being involved was not the only boost to their careers .
 Dan Rather's career-making scoop was his role as the first journalist to view and report on Zapruder film . Rather claimed the home movie showed JFK’s “head went forward with considerable violence” after he was shot .
 The public wouldn’t get to see the film for themselves, and learn that JFK was pitched backward, not forward, for another twelve years . The public would not get to watch the film until the end of that year .
 While covering the assassination helped their careers, it sometimes impeded any questioning of the ‘official’ version of the lone assassin . Both at the time and for years to come, it impeded questions of the "official" version .
 Joe Campisi Sr. continued to hide the two European gunmen in his restaurant in Dallas . He hid the two Europeans in the restaurant for more than a decade .
 The group went to Michigan to cross the border into Canada . That presumably involved crossing into Michigan to Canada .
 In 1985, after hearing Marcello’s remarks about the two, the FBI apparently took action . The FBI took action in 1985 after hearing the remarks on undercover audio tapes .
 JFK's killers were not the only Europeans involved in JFK’s assassination . Those two shooters were also Europeans .
 CIA memo: French Connection heroin kingpin and assassin Michel Victor Mertz was in Dallas on November 22, the day of the shooting . CIA memo said that French Connection kingpin was in D.C. on that day .
 CIA memo: Mertz had been using alias of “Jean Souetre,” a wanted French assassin . CIA memo also indicated that ‘Souetre’ was using the alias of a wanted assassin .
 “Souetre” had exchanged mail with a dentist in Houston, Houston, who had met the real Souetre on a trip to Europe . It also stated that ‘Souere’ had met a dentist who met him on a European trip .
 The dentist says he was interviewed by FBI agents who told him Souetre was in Dallas that day and was flown out in a government plane . The dentist later told investigators that he was questioned by agents .
 The FBI couldn’t find any record of Souetre’s being “flown out” on a government plane . The person in question was actually Mertz, who’d been pretending to be the man who had been posing as the Souet
 When Mertz was picked up by U.S. authorities in Dallas, he had apparently switched to yet another cover identity, one guaranteed to get him deported back to familiar territory . He was arrested on suspicion of illegally entering the country illegally .
 The man's description was very close to Mertz’s, and he looked just a few years older than a cover identity . The man’ed description was similar to that of a man who often used to be a police officer .
 Based on age and description, the man Investigator Bailey remembered could not have been the real Souetre . The man he remembered could have been a man from the same age or description as Souetree .
 Mertz could have picked up alias from two of his heroin associates, Joseph Orsini and Antoine D’Agostino . Joseph orsini had earned “a death sentence in absentia” for Nazi collaboration . Antoine Orsi and Joseph D�
 Bailey’s supervisor at INS at the time, Hal Norwood, recalled other aspects of the story . Norwood: Bailey's supervisor: "It's a good story. It's a very sad story"
 Norwood described the arrest of an “individual who might have been French which occurred shortly after the killing of the President’s . Norwood said the arrest was made after the President was killed .
 Norwood thought Bailey “was one of the men he sent” to pick up the foreigner, Norwood said . Bailey was one of Norwood’s men, he said . Norwood believed Bailey was the man he sent to collect the foreigner . Bailey died in the
 The Washington INS office was “very interested in the man and called twice regarding him,” according to an INS supervisor Norwood .
 Mertz could have used his intelligence connections to make sure the official paperwork was later suppressed . Merts could have made sure that official documents were later suppressed.
 Mertz’s heroin associates had all been identified, but his name was completely missing from the hearings . Something similar had been done in the recent Senate narcotics hearings, but MERTz's name was not mentioned .
 The fact that the CIA discovered later that someone had been using the name of Souetre would also allow an official like Helms to ask INS officials to remove the information about the deportation from their files .
 Mertz likely used the name of one of his wanted associates to get picked up by the INS . He could have used his intelligence connections to ensure he was deported to Canada, instead of to France .
 Carlos Marcello flew his heroin partner and assassin Mertz out of Dallas shortly after JFK’s assassination . It must have been deliciously ironic to see the same INS that had once deported him, on the orders of Robert Kennedy .
 Marcello continued the pressure to have Oswald killed . Oswald was found to be tied to Cuba and Russia . Oswald's associates continued to pressure Washington to kill him .
 Authorities still seeking David Ferrie, who is still being sought, could point to people working for Marcello . The plot could unravel and point to those working for the Marcellos .
 The godfather could make only limited efforts to contain Oswald’s public statements and cooperation with police . Two attomeys linked to Marcello had been asked to represent the still lawyerless Oswald .
 Ruby’s friendship with Dallas Police Sergeant Patrick Dean, Homicide Captain Will Fritz, and Police Chief Jesse Curry . Ruby also has a friendship with the Dallas Police Chief and Sergeant Dean . Ruby is a former Dallas police officer .
 Chief Curry called Captain Fritz to see if Oswald could be transferred to the county jail, and the jurisdiction of the sheriff . Oswald was transferred to a county jail at 4:00 a.m. Oswald was arrested at noon on Saturday .
 At 1:30, Ruby placed a call from the Nichols Garage, next door to his Carousel Club, and told someone the whereabouts of Chief Curry . Ruby was talking to or keeping tabs on Curry, which must mean that Ruby was keeping tabs .
 Oswald was expected to be moved at 4:00 a.m. Harkness cleared a crowd blocking a driveway entrance to the county jail . The crowd was blocking an entrance to a county jail entrance .
 An announcer for Dallas radio station KLIF said Ruby called him to offer to cover the transfer of Oswald for the station . Ruby offered to cover Oswald's transfer to the station, the announcer says .
 Ruby was at the police station, expecting Oswald to be moved . But the transfer was called off and rescheduled . Oswald was arrested at 4:00 and taken to the hospital .
 Chief Curry inadvertently told two reporters wanting dinner, but not wanting to miss Oswald’s transfer, that if they were back by 10:00m. They were back at 7:30m. However, Chief Curry mistakenly told them to return to the scene by 10pm .
 Oswald would be moved the next morming, in an armored truck, which meant Ruby would have to wait until Sunday to complete his assignment . Chief Curry announced at a press conference at 10:20m. Oswald would not be able to be moved until Sunday .
 Ruby began laying groundwork on Saturday for the rationale he would use to be near police headquarters at the time of Oswald’s transfer . Ruby says he would have been near the police headquarters when Oswald was transferred .
 Ruby’s story would be that he had to wire $25 to one of his dancers, Karen Carlin . Ruby would say that he needed $25 from one of the dancers to get the money .
 To begin preparing this cover story, Ruby had Carlin and several others go to the Nichols Garage . Ruby had to prepare the story with Carlin .
 All those involved in this meeting later gave authorities different accounts of what happened there . All of the people involved in the meeting later said they did not know what happened .
 Karen Carlin arrived at the Nichols Garage before Ruby did . Ruby called the parking attendant and told him to lend Carlin $5 . Ruby would reimburse him for the time-stamp .
 When Ruby arrived at the garage, his cover story was that he was supposed to loan Carlin another $25 . Ruby arrived to the garage and said he was only supposed to borrow $25 from Carlin . Ruby's cover story is that he is supposed to have loaned Carlin
 Ruby claimed he didn't have the cash to lend and couldn't get it, ignoring the fact that his club and its safe were next door . Ruby said he didn’t have the money to lend, and that he couldn't afford it .
 The plan was for Ruby to wire Carlin the money the next day, from a Western Union office only one block from the police station where Oswald would be moved . Ruby's plan was to wire the money to Carlin from the office where Oswald was being moved .
 The following day, Ruby’s time-stamped Western Union receipt would be designed to “prove’t that Ruby just happened to be near the police station when Oswald was being moved . Ruby's receipt was designed to "prove" that Ruby was near the
 It's clear this was only a cover story, since there were two Western Union offices much closer to Ruby’s Oak Cliff apartment . Ruby's apartment is located in Oak Cliff, Texas, near where he lived .
 Ruby had to go downtown to use the Western Union office near the police station . Ruby had no need to go all the way downtown, except for the fact that he had to silence Oswald .
 CIA Director McCone met with President Johnson to tell him about “the Cuban situation,” including “our operational plans against Cuba,’ according to McCone’s notes .
 LBJ and McCone no doubt also discussed the latest information from Mexico City that seemed to implicate Fidel Castro in JFK’s murder . JFK and LBJ were likely to discuss the new information .
 Banister associate Joseph Milteer was having breakfast with his friend William Somersett unaware that Somersett was an informant for the Miami police . Somersett, a white supremacist, was unaware that he was a police informant .
 Milteer excused himself so that he could telephone someone to check up with him . He then left the scene to talk to someone else .
 Jack Ruby was spruced up, dressed in his finest, ready for the spotlight he was sure to occupy after he completed his assignment for Carlos Marcello . Ruby was in Dallas, Texas, on November 24 .
 Ruby was undoubtedly nervous, but not about the length of time he might have to spend in jail after shooting Oswald . Ruby shot Oswald in Dallas, Texas, in the early days of the Second World War II .
 Under Texas law, for murders involving a ‘sudden passion, the sentence could be as brief as two years, with time off for good behavior, or probation, with no prison time .
 Ruby was probably worried only that after he pulled out his gun and started shooting at Oswald, he might hit a policeman or a policeman might start shooting at him . Instead, Ruby was worried only about hitting a policeman, not a policeman .
 The Committee also found that Ruby’s shooting Oswald wasn’t “spontaneous,” and that Ruby probably had help entering the basement of the police station for the transfer . The Committee said Ruby probably entered the basement to transfer Oswald .
 Sergeant Dean refused to testify to Blakey’s Committee and even told author Peter Dale Scott “of his longtime relationship with Civello,” the mobster who ran Dallas for Carlos Marcello . Sergeant Dean refuses to testify .
 Dean also worked in narcotics, which Ruby was also involved in with Civello and Marcello . Ruby also was involved in narcotics .
 Karen Carlin in Fort Worth called Ruby’s home, supposedly to ask him to send her money . Carlin called Ruby's home the night before, supposedly asking for money .
 An earlier call to Ruby's home by his regular housekeeper was answered by someone who didn't seem to recognize her voice . It's doubtful that Ruby was there, since an earlier call had been answered .
 At 10:45m, Ruby was talking to a TV crew in front of the police station, before heading to the Western Union office . Ruby was speaking to a television crew at 10:30m, before going to Western Union . Ruby is believed to have been involved in a car
 Sergeant Dean apparently removed police who had been guarding an interior door to the basement . At 11:00 a.m., Sergeant Dean removed police from the basement of the building .
 Oswald's time was up at 11:15m. Oswald was questioned by a small group of officials in Detective Fritz’s office . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the assassination .
 Oswald's transfer car wasn't in position, so the group with Oswald had to slow its passage toward the basement . The transfer car had to be moved to the basement, but the transfer car was not in position . Oswald and Oswald were able to reach the basement of the building .
 The basement was packed with at least seventy policemen and forty newsmen . Police were in the basement at the time of the incident .
 Ruby wired Carlin the money at 11:17m. and then headed back to the police station, only a block away . Ruby then went to Western Union, where he wired the money to Carlin .
 The timing was tight for Ruby to have any hope of claiming a ‘sudden passion’ defense, but he had plenty of associates who could signal when he should arrive .
 Ruby's attorney entered the police station and saw Oswald coming out of the jail elevator . Ruby left the Western Union office only one minute after he left the office, his attorney saw Oswald in the elevator .
 No one ever claimed to have seen Ruby actually enter the police basement, one more indication that he must have had help in doing so . Even with the crowds of press and police, no one claimed that he actually entered the basement .
 Ruby most likely entered the basement from the alley that runs between the Western Union office and the police station, police say . Ruby is believed to have been in the basement of the station's Western Union station .
 One officer claimed to have seen ‘an unidentified white male’ walk down the ramp into the basement . Officer Roy Vaughn was guarding the ramp when the incident occurred .
 Officer Vaughn consistently said he had not let Ruby down the ramp . But that officer failed a polygraph test, while Officer Vaughn, who said he let Ruby go down, passed his test . Officer Vaughn said he did not release Ruby from the ramp, but failed his polygraph .
 Oswald walked through the door at 11:20 a.m. Dallas Police detectives . Oswald was flanked by two Dallas detectives . Dallas Police Commissioner Lee H.W. Lee Oswald was shot in the head by Oswald .
 As soon as he was visible, a car horn blew and is audible on the news broadcast of the transfer . The car horn was heard as soon as the player was visible on the broadcast .
 Ruby surged out of the crowd and fired one shot into Oswald’s abdomen at 11:21 . Ruby then burst into the crowd to fire another shot at Oswald in the abdomen . Oswald was killed by a single bullet in November 1963 .
 It was only after Ruby was told that his victim was dead that “Ruby calmed down,” according to Marcello’s biographer, John H Davis .
 Later that day, a Secret Service agent interviewed a “highly agitated” Karen Carlin . Carlin was interviewed by the Secret Service that day .
 As Officer Archer had suspected, Ruby had apparently been threatened with death as well, and not just for himself . Officer Archer suspected that Ruby had been killed as well as himself .
 Ruby would soon be visited in jail by Marcello underboss Joe Campisi Sr. Campisi Jr. Sr. would soon visit Ruby in jail . Ruby would be visited by Campisi's underboss, Marcella underboss .
 Ruby had last seen Campisi at his restaurant on the night before JFK's murder . Ruby last saw Campisi the night he was murdered .
 Campisi was also close to Sheriff Bill Decker, in whose custody Ruby would spend most of the rest of his life . Ruby was reportedly in a cell overlooking Dealey Plaza in his custody .
 Johnny Rosselli’s legs were cut off after Santo Trafficante had him murdered . At the time, a Chicago mobster associate of Richard Cain was well known in the underworld for that type of Mafia retribution .
 Joseph Milteer had completed his phone call and rejoined his friend William Somersett . In South Carolina, he had completed a phone call to a friend .
 Oswald was dead, Carlos Marcello would soon be free from worry . Oswald was soon to be freed from worry. Oswald's death would be a relief . Oswald's widow would be relieved .
 David Ferrie returned to New Orleans after Oswald's murder . Ferrie turned himself in to authorities after Oswald’s murder . He was arrested in New Orleans .
 The FBI and Secret Service were investigating Jack Martin’s allegations, and the news media had started to get wind not just of Ferrie, but even Marcello, as possibly being involved in JFK's death . Jack Martin's allegations were being investigated by the Secret Service .
 Martin was an unstable individual and quickly backed away from his charges, and within forty-eight hours the entire incident had blown over . Martin was a unstable individual . Martin's charges were quickly dropped .
 Ferrie was also able to produce his library card when the agents asked, so he was released and the investigation dropped . Ferrie also was able to prove he had a library card and was released .
 Former FBI supervisor Guy Banister was briefly interviewed by authorities, but not investigated . Former FBI agent was briefly questioned by authorities . He was not investigated by the FBI .
 Statements by the local FBI to the press seemed to place responsibility for the whole incident on District Attorney Jim Garrison . District Attorney Garrison has been charged with the shooting .
 The matter had been staunched before it could become national news, and the press and the authorities would soon forget the whole thing . The matter was staunching before it became national news .
 Carlos Marcello managed to emerge unscathed from the weekend crisis that could have led to the death of JFK's godfather . David Ferrie and Guy Banister were both involved in JFK's murder .
 Marcello knew that Ruby was a longtime mob associate who could be trusted not to talk . Ruby was an associate of the mob who could not be trusted to talk, Marcellos says .
 The godfather realized there were still avenues investigators could pursue that could lead to his associates . But the godfather said investigators could still look into his associates in the case .
 Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli implemented plans to keep attention away from themselves, and toward Fidel Castro . The coup plan that was on hold was put on hold .
 Carlos Marcello would have other close calls that could have exposed his role in the assassination . Those would continue through the time of his 1985 confession to Jack Van Laningham and its almost deadly aftermath .
 Trafficante used two strategies to conceal their roles in JFK’s murder, at the time and for years to come . Trafficante and his wife used two basic strategies to cover up their involvement .
 First, along with Johnny Rosselli, the two godfathers continued to exploit their work on the unauthorized CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel, to gain a measure of protection from scrutiny .
 Those few CIA officials who knew about the plots would be loathe to look seriously at the possibility that their own operation was somehow involved in JFK's murder .
 To do so would cost their own careers, perhaps even bring themselves and the Agency under suspicion . To do that would cost them, they would bring themselves under suspicion, they say .
 Parts of the ClA—Mafia plots involving the mob bosses would continue in December 1963 and beyond .
 Marcello and Trafficante used the legitimate national security concerns surrounding the coup plan with Almeida to keep the pressure on U.S. officials to withhold key information from investigators, the press, and the public, to protect the United States government’s ally high in the
 "Castro killed JFK" stories continued to be floated by CIA operatives . The stories would find their way to receptive officials in Washington, D.C., for years .
 Those stories would sometimes travel through government channels and other times through the press . Those stories were sometimes told by government channels, other times by the media .
 Commander Almeida would remain high in the Cuban government and unexposed for decades . Protecting his life and his family would be a legitimate national security concern for a series of Presidents and CIA Directors .
 One unexpected benefit of the first two approaches for the mob bosses was that U.S. officials would use legitimate national concerns to hide a variety of intelligence failures and unauthorized operations . That could have been exposed in a truly wide-ranging investigation of JFK’s assassination .
 National security concerns were also used to hide not just the ‘tight” surveillance of Oswald but the structure that allowed a massive program of domestic surveillance by a raft of agencies . Thousands of Americans were conducted on thousands of Americans in the 1960s .
 If their two main strategies failed, the two godfathers would not hesitate to resort to murder to keep their roles in JFK’s murder hidden . Finally, if their main strategies fail, they would kill JFK .
 Jack Ruby threatened to kill mobster Johnny Rosselli, who was murdered by Ruby's associates . Ruby's murder threats would be carried out, including the gruesome slaying of Johnny . Ruby was a long-time mobster who was involved in the deaths of several mobsters .
 In addition to Ferrie and Banister, more associates of Carlos Marcello were interviewed by authorities about JFK's murder . In the weeks after JFK’s murder more associates were interviewed .
 Marcello's godfather would not be mentioned at all in the Report of the Warren Commission . Even though at least a dozen of his associates and family members were interviewed or interrogated, the godfather was not mentioned .
 Oswald’s death was one of the consequences of his death . The Warren Commission was created after the death of Oswald . Oswald's death prompted the creation of the Warren Commission .
 The Warren Commission was created due to the efforts of several Robert Kennedy associates . LBJ created the commission to control the investigation into the Watergate scandal .
 RFK associates apparently saw a commission as preferable to having the whole investigation in the hands of LBJ and Hoover . Neither President Johnson nor J Edgar Hoover wanted the Warren Commission, whereas RFK’s associates thought a commission was preferable .
 Hoover was talking to Nicholas Katzenbach, Robert’s trusted Deputy Attorney General . Within hours of Oswald's death, he was talking with Nicholas Katzzach .
 RFK was consumed with funeral preparations and family matters . Katzenbach was essentially running the Justice Department . RFK died in 1964 .
 Katzenbach focused on areas like civil rights and wasn't a specialist in organized crime or Hoffa . Ruby’s actions are now especially relevant in light of the recent actions .
 There is no evidence that Katzenbach was ever told about the JFK—Almeida coup plan, which had been withheld from all of RFK’s associates who weren’t actively involved in the Cuba operation . Also, there is no indication that there was any knowledge
 Katzenbach's concerns where shared by other high officials, all of whom were very concerned that rampant speculation about Oswald’s ties to Russia or Cuba could trigger an dangerous confrontation with the Soviets . At a time when an untested President had just assumed office, and much of the
 RFK loyalists pushed for a Commission to investigate JFK's murder . Hoover and the FBI continued their investigation, which would later form the basis for much of the Commission's work . The Commission was later formed into a Commission of Investigation .
 Author Henry Hurt found that at least 60 witnesses claimed that the FBI in some way altered what the witnesses had reported . More witnesses have reported discrepancies since that time .
 In addition, in at least two instances, the FBI rewrote memos to completely change their meaning . In addition to re-writing memos, an FBI agent would only do this on orders from the highest authority .
 National Archives eventually released the original, unaltered memos . We know this only because of the National Archives' release of the memos .
 The final three paragraphs of the memo, which cover Civello's ties to narcotics, are completely missing . But in the version the Warren Commission published, the memo is completely missing. The Warren Commission released a version of the document .
 LBJ pulled out all the stops in telling men like Richard Russell why they should join the Warren Commission . LBJ had been persuaded to appoint a Presidential Commission to investigate JFK's murder .
 President Johnson did the same with Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren, whom he wanted to chair the Commission . President Johnson wanted to lead the Commission, but he did not chair it .
 The Warren Commission's real purpose was to end speculation about foreign involvement in JFK’s murder, which it eventually did . It eventually did.
 The creation of the Warren Commission was announced on November 29, 1963 . The creation was announced in 1963 .
 The other members were Georgia Senator Richard Russell, Kentucky Senator John Cooper, Louisiana Congressman Hale Boggs, Michigan Congressman Gerald Ford, and disarmament official John J McCloy .
 J Edgar Hoover leaked the FBI’s own report and conclusions to the press on December 8, 1963 . However, before the Commission could begin gathering evidence, their final conclusion was preordained by Hoover . The FBI's own report was leaked to the media by Hoover in 1963 .
 Hoover used his extensive media connections to make sure the FBI’s conclusions became front-page news . Oswald acted alone and Ruby acted alone, the two had no connection, and there was no conspiracy in JFK's death . The FBI concluded that Ruby and Oswald both acted alone .
 Commission couldn’t really come to any other conclusion, since it would have to depend on Hoover’s FBI for most of their investigative work . At that point, the Commission had to come to a conclusion .
 One of the seven men appointed to the Commission, Michigan Congressman Gerald Ford, wrote that Ford told him “he would keep me thoroughly advised as to the activities of the Commission’s activities . Ford was one of seven appointed members of Hoover's Commission .
 Allen Dulles knew a great deal about U.S. efforts to assassinate Fidel using Trafficante, Rosselli, and Marcello, but he didn’t tell the rest of the Commission . Trafficante was Trafficante’s partner in the assassination plot .
 Earl Warren’s son indicated that the Chief Justice learned something about the plots . Gerald Ford indicated years later that he’d become aware of them as well, though there is no way to know how much they knew or if it was accurate .
 Chief Justice Warren and Congressman Ford were the only members of the Warren Commission who went to Dallas to interview Jack Ruby . The Warren Commission was the first to interview Ruby .
 The Commission denied the request of the Commission’s expert on Ruby to accompany them . They even denied the . request of an expert on the . issue .
 Ruby begged Warren and Ford to take him to Washington for questioning away from Dallas . They refused . Ruby begged them to bring him to D.C. for questioning, but they refused .
 The godfathers’ men quietly supplied a steady stream of stories implying that Castro had ordered JFK’s death . They didn’t want more situations like the Ferrie investigation, so even as the headlines were full of the FBI investigation and talk of the Commission .
 ‘Castro did it’ stories of some, like John Martino, contained hints of the JEK—Almeida coup plan . This kept national security concerns alive in Washington .
 Other mob associates linked to such stories include Rolando Masferrer, Frank Fiorini, and Manuel Artime . Rolando Artime was a mob associate of the 1980s .
 The eager audience for these stories included officials such as CIA Director John McCone, J Edgar Hoover, and Lyndon Johnson .
 The stories spread by John Martino were especially provocative—and accurate . Martino's stories spread about matters the public wouldn't officially learn about for decades . The stories were especially true, Martino said .
 Martino's stories blamed Castro for JFK's murder while hinting at the JEFK—Almeida coup plan . Martino’s stories were published in small-market newspapers and radio broadcasts .
 They were just detailed enough to draw the attention of U.S. officials but not enough to become major news stories . They were detailed enough enough to make the news headlines but not major news .
 The stories helped to force top officials into a continuing cover-up about JFK’s assassination, in order to prevent a public outcry to invade Cuba and to avoid exposing Commander Almeida . The stories forced top officials to cover up about JFK's assassination to avoid public outcry .
 Martino's stories began just two days after Oswald’s murder, when David Ferrie was essentially cleared of involvement in JFK's death . Martino: “David Ferrie's stories are not about the assassination of JFK, but about the murder of JFK.”
 Martino was touring the country as a prominent member of the far-right John Birch Society Speakers Bureau . He was ostensibly to promote his book I Was Castro’s Prisoner . Martino is touring the U.S. as a member of a far right group .
 Martino's book actually mentioned the name of Phillips’s associate, David Morales, a fact that the CIA wanted to keep secret . The CIA wanted Morales to keep his identity secret, but Martino said Morales was Morales .
 Martino’s phony stories started out mildly, claiming that Oswald had gone to Cuba in the fall of 1963 and had passed out pro-Castro literature in Miami and New Orleans . Martino's phony stories start out mildly .
 Martino refused to identify his sources . Martino's tales brought Martino a visit from the FBI on November 29, but he refused to reveal his sources.
 Martino took credit for revealing that the Kennedy Administration planned to eliminate Fidel Castro . The plan involved a more or less token invasion from Central America to be synchronized with the coup, he said .
 At the time, that was more than many high-ranking U.S. officials in the Johnson administration knew about the coup plan . The coup plan was uncovered by the White House in 1964 .
 Three months earlier Martino and Masferrer had been linked to the attempt to smear Ray’s group by tying it to Oswald via Dallas JURE member Silvia Odio . As previously noted, three months earlier three months ago Martino was linked to a smear campaign .
 Only the FBI and a handful of Odio’s closest family and friends knew about the visit . Nothing about Oswald's visit to Odio in Dallas had appeared in the press .
 It's not hard to imagine the consternation Martino’s increasingly provocative articles caused among high-ranking officials in Washington .
 Martino was interviewed by FBI agents on February 15, 1964 . FBI agents interviewed Martino again in 1964 . J. Edgar Hoover investigated Martino's crimes .
 Frank Fiorini, the future Watergate burglar under the name Frank Sturgis, was another Trafficante associate leaking information to the press implicating Fidel Castro in JFK’s murder . Fiorini was also a Trafficante member .
 None of these other leaks hinted at the JFK— Almeida coup plan, and Martino’s stories were unique in that regard, probably because Martino had actually been part of the assassination plot .
 Martino knew Marcello, Rosselli, and Trafficante, while Fiorini was simply a bagman for Trafficante . In addition, Martino was also a friend with Trafficante and Marcelli .
 Fiorini's information implicating Fidel and the Cubans appeared in a Florida newspaper on November 26, 1963 . Fiorini’s information was published in the Florida newspaper in 1963 .
 Fiorini maintained he’d been misquoted . The FBI immediately interviewed Fiorini . Fiorini said he'd been wronged .
 Fiorini admitted he'd received his information from John Martino . Fiorini later admitted he’d received the information from Martino. Fiorini then admitted he had been given the information .
 Other efforts to link Oswald and Ruby to Fidel were less sophisticated, though they sometimes echoed the information in the memo that so alarmed Alexander Haig . Other efforts were also less sophisticated .
 These additional efforts range from fake “Pedro Charles’s” letter mailed to Oswald from Havana on November 28, 1963, to stories linking Ruby to Cuban plots . Ruby was allegedly involved in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 It's amazing how many pages of follow-up FBI and CIA memos were generated because of one or two obviously fake letters or stories . It’s amazing how dozens, sometimes hundreds, of pages of pages were generated by fake letters .
 It’s likely that even more phony information implicating Fidel, with hundreds of pages of official follow-up memos, remains unreleased . It's likely that more phony info will be released .
 Castro might have been behind JFK’s death in response to U.S. actions against him . Castro played a key role in the actions of LBJ, Hoover, and others . JFK's death was a response to United States actions against Castro .
 Former FBI agent Harry Whidbee: "We were effectively told, “They’re only going to prove was the guy who did it"
 Government officials conducted many secret investigations into JFK’s murder . JFK's murder was the subject of many phony mob-linked stories implicating Fidel Castro .
 Many leads and individuals couldn’t be investigated publicly or revealed to the Warren Commission . National security reasons were for national security reasons and to avoid exposing unauthorized operations and intelligence failures .
 The CIA, Naval Intelligence, LBJ, and FBI all had internal, secret investigations of JFK assassination . LBJ asked Richard Helms to conduct one for him, and the FBI had their own .
 Their results weren't shared between, or often even within, agencies . However, their results weren’t shared between agencies .
 Naval Intelligence source: After Oswald died, they quit shredding and sanitizing his surveillance files . They began a lengthy investigation into the assassination .
 The investigation was not shared with most officials inside Naval Intelligence . There is no indication it was ever shared with other branches of the military, the Joint Chiefs or President Johnson .
 Richard Helms had more suspicions about the possible involvement of CIA personnel in JFK’s death than he acknowledged to the Warren Commission or to any of the later Congressional investigations . Helms never acknowledged the CIA's involvement in JFK's death .
 Those investigations have never been released, so there’s no way to know if Helms suspected Barker or other agents . Those investigations never released .
 Helms had the CIA conduct its own internal investigation into Oswald and JFK’s assassination, a little-known fact first uncovered years later by Congressional investigators . Helms conducted the CIA's own internal probe into JFK's assassination .
 Helms initially appointed an AMWORLD veteran, CIA officer John Whitten, to head the investigation . Whitten asked Helms for files on Oswald’s Cuba-related activities, he was taken off the JFK investigation and reassigned .
 In Congressional testimony long after the fact, Whitten said that Helms hadn’t told him anything about the CIA— Mafia plots to kill Fidel . He was ‘appalled’ when he heard about them twelve years later .
 Whitten also wasn't allowed to see the files on Oswald that CIA agent Hunter Leake had delivered from the CIA’s New Orleans office to Helms . Whitten was also told about the assassination aspect of the Rolando Cubela operation .
 Whitten was removed from the investigation, replaced with CIA Counterintelligence Chief James Angleton . Helms replaced him with Angleton, under whom the internal CIA investigation seems to have been designed more to hide information .
 Angleton heard all of the claims from Mexico City that Oswald had killed JFK on Fidel Castro’s orders . Angleton also had access to other incendiary reports, like those concerning shadowy Cuban agent Miguel Cases Saez and young Cuban exile Gilberto Policarpo Lopez .
 Angleton concluded that Fidel had killed JFK and that both Saez and Lopez were involved, according to intelligence journalist Joseph Trento . Not surprisingly, the paranoid Angleton decided that both Lopez and Saez were involved in the killing .
 Congressional investigators got to see many of the files about Saez and Lopez . Fifteen years later, they exposed the numerous flaws in Angleton's conclusion .
 In December 1963, one CIA memo says that President Johnson received a secret Agency report about Oswald and JFK’s assassination . President Johnson got the report in December 1963 .
 Angleton's conclusions probably fed Johnson’s belief that Fidel had orchestrated JFK's assassination . Angleton concluded that JFK had orchestrated the assassination of Fidel Castro .
 Helms made Angleton his key contact with the Warren Commission, both for providing it information and for withholding material Helms didn't want the Commission to see . Angleton was also key to providing information to the Commission, including information Helms wanted to withhold .
 The Warren Commission saw nothing about the JFK—Almeida coup plan, the surveillance of Oswald, or anything else that might have triggered a real investigation or cost Helms his job .
 Richard Helms mysteriously dumped exile leader Tony Varona in January 1964 for unknown reasons . Helms dumped Varona for unknown reason in 1964 .
 Varona's quick fall from grace raises suspicions that someone in the CIA such as Helms, or perhaps even RFK, suspected that Varona was involved somehow in JFK’s death . RFK may have been involved in the death .
 Helms had access to the Varona—Chicago Mafia payoff memos . Helms would have known about Varona’s ties to Rosselli and Trafficante through the plots .
 If Helms knew or suspected that Varona—or other CIA assets—had any involvement in JFK's death, he might have dealt with it himself .
 Robert Kennedy would also have close associates conduct secret investigations of his brother’s murder for much of the rest of his life .
 For months after his brother’s murder, associates described him as being “shattered,” with some indicating he might have in some way blamed himself for his brother's death . For months, associates said he was ‘shattered’
 RFK’s secret investigations started the day JFK died, when the Attorney General called “Julius Draznin in Chicago, an expert on union corruption for the National Labor Relations Board,” according to author David Talbot .
 Sheridan’s widow later confirmed that her husband and RFK worked together on the secret inquiry . RFK and Sheridan were the subject of an inquiry into the death of Sheridan .
 RFK would tell his friend Richard Goodwin that he thought “that mob guy in New Orleans”—Marcello— was behind his brother’s death, as Goodwin told me . Those investigations are probably why, by 1966, RFK told Goodwin that ‘that
 The following year, after David Ferrie’s name finally surfaced as a suspect, RFK had his press aide, Frank Mankiewicz, conduct another secret investigation .
 RFK "couldn't focus on it" when he tried to tell RFK, "it was like he just couldn’t focus" RFK was "unable to focus" on RFK's story, says historian .
 In late 1963, RFK seemed determined to do something about Cuba and the coup plan . RFK was still in the throes of the pain he suffered in the war .
 He seems to have become confident that the coup plan with Almeida was still secure enough to continue . He seems confident that he is still confident of continuing the plan .
 John H Crimmins: "nothing ever surfaced" to make him think Castro was involved in JFK’s murder . State Department looked at Castro in the days and weeks after JFK's death, Crimmins says .
 A formerly “top secret, eyes only” memo “from Gordon Chase of the National Security Council Staff” implies that McGeorge Bundy, the “President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs,” was able to provide some type of “ass
 Commander Almeida was still safe and undetected, but the same wasn’t true for one of his associates . Commander AlMeida’s associates was killed in the early hours of the morning . Commander Almeida allegedly was still alive and
 A couple of rumors about the Almeida coup plan were reported to the CIA in the days after JFK’s death . Fidel‘s agents in Miami might have heard the same or similar rumors . It's possible that Fidel's agents may have heard similar rumors in Miami .
 Commander Almeida left Cuba in a way that would not arouse suspicion . Perhaps out of caution, he left Cuba out of a way not to raise suspicion .
 The timing of Che’s arrest raises the possibility that Fidel had learned something about the coup and had arrested one of those he thought was responsible . Che was arrested just one day before the originally scheduled coup date .
 Che’s house arrest probably lasted for only a short time, perhaps just a day or two . Che's house arrest may have lasted for just a few days, perhaps only a few hours . Che may have been under house arrest for a little more than a day .
 December 2 is the anniversary of the founding of the Cuban Army, the first battle saw Almeida save his friend Che’s life . December 2 marks the start of Cuba's first battle with Che, who was killed in the battle .
 As Commander of Cuba’s Army, Almeida was also considered its founder, so the Cuban public would definitely notice if he didn’t appear for the celebration . Almeidas was considered the founder of the Cuban Army .
 Almeida returned from Algeria to be part of the celebration, something he would not have done if he feared that he was returning home to the same fate as Che . Apparently things had calmed down enough for him to return .
 The day after the big December 2, 1963, celebration, a CIA report says Almeida “expressed despair” to a subordinate . The report says the next day, the day after, he expressed “despair’s”
 Almeida communicated to Harry Williams that he was still willing to stage a coup against Fidel, if RFK and new President Lyndon Johnson would back him . RFK would have backed him if he staged a coup, but he didn't, he says .
 RFK believed that a free and democratic Cuba would be the best memorial to his slain brother . RFK's brother was assassinated in 1968 .
 LBJ worried that JFK’s death was retaliation from Castro . LBJ had heard enough about the coup plan from McCone to worry about the assassination .
 RFK decided to swallow his pride and put his own feelings aside to plead his case personally to President Johnson in January 1964 . RFK was the first African-American to be elected to the White House .
 Robert Kennedy felt that Johnson had moved into the White House and asserted control too quickly . Their relationship had been terrible since 1960 and worsened since JFK’s death .
 Robert Kennedy’s meeting with LBJ about the coup plan did not go well . Robert Kennedy and LBJ's meeting with Robert Kennedy on coup plan went well .
 RFK later told Williams that President Johnson listened sympathetically but made it clear that he would not continue with the plan . Only the two of them were present, and only RFK and President Johnson were present .
 LBJ’s decision also included ending the Cuban exile troop training program at Fort Benning . Those exiles’ real purpose was to be among the first U.S. troops into Cuba after the coup .
 LBJ agreed to continue funding RFK’s favored Cuban exile groups . LBJ did agree to fund the groups in case they proved useful in the future .
 Formerly, Cuban operations had essentially been run by Robert Kennedy through Cyrus Vance and Richard Helms .
 RFK no longer had any role in Cuban operations . Now the CIA would take primary responsibility, with McCone reporting to LBJ, and LBJ .
 RFK offered to back Williams with his personal fortune, but Williams felt they had both done—and sacrificed—enough . Williams went back to being a mining engineer, far away from the intrigue of exile politics .
 Williams communicated the news to Almeida, who apparently ended any planning for a coup . Williams: "I'm sure there's no coup. I'm not going to be a coup"
 RFK made sure Almeida’s family, still outside of Cuba, was covertly sent “$3,000 that the family used.” According to Williams, RFK sent the money to the family in Cuba .
 Almeida’s first wife and two daughters reportedly never returned to Cuba to live . The payments continued for decades, and those payments continued .
 The files have not been released on who in the Agency continued making covert payments and monitoring the CIA’s surveillance of Almeida's family . The files will not be released .
 E Howard Hunt and his aide Bernard Barker were probably behind the top-secret operation . Hunt and Barker had already been working on the top secret operation . However, at least initially, it was probably Hunt's aides .
 RFK himself was expressing a different, more enlightened attitude about Castro . A month after his meeting with President Johnson, RFK expressed a different view of Castro .
 RFK proposed seeking an accommodation with Fidel instead of trying to overthrow him . In an exchange with CIA official Desmond FitzGerald, RFK said he wanted to seek an accommodation .
 RFK grew from being a tough bulldog of a prosecutor and protector of JFK to being one of the most progressive members of the Senate . That was emblematic of RFK’s development over the next four years, as he grew .
 CIA official Richard Helms had not changed his feelings about Fidel, however . Helms was still angry at the death of Fidel Castro .
 Hunt's friend Artime continued to get the lion’s share of the money, which CIA accounts say totaled $7 million . Some former officials say it was several times that amount . Artime's friend Hunt continued to receive the money .
 Artime was soon involved in drug trafficking with Santo Trafficante’s organization . His planes and ships were going to his Central American bases full of CIA arms and supplies .
 A December 6, 1963, attempt to assassinate Fidel Castro involved Herminio Diaz, Trafficante’s bodyguard and narcotics trafficker . Diaz was first documented in 2006 by author Larry Hancock . The attempt to kill Fidel Castro was made in December 1963 .
 The material was slated to be delivered in January 1964 under David Morales’s supervision . The material, especially appropriate for an assassination attempt, was slated for delivery in 1964 .
 Morales remained good friends with Johnny Rosselli . In 1964 Morales made at least one trip to visit the Mafia don in Las Vegas .
 Rosselli continued to split his time between Las Vegas and Los Angeles . He moved into a large, lavish apartment on Beverly Glen, near Beverly Hills .
 Milton Berle and Phil Silvers were part of the Friars Club in the early 1950s . The scam began with an elaborate poker scam involving the stars of the era .
 Helms kept other aspects of the ClA—Mafia plots going as well, keeping European assassin recruiter QJWIN on the CIA payroll in December and for several months thereafter . Reports about Trafficante’s associate Michel Victor Mertz surfaced in Europe and to the CIA
 The Warren Commission never learned about Mertz, though the FBI gave them—with no explanation—a few memos showing the Bureau had checked for airline passengers in Dallas named Merts on November 22, 1963 . As for the Warren Commission, there was no explanation .
 Mertz had $1 million in heroin stolen from in France near the one-year anniversary of JFK’s death . The heroin dealer prospered and lived well after the assassination .
 In Paris, Mertz had a swank townhouse on Boulevard Suchet, also home to the Duke and Duchess of Windsor . In London, he lived in a posh townhouse in the same area as Windsor .
 Mertz was profiled in a Pulitzer-Prize-winning heroin exposé by Newsday in 1965 . He served only a brief, comfortable detention in France a few years later .
 Mertz remained reclusive and threatening to investigators until his death on January 15, 1995 . While his alias Jean Souetre eventually talked to journalists and allowed himself to be photographed, he remained a reclusive man .
 Even his death was kept relatively secret for such a notorious figure, hindering efforts to get U.S. government files about him released . The death of the notorious figure kept his death a secret .
 A far more lowly member of the heroin network Mertz shared with Trafficante and Marcello did not live nearly as long as he did . Trafficante was a heroin dealer in the 1980s and '90s . Marcella was a drug dealer in New York City .
 Rose Cheramie's statements about a plot to kill JFK were finally taken seriously by authorities after JFK’s assassination . Authorities finally took her statements seriously after JFK's assassination .
 She revealed new information about her sometime boss, Jack Ruby, to Louisiana State Police Lieutenant Francis Fruge . Ruby revealed new details about her former boss Jack Ruby to Lieutenant Francis .
 Fruge investigated and confirmed her claims about a heroin ring operating in Texas . She said she had worked for Ruby as a B-girl . Ruby worked for the ring .
 Authorities in Houston lost track of the heroin courier Cheramie had identified and closed the case . Cheramies had identified a heroin courier she had identified . Authorities lost track and the case was closed .
 Cheramie tried to tell the FBI about a heroin deal operating from a New Orleans ship, investigators found . The Coast Guard verified an ongoing narcotics investigation of the ship .
 Cheramie was found mortally wounded under unusual circumstances on a desolate road in Texas, and she died on September 4, 1965 . One month after she contacted the FBI, she was found dead on a Texas road in 1965 .
 JFK's associates prospered after JFK’s murder . Trafficante and most of their associates prof profited from JFK's murder .
 Historian: "The minute that bullet hit Jack Kennedy’s head, it was all over" Historian Richard Mahoney: ‘The minute [Jack Kennedy's] head] hit, all over. It was over .
 The FBI stepped up its efforts against organized crime after JFK’s murder . That wasn’t completely true, and the FBI did step up efforts after JFK .
 Robert Kennedy remained Attorney General, but there were still prosecutions to continue against Marcello, for jury tampering, and multiple counts against Jimmy Hoffa .
 Marcello “had threatened to kill” the government’s main witness during the same trial . Shortly after that, the U.S. Attorney in New Orleans learned that he “threatened’t kill’
 Marcello would not be tried until the following year, and he would be found “not guilty” on August 17, 1965 . He was found not guilty of murder in 1965 .
 By the spring of 1964, Robert Kennedy’s Justice Department and the head of his “Get Hoffa Squad,” Walter Sheridan, had succeeded in convicting Jimmy Hoffa for the first time .
 Hoffa would also be convicted on separate charges, in Chicago, and only a flurry of appeals delayed the start of his long prison sentences . Hoffa was also convicted of separate charges in Chicago and would serve time in prison .
 In the press at that time, Ruby was not connected to the Mafia or considered any type of mobster, which would remain true for more than ten years . Ruby would not be considered a mobster or considered a member of the Mafia .
 Melvin Belli eventually took over Ruby’s defense; his law partner had first been called on November 24, 1963, by someone from Las Vegas connected with mobsters who’d had casinos in Havana . Belli had been called by someone connected to mobsters in Las Vegas
 The Desert Inn is Johnny Rosselli's Las Vegas headquarters hotel, the Desert Inn . The call didn't come from Johnny, but it did come from his Las Vegas HQ .
 Belli was close to Los Angeles gangster Mickey Cohen, who was a good friend of Carlos Marcello . Belli is close to L.A. gangsters Mickey Cohen and was a close friend of Marcella .
 Belli took Ruby’s case and kept any mention of his Mafia contacts out of the trial . Belli kept mention of Ruby's Mafia contacts from the trial.
 Instead of using the ‘sudden passion’ defense available in Texas, the judge used a bizarre “psycho-motor” defense that had never been attempted before . The defense can result in a sentence as short as two years served, or probation .
 Several Warren Commission staff members tried to do a thorough investigation of Jack Ruby’s Mafia ties and Cuban gunrunning . They were stymied by the trial of Ruby .
 The FBI intimidated several witnesses who tried to talk about Ruby's gunrunning . FBI agents relied on Ruby’s mob associates to say that Ruby had no mob associates . Ruby was convicted of gunrunning in 1999 .
 Two staffers investigating Ruby wrote a long memo to the the the Commission’s General Counsel outlining numerous problems and stonewalling by the FBI and by Richard Helms, they were barred from interviewing Ruby in Dallas . After the two staffers wrote the memo, the memo was sent to the
 Given Sheriff Decker's mob ties and Marcello's control of Dallas, Ruby’s concerns were all too real . Ruby was worried that Sheriff Decker had ties to the mob . The series finale is set in New York City .
 Mob associates of Trafficante’s and Rosselli's framed Chicago Secret Service agent Abraham Bolden . Bolden was framed by the mob .
 Bolden was arrested on the day he went to Washington to tell staff about the Secret Service’s laxity . Bolden used information provided by two criminals he’d put in jail, he says .
 One of Bolden's accusers worked for Sam DeStefano, a notorious associate of Richard Cain, the Chief Investigator for in the Cook County/Chicago sheriff’s office . One of the accusers is alleged to have worked for the infamous associate of Cain .
 Richard Cain’s brother, Michael, told me that Richard Cain had the “motive, means, and opportunity” to frame Bolden . Richard Cain is accused of trying to frame Richard Bolden in a bid to get him to trial .
 Cain was part of the Chicago Mafia and had worked with Rosselli and Trafficante on the ClA—Mafia plots . Cain was a member of the Mafia and worked with Trafficante . He was convicted of conspiracy to kill his brother and sister .
 Bolden was sentenced to six years in prison, even though his main accuser later admitted to committing perjury against him . Bolden's accuser admitted perjury against Bolden, but Bolden got a six-year sentence .
 Bolden’s judge told the jury before their deliberations that Bolden was guilty, but even after that misconduct resulted in a mistrial, the same judge was allowed to conduct Bolden's second trial . The jury was unable to reach a verdict .
 Bolden has been fighting to clear his name ever since his release from prison . The result was another conviction, and Bolden was convicted again . Bolden is still fighting for his innocence .
 Some of the many shortcomings of the Warren Commission were covered in Chapters 1 and 2 . The Warren Commission was set up by President Richard Nixon in 1964 .
 Professor Gerald McKnight’s Breach of Trust details the most definitive account of their many problems . They are too numerous to cover here, but Professor McKnight's Breach Of Trust details many of them .
 The Commission was not given much crucial information and had to rely on the FBI for most of their investigative work . Basically, the Commission was given little crucial information .
 Like the CIA, the Bureau withheld much crucial information from the Commission, including the Tampa attempt, and much about Cuban exiles tied to Trafficante and Rosselli . The CIA withheld much of the information, including information about Trafficante's efforts .
 The FBI flooded the Commission staff with reports of wild allegations and irrelevant paperwork . Instead of the FBI, the Commission was inundated with wild allegations, the FBI sent them to investigate .
 Jack Ruby's mother’s dental records are in the one-volume Warren Report but nothing about the JFK—Almeida coup plan, the ClA—Mafia plots, or the threat against JFK by Marcello and Trafficante that informants reported to the FBI in 1962
 David Ferrie and Guy Banister died of natural causes on June 6, 1964 . Like Marcello, neither Ferrie nor Banister is mentioned in the Warren Report .
 I noted in early chapters the Commission’s internal struggles over their conclusion, but another problem surfaced just as the Commission had hoped to be wrapping up . The Commission has been trying to wrap up their work .
 Commission staffers and the FBI were under pressure to resolve the matter of Silvia Odio's visit from Oswald and two exiles a couple of months prior to JFK’s murder . The FBI was under fire for not resolving the matter .
 The soldier of fortune knew Santo Trafficante and had been under house arrest with the mob boss in Cuba in 1959, before being asked to join the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Castro in 1963 .
 Hall's convenient claim came just in time for the Warren Commission’s last meeting, two days later . Hall: “I’m not sure what happened to me. I’ll be happy to see the end of the commission,” he said .
 At that final meeting, three of the Commission members tried to include a dissenting opinion about the “magic bullet” theory . Georgia Senator Richard Russell, led by Georgia Senator Russell, said he was disappointed .
 Hall changed his story and denied having visited Odio, as did his two friends, but it was too late to change the Commission’s Final Report . Over the next two days, Hall .
 Report submitted to President Johnson on September 24, given to Hoover the following day, and released to the public on September 28, 1964 . Report was submitted to the President Johnson and Hoover the next day .
 The press widely proclaimed the Warren Report, as it came to be known, to be the definitive account of Oswald’s guilt as a lone assassin . The Warren Report was published by the Warren Commission in 1945 .
 E Howard Hunt admitted that during the 1960s, one of his duties for the CIA had been press and publisher relations . Hunt later admitted that he had also been press relations with the CIA . Hunt's anti-Castro duties included anti- Castro Castro .
 Both Richard Helms and his protégé Hunt played behind-the-scenes roles with the press and publishers during 1964 and afterward .
 The authors of two early books about JFK’s assassination were the targets of CIA attempts to discredit them . Thomas Buchanan and Joachim Joesten, a left-wing European journalist and concentration-camp survivor, were targeted .
 The CIA even dug up Nazi files to use against Joesten, foreshadowing the more extensive efforts Helms and the CIA would launch against Warren Report critics just two years later . Helms would launch a similar effort two years after the Warren Report .
 The CIA issued a fifty-three-page memo detailing how CIA officials could attack critics and bolster the “lone nut” theory in the press . After the first wave of well-researched, bestselling books critical of the Warren Commission emerged in 1966 .
 The CIA maintained covert relationships with about 50 journalists or employees of U.S. media organizations . In the 1970s, the Senate Church Committee was able to document that “the CIA maintained . relationships with . about 50 American journalists .
 Bernstein wrote that even that figure “refers only to those who were ‘tasked’ in their undercover assignments or had a mutual understanding that they would help the Agency or were subject to some form of CIA contractual control . Bernstein: Even that figure only refers to those �
 E Howard Hunt confirmed Bernstein’s much higher figures in his final autobiography . Hunt’ final autobiography, he confirmed Bernstein's much higher . figures and the other information in his article .
 In the mid-1960s, Hunt, and his assistant Bernard Barker, was still involved with the Manuel Artime side of the ClA—Mafia plots, which had now been officially merged with the Rolando Cubela assassination operation . Hunt and Barker were still involved .
 RFK’s liberal exile leader Manolo Ray was no longer working with the CIA, and Eloy Menoyo had been captured while on a mission into Cuba and had been given a life sentence . The CIA had been working with RFK's liberal exile .
 The CIA started getting reports from Trafficante associates showing that the Cubela operation was insecure . However, the CIA was able to secure the operation . Trafficante was killed in a shootout with the CIA .
 Fidel Castro's intelligence agents had actually penetrated Artime’s group a year earlier . Artime had been infiltrated by the Cubela operation . Fidel Castro had been involved in the operation .
 Richard Helms was no doubt livid when he saw a January 25, 1965, article in The Nation . It gave an all-too-accurate description of the expensive scope of Artime’s operation . Helms would have been livid by the article .
 Helms began the gradual process of shutting down Artime’s operation . Helms: The publicity, various problems with Artime, and the insecurity of Cubela's operation proved too much for Helms .
 Harry Williams had one last encounter with his former colleague Manuel Artime . Artime’s CIA-backed operations had been ended, in part because of financial irregularities .
 In Miami, Williams happened to drop by a friend’s house . He was surprised to find Artime, Hunt, and Barker there, along with a Trafficante associate .
 Williams told me “they were planning the selling of the equipment” for Artime . Williams said they were planning to sell the equipment . Williams: “They were planning ... to sell it”
 He advised them not to, and after declining their offer to join their venture, he quickly left . He declined to join them and quickly left.
 Artime, Hunt, and Barker sold the supplies and apparently kept the money . Instead of selling the supplies, they apparently sold the money and kept the supplies .
 Rolando Cubela was arrested in Cuba on February 28, 1966, due in part to information from Fidel's agent in Artime’s camp . The arrest was made in part due to information that came from Fidel Castro's agent .
 Richard Helms officially became CIA Director on June 30, 1966, putting him in an even stronger position to ensure that his unauthorized activities under JFK and LBJ were not exposed . Helms was the CIA Director of the CIA from 1966 to 1966 .
 Helms made sure that six CIA veterans of AMWORLD and his sensitive anti-Castro operations were reassigned to Laos in 1966 . In addition to firing Bernard Barker, Helms reassigned the CIA veterans to Laos .
 In May 1966, Sam Giancana left the country, after using his work on the CIA—Mafia plots to avoid spending another year in jail . He refused to testify about the Mafia to a grand jury after being granted immunity .
 FBI got a tip that his real name was Filippo Sacco and he wasn't a U.S. citizen . Johnny Rosselli was not so lucky, when the FBI found out his real identity .
 William Harvey tried to get the CIA to aid Rosselli, but to no avail, and Harvey was forced to resign from the CIA the following year . Harvey resigned the CIA following the incident .
 Marcello was found guilty of murder in New Orleans . He was found dead at the scene of his wife's murder . FBI agents say they were tired of seeing him get away with murder .
 FBI agent staged a public confrontation with the godfather at the airport . Marcello's godfather is accused of sexually assaulting an FBI agent at the age of 16 .
 The resulting arrest and charges would dog Marcello for years, eventually sending him to a federal prison . The resulting charges would send him to prison for a short time .
 The Texas Court of Appeals ordered a new trial for Jack Ruby in 1966 . Marcello and ‘Trafficante’ were dealt another blow on October 5, 1966 .
 Court orders a change of venue to Wichita Falls, Texas, away from Dallas and its mob-affiliated sheriff . Two months later, the same court would order a move of venue away from the city .
 Ruby was diagnosed with cancer and died on January 3, 1967, before his trial could begin . Three days after winning that appeal, Ruby died of cancer .
 The Times wrote to a New Orleans Police Lieutenant, listing thirty-two questions about the assassination . The questions were primarily focused on David Ferrie but also on Carlos Marcello .
 The police chief gave a copy of the letter to New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison . Garrison then had Ferrie brought in for questioning in December 1966 .
 Garrison tried to conduct his investigation in secret at first, but it was leaked to the media, resulting in a firestorm of publicity that centered on Ferrie . Garrison's investigation was conducted in secret, but the leak led to Ferrie's arrest .
 David Ferrie died at the height of the controversy on February 22, 1967, an apparent suicide . Ferrie was the subject of a series of controversial films and television shows .
 Ferrie’s friend Eladio del Valle, an associate of Trafficante and Masferrer, was murdered in Florida that same night . That same night, Ferrie's friend was killed in Florida . Ferrie was killed by Trafficante associates .
 Garrison’s investigation was targeted by a variety of people offering to help . Some of whom should have been investigated themselves, he says . Trafficante associates Rolando Masferrer and Loran Hall offered to help Garrison's investigation .
 After Ferrie’s death, Garrison focused on Clay Shaw, a coworker of Fowler . Shaw was a friend of Ferrie's, Garrison says .
 RFK asked his close associate Walter Sheridan to go to New Orleans and look into Garrison’s charges . Garrison was charged with attempted murder of RFK in 1964 .
 Sheridan felt that Garrison was a fraud, and he soon began to undermine Garrison’s investigation in various ways, which included producing an NBC News special critical of Garrison . Sheridan produced a special on Garrison's investigation for NBC News .
 Recently released FBI files show Garrison twice considered indicting Marcello for JFK's assassination but decided not to . Garrison's decision was made in the late spring of 1967, 1967 .
 Garrison’s investigation wound up becoming a media circus, and Clay Shaw was eventually acquitted . Instead of Garrison's investigation, it wound up being a media media circus .
 In 1967, amid the Garrison firestorm, to pressure the CIA to help him, Johnny Rosselli began leaking information to Jack Anderson, who was not yet the journalist superstar he would become before Watergate scandal, five years later .
 Rosselli’s leaks to Anderson hinted at the CIA—Mafia plots, though the Mafia don attempted to tie them to Robert Kennedy . Rossella's leaks hint at CIA plots, but he also tried to tie Robert Kennedy to Kennedy's assassination .
 President Johnson asked CIA Director Richard Helms for a report on the plots and any links they might have had to JFK’s assassination . No other reporters followed up on Anderson's stories, but Helms asked Helms to investigate .
 Helms met with RFK around this time, and the resulting Inspector General’s report delivered by Helms contained no information about the JFK—Almeida coup plan or AMWORLD .
 In July 1967, CIA official Desmond FitzGerald, who had overseen the CIA— Mafia plots in 1963, died of natural causes . He had overseen many of the CIA's most successful covert operations in the 1960s .
 Carlos Marcello would increasingly become the focus of unwanted attention in 1967 and the first half of 1968 . Marcella would become the star of the show in the late 1960s and early 1960s .
 Ed Reid showed a copy of the manuscript for his new book to the Los Angeles FBI Bureau . Reid showed the manuscript to the FBI on May 6, 1967 . Reid's book was published in 1967 .
 Ed Becker heard Marcello’s fall 1962 assassination threat against JFK, heard by Ed Becker . It mentioned for the first time the assassination threat was heard by Becker . Ed Becker says the threat was a threat to JFK .
 The Mafia’s most powerful attorney —Sidney Korshak — provided the FBI with derogatory information about Becker . Reid's manuscript was discovered by the Mafia's most powerful lawyer . The FBI was given derogatory information by the mob attorney .
 Senator Robert Kennedy offered behind-the-scenes help to journalist Michael Dorman for an article about Carlos Marcello . Dorman worked with Kennedy to get behind the scenes for the article .
 Dorman told author Gus Russo that “Robert Kennedy was enthusiastic about the article” and offered to have one of his aides assist Dorman . Dorman said Kennedy was “encomprehensible” with the article .
 Robert Kennedy officially entered the race for the presidency in March 1968 . In March 1968, Robert Kennedy became the first candidate for the White House .
 His late-starting campaign was building impressive momentum, by winning the all-important California primary . He was tragically assassinated on June 4, 1968 .
 Marcello still ordered contract killings, even while appealing his assault conviction and two-year sentence for slugging an FBI agent . He was sentenced to two years in prison for hitting an agent .
 Marcello was under pressure because he’d been convicted of assaulting an FBI agent . His appeals were running out, and his appeals are running out .
 Marcello had backed Nixon for years, but one of his "fixers" was close to President Nixon’s own fixer, former mob attorney Murray Chotiner .
 Jimmy Hoffa was doing hard time at the Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary . That was in stark contrast to his old friend Jimmy . Hoffa is now serving time at a federal prison in Pennsylvania .
 Marcello had no trouble running his empire from prison . Since it was one of the least secure and most comfortable federal prisons, he ran his empire there .
 Marcello was released from prison in 1971 after serving just five months . He spent the rest of his life in prison . He was released in March 1971 .
 Even before Marcello entered prison in 1970, reporters whispered among themselves that the New Orleans godfather was tied to JFK’s murder . Even before he entered prison, reporters had whispered about the connection .
 In fall 1971, Noyes learned from the Los Angeles Chief Deputy District Attorney that the Senate Judiciary Committee was holding secret hearings into the assassinations of John and Robert Kennedy . The hearings were held on secret grounds .
 An aide to Murphy confirmed the secret hearings to Noyes, who is now writing a book about the assassinations .
 At sixty-five, Johnny Rosselli was facing five years in prison after being caught and convicted for his Friars Club cheating scheme and immigration violations . He was facing a maximum of five years behind bars .
 The INS deportation efforts were halted after Rosselli entered prison on February 25, 1971 . The CIA admits “meeting with INS regarding the status of the deportation proceedings March 1971”
 Rosselli had forced Helms to intervene by resuming his leaks to muckraking columnist Jack Anderson . Helms had been forced to step down by continuing to leak to Anderson .
 The new articles discussed “six attempts against Cuba’s Fidel Castro,” including those involving rifles . The articles also discussed attempts to kill Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 Anderson’s linking the Bay of Pigs and the CIA— Mafia plots to JFK's assassination would hit President Nixon especially hard, since it referred to events during his tenure as Vice President . President Nixon would be especially hard .
 Nixon’s alarm at the time was confirmed by long-secret Senate Watergate Committee files that I published for the first time in 2012 . Nixon's alarm in the 1970s was confirmed .
 Anderson’s column didn’t mention Trafficante, Giancana, Marcello, or David Morales . Someone as knowledgeable as Helms would realize Rosselli had more bombshells to drop if he chose .
 E Howard Hunt began working as a White House consultant soon after the Rosselli-Anderson articles . Hunt now works as a consultant to the White House .
 Hunt was a veteran of the ClA—Mafia plots that Nixon had begun back in 1960 . Hunt's first priority was to make sure that Nixon’s role in those plots didn’t surface . Hunt: “I’m not sure Nixon's role in
 Hunt was ordered by the White House to look into assassinating Jack Anderson . Testimony shows that Hunt was even ordered to look at assassinating Anderson .
 Later in 1971, CIA official David Atlee Phillips was apparently overseeing a new assassination attempt against Fidel Castro . The attempt involved Cuban exile Antonio Veciana .
 Fidel ordered the compilation of a huge Dossier of the CIA’s attempts to kill him . The attempt failed, but Fidel was apparently so angry that he ordered a huge dossier of CIA's attempts .
 The Dossier began when Nixon was Vice President in 1960 and continued under Nixon’s Presidency . Dossier includes photos of captured weapons and assassins .
 Watergate break-ins were all about trying to see if that Dossier had fallen into the hands of Nixon’s enemies . Frank Fiorini confirmed in a long-overlooked published interview that Watergate was all about the Dossier . Fiorini said the break-in was all
 Hunt, Barker, Fiorini (using the name Frank Sturgis), and the other “Plumbers” broke into the Chilean Embassy in Washington . The first break-in occurred at the Chilean embassy in Washington, D.C.
 Watergate burglary occurred two weeks before the first Watergate break-in . That burglary, which Nixon talked about on a White House tape, occurred on the Watergate tape .
 Trafficante later revealed to the Chief Investigator for his attorney, that’s also why almost all of the Watergate burglars were veterans of the C[A—Mafia plots . Trafficante also revealed that almost all the burglars in Watergate were veterans from the mafia .
 Six months before the first Watergate break-in, President Nixon had received a new Mafia bribe of $1 million involving Jimmy Hoffa . President Nixon received the bribe six months before Watergate broke out .
 The new Mafia—Hoffa bribe again involved Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, and New Jersey mobster Tony Provenzano . Just as in 1960, this new Mafia-Hoff a bribe again .
 As documented by the FBI and Time magazine, the bribe was for Hoffa’s release from prison, only with the condition that he couldn’t return to the Teamsters for eight years . The bribe was only for the release of Hoffa, but he was allowed to
 The mob bosses preferred to deal with Hoffa’s easygoing replacement, Frank Fitzsimons, instead of the volatile Hoffa . The mob boss preferred the easygoing successor to Hoffa, Frank Fitzgeraldsimons .
 Hoffa tipped Senate Watergate Committee investigators about Nixon, Johnny Rosselli, and the CIA—Mafia plots . In late 1973, Hoffa was angry that Nixon had kept him from the Teamsters .
 Committee investigators interviewed Johnny Rosselli in a secret session about those plots . Committee investigators interview Johnny Rosseli in secret session . Committee members interviewed him in secret .
 For reasons that are still unclear, that part of the investigation was shut down in early 1974 and withheld from the press . However, for reasons that is still unclear it was withheld from press .
 Ford created the Rockefeller Commission on January 4, 1975, to investigate CIA activities, including assassination plots and JFK’s assassination . The Rockefeller Commission was created following the resignation of President Nixon in August 1974 .
 Their goal was to investigate CIA operations, domestic surveillance, and assassination plots . The group's goal was investigating CIA operations and domestic surveillance .
 In the case of each of the Committees, all the files about JFK—Almeida coup plan—and its infiltration by the Mafia—were withheld from Congress . In the . case, all of the files were withheld from . Congress, the Committee of Committees .
 Almeida, still a very high official in Cuba, was exposed as a U.S. asset in Cuba . That was ostensibly to protect him from being exposed as an asset . The Cuban ex-Cuba official is still in the United States .
 It also prevented the exposure of intelligence failures by agencies like the CIA and potentially embarrassing revelations about officials from both parties .
 All four men had been part of the Nixon Administration during the Watergate scandal . The Watergate scandal involved numerous veterans of the anti-Castro plots, including those linked to the Mafia .
 Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli had the most to fear if their roles in JFK’s assassination were exposed by the Congressional investigations . Of course, the most of the three men to fear would be exposed if their role was exposed .
 The godfathers would try to prevent that at any cost, even if it meant murdering some of their own . They would want to stop it happening, even though it might kill their own people .
 The Rockefeller Commission issued its final report on June 11, 1975 . The Senate Church Committee intensified its efforts to investigate the church .
 On June 13, the Church Committee again grilled Helms, this time exclusively about CIA assassination plots, including those with the Mafia . Helms was grilled by the committee again on June 13 .
 He testified in closed session, so the public had no way of knowing what he said or didn't say .
 Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante would have been extremely concerned, since Helms’s revelations about the ClA—Mafia plots could lead to the exposure of their roles in JFK's murder . The two men would be extremely concerned that their roles could be exposed .
 Trafficante had the most to lose, since he’d played a much bigger role in the C[A—Mafia plots . Trafficante was the most likely to lose in the short term, but he had a bigger role to lose .
 Trafficante would have been especially worried when Sam Giancana was subpoenaed and slated to testify on June 26 . Trafficante says he's worried about the subpoena of Sam Giancanas .
 Sam Giancana was the first of several Congressional witnesses to be murdered in 1975 . He was a Congressional witness to the Watergate scandal . He became a witness to Watergate .
 The former mob boss was cooking a late-night meal for a trusted friend visiting his home in Chicago’s Oak Park neighborhood . He was cooking for the friend at his home .
 His friend shot Giancana seven times with a silenced .22-caliber pistol, an unusually small gun for a mob hit . The victim was shot seven times by a friend who was part of a mob mob hit in the 1980s . The friend's friend was also killed in the
 Five of the shots were around Giancana’s chin and mouth, a sign that Mafiosi shouldn’t talk . Five of those shots were shot in the head and mouth . Five shots were aimed at the mouth .
 The gun was eventually traced to Florida, and some pointed the finger at Trafficante . Trafficante is accused of carrying out the crime in Florida .
 One government informant, Charles Crimaldi, said Giancana was killed by someone who worked for the CIA . The hit man was acting on his own and not at the request of officials .
 The hit man could have been someone with ties to both the mob and the CIA . Since several CIA assets and officials also worked with the Mafia, the hit man may have ties to the Agency .
 Giancana’s murder made headlines across the country, adding urgency to the Committees’ investigations . The Committees' investigations have been launched by the Committees of Investigation into the murder of Giancanella Giancani .
 The day after Giancana’s death, CIA Director William Colby testified about CIA assassination plots . Four days later, Johnny Rosselli also testified about assassination plots, followed by Colby .
 Rosselli had mastered the art of saying a lot while revealing little, sticking to an incomplete version of the CIA—Mafia plots that mirrored the whitewashed version Helms had promulgated in his own testimony and in the 1967 Inspector General’s Report . The transcripts were
 On June 25, William Harvey testified to the Church Committee about the CIA—Mafia plots, followed by more testimony from Helms on July 17 and 18 . Helms testified in closed sessions .
 Jack Anderson wrote once more about Rosselli on July 7 . Time magazine ran an article touching on the original 1959 ClA—Mafia plots that Jimmy Hoffa had brokered .
 Hoffa was now in the crosshairs of the Committee, because of Time’s article about the 1959 CIA—Mafia plots . The Committee of the House of Representatives is now investigating the case .
 Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficane couldn’t afford to let Hoffa testify, continue his leaks to Committee staff, or continue his efforts to rejoin the Teamsters . The two men couldn't afford to allow Hoffa to testify or continue to leak to the Committee
 Marcello summoned Hoffa to Churchill Farms for a conference shortly before his disappearance, but Hoffa refused to back down . According to the CAMTEX FBI file, Hoffa's disappearance was the result of his death .
 Jimmy Hoffa was spotted leaving a restaurant near Detroit, headed for what he thought was a meeting with New Jersey mobster Tony Provenzano . He thought he was meeting with an associate of Carlos Marcello’s .
 Hoffa was killed the same day Senator George McGovern released to the United States news media an updated copy of the Cuban Dossier of CIA assassination attempts against Castro . Senator McGovern had recently received in Cuba, which McGovern was studying in Cuba .
 Johnny Rosselli used Jack Anderson to ensure he didn’t meet the same fate as Giancana and Hoffa . The Italian legend used Anderson to make sure he didn't meet the fate of the two men .
 Anderson’s September 1, 1975, column claimed that Rosselli had avoided deportation because of his war record . Anderson said he was helping to show Trafficante and Marcello that he wasn’t getting preferential INS treatment because he was testifying .
 Rosselli was back in front of the Church Committee on September 22, ten days after Helms had faced the Committee yet again . Helms was back before the Committee again in September . The Committee held a hearing on the issue on September 25, 2013 .
 Trafficante’s old associate Rolando Masferrer was killed in a spectacular car bombing on October 31, 1975 . Trafficante was on the fringe of the JFK plot, but was killed by a car bombing .
 His death could have been related to the Church Committee hearings or to the general upsurge of violence in Miami’s exile community, fueled by politics .
 A current article about JFK’s assassination was on his desk when he died . Masferrer was a member of the staff at the White House .
 John Martino, Masferrer’s mutual associate with Trafficante, died of natural causes on August 3, 1975, three days after Hoffa disappeared . Martino died three days later .
 Martino confessed his role in JFK's murder to two friends, his business partner and reporter John Cummings . Martino was in declining health, Martino had finally confessed to the murder to friends .
 The Church Committee apparently never learned about Martino or his published Statements about the Kennedys’ 1963 coup and invasion plan . Martino’s published statements about the 1963 coup were published by the Church Committee .
 William Harvey, who had already testified to the Church Committee, died on June 9, 1976 . Harvey had not revealed all he knew about the CIA—Mafia plots .
 In addition to the main Senate Church Committee, there was a subcommittee with Senators Gary Hart and Richard Schweiker that was devoted exclusively to exploring JFK's assassination .
 Schweiker was determined to forge ahead with the investigation, which included the possibility of more interrogation of Johnny Rosselli . Their report was issued on June 23, 1976, but Schweiker forged ahead .
 JFK reportedly gave investigators Santo Trafficante's name in relation to JFK's assassination . During intense questioning, he had reportedly given investigators the name of Trafficante . He had reportedly told investigators that Trafficante’s name was in relation .
 Rosselli had to explain to Wadden why that, or further testimony, was so dangerous . Wadden's testimony was not the first time he had been allowed to testify in court .
 According to historian Richard Mahoney, Rosselli confessed to Wadden his “role in plotting to kill the President” Wadden revealed only much later, to RFK’s former Mafia prosecutor William Hundley . Wadden also revealed his confession to Wundley
 On July 16, 1976, Rosselli had dinner with Trafficante and told the godfather he’d had to mention his name during his most recent testimony . Trafficante was the victim of a drug war in the 1970s and '80s .
 Rosselli was seen alive in public for the last time in July 1976 . Twelve days later, on July 28, 1976, he was seen in public again .
 Senator Schweiker asked the FBI to look into the matter . Once it was clear Rosselli was missing, the FBI was looking into the case .
 Rosselli’s body finally turned up on August 7, 1976, in a fifty-five-gallon oil drum . The body was found in a canal near Miami .
 Rosselli had been shot and stabbed, his legs cut off, and his body stuffed in the oil drum . Rosselleri was found stuffed in an oil drum after being shot, stabbed and cut off .
 It was shot with holes so it wouldn't float, then weighted with chains, but somehow it was still discovered . It was then weighted by chains but somehow managed to float again .
 The police were officially baffled, and E Howard Hunt suggested that Fidel had killed Rosselli . Hunt suggested Fidel had been killed .
 Three of Rosselli’s associates said Trafficante had ordered the gruesome slaying . However, three of the associates said that Trafficante ordered the killing .
 Rosselli’s murder was the kind of headline news that even the most jaded or intimidated reporter couldn’t ignore . Jack Anderson revealed information he had to keep secret while he was alive while Rosselly was alive . Jack and Jack Anderson had to hide the information
 Anderson wrote that Rosselli had said those involved in the CIA—Mafia plots had killed JFK . Anderson: Shots from the grassy knoll were part of that plan . Anderson also hinted that shots from the knoll may have been part of the plan .
 The Senate Church Committee hearings had overshadowed those in the House by the Pike Committee . On September 17, 1976, the House created the Select Committee on Assassinations .
 The investigation’s first nine months were hampered by problems in settling on a chief counsel to direct the probe and determining which member of Congress would chair the Committee .
 Not until the summer of 1977 did the House Select Committee finally have its permanent general counsel, G Robert Blakey, creator of the RICO racketeering law . Blakey was a former Mafia prosecutor for Robert Kennedy .
 Santo Trafficante had been interviewed once by the Church Committee, with no record kept at Trafficante’s request . The new House Select Committee will not hold a hearing on the issue .
 Hit man Charles Nicoletti, an associate of Johnny Rosselli’s and a veteran of the CIA—Mafia plots with Trafficante, was slated to talk to Congressional investigators . Nicoletti was a hit man for Trafficante .
 On March 29, 1977, Nicoletti was “the victim of a mob assassination” in Chicago, the Miami Herald reports . Nicoletti died in March 1977 .
 The article mentioned that Nicoletti had once “been responsible for drawing up CIA-ordered plans for the assassination of Castro in October, 1963,” though at that time, Nicoletti’s mob superiors were far more focused on assassinating JFK than Castro .
 Gaeton Fonzi, an investigator for the Church Committee, had gone to work for the new House Select Committee on Assassinations . He had previously worked for the House of Representatives .
 On the same day that Nicoletti died, Fonzi was in south Florida to interview George DeMohrenschildt, the sophisticated White Russian who had been Oswald’s best friend for a time . On that day, he was in Florida to talk to De Mohrenschild
 DeMohrenschildt told a Wall Street Journal writer he'd informed Dallas CIA official J Walton Moore about Oswald’s activities . Even as Fonzi was arranging the interview, he was meeting with a writer for the Wall Street .
 DeMohrenschildt committed suicide by putting the barrel of a .20-gauge shotgun in his mouth and pulling the trigger . Fonzi was the last person to meet Fonzie Fonzio .
 Fonzi had also planned to set up an interview with former Cuban president Carlos Prio . Prio is also an associate of Trafficante’s .
 On April 5, 1977, before Fonzi could interview him, Prio shot himself in the heart with a .38 pistol . Prio committed suicide by shooting himself in 1977 .
 Fonzi tried to arrange an interview with Cuban exile Manuel Artime after being tipped that Artime had ‘guilty knowledge’ of JFK’s assassination . Artime is a Cuban exile who is accused of having knowledge of JFK's assassination .
 E Howard Hunt’s best friend was a supplier of “hush money” to Hunt and the other Watergate burglars . Artime had become a player in Miami's exploding drug market . Hunt was Hunt's best friend and source of "hush cash"
 Fonzi’s partner talked to Artime in early November about scheduling an interview . Artime entered the hospital the following week, was diagnosed with cancer, and died two weeks later, on November 18, 1977, at only forty-five .
 The following spring, Fonzi tried to track down David Morales, though the CIA made it difficult for the House Select Committee to determine even Morales’s CIA position in 1963 .
 Two weeks after David Atlee Phillips and Antonio Veciana testified to the Select Committee in executive session, Morales died of natural causes . Morales was added to the list of CIA personnel the Committee wanted to interview .
 In less than three years, Congressional investigations had been thwarted by the deaths of at least nine actual or potential witnesses . The deaths of nine witnesses have thwarted Congressional investigations . Congressional investigations have been thwarted .
 Those important witnesses died before they could testify fully or, most cases, testify at all . Most of them died before being able to testify fully, or, in most cases .
 Harry Williams volunteered to talk to the House Select Committee, but he never heard back from them . Williams says he still volunteered to speak to them .
 Richard Helms faced charges about lying to Congress that needed to be resolved before he could testify to Congress . Helms was charged with perjury, but the charges were dropped before he was cleared .
 Helms agreed to plead guilty to making a false statement to Congress in 1977 . Helms was fined $2,000 on November 4, 1977 .
 Later that day, he went to a CIA reception where his current and former CIA colleagues donated an even larger amount . The reception was attended by members of the CIA .
 Santo Trafficante had primarily pleaded the Fifth in his first House Select Committee appearance on March 16, 1977 . Blakey arranged to grant him and Marcello limited immunity, in an effort to get them to talk . The two men were granted limited immunity by the committee .
 Trafficante was under indictment for charges relating to the FBI’s BRILAB investigation, which had grown out of the Watergate-era prosecution of Richard Kleindienst . Trafficante had been indicted for his role in Watergate-related Watergate-style prosecution of Nixon's former attorney
 Carlos Marcello didn't realize his new business partner, Joe Hauser, would soon be a wired FBI informant for that operation . Carlos Marcelo didn’t realize his business partner was soon being a wired informant for the operation .
 Trafficante testified on November 14, 1977, and September 28, 1978, respectively . Marcello testified in January 1978 . Trafficante was convicted of attempted murder in 1978 .
 JFK's killers denied having anything to do with JFK’s murder . Both men gave cautious statements and denied having any involvement in JFK's murder .
 The same month that Trafficante testified for the last time, author Dan Moldea had a revealing exchange with Frank Ragano, Trafficante’s former attorney who had gone through an acrimonious split with the Tampa godfather .
 Ragano had offered Moldea a large sum for the rights to his book . Possibly as part of a Teamster effort to suppress Moldea’s book, Ragano offered a big sum for it .
 Moldea had his attorney ask Ragano about his book's theory that Hoffa, Marcello, and Trafficante were behind JFK's murder . Moldea's book was published in 1978 .
 Bernard Barker was investigated by the House Select Committee on Assassinations in 1978 . Barker had been released from prison for his Watergate crimes in June 1974 .
 Even more senior CIA figures like Richard Helms, E Howard Hunt, and David Atlee Phillips have been released in full . That is highly unusual, since even the testimony of far more senior figures has been released .
 For CIA figures, testimony can be released with any sensitive terms or identities censored . Barker's testimony is remarkable that all of his Committee testimony remains secret .
 Even though the Committee conducted an investigation of Barker, it's not mentioned in the Committee’s Final Report or in any of their supporting volumes . Barker's investigation was conducted by the Committee .
 The FBI report of Barker’s gangster activity in Cuba may not have been provided to the Committee . However, the memorandum does not mention the FBI report .
 There is no indication in the memo that the Committee investigated Barker’s Mafia ties .
 The CIA withheld much material from the Committee about the roles of Barker in the JEK—Almeida coup plan and the CIA—Mafia plots . The Committee also withheld much of the information from the CIA about Barker's role in the plot .
 CIA officer George Joannides was assigned to be the Agency’s new liasion with the House Select Committee . A short time later, he was assigned a CIA officer with the Committee .
 Joannides had worked with David Atlee Phillips in 1963, running the DRE exile group involved in the altercation with Oswald . Joannide worked with Phillips in the exile group .
 The Committee wanted to interview the CIA agent running the DRE in 1963, but Joannides claimed he couldn’t be found . The Committee was unable to interview him .
 CIA official, probably Ted Shackley, was using the excuse of protecting Almeida to withhold important information from the Committee . It appears that some high CIA official was using Joannides as an excuse to withhold information .
 Acoustic tests indicated there had been at least one shot from the grassy knoll . House Select Committee on Assassinations rushed to finish its work on the JFK assassination .
 The highly technical findings have been the source of much debate ever since, so I have not factored them into my conclusions . I have been unable to factore in my conclusions about the findings .
 The House Committee concluded in 1979 that JFK's murder was likely a conspiracy involving at least one shot from the grassy knoll . The House of Representatives' final report concluded that the assassination was a conspiracy .
 Trafficante, like Marcello, had the motive, means, and opportunity to assassinate President Kennedy . Trafficante had the opportunity to kill President Kennedy, the Committee found .
 Investigator Gaeton Fonzi later wrote a book-length account of all the Agency stonewalling the Committee had faced, called The Last Investigation .
 The Committee also recommended the Justice Department investigate the possible involvement of Marcello and Trafficante in JFK’s murder .
 Marcello was feeling the full force of the FBI’s BRILAB undercover operation in 1981 . The operation was part of an FBI investigation into Marcellos' involvement in the 1980s .
 Marcello was under indictment in Louisiana for trying to bribe state officials in a multimilliondollar insurance scam . He was facing the biggest legal battle of his life, facing a possible life-long legal battle .
 In Los Angeles, he’d been indicted for trying to bribe a federal judge . He’s been indicted in Los Angeles .
 Much of the evidence was in the godfather’s own words, recorded by a bug and phone taps the FBI had finally placed in Marcello's office at the Town and Country Motel . Even worse, much of the incriminating evidence was recorded by the FBI .
 He was aided by two undercover FBI agents, who pretended to be crooked businessmen . The FBI agent was involved in the operation .
 In Miami, Santo Trafficante was under indictment for a $1 million labor union fraud scheme . He was also under indictment in Miami, Florida, for a labor union scheme . In the U.S., he was indicted in a labor fraud scheme in Miami .
 Trafficante and Marcello were also hit with RICO racketeering charges . The statute that G Robert Blakey had helped create was created by Blakey . Trafficante was also charged with racketeering using the statute .
 Trafficante would avoid conviction, but Marcello’s luck had finally run out . Trafficante's luck had run out. Trafficante was acquitted of any charges against him .
 Marcello’s lawyers were barred from the trial, at the request of his lawyers, so they wouldn’t prejudice the jury . They weren't mentioned in the press and were barred . They were not mentioned in press and barred from trial .
 The jury was able to hear hours of Marcello discussing the blatant corruption and crimes he had been committing for years . Still, the jury heard hours of hours of testimony . The jury could hear hours and a half of the testimony .
 Marcello was convicted in Louisiana on August 4, 1981, and in Los Angeles on December 11, 1981 . He was found guilty in both Louisiana and Los Angeles in 1981 .
 The following year, he was sentenced to seven years for the Louisiana counts and ten years for Los Angeles counts . He was sentenced in Louisiana and Los Angeles .
 Marcello’s BRILAB appeal was denied and he was ordered to begin serving his sentence immediately . His powerful attorneys did everything they could, but on April 15, 1983, he was denied .
 The prison and its park-like grounds were designated as level one, meaning it was one of the least secure and most comfortable federal prisons . The prison is located in a federal park on the lower level .
 Marcello was transferred to the far more secure federal prison in Texarkana, Texas . He was moved to a level-three facility where most prisoners had few comforts . After a year, he was transferred .
 Marcello was not like most other prisoners, and soon found ways to receive extraordinary privileges . He soon became a prisoner of his own, and he soon had access to all kinds of privileges .
 Jack Van Laningham was Carlos Marcello's cellmate at Texarkana, as part of the FBI’s highly secret CAMTEX undercover operation . He was part of a highly secret operation in the 1980s .
 Van Laningham had placed a court-authorized, bugged transistor radio in their cell, and the Bureau was recording everything they said there . The Bureau had placed the radio in the cell, recording everything the two said there.
 Agent Tom Kirk pretended to be a sleazy businessman with a friend in the Bureau of Prisons . The right price could get Marcello transferred to a nicer prison and, eventually, even released .
 While Carlos was in prison, his younger brother, Joe* ran the parts of Carlos’s empire that the godfather couldn’t run from prison . Joe* is Carlos's younger brother and godfather to him .
 Van Laningham tried to mollify the godfather and reassured him his secret was safe, all while knowing the FBI was recording their coversation through the bugged transitor radio .
 Van Laningham was even more nervous about his undercover role after Marcello’s admission . He said he was nervous about the undercover role in the wake of the admission .
 Marcello’s family had paid the first bribe, and the godfather wanted Jack to be the first to go to the nicer level-two Seagoville Prison near Dallas, Texas . Jack would join him in a few days later . Jack's family wanted him to
 The next time Marcello brought up the Kennedys, Jack encouraged him to talk about his hatred of the family . Jack encouraged the next time they were in their cell, Jack said, "Marcello's deportation is not an easy one."
 Marcello made a few more revelations about the assassination, including the two hitmen he imported from Europe, which were all recorded by the FBI’s bugged radio . That resulted in the two more revelations, including that the FBI had bugged them .
 He said we have become good friends and I want to tell you a story; he said he was dead serious and I was scared. He said he wanted to talk to me about the situation . He said: "He said we were good friends. He wanted to tell me a story
 He was telling me that if I crossed him, the grass would grow over me, as I would be dead, he said . He was also telling me he was afraid to cross him, as he would be killed .
 A final bribe was to be paid to Kirk, for Marcello’s early release from prison . After the godfather was moved to Fort Worth, a final bribe—$1 million—was to be made to Kirk . Kirk was also paid $1 million to Kirk for
 Marcello complained to Van Laningham about the ‘running of his organization,” by his brother, Joe Marcella, who lacked the ability to run such a huge criminal empire, he said . He complained about the "running" of the organization by Joe Mar
 Marcello’s family member paid a bribe to get him moved to the Fort Worth facility . Marcella was moved to a facility in Fort Worth, Texas .
 Joe Marcello was supposed to pay the final bribe to get his brother out of prison . However, when it came to pay it, it wasn't paid .
 While in prison, his old partner Santo Trafficante made a startling confession to his old attorney . The confession was made to the attorney of the convicted murderer .
 Trafficante called Frank Ragano to arrange a meeting for the following day . Trafficante died in March 1987 at the age of 70 .
 Trafficante had brought Ragano back into the fold, after smoothing over their acrimonious split in the 1970s . Ragano had helped Trafficante beat a federal RICO prosecution in 1986 .
 The Tampa godfather had fallen seriously ill, was facing risky surgery, and wanted to talk to his old confidant one last time . He wanted to speak to him again, but he was too ill to call him .
 Trafficante mused about his criminal career and their long association with Ragano . Trafficante: "It's a good thing that I'm not going to be in prison," Trafficante said .
 Trafficante told Trafficante that when the subject of John and Robert Kennedy came up, Trafficante said, “Goddam Bobby.” Ragano said . Trafficante also said that John Kennedy was a good friend .
 Ragano later claimed he was stunned that Trafficante was admitting a role in JFK’s murder . Ragano said Trafficante admitted to the murder of JFK . Trafficante pleaded guilty to JFK's murder .
 Ragano held a news conference in front of the Trafficante family home in Tampa’s posh Parkland Estates . Ragano is accused of stabbing Trafficante Trafficante to death .
 Ragano mentioned his meeting with Trafficante four days earlier, as documented in a Tampa Tribune article published the following day . In discussing Trafficante's illness, Ragano said he met Trafficante just four days before .
 Ragano wouldn’t reveal Trafficante’s confession to the public until 1992 . Trafficante's confession wasn't revealed until his 1994 autobiography was published in 1994 .
 Trafficante's family remained silent when Ragano’s allegation first surfaced, but in 1994 they denied it to Anthony Summers and other journalists . In 1994, Trafficante family denied Ragano's account to reporters .
 Ragano says Trafficante was receiving medical treatment in Miami on March 13 and therefore couldn't have been in Tampa, where he says he met with Trafficante . Ragano: Trafficante had been in Miami receiving treatment in March 13, therefore can't be in Tampa .
 Medical records show Trafficante was in Miami receiving dialysis on March 12 and March 14 . However, no medical records place him there on March 13 . Trafficante says he received dialysis in Miami on March 14 and March 12 .
 By May 21, 1987, it was clear that Marcello’s family was never going to pay the final bribe for his release . Marcella's family never went to pay a bribe to get him out .
 That night, federal marshals removed Marcello from his comfortable room at the Fort Worth prison . Federal marshals remove him from the prison room .
 Marcello's move from level-one Fort Worth to level-three Texarkana must have seemed like a nightmare . The sudden move was a nightmare for his family and attorneys .
 Kirk's undercover role for CAMTEX had ended, but his undercover role had ended . They no doubt tried to contact Kirk for an explanation, but he had already ended .
 Carlos Marcello would have been a crushing, devastating blow to his career if he had been allowed to leave the club . The move would be a crushing blow to Marcellos, who has been with the club for more than a decade .
 Joe Marcello's friend was not a criminal, just a salesman who dealt with one of his brother’s businesses in the mid-1980s . The friend was a salesman for one of the legitimate businesses he managed for his brother's empire .
 The salesman and his family were with Joe Marcello at his restaurant one afternoon, for a holiday meal . The salesman's family was at the restaurant for the holiday meal with Joe .
 The salesman thought it odd that Joe would have such a meal with him, instead of with his family . Joe thought Joe would be odd that he had such an unusual meal with Joe instead of family .
 Someone came out from the back of the restaurant and whispered to Joe Marcello, the author of the book . The book was published in the fall of 2008 .
 Joe excused himself, and an unusually long amount of time passed, more than an hour, with no sign of Joe . Joe excuses himself, but no one appears to notice him for an hour before he leaves .
 The salesman thought it so unusual that he told another family member about it . Joe said nothing more, but the salesman said it was so unusual he told someone else .
 JACK VAN LANINGHAM knew nothing about that, when he called Carlos Marcello’s office in April 1988, shortly after Easter . He knew nothing when he phoned Carlos Marcells’ office in 1988 .
 Van Laningham, still in prison in California, was simply curious about what had happened to Marcello . He assumed his secret was still safe and assumed it was safe .
 Van Laningham was frantic and remembered Marcello’s threat to him, after the godfather's outburst about ordering JFK's assassination . The godfather had threatened to kill JFK, but the threat was ignored .
 He knew enough about Marcello’s associates and connections to realize he was in danger, especially while he remained in prison, he says . He says he knew enough to realize that he could be in danger .
 Fearing for his life, Van Laningham wrote the first of a series of increasingly frantic letters to the Justice Department in Washington . The letters were sent to the Department of Justice in Washington, DC .
 He listed the important information he had obtained for the FBI, including Marcello’s JFK confession, among others . He also listed the information he'd obtained from the FBI .
 Van Laningham: Kirk told me during the investigation that the Attorney General knew what was going on . Kirk told him during the probe that he knew what had been going on, he said . Kirk said to have been involved in the investigation .
 Van Laningham also told the Justice Department, “Marcello knows all about what we did to him.” ‘Marcell’s lawyer says he is “absolutely sure” that Marcello is innocent .
 Van Laningham volunteered to take a lie-detector test about Marcello’s JFK confession . He also volunteered to test a lie detector about the confession .
 Van Laningham threatened to tell the news media about his FBI work and about the Justice Department’s reluctance to prosecute Carlos Marcello or his brother . He also threatened to speak to the media about the decision to not prosecute Carlos and his brother.
 John H Davis had been in contact with the FBI regarding his upcoming biography of Carlos Marcello, scheduled for release in January 1989, since he was seeking the release of FBI files and BRILAB surveillance tapes .
 PBS and journalist Jack Anderson were also working on major television specials for the twenty-fifth anniversary of JFK’s assassination in November 1988 .
 A high official in the Reagan—Bush Justice Department apparently decided it was better not to add Van Laningham’s explosive Marcello confession to the mix . The decision was made by a high-ranking official .
 By September 1988, Van Laningham had been given a firm release date in January 1989, ending any talk of his going to the press . Davis’s book was published by January 1989 . Davis's book is due to be released in January 1990 .
 Two television specials aired around November 22, 1988, featuring information about the Mafia . Two specifically highlighted Marcello .
 Marcello's confession was part of a trove of secret reports and tapes that included his confession . None of the journalists knew the FBI was sitting on the tapes and reports .
 It focused extensively on Marcello, Trafficante, and especially Rosselli, though it sometimes appeared to endorse the false claim that Castro was involved in JFK’s murder .
 Anderson’s documentary revealed that much information—especially from the CI[A—remained unreleased . Anderson's documentary reveals that much of the information remained unreleased. Anderson's film, "The Assassination of the Columbine Columbines," airs on PBS at 9 p.
 His special, and the other programs and articles that appeared by November 22, 1988, started to generate a movement calling for the release of all the JFK assassination files . His special and other programs, and other articles, generated a movement .
 Unlike most other books and articles published at the time, it presented Marcello not as one of many suspects in JFK’s murder but as THE suspect . The book was published in the 1980s .
 Even with so much material still withheld, Davis came remarkably close to outlining how Marcello had murdered JFK, something that would have seriously alarmed him and his men . Davis came close to describing the assassination of JFK JFK, but would have alarmed the CIA .
 The attention generated by the twenty-fifth anniversary coverage reignited public interest in JFK’s murder, eventually leading to action by Congress . Essentially, the attention generated .
 In January 1989, Jack Van Laningham was paroled from federal prison and sent to a halfway house in Tampa, Florida, where Trafficante’s mob family was still active . Trafficante's mob family still active in Tampa .
 Carlos Marcello made a call to his office, in hopes of reaching some type of accommodation . The situation has not been resolved, but he hopes to reach some sort of accommodation with the former footballer .
 Jack Ruby met with Jack Ruby six weeks before JFK’s murder . The organization was still being run by Joe Marcello and underbosses like Frank Caracci .
 A few days after his call to Marcello’s office, Van Laningham had left work and was walking back to the halfway house . He had been in a halfway house for a month . Van Lanedham was arrested in December .
 The two looked like mob “torpedoes” but initially seemed as if they were going to give him something—until they began savagely beating him . The two initially seemed to be looking like they were giving him something, but then began beating him up .
 One of the men held the stunned Van Laningham on the ground, the other looked around and went back to the car to get his gun . The two men then looked around, seeing no one in the area, went back and grabbed the gun .
 Van Laningham was lying on the ground when a car pulled onto the street . The driver of the car called out and called out, and the driver called out .
 The two hitmen jumped in their car and sped off while the driver helped him to his feet . The driver helped the hitman to get back on his feet, but the hitmen sped off .
 Van Laningham was helping the Tampa FBI at the time of the attack . He reported the attack to them, and he reported it .
 The FBI gave Van Laningham a lie-detector test, not only about the attack but also about Carlos Marcello’s JFK confession, and he passed . He passed the test, and the FBI also gave him a lie detector test .
 He was eventually released from parole and kept a low profile for twenty years . He was finally located by NBC News, to appear in a 2009 special that NBC produced for the Discovery Channel .
 Carlos Marcello also had the first of several small strokes in January 1989 . Carlos had several strokes in his life .
 The godfather was transferred to Rochester, Minnesota’s, Medical Center for federal prisoners . His godfather is now in a federal prison .
 Apparently, the Bureau didn’t question Marcello at that time about his earlier remarks to Van Laningham . The Bureau of Standards didn't question him about the remarks .
 By that time, the debilitating effects of Marcello’s strokes, compounded by Alzheimer's, were clear . By the time he died, the effects of the strokes were clear, and he died of Alzheimer's . He was diagnosed with the disease in 1992 .
 One of the CAMTEX FBI officials told us he had not noticed any signs of the latter four years earlier, while listening to all of the Bureau's undercover Marcello tapes .
 Agent Kimmel said he thought a few of Marcello’s remarks showed such indications . However, they weren’t enough to stop the dangerous CAMTEX undercover operation . The operation continued until May 1987 .
 It’s important to note that both Van Laningham and Agent Kirk were risking their lives for the FBI at that time . Something the Bureau would not have allowed if Marcello had shown serious signs of being senile . The FBI wouldn't have allowed such a move if
 Marcello’s statements, noted by Van Laningham in the FBI files, are usually accurate and consistent with facts not well known at the time . Marcella's statements are often accurate, according to FBI files .
 Van Laningham said Marcello was mentally ‘sharp’ with no signs of Alzheimer’s while he knew him . He said he had no Alzheimer's symptoms, and showed a firm grasp of complex criminal matters in 1985 and 1986 accounts .
 The earliest documented sign of Alzheimer’s was noted by John H Davis, who indicated that by . January 1, 1988, those visiting Marcello had begun to notice signs of the disease .
 Carlos Marcello was released from prison on October 6, 1989, after his BRILAB conviction was reversed unexpectedly unexpectedly . Marcella was released after his conviction was overturned unexpectedly .
 The government decided not to retry him, so Marcello, increasingly incapacitated from the strokes and his Alzheimer’s, returned to Louisiana . He was left incapacitated by the stroke and Alzheimer's .
 By the time of his strokes, Marcello’s empire had begun to break apart . The empire was beginning to be broken apart .
 Carlos Marcello died on March 2, 1993, at age eighty-three . After spending his final years at home, his mind ravaged increasingly by disease and strokes .
 He reportedly died peacefully at his home, a far cry from the bloody executions he had ordered for so many victims . The executioner's death was reportedly peaceful .
 Commander Juan Almeida was still a revered figure in the Cuban government, and his secret work for JFK had not been exposed . In 1989, Commander Juan was still revered in Cuba .
 Some of his protéégés were caught up in a major drug scandal in 1989 .
 Almeida largely disappeared from view in Cuba after the trials . One may have bartered for his life .
 There was no official explanation, though Almeida’s absence was noted by exiles and journalists . No official explanation was given for his absence .
 JFK's Secretary of State Dean Rusk first revealed JFK’s fall 1963 coup plan to me . It was after Almeida's disappearance, Rusk revealed the plan to JFK . Rusk was JFK's secretary of state and JFK's CIA director .
 Harry Williams began telling Thom Hartman and me details of the coup plan . With Almeida assumed dead, with the 1992 passing of former exile Tony Varona, Harry Williams told Thom Hartmann .
 Williams revealed Bernard Barker’s work for Trafficante, and that he eventually learned both were involved in JFK's assassination . Williams revealed that he learned both Barker and Trafficante were involved .
 Williams for the first time also named Almeida, whose identity as the coup leader was soon confirmed by a former JFK and RFK associate who later became a prominent Washington official . Williams also named the man who led the coup as the leader .
 In November 1994, I informed the Review Board very generally about JFK’s 1963 ‘plans for a coup in Cuba,” without revealing Almeida’�s identity . In 1994, he told the board about JFK's 1963 “plans’
 By 1995, Commander Almeida had resurfaced in Cuba, perhaps because his presence was needed to help stabilize the country . Cuba was in dire financial straits after the fall of the Soviet empire .
 No official explanation for Almeida’s return, or his several-year fall from grace, was ever given .
 Harry Williams passed away on March 10, 1996, after Thom and I had extensively interviewed him as a confidential source more than half a dozen times . Thom and Thom had interviewed Williams as confidential source several times before .
 CIA and FBI files remain unreleased, but he lived to see a few declassified AMWORLD memos about himself . They detailed and confirmed information he had first revealed to us four years earlier .
 In 1997, the Review Board declassified hundreds of pages of military files about JFK’s 1963 “Plans for a Coup in Cuba” from the files of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Joseph Califano . They referred only generally to the high-ranking Cuban military officials
 JFK Review Board official tried to get information naming Almeida and AMWORLD released, but it wasn't released . Almeidia's lawyer says he was contacted by an official in late 1997 and 1998, who contacted him .
 The Board’s mandate expired in September 1998, and though it had declassified more than 4. million files, NBC News reported on September 29, 1998, that “millions” of pages remain unreleased .
 Phillips grew up in Fort Worth and had friends and former classmates in the area . It's hard to believe Phillips would have met Lee Oswald in public, in Dallas, less than three months before JFK’s murder .
 Only the release of the remaining JFK assassination files might clarify the matter . As with William Harvey, and E Howard Hunt, only the release may clarify the issue .
 Richard Helms died on October 23, 2002, having successfully maintained his decades-long cover-up in the public eye . Helms had largely rebuilt his reputation in the process .
 Hunt limited his JFK assassination comments in his book to speculation . Some of his comments were inconsistent with remarks he made to his son in a so-called “confession” tape . Hunt said some of his JFK comments in the book were not consistent with his son's statements .
 Hunt tried to make millions selling his story to actor Kevin Costner before his death . Hunt speculated about a large conspiracy that could have included LBJ, Cord Meyer, William Harvey, David Phillips, David Morales, Frank Fiorini, and French hit man Lucien Sarti .
 Hunt never mentioned the documented Mafia ties of his best friend Manuel Artime and former assistant Barker, or their work on the CIA—Mafia plots . Hunt's father never mentioned in his autobiography or in his son’s tape .
 Whether Hunt was involved in the assassination, or was used by Barker on behalf of Trafficante, might only be known when the remaining JFK assassination files are released . The remaining assassination files will be released in the fall .
 Commander Almeida passed away in Cuba on September 11, 2009, with his work for John and Robert Kennedy never having been publicly exposed to the Cuban people . He was a hero for the Kennedy family .
 In the last years of Almeida's life, after Fidel Castro’s illness forced him to step down, he had very high profile in Cuba . In the late years of his life, he was a prominent figure in the Cuban government .
 Former exile leader Eloy Menoyo was released in 1986, the same year Senator Edward Kennedy engineered the release of the last Bay of Pigs prisoner . After serving twenty-one years in a Cuban prison, former exile leader was released .
 Former exile leaders Manolo Ray and Antonio Veciana are still alive, in Miami and Puerto Rico, respectively .
 Several Cuban-exile military veterans of AMWORLD and JFK’s Cuban-American training at Fort Benning have formed CAMCO, an outreach to military leaders inside Cuba . CAMCO is a group that aims to reach out to Cuban military leaders .
 The U.S. and Cuba have been withholding JFK assassination files for years . JFK files are still withheld from the U.K. government . The files could be used to help normalize relations with Cuba .
 The respected Washington think tank OMB Watch found that “well over one million CIA records” pertaining to JFK’s assassination remain unreleased . “Over one million records’ pertaining to the assassination remain unreleased, the think tank said .
 Despite a 1992 law requiring their release, the CIA intends to keep those records secret until at least 2017 . The CIA has reserved the right in court filings to keep them secret even longer .
 With Almeida’s death, there is no longer any legitimate national security reason for so many files to be withheld . The files are no longer being withheld, officials say .
 As of September 16, 2013, the National Archives has refused to tell the public or journalists exactly how many JFK assassination files are still secret .
 Until all the files are released, former officials and CIA personnel will continue to say or imply that Fidel killed JFK . This perpetuates the fifty-plus-year Cold War with Cuba .
 Only public pressure on Congress and White House can get the remaining JFK files released . Public pressure is needed to get the documents released .
 Abraham Bolden is still fighting for a pardon after almost fifty years . The framed ex-Secret Service Agent is fighting for his last chance of justice .
 This memo refers to the FBI’s CAMTEX undercover operation that targeted godfather Carlos Marcello in prison, and obtained his confession to JFK's murder . The operation was part of an FBI operation that obtained the confession .
 The secret coup plan, and the code-name for part of it, was withheld from the Warren Commission and the five later U.S. government committees that investigated JFK’s murder .
 John V Martino was sware of the article which had appeared in the Memphis, Tennessee, ""Press-Scimitar,"" on January 30, 1964 . Martino, born August 3, 1911, at Atianeie City, New Jarsey .
 Mr Martino said he had been interviewed by Kay Pittwan of the ""Press-Seimitar"" on the day before he gave a lecture in Memphis om the situation fm Cuba .
 Mr Martino gatd Lt bad been completely twisted by the raporcer, and he had reprimanded her for it . With regard to the content of the newspaper .
 He said he had never stated that Osweld had been paid to assassinate Prysicent Kennedy . He said, specificslly, that he did not say he had ever stated that he had been involved .
 He said he does not work with the Cuban underground, es quoted in the ercicle . He has sources of information concerning activities in Cuba .
 He seid he was quoted correctly in the statement that his sources informed him that President Kennedy was engeged in a plot to overthrow the Castro regime by preparing another invasion attempt against Cuba .
 This is a selected Annotated Bibliography of the source material used in The Hidden History of the JFK Assasssination . Martine refused to cGivuige the sources of his information or how they might know what plans President Kennedy might Rave had .
 The exact source for most quotes can be found using Google . Far more books, documents, and articles were consulted than can be listed here .
 My previous books dealing with JFK’s assassination, each had approximately 2,000 endnotes, with almost every paragraph, sometimes every line end noted . Each book deals with JFK's assassination had 2,500 endnotes .
 Book highlights just the most important references, in an easier-to-read format . This book highlights just one of the most significant references in the book . The book is available in the Kindle version of this book .
 More references will be available after November 10, 2013 at thehiddenhistoryofthejfkassassination.com .
 More detailed information about any of the topics covered in this book can be found in earlier books .
 Ultimate Sacrifice covers JFK’s plan for a fall, 1963 coup in Cuba in great detail . Ultimate Sacrifice also covers all of the events leading up to the assassination of JFK .
 Legacy of Secrecy has new material about JFK’s murder especially its aftermath and the cover-ups that followed . JFK's murder was the murder of JFK and the subsequent cover-up .
 Trade paperback of each contains important material not in the hardback editions . Hardback editions of each contain material not included in hardback versions .
 JFK's assassination was an assassination that has stood the test of time . JFK’s assassination was the assassination of JFK's widow, Bobby Kennedy, in 1968 .
 A Google search for documents using some or all of that information will often locate the document . A search for that document can also be used to find a document .
 Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders. and Church Committee Report, Vol. and . Church Committee report, Vol., Vol. of the Church Committee, was published by the Church of Christ .
 This book draws on interviews with more than fifty individuals, conducted over the past 23 years . Interviews with JFK’s Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, in 1990 and continuing through 2013 .
 A dozen interviews were conducted with CAMTEX FBI informant Jack Van Laningham, from August 2009 through 2012 .
 Van Laningham was the subject of a professionally-filmed Oral History, in which he discussed every aspect of CAMTEX and his time with Carlos Marcello over two days . In addition, he was also subject of an Oral History of his time at CAMEX .
 Additional CAMTEX interviews include those with FBI supervisor Thomas Kimmel, FBI official Thomas Kimmel and source with Joe Marcello when Carlos found out Van Laningham was an FBI informant . Additional interviews also include those of another FBI official who heard all of the CAMEX tapes .
 In addition to several talks with Ronald Goldfarb and G. Robert Blakey, others interviewed include Marvin Loewy, Thomas Kennelly, and John Diuguid, Marcello’s Justice Department Prosecutor in November, 1963 .
 Interview with ex-Secret Service Agent Abraham Bolden 4-15-98; Interviews with JFK’s Press Secretary, Pierre Salinger 4-3-98 and 4-10-98 . Phone interviews with Jim Allison, who witnessed Jack Ruby receiving a payoff of approximately $
 Miguel Casas Saez document 1-27-64, F82-0272/1, declassified 8-16-83; CLA memo about Saez released 8/16-93, still partially censored . Saez documents: 1,27,64, 1, F
 The Secret Life of Jack Ruby was published in the New York Times in 1978 .
 Summers, Anthony and Robbyn, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, Dec. 1994 . Summers and Robyns Summers: ‘Ghost of November’
 Hinckle, Warren, and William W Turner. JFK Lancer Productions and Publications, 2010 .
 JFK Lancer Productions, 2005) Lifton, David S Best Evidence: Disguise and Deception in the Assassination of John F Kennedy . Lifton: "Best evidence" in the assassination of JFK was a cover-up .
 This book builds on 25 years of research, and the work that led to my three earlier books about President Kennedy’s life and death . The Secret History of the War on Drugs is published by Edward Snowden .
 When I’d said something as concisely and accurately in a previous book, I sometimes adapted that wording for this book . When I'd said something about it in a new book, it was adapted to suit the needs of the book .
 I want to thank those who helped my previous books come to fruition . So, before I thank the many people who made this book a reality, I . also thank the people who helped me to write this book .
 There isn’t room to name them all, but their efforts are both appreciated and remembered .
 Counterpoint’s founder and CEO, Charlie Winton, has been there to shape and mold all of his books . Counterpoint is Counterpoint, Counterpoint's CEO, and this one is no exception, he says .
 A literary editor in the truest sense of the word, he helps to bring my often diffused work into sharp focus, and it's always the better for it, he says .
 Kelly Winton is following in her father’s footsteps at Counterpoint . Kelly guided an ever-expanding book —that grew by more than 50%—seamlessly through a tight production schedule . Kelly led the book to a 50% growth in production .
 She coordinated an effective team that included Peg Goldstein’s excellent copyediting, Megan Jones’ attractive interior layout, Charles Brock’�s sharp cover design, and Sara Walker’ed proofreading .
 Judy Klein is always working to bring the book to other countries . Publicity expert Lorna Garano is already laying plans to spread the word about the book .
 Brad Strickland, an excellent writer himself, always helps his prose to read more smoothly . Brad's work is published by The Guardian, a collection of essays by author Tom Charity .
 Jack’s son, Craig, allowed me to provide the proof that backs up his amazing story . Thanks also go to Craig, Jack's son, for allowing me to show proof that proves his father's story .
 Thom Hartmann helped with the first six years of research and has remained a staunch supporter and friend ever since . The best research partner anyone could ever have is Thom Hartman .
 Thom Hartmann's wife Louise and producer Shawn Taylor make Thom’s radio and TV shows a pleasure . Check out their many great projects at thomhartmann.com .
 My father, Clyde Waldron, is my partner in the book writing business, and I couldn’t do it without him, says Waldron .
 Robert De Niro will soon bring Jack Van Laningham’s story to the screen . George and Leonardo DiCaprio, and Earl Katz, have also been great supporters of the film adaptation .
 Ron Goldfarb, a long-time friend and supporter, was a great help in getting this book off the ground . Ron Goldfranb was a long time supporter of this book .
 It is truly an international effort, and research help came from Stephane Risset in France, Paul Byrne and John Simkin in England and Kate Willard in Australia .
 Henry Rosenbloom and his crew at Scribe always do a great job in presenting my work in Australia . Henry is a great writer and photographer for Scribe .
 Special thanks is due to several key sources for this book, including Daniel Sheehan, Travis Kiger, Casey Quinlan, Thomas Kimmel, and others who wish to remain anonymous .
 Dan Moldea, Peter Dale Scott, Anthony Summers and Robbyn Swan, the late John H Davis, John Newman, Dick Russell, and William Turner—I encourage our readers to Seek out their work. Seek out the work of these writers.
 Mike Cain was a source of valuable information about the Chicago Mafia . Gordon Winslow is a fountain of information about Cuban exiles . Mike Cain is also a source for valuable information .
 Vince Palamara contributed valuable work about the Secret Service . Larry Hancock and Stuart Wexler are always sharing new discoveries .
 Historian Gerald McKnight demolished the Warren Commission with his book Breach of Trust . He says he didn't have to .
 Liz Smith remains an icon of American journalism, who isn’t afraid to report the truth . Liz Smith is a proud member of journalism’s class of journalists .
 Rex Bradford and the Mary Ferrell Foundation do a remarkable job a making one million assassination files available online . Rex Bradford: One million assassination records have been made available online. Rex Bradford says it's a good step for the public to look at the files .
 National Security Archive and JFK Lancer are great online resources . Also great resources are the National Security Archives and the JFK-Lancer .
 Susan Barrows and Chris Barrows are always unfailingly helpful, while Jim Steranko’s interest and encouragement have been part of this project since the start . Susan and Chris have been unfailable helpful to the project, and Jim Sterankso has always been part
 To all of these great people—and anyone I might have forgotten, I give my warmest thanks for your help .