 Microsociology is the study of everyday interactions in everyday interactions . The study suggests several critical ingredients for a successful interaction, including bodily copresence .
 In this article we interrogate this claim and provide theoretical reasons why textual communication may serve as a proxy for copresence in leader interactions . We also discuss the role of textual communication in a leader's interactions .
 Copresence, in the form of face-to-face interaction, is required for strong bond formation . But mediated interaction can serve to create weak social bonds, study finds .
 The strength of weak bonds is in the reduction of distrust and the gradual development of trust that can be critical to the de-escalation of crises . Trust is the key to the success of a nation's relationship with the U.S. President .
 We conclude by pointing toward an interdisciplinary research agenda on the determinants of social bond formation in diplomacy . We conclude that we are looking at the social bonds of diplomacy .
 Five years later, he was walking alongside Mikhail Gorbachev, shaking hands in the streets of Moscow .
 Reagan and Gorbachev’s own answer to this question was the personal relationship of trust they forged together . Reagan and his own answer is that they forged through letter writing, a breakthrough face-to-face meeting in Geneva .
 Diplomats, ambassadors, and heads of state have long been able to create bonds with one another and develop sophisticated social networks, through non-face-to-face interaction .
 Research highlights the importance of face-to-face interaction for reassuring adversaries . Text-based communication also played a supporting role in the Reagan– Gorbachev case .
 Historically, this modality of communication appears to have played a singular role in reassurance . And historically, it appears, it has played a unique role in such reassurance, the BBC says .
 Letters, cables, and telegrams were the only form of interaction heads of state or diplomats would have with one another . Prior to the advent of telephony and relatively expeditious international travel, letters and cables were often only forms of interaction with diplomats .
 Italian ambassadors, diplomats, and leaders engaged in intricate and complex signaling through many channels, including the development of the structured and strategic diplomatic letter . Much later, in Renaissance diplomacy, Italian ambassadors and diplomats engaged in complex and sophisticated signaling .
 Historically, text communication had to be able to clarify intentions, build trust, and settle disputes, for it was, in some cases, the only way for parties to interact . In short, text messages must clarify intentions and build trust .
 This article investigates whether bonds can form in text-based communication as they do in face-to-face diplomacy . Text-based diplomacy is a form of communication that can form as well as diplomacy .
 We define a process of social bonding as one that involves two individuals changing their understanding of their own and the other’s identity and interests . A process of positive and mutual identification involves a positive, mutual identification .
 We argue that existing research in a variety of disciplines, from psychology to social information processing theory, highlight the ways in which text can serve as a stimulus to imagination, empathy, and behavior adaptation .
 Text text can serve as a proxy for face-to-face interaction and ultimately produce social bonds . Utilizing these insights, we argue that text can be used to help people form social bonds. Text can also be used in the form of text messages, we say .
 The proxy is not a perfect corollary to face-to-face meetings, and therefore the bonds formed are weaker than those formed . However, the proxy is a better form of bond than the face to-face meeting .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev had met face-to-face at the 1961 Vienna summit, prior to their exchange of letters . This was a negative emotional encounter that created deep distrust between the leaders .
 Lebow suggests a further explanation for the peaceful ending of the crisis that has not figured prominently in previous accounts . However, Lebow says it is possible to explain why the crisis ended without bloodshed .
 Jervis has gone so far as to claim that trust was critical to the peaceful resolution of the crisis . He said trust was crucial to the peace process in order to avoid further bloodshed .
 Neither Lebow nor Jervis have provided a detailed explanation of how the leaders overcame their preexisting relationship of distrust and developed a new bond .
 The bond formed between Kennedy and Khrushchev during the crisis as an outcome of what microsociologists term an interaction ritual . We intervene by explaining by explaining the bond that formed between the two during the . crisis .
 Social interaction between the two leaders produced a bond that comprised a relatively low, though important, level of solidarity between Kennedy and Khrushchev . Using a model of bond formation initially proposed by Randall Collins, we demonstrate that the bond was low but important .
 We argue that solidarity created in the CMC case was relatively weak, because it lacked a face-to-face element . However, we argue that the solidarity created . It is relatively weak because it lacks a face to face element, we say . We argue .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev coexisted alongside hedging and risk calculations regarding the current and future intent of the other . As a result, the trust between the two coexist in the world's most powerful nations .
 The key difference in the interaction is a variation in the modality of interaction, the author says .
 As with Kennedy and Khrushchev, there was an exchange of letters, but crucially also several face-to-face interactions . The two men had letters exchanged, but also had several meetings with each other .
 The result, we demonstrate, was a bonding process that resulted in a strong level of solidarity . The result of the bonding process was a strong bond of friendship .
 There is a complete absence of risk calculation between two leaders who have bonded in this way . Here, solidarity is achieved at the highest level, and there is no risk calculation .
 In the next section we briefly introduce the Collins model and existing International Relations applications of it . The Collins model is a model of international relations that has been used in the past .
 Social theorists argue that social bond formation can develop in non-face-toface interaction through text-based communication . We then explore the arguments of those social theorists who argue that text communication can help form social bonds .
 We probe the importance of bodily copresence in relation to the letters sent between Kennedy and Khrushchev during the CMC and the letters and face-to-face interaction between Reagan and Gorbachev .
 We pay particular attention to within-case variation and use process tracing techniques to tease out when bonding occurred, or did not occur, in each interaction .
 The conclusion explores the implications of our argument and identifies future research questions . The conclusion of this article concludes that the study was wrong .
 In previous work, we asked why leaders often “hit it off” and develop “personal chemistry” with one another . However, other times the interaction remains mired in distrust or apprehension . Overcoming lack of copresence and barriers to outsiders are possible .
 The puzzle is how social bonds can develop in text-based communication where one of the ingredients, bodily copresence, is not possible . Another, barriers to outsiders, is challenged .
 Collins has been deeply skeptical regarding the notion that bonding is possible without bodily copresence . Collins has said he is deeply skeptical about the notion .
 This, in turn, brings productive effects in establishing shared mood and mutual focus of attention . This, of course, can also be seen as a way to improve the mood and focus .
 In subsequent work building upon the original model, his stance has been a bit more optimistic regarding the possibilities for bonding through, for example, digital technology . Intriguingly, however, in subsequent work, he has been more optimistic about the possibilities of bonding through technology .
 Collins opens the door to the possibility of some bonding occurring through non-bodily copresence . Collins: "I'm looking forward to some bonding happening"
 Collins’ intervention leads us to develop the notion that social bonds might be differentiated by strength . The strongest bonds will be products of interaction rituals where all four ingredients are present and the outcome variables exist at relatively intense levels .
 Weaker bonds, on the other hand, are products of interaction rituals where bodily copresence is absent and barriers to outsiders challenged, but mutual focus of attention and shared mood are present .
 We begin by investigating reasons why text-based communication is believed to result in weaker bonds . We then turn to theoretical reasons why some of the limitations of text communication can be overcome .
 Text-based communication makes bonding difficult because of the lack of ability to perceive, and respond to, others . Text-free communication is difficult because it doesn't allow people to perceive others, experts say .
 The temporal nature of text-based communication, even digitally, means that such synchronicity is challenged . Text-based communications, even digital, is challenged by the nature of texts .
 Text-based communication “lack the flow of interaction in real time,’s author says . This is because “even if electronic communications happen within minutes, this is not the rhythm of immediate vocal participation,” he says .
 Text-based communication is therefore asynchronous one-channel communication with relatively low information richness, low feedback, little or no propinquity, and low entrainment . Text based communication has relatively little information richness and low feedback . Text-free communication is a form of communication with low feedback
 To the extent that digital technology aids bonding, it seems to be in a supportive role . Digital technology has a positive role in the bond bonding process, says author .
 Scholars in a variety of fields and disciplines have long noted the ability of text to substitute, in some ways, for “real” experience . On the other hand, scholars in a range of fields have long said text can substitute for ‘real’ experience .
 The traveler goes some distance from his or her world of origin, which makes some aspects of that world inaccessible . Some aspects of the world of origins are inaccessible to travelers .
 Psychologists say the notion of transporting one’s mental state from one place to another is an important aspect of how text provides meaning . Anyone who has “gotten lost in a story” can attest to the aptness of the metaphor of travel .
 Reading fiction is therefore not only narrative transportation, but an exercise in empathy . Reading fiction can be a narrative transport, but also an exercise of empathy .
 Empathy skills practiced through reading may be beneficial in social life as well, studies show . And empathy skills in empathy may also be beneficial to social life, studies have shown .
 It may be one thing to argue that fictional texts can produce empathy . Yet, it may be quite another to argue non-fictional portrayals produce similar outcomes .
 Resence is a term that need not refer always to material, corporeal presence . As Esther Milne puts it, “resence” is not always to be a material presence .
 Social information processing theory is an interdisciplinary approach that draws upon psychology and cognitive science . It is an approach to understanding social information processing that draws on psychology .
 One of the early findings in the study of computer-mediated communication suggested that mediated communication is not necessarily detrimental to interpersonal relations, but rather might enhance a sense of connection between individuals .
 Individuals engaged in text-based communication will employ behavioral strategies to make up for the deficit of visual cues . For example, individuals engaged in texting will use behavioral strategies such as behavioral strategies .
 One noted complication with non-immediate forms of communication is accounting for spontaneity of thought of collective effervescence, something more easily measured with instantaneous message delivery in a laboratory than with letters sent over a period of time .
 If individuals utilize words and constructions to serve as proxies for the visual cues obtained in bodily copresence, then it is conceivable that bonding may take longer, but ultimately is possible, to some degree, through text .
 There have been few direct and systematic applications of the Collins model to text-based communication . Ling’s study of cell-phone usage is instructive, Ling says .
 Ling finds that while face-to-face interaction creates stronger solidarity, cell phone usage, strengthens solidarity . The study was conducted by interviewing and ethnographic methods .
 I do, however, assert that social bonds can be maintained and nurtured through mediated interaction . I do not believe social bonds should be maintained by mediated interaction, however . I'm not sure if social bonds will be maintained or nurtured .
 Ling suggests the possibility for weak bonds to form through mediated interaction (such as cell phone text messaging) and then strengthened with subsequent face-to-face interaction . Ling goes further and suggests that weak bonds may form via mediated interaction .
 Ling does not identify a central mechanism by which the mediated interaction substitutes for bodily co-presence . Ling's rich empirical work suggests a strong role for imagination and “narrative transportation,” placing oneself closer to the interlocutor .
 Overcoming copresence limitations is not the only problem for text-based interaction rituals . Text-based interactions can be difficult to overcome, such as the use of text messaging .
 Barriers to outsiders implies that individuals in an interaction are able to delineate those in the interaction from those that are not . Barriers imply that people in an interactions are able of delineating those in that interaction .
 Diplomats and leaders are often accompanied by translators, note-takers, advisors, photographers, and so on . Diplomats, leaders often accompany them with translators and translators .
 Leaders can exclude individuals from the interaction itself, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Leaders can also exclude them from their interactions, he says .
 Sometimes this exclusion is subtle, such as a whispered conversation in the back of the room . Sometimes it's subtle, like a whispered discussion in a back-room room .
 In either case, the ability to exclude who is involved in the interaction is achieved . In either way, the interaction between the two parties can be avoided .
 Barriers can also be created through non-material means as well . Crucially, however, barriers can be created using non-physical means .
 Individuals can use linguistic stratagems whose true meaning might only be ascertained by individuals within a particular interaction . Discursively, individuals can utilize linguistic strategies that may only be used within a specific interaction . The true meaning of these linguistic strategies can only be determined by individuals in a particular
 Overt examples might involve a cryptolect, argot, or anti-language, where a dyad or group utilizes either new language or existing language in new ways, to exclude outsiders from grasping meaning .
 More subtle examples include reference to ideas or concepts that only those in an interaction could fully understand or appreciate . Perhaps because of the affect-laden nature of their meaning, their meaning is subtle .
 Only individuals with responsibility of the lives of other human beings can fully appreciate the meaning of the terms used . Meaning is understood by group membership; only individuals with the responsibility of . other human . human beings . Only individuals responsible for the . lives of others can fully understand the meaning . of
 Carol Cohn’s groundbreaking work on the symbolic language used by nuclear defense officials highlights the group-membership aspect of particular diction that is only understood by those within the narrow confines of group borders .
 This cultural membership capital, or knowledge of group symbols, represents a form of barrier creation, as outsiders will be unfamiliar with the symbols that have developed over time .
 We argue that this type of barrier creation could also exist in textbased communication . We argue it could also be used in text-based communication.
 The easiest case would be where two leaders retained exclusive control over the letters they sent to each other . Private individuals may choose to keep a bond forged with a significant other through letters and other text-based communication secret from partners, loved ones .
 The letters that were sent were drafted by small groups of close and trusted advisors . However, this type of overt barrier to outsiders is rare in diplomacy, it is rare to see .
 The absence of overt barriers does not mean that barriers did not exist between the leaders and their team of drafters . Nevertheless, the absence of an overt barrier does not . However, it does mean that there was no overt barrier .
 While bodily copresence and a clear barrier to outsiders are required ingredients for a strong social bond, individuals are capable of forging weaker social bonds and maintaining those bonds in the absence of those .
 Individuals can substitute for bodily copresence by being present in the interaction through careful and precise textual self-representation of their beliefs, mental states, and emotions, while imaginatively placing oneself into the position of the other through empathy .
 A barrier to outsiders can be created through cultural membership capital . Cultural membership capital can be used to create barriers to outsiders . Culture capital is key to creating a barrier to outsider culture .
 While individuals may not be able to physically interact together in private, they can still interact and develop mutual focus of attention, shared mood, and exclude outsiders .
 The CMC represents a fascinating puzzle of how two leaders, on the brink of nuclear war, came through the exchange of letters to trust one another such that they could de-escalate the crisis . The letters were exchanged in the hope that the two leaders would trust each other .
 We explain this puzzle by arguing that during these six days of text-based interaction, a weak bond developed between the two leaders that contributed significantly to the peaceful ending of the crisis . We argue that this bond developed significantly to help end the crisis in Syria .
 This requires placing the memoir or other document within the greater social context and set of relationships in which it was created . The memoirs should be placed in the context of the relationships they were created .
 In our investigation of the CMC, we have triangulated the data based on several sources . In this article, we provide an analysis of the data . We are happy to make clear that the data is accurate .
 We have relied on Khrushchev’s memoir and his reflections in Khrushvich Remembers . We have also relied on contemporaneous notes, as well as oral and critical oral histories .
 Crucial to our empirical strategy is the ability to demonstrate that the ritual ingredients come together to form the bond, rather than are a result of the bond . Crucial is to prove that ritual ingredients are the ingredients together to create the bond.
 For instance, one might ask why the sharing of emotional states is not an effect of a social bond rather than a cause of it . For example, a person sharing emotional states can be found to be a positive part of a relationship .
 It is crucial that the process of bond formation be teased out in order to carefully establish causality . In order to avoid concerns of endogeneity, that it is the bond that creates shared mood .
 This requires detailed and incremental step-by-step analysis to establish how shared mood and mutual focus of attention obtained, generating collective effervescence, and ultimately solidarity .
 Before turning to the crisis itself, it is important to recall the baseline relationship of the two leaders heading into October 1962 . The two leaders had a baseline relationship .
 Four months earlier, the two leaders met in Vienna for a summit that was perceived differently by each side . The two leaders meet in Vienna, Austria, four months earlier .
 Kennedy, perhaps because he was unprepared for what was to come in the interaction, remarked afterward that “ just beat the hell out of me” Khrushchev was in “bubbling good spirits” because he had been able to dominate Kennedy and, from all accounts,
 The two leaders begin their interactions over Cuba not from a position of having a positive relationship, but rather from an attitude of deep distrust and suspicion of each other’s intentions . This makes this a hard case for bonding, making it hard for them to bond .
 He called upon the Soviet leader to turn back from this course of action and dismantle missile sites . The quarantine was aimed at signaling United States resolve .
 In a letter sent two days later, the Soviet leader described Kennedy’s actions as an “ultimatum” and rejected his “arbitrary demands” This is also the moment in the crisis when we see the first signs of an imaginative identification between the
 Khrushchev wrote, “No, Mr President, I cannot agree to this, and I think that in your own heart you recognize that I am correct.” Khrushchevitch wrote . “Mr President” wrote. “I think that Mr President
 Kennedy’s response was sent the following day and in it, emphasized to Khrushchev his sense of betrayal and regret . The U.S. leader urged the Soviet leader take the necessary steps, including removal of the missiles, to end the crisis .
 No offensive weapons were being sent to Cuba, the Cuban government said . After that time, this Government received the most explicit assurance from your Government . . No weapons would be sent to the island nation .
 A positive moral identification would grow between the two leaders as each came to positively identify with the other’s responsibility to avoid nuclear war . However, as the fear increased for each leader that events were slipping out of control, a positive .
 Khrushchev’s response came the following day in the most important letter exchanged between the two leaders during the crisis . The letter provided the basis for the de-escalation of the crisis in the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev's letter was critical one because it created the mutual focus of attention and shared mood (positive identification of interests and humanization) that are essential ingredients in a process of social bond formation . This letter was a critical one as it created a mutual focus, shared mood
 Khrushchev captured the emotion of fear that Kennedy was experiencing at the same time . What is striking about this letter is how it captures the fear Kennedy was feeling .
 Khrushchev framed the crisis, and the risk of nuclear annihilation it had created, as a responsibility they both shared . The crisis was a shared responsibility for both the country and the world .
 He told Kennedy, referring to Kennedy’s letter of October 25 that, “I got the feeling that you have some understanding of the situation which has developed and sense of responsibility.”
 Khrushchev imaginatively transported himself into Kennedy’s shoes and invited the U.S. president to do the same with regard to him . Kennedy was assassinated in September 1968 .
 The Soviet leader appealed to Kennedy in this letter to show restraint in language directed to him as a fellow human being and not just as the office of the U.S. President of the United States .
 Khrushchev sent a second letter, broadcast on Radio Moscow at 5m. local time, to Kennedy . Kennedy could not reply to the letter because he had not been allowed to reply .
 Khrushchev tied the promise to remove missiles from Cuba to the removal of U.S. Jupiter missiles that were based in Turkey . The promise was tied to removing the missiles from Turkey .
 The limited solidarity that was developing through their communication was in further evidence in this letter . Despite the Soviet leader escalating his demands in his public letter of October 27, the limited solidarity was in evidence in the letter .
 Khrushchev publicly appealed to Kennedy to join him in exercising their shared responsibility to avoid a nuclear conflict . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 A weak social bond was forming between the two leaders as each came through their written correspondence to imaginatively realize that the other was experiencing the same anxieties about the specter of nuclear annihilation . The two leaders were writing to each other in their correspondence .
 If this knowledge had been transparently obvious to Kennedy and Khrushchev from the outset, then they would not have needed to write these letters . Kennedy's knowledge of the situation would have been transparent .
 It was their text-based interaction which created the mutual focus of attention and shared mood that produced the bond .
 Khrushchev gave voice to Kennedy’s fears at this time in his letter to Kennedy the following day agreeing to the removal of the missiles . Kennedy agreed to remove the missiles the next day .
 The shared mood of fear between the two leaders enabled them to navigate their way out of the crisis . The two leaders were able to navigate out of a crisis with a shared fear .
 The trust that developed between Kennedy and Khrushchev as a result of their text-based interaction was a limited one . The trust between the two men was a much less than that of the time .
 Kennedy began the crisis feeling betrayed by Khrushchev . This was a remarkable transformation in their relationship when it is remembered that Kennedy .
 Kennedy secretly agreed to remove Jupiter missiles in Turkey within a few months . He trusted the Soviet leader to keep the deal confidential .
 Kennedy had no guarantee that Khrushchev would not go public, but he honored his trust, never mentioning the deal in public or in his later memoirs and reflections . Kennedy never mentioned the deal, never mentioned it in public .
 Kennedy trusted Khrushchev when he agreed to remove the missiles and what US intelligence presumed to be the nuclear warheads that had been deployed there . Kennedy also trusted the then-Khrrushchev .
 The views of the JCS illustrate how the two leaders maintained a barrier to outsiders here . The JCS were not part of the process of social bonding and trust emergence between Kennedy and Khrushchev, and hence they calculated the risks very differently .
 Khrushchev also had to trust Kennedy to honor his pledge not to invade Cuba and remove the Jupiters as he did a few months later . Kennedy also agreed to remove Jupits from Cuba in the fall .
 The process of bonding through text-based interaction coexisted uneasily during the crisis with continued hedging on the part of both leaders .
 Lebow has recognized that a personal bond formed between Kennedy and Khrushchev, but he does not provide an argument for how this developed . As we discussed earlier, we discussed this, Lebow recognized that the bond formed .
 The letters exchanged between Kennedy and Khrushchev were crucial to the peaceful ending of the crisis . Textually mediated interaction made possible a level of solidarity between the two leaders .
 One of the central puzzles of the Cold War is how the relationship between the U.S. and Soviet Union could have been transformed in such short order . The Cold War was a two-decade-long period of Cold War .
 Ronald Reagan famously called the Soviet Union the “evil empire” in 1983 . Less than five years later, the two states had forged a historic agreement to ban a large swathe of nuclear weapons .
 Face-to-face diplomacy between Reagan and Gorbachev allowed both leaders to clarify their intentions, Holmes argues . Holmes argues, for example, that diplomacy allowed Reagan to be comfortable taking on more vulnerability vis-a-vis the other leader .
 The relationship of “bonded trust” meant that the two leaders could effectively disregard hawks in their own administrations and focus on transforming the relationship of the two states from a competitive one to one characterized by partnership .
 In contrast with the CMC, the letters exchanged between Reagan and Gorbachev both preceded and followed the face-to-face diplomacy . In contrast to the letters exchange, the letter exchanges were exchanged in the 1980s . The CMC was a precursor to the now-defunct
 Reagan and Gorbachev sent each other 38 letters between March 1985 and March 1985 . The series of correspondences provide insight into how both sides sought to build and maintain social bonds .
 Reagan writes to Gorbachev the same day that the latter takes office as General Secretary . Reagan writes the letter the day he becomes General Secretary of the Soviet Union .
 The letter is noteworthy both for its conciliatory tone as well as the deep desire conveyed to build a personal relationship . It is noteworthy for the conciliating tone of the letter .
 Reagan notes that, “Our differences are many, and we will need to proceed in a way that takes both differences and common interests into account in seeking to resolve problems and build a new measure of trust and confidence .
 Reagan shared Gorbachev’s intuitive feeling that a face-to-face meeting was necessary for a breakthrough in the conflict . Reagan: “I’m not sure what I’ve done, but I think we’re going to find a way to
 Gorbachev and Reagan met in Geneva in November 1985 . Reagan and Reagan had hoped to advance the advance both was seeking . Their first summit meeting in Geneva produced a breakthrough .
 The importance of the Geneva meeting is that Reagan and Gorbachev came to positively identify with the other’s anxiety regarding the risk of nuclear war . The importance is that the two leaders identified with each other's anxiety regarding nuclear war, says historian John Avlon .
 Reagan and Gorbachev met for five hours to discuss security . Reagan said there could be no security if each acted on the belief they were secure if the other was insecure .
 Gorbachev and Reagan were able to impress upon the other that not only did they understand that the two states they represented may each be culpable in the insecurity of the other, but crucially they both came with peaceful intent . The two states represented each were culpable for the insecurity
 Reagan and Gorbachev came to see the humanity in one another . Reagan's interests were aligned, and they were in this together . The process of realizing their interests was aligned .
 Their emerging solidarity showed some signs of faltering as 1986 progressed . However, their emerging solidarity was not always as strong as 1986 .
 Gorbachev perceived a growing gap between Reagan’s sincere intent and integrity towards him and his capacity as president of the United States . Reagan's policies challenged the “enemy image” of the Soviet Union that had guided previous United States policy .
 Gorbachev became convinced that if real progress was to be made, it had to come from the top . The meeting was critical to this was another face-to-face meeting between him and Reagan . Reagan was the president of the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 The meeting in Reykjavik in October 1986 demonstrates the importance of bodily copresence in giving renewed energy and dynamism to a bonding process .
 Reagan-Gorbachev summit was turning point in Reagan's relationship with Gorbachev . The two leaders were in a mental state of trust as suspension was suspended . The summit was a turning point for the relationship between the two .
 The trust that emerges out of a strong bond of this kind exists exists when neither individual feels the need to hedge against the intent and integrity of the other .
 The contrast is clear with the weak bond that developed between Kennedy and Khrushchev through their textual mediated interaction in the CMC, where both leaders continued to hedge against the future intentions of the other .
 We set out what might count as evidence against our claim that a strong bond of trust existed between Reagan and Gorbachev . The evidence is not persuasive in this case, we say .
 If there is discursive evidence that Reagan and Gorbachev were calculating risks in relation to the other’s intent and integrity, then this would be evidence that would falsify the theory of suspension .
 Reagan and Gorbachev had disagreements over SDI that continued throughout their three years as leaders . Each was still seeking to achieve security at the expense of the other .
 Reagan and Gorbachev may have placed less emphasis on competitive aspects of the US–Soviet relationship than their predecessors . For all their personal warmth, they were leaders of two superpowers that viewed each other with suspicion .
 The problem with this criticism of the suspension claim is that it conflates hedging at the interstate level, where we recognize enemy images of both sides persisted in key elements of the national security bureaucracy, and the interpersonal relationship where such hedging is absent .
 Caspar Weinberger, Reagan’s Secretary of Defense at the time of the Reykjavik summit, viewed the risks of trusting Gorbachev very differently from Reagan . Weinberger was not a party to the process of bonding that had taken place between Reagan and . Gorb
 Had Reagan accepted this counsel from Weinberger, he would have betrayed Gorbachev’s trust . Reagan accepted Weinberger's counsel, it would have been a betrayal .
 It is erroneous to argue this stemmed from a lack of trust between the two leaders . However, it is not the case that this is the case for the country's future leaders .
 Neither could not be sure that their successors would honor this trust, they say . Instead, the obstacle to an agreement was that neither could not trust their successors . Neither could be sure they would honor the trust .
 He trusted in Gorbachev’s peaceful intent and integrity, but wanted SDI as an insurance policy . SDI was designed to protect the interests of his successor, Vladimir Putin's successor .
 Reagan and Gorbachev had face-to-face meetings in Geneva and Reykjavik . Reagan's 'solidarity' helped them suspend risk calculations in relation to each other, the authors say .
 We have argued that while face-to-face interactions may be required for strong social bonds to develop, leaders may form weak social bonds, even in the absence of bodily contact .
 We find evidence for weak social bonds in letters and strong bonds in face-to-face interaction . We also find evidence that social bonds are strong in letters, not face to-face .
 With the former, the relationship was characterized by a lower level of solidarity that coexisted with continued suspicion and hedging behavior . With the latter, it was characterized as a low-level of solidarity with the former . The relationship is characterized by solidarity, but also by suspicion .
 With the latter, the relationship was characterized by a high degree of solidarity and the absence of risk calculation, or trust as suspension, or risk calculation . The relationship is characterized by solidarity and lack of risk calculations .
 In the end, there is strength in weak bonds to the extent it allows leaders to reduce distrust and even, as in the case of Kennedy and Khrushchev, develop enough trust to de-escalate and resolve a nuclear crisis .
 There are several empirical difficulties in studying social bond formation . Social bond formation is difficult to explain, says author .
 Observational data does not provide direct access to the existence or non-existence of bonds . One reason for this is that observational data doesn't show the existence of bonds in the universe .
 Researchers must instead use empirical indicators of these concepts or proxies, which may be prone to error, they say . Researchers need to use empirical data to make their point of view .
 It is impossible to account for, or control, all confounds, such as a changing material environment . Second, given the temporal nature of interactions in international politics, which may take place over a condensed time period, as in the CMC, or several years .
 Process tracing allows for demonstrating the plausibility of bond formation and to understand its effects . Nevertheless, despite these limitations, process tracing can be useful for scientists .
 We have posited a number of different mechanisms by which letters might serve as a proxy for copresence . These include empathy, imagination, solidarity, solidarity and the way words are used to represent the self .
 The ability to isolate and test for specific mechanisms may yield significant dividends . While it is difficult to definitively test these qualitatively in historical case studies, laboratory experiments (that gain in internal validity what they give up in external validity) are promising areas for future research .
 In some respects our cases may be classified as empirically straightforward . Finally, in some respects, our cases are quite straightforward . We have a simple set of questions to answer .
 Both U.S. and USSR archives are believed to be relatively complete . declassification procedures that have largely kept the historical record intact .
 There are theoretical difficulties in interrogating bond formation in diplomacy . There are also theoretical difficulties to interrogate bond formation .
 Collins model privileges that which occurs within the interaction, rather than reducing outcomes to the dispositions of the actors or the environment in which the interaction takes place . Such interactions can never be isolated from previous interactions nor are dispositions unimportant .
 The next theoretical move is to interrogate how a narrowly defined interactional order, as we have done here, can be broadened to account for social structure .
 Other theoretical approaches, such as recognition theory, complement the approach we have taken here . They may be useful in explaining how we can make the move from dyadic interactions at the leader level to broader Self/Other identity understandings and narratives .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev bonded, yet it was also true several individuals were part of the overall decision-making process on both sides . Kennedy: "We argue that Kennedy . and Khruschev bonded. Yet it is also true that several individuals . were part in the overall . decision
 We know empirically that outsiders gave advice, pushed particular policy proposals, and this included on both sides, calls for military action . Even if these internal actors were not integral to the bond formation between the two protagonists, we know .
 Reagan and Gorbachev eschewed hawks in their own administrations in favor of privileging the personal bond they developed dyadically . We see a similar dynamic with Reagan, who eschewed hawkks in his own administrations .
 The interaction between bonded leaders and their non-bonded advisors may be a fruitful area for future research .
 Microsociology also investigates the ways in which such interactions scale to create broader social structures . The study has been on the micro-interactions of leaders .
 This is particularly relevant for explaining how cultures of enmity may change over time, in this case the US-USSR . It is also crucial for understanding how structures are created that then give rise to micro-interactions .
 Cablewire and letter-exchange were ubiquitous means of interaction among leaders . Letter exchange is a form of mediated interaction between political leaders .
 During the COVID-19 pandemic, leaders and diplomats became all too familiar with the intricacies of these various technologies . Leaders and diplomats often lament the inability for them to replace bodily copresent face-to-face diplomacy .
 Collins: New technology should increase synchronicity and make collective effervescence easier to achieve . Theoretically, from a Collins perspective, new technology should make synching easier . Collins: "Theoretically" is a better way to achieve a collective experience .
 The existence of weak bonds in letters, which are heavily temporally mediated, bodes well for the notion that bonds may form through more immediate forms of technology . Put another way, we find the fact that we find weak bonds bodes for the possibility of more immediate technology .
 Future research may investigate how telephone, texts, or video conferencing, affect the imagination process . Future research could also investigate how phone, text messages, and other technologies affect imagination .
 It may be, for instance, that what tweets or text messages gain in speed they lose in length and nuance, affecting the ability for parties to imaginatively place themselves inside the interaction .
 In the end, the means by which leaders reduce distrust and mistrust about one another, through a process of social bonding, represents a potentially fruitful, and interdisciplinary, research agenda .
 Microsociology is interested in the ways in which micro-interactions create bonds, such as those between two individuals, create bonds as well as how those bonds replicate and expand to create social structures .
 Our interest here is on the former, though we elaborate some ideas for future research regarding the latter, in the conclusion . In the conclusion, we focus on the latter of the research .
 We elaborate the Collins model, and the meaning of the four conditions, in more detail in the online Appendix . For space purposes we elaborate the model for space purposes . For more information, please visit the online appendix .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev exchanged letters between them . Blight and Lang imagine how the two leaders' mental states changed as they interacted with each other through letters .
 Many of the letters contain lengthy, but highly relevant, passages that are relevant for our argument . We have placed a significant amount of detailed process tracing in the Online Appendix for both cases .
 Dobrynin AF In Confidence – Moscow's Ambassador to America’s Six Cold War Presidents . Dobrynins AF Inconfidence: Russia's President George W. Bush was the Cold War President of the Soviet Union in 1950s and 1960s .
 Dossena M. Building trust through appraisal in nineteenth-century business correspondence . Building trust was created through appraisal of letters from business partners . Trust was established in 18th century .
 Theory of mind predicts collective intelligence equally well online and face-to-face . Theory of Mind predicts intelligence as well as face to-face, online and in-person . It's a good idea to use theory of mind to predict social intelligence, say experts .
 Green MC and Brock TC The role of transportation in the persuasiveness of public narratives is key to persuading public narratives, they say .
 Spohr K and Reynolds D. Transcending the Cold War: Summits, Statecraft, and the Dissolution of Bipolarity in Europe, 1970–1990 . The book was published by the same authors .
 Amarna Diplomacy: The Beginnings of International Relations: The First World War . Amarna diplomacy: Diplomacy is the beginning of international relations .
 Kaufman GF and Libby LK Changing beliefs and behavior through experience-taking . Kaufman GF, LK. Kaufman GF & LK . Kaufman . LK: "Change your beliefs through experience taking"
 Kennedy JF A Radio and television address to the American people on the Soviet arms build-up in Cuba, 22 October 1962 . JFK JF addressed the U.S. on the issue of Cuba .
 Reading literary fiction improves theory of mind, says Kidd DC and Castano E. Kidd DC . Castano and Kidd DC: "Reading literary fiction is a good thing for the reader's mind"
 We’re still relying on Trump-Kim chemistry to prevent nuclear war . Lawler D. Lawler says we're relying on the chemistry of the two countries to prevent war .
 The nature of trust from Georg Simmel to a theory of expectation, interpretation and suspension . Möllering G. Möllering G.
 The effects of text, audio, video, and in-person communication on bonding between friends can be seen on the Internet .
 Baumann B and Bultmann D , Social Ontology, Sociocultures and Inequality in the Global South . Baumann, Bultman and Bumann .
 A pragmatic guide to qualitative historical analysis in the study of international relations . Thies C. Thies . A pragmatic . guide to . qualitative historical . analysis in . the study .
 Wong S Emotions and the communication of intentions in face-to-face diplomacy . Wong S. Wong S: Emotions are an important part of diplomacy . She also discusses the role of diplomacy in diplomacy .
 Leaders, Intelligence, and Assessment of Intentions in International Relations . Leaders, intelligence, and assessment of intentions in international relations .
 He is co-editor with Professors Christian Reus-Smit and Evelyn Goh of the Cambridge Series in International Relations .
 He is director of the Political Psychology and International Relations undergraduate research lab . He is also co-director of the Social Science Research Methods Center .