 Fidel Castro reiterates that the Cuban Republic is a Socialist Republic . Towards the Deployment of Nuclear Missiles in Cuba, Fidel Castro said .
 Cuban government sends several requests for peace between Cuba and U.S. only weeks after the Bay of Pigs invasion . May Day is May Day in Cuba . Cuban government sent request for peace .
 Cuba still makes efforts to bring peace between the two nations and to re-establish trade agreements . Despite Cuba's outstanding victory of self-defense, Cuba still attempts to reestablish peace between Cuba and Venezuela .
 Khrushchev delivers an ultimatum threatening to ""normalize"" the situation in Berlin if the U.S. does not withdraw within six months . Khrushchen threatens to "normalize" the situation if the United States .
 Khrushchev allows his deadlines on resolving the Berlin question to pass without further incident . However, the construction of the Berlin Wall brings stability, and the building of the wall brings stability to the country .
 Castro proposes that Cuba will release all prisoners captured at the Bay of Pigs in exchange for political prisoners . Cuba will also release political prisoners from Guatemalan, Nicaraguan, Spanish, and U.S. jails .
 General Maxwell Taylor submits a report on further United States ""limited war" programs against Cuba . Kennedy had ordered following the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion . General Taylor submitted the report in 1961 .
 Taylor calls for the creation of a new subversive method for destroying the Cuban Republic . Explains that there is ""no long term living with Castro as a neighbor"" and that international workers solidarity ""constitutes a real menace"" to Latin American nations .
 The options for terrorism against Cuba are among the full range of political, military, economic, and psychological tactics . The options include political and economic, military and economic tactics .
 On July 26, the CIA fails in another attempt to assassinate Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, and Che Guevara during celebrations . The July 26th movement commemorated Fidel Castro's assassination attempt .
 Had the assasinations been successful, Humberto Torres would later explain, the plan called for a covert U.S. attack against the Guantanamo Naval Base, in order to make it appear that the Cuban's were attacking the United States in retaliation .
 In August, a rumor planted by the CIA spreads through Cuba, explaining that the government plans to take all Cuban children away from their Mothers and Fathers and raise them in state institutions . The rumor is believed to have been planted in Cuba .
 15,000 Cuban families send their children abroad . Operation Peter Pan is known as "Operation Peter Pan" In what is known, the children are sent to live abroad .
 CIA report on Soviet nuclear capabilities is disseminated within the U.S. government . On September 21, 1961, the report was disseminated in the United States government .
 Only some ten to twenty-five Soviet ICBMs are known to exist in the world, and all within the Soviet Union . No major increase in Soviet ICBM strength is expected in the near future .
 By this time the U.S. has a total of 22,229 nuclear weapons, while the Soviet Union has 2,450 . The United States has 22,230 nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union is the second largest nuclear arsenal in the world .
 In October, the terrorist organisation Alpha 66 is founded in Miami, partly out of frustration of continual failed attempts to assasinate Castro . The October 4th attempt had just failed — headed by CIA assasins Antonio Veciana Blank .
 Rubén López Sabariego, a Cuban worker at the U.S. held Guant´namo Naval base, is killed . He was killed on October 15, 2013 .
 U.S. Navy secretly dismissed Marine Captain Arthur J Jackson, who said he was acting in self-defense . Two years later, a U.K. journalist uncovers that the Navy dismissed him .
 Manuel Ascunce Domenech, a volunteer teacher in the Literacy Campaign, and his peasant student Pedro Lantigua, are shot dead by terrorists in Escambray .
 President Kennedy authorizes another aggressive covert assault on the Cuban Republic codenamed Operation Mongoose . On November 30, 1961, after replacing the CIA Director Allen Dulles with John Alex McCone, President Kennedy authorized the operation .
 The operation is directed by the CIA Brigadire General Edward G Lansdale, under the guidance of Attorney General Robert Kennedy . The operation has been described as 'a success story'
 The CIA creates an organization under its control, the Special Group Augmented, to carry out Operation Mongoose . The CIA created the organization under the control of the organization . The operation is part of the CIA's "Mongoose" operation .
 William K Harvey is put in charge of Task Force W, under guidance from the SGA, a task force that will subsequently involve approximately four hundred Americans agents at the CIA headquarters in Miami .
 Task Force W assimilates about two thousand Cuban exiles, possesses a private naval fleet of speedboats, and has an annual budget of some $50 million . Task force W has a private fleet of private speedboats and a private budget of $50million .
 Task Force W aims to attack Cuban ships and aircraft . Also targets non-Cuban ships engaged in trading with Cuba . Tactics are to contaminate sugar and oil freighters .
 Cuba provided U.S. intelligence with the first reliable information on the extent of Soviet defense arms deliveries to Cuba . During the New Year's Day parade in 1962, Cuba provided first reliable intelligence on Soviet defense weapons .
 U.S. intelligence estimates around sixty Soviet jet fighters are in possession of the Cuban Revolutionary Air Force . The planes on display include MiG15 and MiG-17 aircraft with a small number of MiG19 planes .
 The MiG-15 had been first deployed over a decade ago in the Korean War and had shown its effectiveness in combat . While the MiG19 was relatively new, having first been deployed in early 1955 . The MiGs-15 was first deployed in Korea in the early 1950s
 Cuba received a modest shipment of the older, more ""experienced"" planes for the role of self-defense . Cuba received the most recent development in Soviet aircraft was the MiG-21, put into service in early 1958 .
 On January 19, 1962, a meeting of the SGA is held in Robert Kennedy's office . Robert Kennedy was president of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Notes taken by CIA representative George McManus contain the following passages, "Overthrow of Castro is Possible" and a solution to the Cuban problem today carried top priority in U.S. Gov. Nixon .
 From January 22 to 31, 1962, a conference of the OAS was held in Punta del Este, Uruguay . The OAS conference was held from January 22, 1962 to January 31, 1963 .
 Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, and Mexico — all who explain the vote is illegal, and refuse to participate . Argentina, Bolivians, Brazilians, Ecuadorians, Chileans and others say the vote should not be allowed to vote .
 OAS members are prohibited from selling arms to Cuba and setting measures for collective ""defense"" against the island of Cuba . Another resolution was also adopted prohibiting members of the OAS from dealing with Cuba .
 It was directly against the charter of this organization to take such steps, it said . No country could use economic pressure or aggression to gain its objectives or influence affairs inside another country, it added .
 Terrorists are arrested in Cuba in an attempt to paralyze urban transportation by destroying motors with chemicals and magnetic mines . Terrorists attempt to destroy motors by destroying them with magnetic mines and chemicals . Terrorist group was arrested on January 28 in Cuba .
 Edward Lansdale lists a list of plans to "provoke, harass, or disrupt" the Cuban government . Lansdale's list includes plans to 'provoke' and 'harass' the government of Cuba .
 On February 7, the United States institutes a ""total"" embargo of trade with Cuba . The embargo is intended to be forced on all nations in the world . Operation Mongoose: Possible Actions to Provoke, Harrass, or Disrupt Cuba .
 All U.S. aid to Cuba would be cut off, while covertly actions are taken to sink ships that trade with Cuba . The United States Congress resolves that should any nation not hede the United States dictate of not trading with Cuba, all United States aid to that country would
 U.N. General Assembly rejects resolution demanding U.S. cease it's operations in Cuba . Vote of 50 vs. 50 vs., with 39 abstentions . The United States was defeated by the majority of the General Assembly .
 Cuba tells the United Nations Security Council that it is certain the United States is planning another invasion . The U.S. denies the charges, and the U.N. Security Council refuses to hear out Cuba .
 Lansdale notes that a 'vital decision' has not yet been made regarding a direct U.S. military invasion of the Cuban Republic . Lansdale says it must be done quickly before the Cuban government becomes too strong among its people .
 Cuba's Ministry of Public Health, assisted by workers organisations throughout Cuba, carry out a nationwide campaign of vaccination against polio .
 The disease will be eradicated from Cuba by the end of the year . Workers are working to eradicate the disease from Cuba .
 U.N. World Health Organisation finally recognises Cuba was the first nation to accomplish this in the Americas . Cuba is the first country to have achieved this feat .
 Kennedy is unwilling to committ to a full scale invasion, but keeps the option open, and agrees to allow the terrorist activities to continue in the meantime . Kennedy is reluctant to commit a full-scale invasion .
 15 U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey become operational, on the border of the Soviet Union . Elsewhere in the world, in April of 1962, 15 Jupiter missiles become operational .
 All positions are reported ""ready and manned"" by United States personnel . U.S. personnel — ready to launch against the Soviet Union at any moment . All positions were reported "ready to launch"
 The missiles are armed with 1.45 megaton warheads, 97 times the power of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima . The missiles were armed with warheads that can be detonated in Hiroshima .
 Khrushchev realized the nuclear tipped knife that is at the throat of the Soviet Union in 1962 . The Soviet Union was threatened by a nuclear arms deal with the West .
 Khrushchev considered deploying nuclear weapons to Cuba to prevent a full U.S. invasion . The Cuban government considered using nuclear weapons as a deterrent to prevent an invasion .
 The Soviet Union had only 10 25 nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States . The United States had nuclear missiles all around the world and on the very borders of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev discusses the idea with First Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan . The idea was discussed with the First Deputy PM of the USSR .
 Khrushchev asks a group of his closest advisers, including Frol Kozlov, Commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces Sergei Biryuzov, Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, and Marshal Malinovsky to evaluate the idea . Although Mikoyan is skittish and opposed
 The group proposes that a mission be sent to Cuba to see if Fidel Castro would agree to the proposed deployment . The mission would be sent in Cuba to find out if Castro agreed to the mission .
 On May 8-18, 1962, a full-scale U.S. military exercise designed to intimidate and practice a full military invasion of Cuba begins . The exercise was intended to intimidate, practice and prepare for an invasion .
 On May 12, the Alpha 66 terrorists attack a Cuban patrol boat, killing three and wounding five Cubans . The attack on the boat was the first attack on a Cuban patrol boat .
 Moscow discussed the possible installation of missiles in Cuba in Moscow . The following month deliberations continue in Moscow over the issue . The Russian government is considering installing missiles in the Cuban territory .
 Alekseyev and Marshal Biryuzov should travel to Cuba to explore the question with Castro . The two will meet with Castro in Cuba to discuss the issue . The Russian president expresses concern over the idea .
 In the event of deployment, the Soviet military proposes a force of 24 medium-range ballistic missile launchers and 16 intermediate-range launchers . Each of the launchers would be equipped with two missiles and a single nuclear warhead .
 Soviet officials also decide to send a defensive contingent of four elite regiments, twenty-four advanced SA-2 surface-to-air missile batteries, forty-two MiG-21 interceptors . Forty-two IL-28 bombers, twelve Komar-class missile boats, twelve
 On May 29, 1962, Sharif Rashidov, an alternate member of the Soviet Presidium, arrives in Cuba with a delegation on a ten-day mission to study irrigation problems and to discuss the possibility of introducing nuclear missiles . The mission was a 10-day trip to Cuba to
 The presence of the ambassador-designate in Cuba is not known to the U.S. military . Aleksandr Alekseyev, Marshal Biryuzov and two or three military experts are not known . The presence is unknown to the United States .
 Castro responds telling the group that he will need to consult with his government before providing an answer . Castro responds to the group telling them he will consult with the government . Castro says he will not provide an answer until he consults with government .
 Fidel Castro tells Soviet officials that Cuba will accept the deployment of nuclear weapons as a deterrent to U.S. invasion . The following day, after conferring with the chief ministers of government, Fidel Castro informs the visiting Soviet officials of Cuba's decision .
 Marshal Biryuzov later informs Khrushchev that the deployment of the missiles could be done secretly . The deployment of missiles was a secret operation . The decision to deploy missiles was made to be made secret by the Marshal .
 On July 2, 1962, Raul Castro and a high-level Cuban military delegation arrive in Moscow . They were met at the airport by Marshal Rodion Malinovsky and Anastas Mikoyan .
 The missiles and maintenence of them will be entirely under the jurisdiction of the Soviet military . According to the formal agreement, which is renewable every five years, the missiles will be kept under the control of the military .
 In mid-July, Soviet cargo ships begin moving out of the Black Sea for Cuba . Soviet ships begin leaving Black Sea to move to Cuba . The ships began leaving the Soviet Union in mid July .
 Aerial reconnaissance of the ships in the following months show them ""riding high in the water"", which is indicative of the vessels carring unusually light cargo, typically a sign that military equipment is being transported .
 U.S. terrorism against the Cuban republic continues . Meanwhile, United States terrorism against Cuba continues .
 By July 25, Edward Lansdale provides an assessment of the accomplishments of Phase One of Operation Mongoose . The SGA will provide an assessment by July 25 of the SGA .
 Some successes are reported, aside from several victories of sabotage, propaganda and murder . The infiltration of eleven CIA terrorist teams into Cuba is reported .
 CIA Director John McCone dictates a memorandum for the President expressing the belief that Soviet MRBMs are destined for Cuba . By August 10, 1962, after examining CIA reports on the movement of cargo ships from the Black and Baltic seas to Cuba, CIA Director McCone dictated a memorandum .
 McCone's memorandum is sent over the objections of subordinates concerned that McCone has no hard evidence to back up his speculations . McCone sent the memo over concerns that he has no evidence to support his theories .
 In August 20, 1962, by now General Maxwell Taylor informs President Kennedy that the SGA sees no possibility for overthrowing the Cuban republic through internal dissent, no matter how the situation is manipulated . The Cuban republic was overthrown by the U.S. President Kennedy .
 The only method that can defeat the Cuban Republic is through direct U.S. military intervention, says President Obama . He bluntly explains that the only method of defeating Cuba is to defeat the country .
 In the meantime, the SGA recommends a much more aggressive Operation Mongoose . The SGA also recommends a more aggressive approach to the situation .
 Kennedy authorizes the development of more aggressive plans, but specifies that no open U.S. military involvement could take place . Kennedy says no open United States military involvement would take place in the region .
 British freighter forced to dock in Puerto Rico because of damaged propeller . Streathen Hill was heading to Soviet Union with Cuban sugar . The ship was carrying the sugar to the Soviet Union .
 With repairs underway, 14,000 bags of sugar are offloaded to speed up the process . The sugar is being transported to a sugar factory in New Jersey .
 CIA agents lace the bags in an unknown chemical . CIA agents enter the warehouse where the sugar is stored, and lace them in unknown chemicals .
 President Kennedy learns of the action, horrified, he orders the sugar to be destroyed . President Kennedy is horrified at the action and orders sugar destroyed .
 Che Guevara, Cuba's Minister of Industries, and Emilio Aragonés Navarro, arrived in the Soviet Union in August 1962 .
 Guevara urges Khrushchev to announce the missile deployment publicly . Khruschev refuses to announce his missile deployment . Guegara: "I want to know what I think about the missile launch"
 In August 29, 1962, a high-altitude U-2 surveillance flight shows air defense missiles at eight different locations in Cuba . The flight was captured by a U.S. Air Defense Missile Interceptor in Cuba in August .
 Additional reconnaissance shortly thereafter identifies new coastal defense cruise missile installations . Additional reconnaissance later identified new coastal defenses in coastal areas .
 U-2 photographs of the area around San Crist—bal, Cuba, where the first nuclear missile sites were later deployed, reveal no evidence of construction at this time .
 In the first week of September 1962, unknown to U.S. intelligence, Soviet troops began arriving in Cuba . Unknown to United States intelligence, they arrived in Cuba in September .
 Attorney General Kennedy meets with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . U.S. informed that the Soviet Union does not intend to install missiles in Cuba .
 By the end of the week the United States Tactical Air Command establishes a military group to begin developing plans for a coordinated U.S. air attack against Cuba . Plans to launch the attack well before a ground invasion of Cuba .
 On September 15, 1962, The Poltava, a Soviet large-hatch cargo ship, docks at the port of Mariel, Cuba, carrying the first SS-4 MRBMs to be deployed .
 U.S. spy agencies become aware of shipments of the Soviet IL-28 light bomber aircraft . By the 28th, the United States spy agencies were aware of the shipments .
 The first Soviet jet bomber ever made had been completely phased out of the Soviet Air Force by 1960 . Over 14 years old, the first Soviet aircraft was the first to be built .
 In the House of Representatives, a bill is approved to cut off aid to any country permitting the use of its merchant ships to transport goods of any kind to Cuba . The bill was approved in the House by a vote of House Republicans on Thursday .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko accuses the U.S. of creating 'war hysteria' and aggressive military preparations to engage Cuba . The following day, in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly, the Soviet foreign minister accuses the United States of creating ""war hysteria"
 Gromyko states that Cuba could not possibly invade the United States, and has never done anything aggressive against the U.S. nor ever will it . Gromykos states that "any sober-minded" person realizes that Cuba has never invaded the United. States .
 Gromyko explains that if the U.S. attempts to invade Cuba again, the Soviet Union would stand solidly in defense of Cuba . Groroko: The Soviet Union will stand in support of Cuba if the United States tries to invade again .