 One minute before high noon on Oct.,1962, the air-defense tracking network. I t was one minute before . high noon . The air-defence tracking network .
 More than 100,000 American troops were preparing to invade of Russian air defenses . The ability to ""read the mail" was a closely guarded Cold War Cuba .
 "There's always some sonofabitch who doesn't get the word,"" short of nuclear war . The United States Strategic Air Command's missiles and four minutes later. manned bombers bad been ordered to DEECON-2, one step from nuclear war.
 At 2:03m. came news that another U-2, piloted by Major, was armed with nuclear-tipped torpedoes . In the Caribbean, U.S. Navy destroyers were playing a cat-and-mouse game with Russian submarines .
 Rudolf Anderson Jr., was missing while on an intelligence mission over eastern Cuba . He was flying a U-2 spy plane over Cuba .
 Evidence soon emerged Charles W Maultsby unwittingly penetrated Soviet airspace . It had been shot down by a Russian surface-to-air missile in the Chukot Peninsula .
 Air Force Historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. called the Cuban Missile veteran oblivious to the drama below . The 11-year Air Force historian was flying at 70,000 feet at the time .
 Scholon a routine mission to the North Pole, gathering radioars and politicians agree that for several days the world was active air samples from a Soviet nuclear test . Scholon says the test took place in the wake of the Soviet Union's nuclear tests .
 Dazzled by tbe the closest it has ever come to nuclear Armageddon . aurora boreahs, he'd wandered off course, ending up over . But the nature of the risks confronting Kennedy and the Soviet Union on the most perilous day of the Cold War .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was completely unaware the Soviets had scrambled understood . He was unaware of the threat posed posed by the Soviet Union .
 A young American president went he was. ""eyeball to eyeball"" with a Russian chairman and forced . A former member of tbe Air Force's Tbunderbirds fligbthim forced to back down through a skillful blend of diplomacy .
 Kennedy "dazzled the tank for nine hours and 40 minutes of flight," according to Scblesinger . Kennedy was the first person to fly in the U.S. Air Force One to fly aboard .
 Eielson Air Force Base and Nortb Pole are located in Alaska . The base base is located in Fairbanks, Alaska .
 Maultsby shut down his single Pratt & Whitney key participants in the United States, Russia and Cuha, it is J57 engine and entrusted his fate to his U-2's .
 The Air Force's Alaskan Air Command risks of war in October 1962 arose not from the ""eyeball-tosent up two F-102 figbters to guide bim back across tbe eyeball"" confrontation between Kennedy and Khrushchev, Bering Strait
 The F-102s were armed with nuclear-tipped air-to-air missiles . The missiles had enough firepower to destroy an entire fleet of Russian peasants .
 On the ground, SAC commanders were frantically trying horrified hy the prospect of a nuclear apocalypse . Having experienced World War II, both were veterans of SAC .
 As the crisis lurched to a climax on Black Saturday, events loomed to an end . Maultsby's location, as they had tapped into the Soviet Union, was a key factor .
 A full-scale invasion of the island would follow within within communicate with each other, the two leaders struggled seven days . Unable to effectively communicate, they were unable to effectively .
 Marine units and Army's 1st Annored Divito rein in the chaotic forces of history they themselves sion would hit the beaches east and west of Havana, along a had unleashed.-mile front, in an operation modeled after the ]uno 1Q44 D-Day landings in
 Kennedy learned that Khrushchev had broken his promise not to deploy offensive weapons in Cuba . A U-2, piloted by Major Richard Heyser, had flown over the island two days earlier and taken photographs of the island .
 The full scope of the danger was not of intermediate-range Soviet missiles near Washington, Moscow or Havana . And the full scope was not known in Washington, Havana or Washington, Washington .
 Kennedy branded the mercurial Russian the main protagonists—Kennedy, Khrushchev or Castro— leader ""an immoral gangster,"" but the Americati presihad tnore than than a very limited knowledge of events unfolding on a global battlefield that stretched from the Florida Straits
 World War III had already begun, with planes taking fire, missiles being readied for launch and warships forcing potentially hostile subtnarines to surface . Aircraft were taking fire and missiles were readied to launch .
 Castro wrote Moscow of his conviction that an American attack on the island was ""almost inevitable"" and would take place in the next 24 to 72 hours . Castro wrote that the attack was 'almost inevitable' and would happen within 24 hours .
 Cuban leader visited the Soviet embassy in Havana at 3m. and petined an anguished telegram to Kbrushchev . Unbeknownst to Kennedy, the Cuban leader had visited the embassy at 3.m.
 If the ""itnperialists"" invaded Cuba, Castro declared, the Soviet Union should undertake a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the United States . Castro declared that if the "itnimperialists" invaded Cuba they should attack the U.S. if they invaded Cuba
 He ordered his anti-aircraft defenses to begin firing on low-flying U.S. reconnaissance planes .
 Castro declared he and his comrades were ""ready to die in the defense of our country"" rather than submit to a Yanqui occupation . Castro declared that he and comrades were ready to die rather than subdue to the Yucucuans .
 The Soviet cotnmander in Cuba, General Issa Pliyev, was also preparing for war . The Cuban government was preparing for a possible invasion .
 A convoy of trucks carrying nuclear warheads moved out of the central storage depot at Bejucal, south of Havana, around midnight . On his orders, the convoy of weapons moved out around midnight, Cuban president says .
 By early afternoon, the convoy had reached the Sagua la Grande missile site in central Cuba, tnaking it possible for the Soviets to lob eight 1-megaton missiles at the U.S. Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and American President John F Kennedy .
 Pliyev ordered the arming of shorter-range tactical nuclear missiles to counter a United States inAustria, in June 1961, in a light moment after a meeting at the U.S. Embassy in Vienna, Vienna .
 Khrushchev's bellicose attempts to get Kennedy to get rid of Castro were unsuccessful . Kennedy was blissfully unaware of the nature of the situation in Cuba . Castro's assassination of Castro had provoked Khrrushchev into taking action .
 Kennedy imposed 23, the CIA estimated that the Soviets had between 8,000 and 10,000 a military quarantine on the island . The Soviets demanded the and demanded the . and 10 .000 military ""advisers"" in Cuba, up from an earlier estimate of 4,000 to
 By October 27—tbe 12th day of the crisis—the two superSoviet troop strength on Black Saturday was 42,822, a figure powers were on the brink of war . We now know that the actual by October 27, the actual
 All that remained was for warheads intended to hurl an invading force back into the sea . All that was left was for the warheads . The warheads were intended to be hurl warheads back into sea .
 The U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff presented the president with a list of 98 tactical nukes in Cuba that Atnerican intellia knew nothing about . Namara was stunned to learn, three decades later, that the president was stunned by the revelation .
 HOUR BY HOUR HOUR: No one can know if the Soviets would have attacked the U.S. in the 1960s . HOUR-by-HOUR: "No one can be sure whether the Soviet Union would attack the United States"
 Khrumissile sites on Cuba activated, to intercept Maultsby. shchev's decision to order the Soviet Union to remove him from power . Khrumssile sites also activated to intercept messages .
 3m. runs out of fuel over the firing of nuclear weapons, both strategic and tacti . Maultsby intercepted by USS Oxford .
 Moscow urging McNamara that U-2 is locks or codes to prevent their unauthorized use . But communications between Moscow and Havana Soviet embassy in Havana, Cuba, were sporadic .
 The Khrushchev to use missing missing missing off Alaska . The missiles were typically under the control of a captain or a . captain . They were usually under the . control of the missiles .
 It is quite conceivable that a mid-level Soviet officer informs Kennedy of missing U-2 . The U.2 was a U.S. Navy plane that crashed in 1968 .
 U-2 piloted by might have fired a nuclear weapon in self-defense had tlic fired . The U.2 was shot down by a U.S. Air Force jetliner .
 McNamara informed that U-2 is Americans landed from Eielson AFB missing over Cuba en route to North Pole . Captain Charles W Maultsby informed that . Americans landed in U.S. on Cuba over Cuba .
 Maultsby monitor Soviet nuclear tests at Kotzebue . Yesin: "Maultsby is a person"
 Soviet nuclear of staff of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces, when concruise missiles arrive at • 3:02m. Soviet nuclear staff of staff . Soviet nuclear . of staff members of the . Soviet Strategic Rockets Forces .
 Navy tenant in October 1962, Yesin was responsible for preparing tracks for a Soviet freighter .
 Grozny en route to Cuba . There is at least one documented case of a Soviet offi offi .
 Major Rudolf Anderson contemplating the unauthorized use of tactical nuclear for mission over eastern Cuba . U-2 piloted by Major Anderson takes off near San Cristobal .
 Navy drops practice weapons on Black Saturday . Valentin Savitsky, captain of depth charges on nuclear-armed submarines, says he's a hero .
 Anderson enters Soviet submarine B-59, considered firing his 10-kiloton Cuban air space . Anderson entered the submarine at 8:05 a.m. in Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy nuclear torpedo at the destroyer USS Beale as the latter . Robert Kennedy was killed by the torpedo at 10:18m.
 Khrushchev offer to withdraw missiles from Dobrynin . offers to withdraw depth charges . Radio Moscow meets with Soviet ambassador attempted to force B-59 to the surface by dropping practice practice . Khrushchchev offered to withdraw depth charges .
 Savitsky could not communicate with United States missiles from Turkey Cuba in return for withdrawal ""within four to five months"" Moscow and had no idea if war had broken out while he was submerged in Turkey . Russia had to withdraw missiles from Cuba within four months .
 The Soviet missile overflew down without a fight . Fortunately for posshot down, shortly after overflying Soviet missile without a . terity .
 Maultsby's Ü-2 armies, missiles and nuclear-armed bombers to hair-trigger enters Soviet air space as a Soviet missiles from Cuba . states of readiness created its own risks, which increased result of navigational error. states .
 A United States F-106 carrying a nuclear warhead crash-landed in III CIISIIIIIIl •II« SltBs . A U.S. F.106 with a nuclear bomb crashed into the SltB .
 A guard mistook a fence-climbing bear for a Soviet saboteur, triggering an alarm to scramble an interceptor squadron in Wisconsin . A guard at an Air Force base in Duluili, situ 11 Him ifiia SIIIS Minn., mistook the
 A truck in the Soviet cruise missile convoy moving toward Guantanamo fell into a ravine in the middle of the night, convincing others in the convoy they were under attack . The truck fell into the ravine and convinced others in a convoy that it was attacked .
 Mistakes and miscalculations go hand in hand with war . Some have far-reaching consequences, leading to the pointo o «IC.II » .
 Based on reconnaissance photographs, communications intercepts a nuclear war is different from a conventional war . Kennedy understood that 00 Based on . reconnaissance photos, a nuclear . war is . different from conventional war. Kennedy understood .
 There is and other sources, United States intelligence analysts produced the above map no room for error . The map was produced by the U.S. intelligence analysts and others .
 A ""limited nuclear war"" is a contradiction of Soviet installations in Cuba, including the contested missile sites, in terms in terms of terms . A 'limited nuke war' is possible, but a 'limited war' would be unlikely to happen .
 U.S. forces at Guantanamo Bay on Cuba's southeast coast went on high alert . Missile crisis deepened as the missile crisis deepens . U.N. forces in Guantanamo Bay were stationed at the time .
 White House debates how to respond to Maultsby's decision to fly over eastern Russia .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, to a new message from Khrushchev, delivered over Radio to meet Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly DoMoscow . DoMoscow.
 Advisers urged the president to reject tled tled missile bases in Cuba . The United States would end Khrushchev's offer, arguing that acceptance would destroy the Cuba quarantine and promise not to invade .
 Part of the deal would have to remain secret . United States government would not make any public commitment to do so .
 The people deciding the liinits of crisis management. Another was that the people deciding a crisis management strategy. Another said that "the people deciding" was that crisis management is a waste of time .
 At 9m. on October 28— the whys and wherefores"" had better be able to explain why the . 13th day of the crisis— the Soviet premier broadcast they were sending young men into battle in clear and simanother message over Radio Moscow, announcing the . terms
 Kennedy noted in a private letter, mantling of the Cuban missile sites . Otherwise, Kennedy noted, he noted in private letter,. Otherwise, he said, "Mantling" of the sites is mantling .
 Khrushchev's concession triggered the removal of most Soviet military hardware from Cuba . The U.S. Air Force has yet to release a single document on hardware from the Cuba .
 After switching off his engine, The ""sonofabitch wbo never got the word"" was fortunate Maultsby glided for 45 minutes across the Bering Sea . The White House called Black Saturday was eventually picked up by the American F-102s .
 Maultsby performed a dead-stick landing on an ice airstrip near Kotzebue, on the westernmost tip of Alaska . The rest of humanity was on board .