 'He helped me achieve the passage of the Symms `Cuba Resolution' by Congress twice, in 1982, and again in 1984 . He helped me to achieve the . passage of . the . resolution by Congress .
 I will never forget Claudio's help in my successful efforts to reaffirm the Monroe Doctrine and to support the rights and liberties of the oppressed Cuban People . Claudio was a key ally in his efforts in his successful efforts .
 Claudio Benedi is the author of the `Benedi Doctrine,' which condemns the institutionalized violations of human rights by totalitarian Communist regimes around the world, especially in Castro's Cuba . Benedi: Cuba's human rights abuses are institutionalized by totalitarian regimes around world .
 Claudio has for a long time been in the forefront of those who denounce the Soviet military base in Cuba, in violation of the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement . Claudio says the Cuban military base is violating the agreement .
 Claudio is an expert on inter-American affairs, and for the last three decades he has been fighting for the security of America and the freedom of Cuba . Claudio says he is fighting for U.S. and Cuba's freedom .
 The Soviet-Cuban geostrategic relationship was printed in the Diario Las Americas of Miami of Miami on May 2, 1990 . The relationship was described as a "strategic relationship"
 Dr. Manuel Antonio de Varona is president of the Junta Patriotica Cubana . Dr. Varona was also the president of Cuba's National Socialist Party Party . The party is currently in the midst of a political crisis .
 Claudio Benedi was Secretary for the Foreign Relations and Washington Representative of the Junta Patriotica Cubana . He was sent to the 20th Session of the General Assembly of the Organization of American States .
 Soviet Union's Relations With Cuba are Geostrategic, Not Economic, Dr. Dr. Josef Zarate says . Zarate: Relations with Cuba are geostratic, Not economic .
 Claudio Benedi: Relations between USSR and Cuba are not merely economic, but fundamentally geostrategic . 'The Soviets have attained in Cuba for their penetration into the Western Hemisphere, 90 miles from the U.S.'
 Claudio Benedi, representative of the Cuban Patriotic Board in Washington, Cuba, is in Washington . Benedi is a member of the board who represents Cuba's Patriotic Council .
 If the USSR needs investment capital, it should get ahold of the $5,000 annual millions that is given to Castro for the use of the island as a strategic base . Patrick Buchanan recently affirmed that, as columnist Patrick Buchanan .
 The Cuban economy is weakening, as a result of the reductions in the aid that it receives from the USSR, says U.S. Senator Sam Nunn, chairman of the Armed Forces Committee in the United States .
 The USSR uses the Cuban territory as a base for its warplanes and warships, as well as its main facilities, such as the Cienfuegos base, the espionage plant at Lourdes, where it has 6,000 troops and technicians, and 27,000 military
 Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of the USSR, Victor Komplektov, said to Pravda that the USSR will continue economic cooperation with Nicaragua . Washington analysts say it could be a precedent for other communist totalitarian regimes .
 Benedi ends, do not seem to know the Stalinist nature nor Castro's megalomaniac paranoia, nor the sufferings and struggles of the Cuban people for 31 years, inside & outside of Cuba, for their freedom'
 This General Assembly meets in historical moments for the Americas and for the world . Honorable Ministers of Foreign Relations: Honorable Ambassadors and Representatives of the American States . Distinguished Representative of the Americas: Distinguished Representatives of .
 For the Americas, because we are celebrating the Centennial of the Inter-American System, and for the world because of the . unavoidable crisis of the totalitarian system of Marxist-Leninist socialism, that we expect to reach, in its full extension, the Stalinist redoubt in Cuba
 Cuban citizens have moral and legal duty of submitting to your learned consideration our position and denouncements to the effect that, as we suppose, linked by the same cause, they shall be taken into account .
 Cuba's Marxist-Leninist regime is 'totally incompatible' with the Inter-American System, says President Obama . Cuba is excluded from the U.S. because of its being a Marxist- Leninist regime, he says .
 An extra-continental power has tried to take it out of its geopolitics and geostrategy, through the use of a satellite government subjected to ideological servitude . Said part is integrated in the whole, historically, geographically, politically, economically & ideologically, despite the fact that an
 This Soviet Union's intervention in the internal affairs of the Americas, through its base in Cuba, has posed a challenge to the Continent of the U.S. It has produced a crisis in its institutions, values and principles, because of the Marxists .
 We are dealing with a subversive supplantation, with a displacement, with the destruction of the spiritual and material structures, in order to replace them with others that are alien to its history, its traditions and culture .
 Marxists have understood it thus and, because of it, they have declared war on the Inter-American System, on the OAS and on those nations which represent those values and principles . That is the reason why they attempt, by all means at their disposal, to introduce their Trojan
 The historical sequence cannot be broken by grafting onto the heart of the Americas alien ideologies, such as Communism . Communism is impracticality and evil nature have been proven, one that destroys man, woman and peoples .
 Pope John Paul II: 'Tragic Utopia has made peoples to retrocede to unprecedented levels in the history of humankind' Pope: 'That `tragic U.topia' has made people retroced to 'unprecedented levels'
 This Twentieth General Assembly of the OAS has no jurisdiction or powers to allow the entry of Castro's Marxist-Leninist regime to OAS . Not all the countries who are members of OAS are signatories to the Treaty of Rio, not all the nations who are .
 It must be pointed out that at the Eighth Consultation Meeting of the Foreign Relations Ministers, a Resolution was passed which declared Marxism-Leninism incompatible with the Inter-American System . The Resolution is still in force .
 Despite efforts to repeal it, it is still in force and still binding, since the modification of said Treaty, that was made in Costa Rica, has not taken effect because the necessary number of required states have not ratified it . Despite efforts .
 In the hundred years that the Inter-American System has lasted, a constant preoccupation has been, to protect the countries of this Hemisphere, as it was wished by Simon Bolivar, the Liberator and Jose Marti .
 This principle and foundation of our regional organization and our political philosophy has been violated by the Soviet Union through its satellite Castro . The Soviet Union has violated this principle and the defense of sovereignty and freedom, self-determination and the dignity of the human person, the president says .
 Castro's entry into the OAS is tantamount to become an accomplice of the Soviet Union and of the evil Marxism-Leninism . That is why to let satellite Castro enter into the U.S. OAS, he says .
 Those who attempt such a thing can be defined as suffering from political underdevelopment, political daltonism; they cannot see the red and black colors . Those who try to change the course of history are defined as 'political underdevelopment' Those who do so are 'suffering from
 Castro's Marxist-Leninist regime is a satellite of the Soviet Union, a lackey of Soviet imperialism . Castro's regime is the lackey to Soviet imperialism, writes David Frum .
 The answer is obvious; therefore, if we are honest, let us apply it to the satellite regime of Castro in Cuba . The answer to the question is obvious, and therefore, the answer is the obvious .
 We must be consistent and follow the historical sequence and the traditions of the Americas, instead of defrauding the founders of our nations . We believe that it is fundamental that we make reference to the indispensable background .
 We have proven that a regressive transculturation has taken place in Cuba, says Cuban president . Cuba has a history of 'regressive transport transformation has taken place in Cuba'
 The values and principles upon which a civilized coexistence of the free nations of this Hemisphere is supported have been destroyed, and other, falsely called values, which run counter to the Cuban people's tradition, culture and history, have been imposed . Cuban President Camillo Castro: "The values
 Cuba has been in Cuba an institutional violation of human rights, says CNN's John Sutter . Cuba's human rights record has been violated, he says . Sutter: Cuba has a history of institutional human rights violations .
 The human violation is committed both in the totalitarian and authoritarian regimes, albeit in the former it is committed in a totalitarian manner, but the institutional violation is only committed in Marxist-Leninist regimes . The so-called State has all rights and individuals have none, vis-a-vis
 None of the freedoms recognized for citizens may be practiced against that which is established by the Constitution and the laws, nor against the existence and purposes of the Socialist State . The Cuban people's decision to build Socialism and Communism is not against the Constitution .
 Only a naive or deluded person, or an accomplice of communism, would believe that in Cuba, under the Marxist-Leninist system, there could be any vestige of democracy . Only a . naive or . deluded . person would believe in Cuba that in . under the
 To this it must be added, mainly and fundamentally, that a military and strategic Soviet base is in Cuba . Cuba is a key military base for the Soviet Union, writes David Frum .
 The relationship between the Soviet Union and Cuba is geostrategic and not merely economic . We have proven that the relationship between Soviet and Cuban relations is not only economic, it's also strategic .
 The Soviet Union subsidizes Castro and his economic and social disaster with over $5 billion annually . That is why some people wonder that the Soviet Union would continue to subsidize Castro . Castro is an economic disaster for the United States .
 It is cheap for the Soviet Union to maintain its base within the heart of the Americas . The Soviet Union has a base in the U.S.
 The Soviet Union entered the Americas through Cuba, and it has established a military, political, ideological and subversive base . Cuba has established there, in fact, a military . political, political and ideological base .
 Cuba has a nuclear submarine base at Cienfuegos; an electronic base--the largest and most up-to-date outside of the Soviet Union--operated by 6,000 military and technicians . It utilizes the whole of the Cuban territory for its warplanes and warships .
 All of the above entrails, besides an affront, are a threat to the security and peace in the Americas, writes John Defterios . The U.S. should be aware of the threat, he says .
 In 1962, satellite Castro imperiled the Cuban people to extermination in a nuclear conflict, only to serve the interests of the Soviet imperialism . In the Nuclear missile crisis, in 1962, in Cuban exile, in Cuba, in the . Cuban people were threatened by the Soviet .
 Cuban people continues to be imperiled through the same or similar reasons, and a holocaust could take place . The Cuban people is imperiled by the same reasons, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "There, where a state of law does not exist, cannot be any protection for human rights," says Amnesty International . There, "there, where there is no state law does exist, can't be a protection for rights"
 There does not exist in Cuba the division of powers that is basic in the juridical and political structure of modern states, as Montesquieu declared . The division of power in Cuba is not basic in modern states .
 On Articles 9 through 29, the division of powers is banished, private property rights are abolished, as well as inviolability of the human person, freedom of education and all other rights recognized in the Americas about family, religion .
 In the so-called `Socialist Legality', the principle of `analogy' is enshrined . The principle of ‘analogy’ is also enshrined in the Socialist Party .
 Cuba's political prisoners of both genders are political prisoners, both genders . The system must generate violations in order to stay in power through terror and force, says Cuban president . Cuban president: "It is not a case of more or less freedom"
 Terror against the civilian population has been recrudesced and the dissidents have been threatened with a modification of the Penal Code to include dissidence as a form of fellonious treason punishable by the death penalty .
 Since the end of World War II, the Inter-American System has been getting ready to face the challenge of international communism, to prevent the intervention of an extra-continental power in the internal affairs of the Americas .
 NATO was a deterrent in Europe to prevent communist expansion, but the Treaty of Rio could not prevent the Soviet Union from expanding its neo-colonialism and its imperialism to the Americas, through locating its base in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro and the communist agents infiltrated in the Americas tried to prevent the OAS from being created, by murdering Jorge Eliecer Gaytan and bringing about over 5,000 deaths and a great deal of destruction . And it was not by coincidence that Fidel Castro .
 Despite that tragedy, the OAS was created to respond to the challenge . The OAS is the body of the Organization of African Nations .
 Some leaders of the Americas have been weakening the OAS, creating parallel organizations that have diminished its efficiency and dynamism, upon usurping some of its functions . OAS leaders have been turning their backs to this tragic reality .
 The OAS is what its states want it to be at a given time in its history . It is what the OAS has been called what it is at a moment in history . The U.S. has been at the top of the world's most powerful body .
 The United Nations Organization was created in 1945 and the OAS in 1948 . The OAS was the first organization to be created in the U.N. Organization .
 There are exemplified the case of satellite Castro and the intervention of an extra-continental power in the internal affairs of the Americas, with a military, subversive, political, ideological, terrorist and economical base .
 The Cuban government has declared itself Marxist-Leninist, it is separated from the Inter-American System, from the OAS and from all of its organisms . Cuba is now separated from all its organisms, the Cuban government says .
 A Joint Resolution of the United States Congress was approved--now known as the `Cuba-Symms Resolution, because of Senator Steve Symms having been its advocate . The United States obligated itself to fight together with the Organization of American States and with freedom-loving Cubans to attain
 On October 22, 1962, the so-called 'Missile Crisis' took place in Cuba . The Soviet Union learned that its base on the island was in danger and it placed its nuclear missiles there . Not to protect the Castro's satellite regime, but its base .
 By virtue of the 'Missile Crisis', the so-called `Kennedy-Khrushchev Understanding' was signed, a disastrous political mistake on the part of the U.S. It violates the Monroe Doctrine, the Treaty of Rio, the OAS's Charter and the
 Monroe Doctrine has been rendered useless to prevent Soviet penetration in Cuba and Nicaragua . In the latter, the Soviet Union maintains its power, although it may have surrendered government half-way through .
 One of the most outstanding leaders for democracy in Latin-America, Dr. Juan Carlos Vidal, is a Latin-American leader .
 Romulo Betancourt, an illustrious Venezuelan descended from the Liberator, Simon Bolivar, charged the Stalinist tyrant Fidel Castro with attacking and violating the Venezuelan sovereignty . Castro is accused of attacking and defying Venezuela's sovereignty .
 The Ninth Consultation Meeting of the Foreign Relations Ministers, on July 26, 1964, condemned the Castro regime as an aggressor and violator of the Venezuelan sovereignty .
 The next step should have been the application of the Treaty of Rio to the agressor and violator . The treaty of Rio was supposed to have been applied to both sides of the border .
 President-elect of Costa Rica, Dr. Dr. Juan Carlos Vidal, will be sworn in as president of the country . He says the regime has continued attacking and violating the sovereignty of the Americas .
 Rafael Calderon accuses Castro of intervening in the internal affairs of El Salvador by helping the Marxist-Leninist guerrillas . Calderon has stated, accusing Castro of . intervening in . El Salvador .
 Those aggressions are consubstantial with the communist system implemented in Cuba, says the Cuban government . "Those aggressions" are not the result of Cuba's communist system .
 Cuban state has freely agreed with you to comply with treaties, covenants, agreements and resolutions which are in force within the Inter-American System . "That is why we now ask you to fulfill what you obligated yourselves to comply," says Cuban president .
 Two nuclear plants are being built in Cuba, one of them precisely close to the Soviet submarine base in Cienfuegos . One of the plants is being built close to a Russian submarine base .
 These plants are being built with the same Soviet technology that so noisily failed at Chernobyl, in the Soviet Union . The plants will be built using the same technology that failed in Chernobyl in the USSR .
 Cubans are at risk of being killed by the U.S. State Department of Homeland Security . They are also a threat to the rest of the American States, says President Obama .
 The satellite Castro, following orders from the Soviet Union, has refused to sign and ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco on the Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in Latin-America . Castro refused to ratify and signed the treaty .
 15% of the Cuban population, that is, one and a half million people, both men and women, in the regular military and the militias, are on arms . We have learned from reliable sources that .
 Cuban economy has been destroyed by the communist system, Castro could not pay for the mobilization of those forces, he says . Castro was not able to pay for those forces .
 It has been verified that the Soviet Union had done likewise in Nicaragua . The Soviet Union also did it in Nicaragua, according to the report .
 The crisis of identity is fostered when governments fail to support the principles and values that have given them life . Governments turn their backs to their traditions, culture and history, and embrace ideologies that deny their transcendental values .
 There is identity among the nations of the Americas, and through that identity they make up an organic and regionally structured whole in the U.S.
 In order to attack and destroy the Americas, it is indispensable to attack the System based upon that identity and upon those principles, and that is exactly what is happening today . The Americas are at the center of the U.S. and the United States.
 Extra-continental foreign forces have infiltrated the Americas to subvert and destroy them . They have begun by securing a base in Cuba and attempting to have another one in Nicaragua, and by devising a strategy to destroy the Inter-American System .
 The economic, political and social development has been hampered, other times interrupted and in every case adversely influenced . The exodus of capital and skilled persons and the deactivation of national and foreign investments--by communist subversion, both urban and rural--was sponsored by the Soviet Union .
 The Inter-American System is theocentric and its values and principles comprise the belief in God, the full dignity of man and woman, their freedom, justice, peace and the idea that the resources existing in the Americas are at the service of the common good, administered by human beings
 The Inter-American System proclaims the unlimited respect to human rights, fraternity and brotherhood among men and women, vis-a-vis the class struggle . It is incompatible with Marxism-Leninism, since the latter proclaims . the barbarous practice of hate, instead of the
 Ideological pluralism--any euphemism used to cover the permissiveness that is an accomplice of Marxism-Leninism in the Americas-- is a negation of democratic coexistence in the bosom of the Inter-American System . Ideological pluralityism is a negate of democratic
 "There cannot be any possible coexistence where all the attributes and conditions for coexistence are not given," says the author of a new book .
 We say 'yes' to democratic pluralism, whereby representative democracy will be implemented . The people shall vote periodically, with full liberty, to elect its leaders in the plurality of democratic parties, which is the antithesis of Marxist-Leninist totalitarianism .
 "What they want is not coexisting, but destroying our democratic system," says Julian Assange . What they want to do is destroy the democratic system, he says .
 There is no ideologic pluralism in the Soviet Union or Cuba, nor was there any in the former communist-subjugated countries . The United States is not the only nation in the world to have an open society .
 In the former, those who advocate ideological pluralism are deemed as `deviationists' and severely punished . In the latter, they will be severely punished for their deviationism . The former was deemed as 'deviationist'
 There is the categorical answer for the deluded and the naive, the naive and the accomplices, who say or believe that there could be democracy and freedom in Cuba under the Communist system . The totalitarian Stalinist tyrant and the Soviet base are there .
 The Treaty of Tlatelolco on the proliferation of nuclear weapons in Latin-America has not been signed by satellite Castro . Castro says the treaty is so important for the present and future of the Americas .
 It is known that the Soviet Union has built a base for nuclear submarines at Cienfuegos, Cuba, which has been `visited' by warships capable of transporting and firing nuclear weapons .
 We believe that the Soviet Union, which signed the II Protocol of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, has violated it . The Soviet Union has violated the treaty, the U.S. government says .
 The government of satellite Castro has been charged with being involved in the illegal narcotics traffic . It lends its air space and territorial waters to facilitate said traffic between Latin-America and the U.S.
 Courts have accused high-ranking officials of the communist regime of being involved in illegal narcotics traffic . Cuba's communist regime has been accused of involvement in the illegal narcotics trade .
 A few days ago, Castro met at La Habana the lawyers of his partner in crime, former General Manuel Noriega, in trying `to contribute evidence' to defend his disgraced partner .
 The return to the Soviet Union of 27,000 Soviet military personnel who are presently in Cuba . The organized brigade with a force of 2,800 members, and the . Soviet military technicians who are 6,000 strong, stationed at the electronic base of Villa Lourdes .
 The return to the Soviet Union of the military personnel and `advisors' who are still in Nicaragua and with other subversive movements in the Americas . The return of Soviet Union will be seen as part of the return to Russia .
 The return to the Soviet Union of the nuclear and/or conventional weapons located in Cuba could be a return to Cuba . The return of Cuba's nuclear and conventional weapons could be seen in Cuba .
 The breakup of the military and ideological and geostrategic submission links between Cuba and the Soviet Union . Cuba and Russia were the two most powerful allies of the Cold War . Cuba was one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 The elimination of the communist system implemented by deceit, terror and force in Cuba in Cuba . Cuba's elimination of communist system was achieved by deceit and terror .
 The cessation of the subversive movement sponsored by the Soviet Union in several countries of Latin-America . El Salvador, Guatemala, Colombia, Peru, Chile, Brazil, Guyana, Suriname, Nicaragua and Honduras .
 This quotation should be present in the reformist deliberations of this Assembly, because Castro is an imitator of Stalin . Castro is the imitation of Stalin. This quotation is an example of Castro's imitators of Stalin, he says .
 That there cannot be any freedom in the Americas, as a whole, if it does not exist in each of its components, he says . That is the case that freedom must be found in all parts of the Americas .
 Democracy cannot exist in each of the Americas if it does not exist in all its components . That there cannot be any democracy in the whole, which is made up by the Americas, is said to be the case .
 Cuba is currently subjugated by a totalitarian, tyrannical, Marxist-Leninist regime of a Stalinist nature, convicted and self-avowed . Cuba, which is a part of the Americas, is part of a totalitarian regime .
 That there cannot be any peace in the whole, if it does not exist in each of its components . That cannot be peace in any of the parts of the world, he says .
 There could happen a holocaust in Cuba worse than that of Romania, if the American States would not help the Cuban people and act in solidarity with same to prevent that . The U.S. should help the Cubans and their families, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A crime is being committed in Cuba upon the Cuban people for the last 31 years, by a tyrant dressed in military garb who threatens to stain with blood that country before surrendering the power to the legitimate representatives of the people .
 We respectfully request that these denouncements be considered as made, that this document be circulated among the member States, and that action be consequently adopted . This document is circulated among member States .
 We still expect and trust that you shall act in solidarity with us and join us, as the patriots and statesmen of the last century did, to help several countries of the Americas to become independent . We are in the vanguard of that struggle and we still expect to act in
 Cuba is fighting for its second independence and the whole of the Americas has committed its history and dignity of free nations with the Cuban people, says President Obama . Cuba's independence is being fought for by Cuban people .
 Dr. Manuel Antonio de Varona, Chariman, Cuban Patriotic Board, Former Prime Minister and Chairman of the Cuban Senate, Dr. Dr. Manuel Antonio de . Varona is a former Prime Minister of Cuba and former President of Cuba .