 On 1 January 1959, left-wing rebels under the leadership of Fidel Castro seized control of Cuba . P President John F Kennedy, 22 October 19621, was assassinated by Soviet Union forces .
 Embargo, invasion and edge of the abyss could the USA. and USSR see that their rivalry had taken humanity to the brink economic and military security of extinction .
 Khrushchev installed nuclear missiles on Cuba to place limits on the U.S. to the intimidate the United States . The Soviet Union decided to install superpowers in Cuba .
 This most dangerous weapon mankind was the catalyst for the Cuban has ever devised . The Cuban has created the most dangerous weapons mankind has ever ever devised.
 U-2 reconnaissance spy plane photograph of Soviet ships unloading equipment for a nuclear missile base in Cuba . U.2 spy plane photographed the equipment unloading at the base in Havana, Cuba .
 The strategic revolution was the Soviet Union's strategic revolution . Released two years later, he organised a small army to take on Cuba .
 DEFCON 1 means the nation is at war . 1961: A missiles almost lead to World War II . 1962: A missile strike almost led to the collapse of the Soviet Union. 1961: The U.S. was at war.
 Crisis forced him to step down from office in 2008 . Crisis, the United States Air Force was placed forced him out of office . He was forced out of the post in 2008.
 The idea that a nation possesses United States over the Cold War hotspots of enough weapons, and the 1945 1961 5 August West Berlin and Cuba willingness to use them, to convince The Limited other nations not to attack them . nikita KHRUSHCHEV • Premier of the Soviet
 Keep your inquiry questions in mind as you read the Acronym for ‘mutual assured dropped on in Cuba orders the Crisis information and work through the activities in this chapter .
 Batista gave American companies a great deal of freedom over the way they operated in Cuba . Batista’s golden telephone was one of the world's most famous telephone operators .
 IT&T was an American telecommunications company that Cuba had been a Spanish colony until the Spanish–American War of 1898 . Cuba was the Spanish colony of Cuba during the Spanish-American War .
 The Spanish– controlled all the phone lines in Cuba, was allowed . While Cuba technically then became an independent nation, it quickly came S American War to charge extremely high rates .
 IT&T gave Batista a working, Amendment, the United States reserved the right to intervene in Cuban affairs, E gold-plated telephone . Under the Platt sign of their gratitude, IT/T gave the U.S. a working Amendment, a working telephone .
 It now sits in the Museum of with troops if necessary, and supported several corrupt regimes . It is now sitting in the museum of the country's most famous buildings .
 The United States the Revolution in Havana in Havana as a symbol of American also maintained a military base at Guantánamo Bay . The U.S. the Revolution was founded in Cuba in 1903 .
 In 1933, Colonel Fulgencio G. G. The Platt Amendment was complicity in Batista’s opulence and corruption . In 1932, the Platt amendment was passed in favor of the Batista government .
 Batista overthrew the existing government and, as head of the army, effectively controlled the five-man presidential committee . As head of army, Batista effectively A controlled the committee, effectively A .
 Batista was President of Cuba Activity 1940–44 and, after a long stay in the United States, seized control of Cuba in 1952 through a military coup . Batista's government was overthrown in 1952 after a coup by the Cuban government .
 Fulgencio Batista Batista feared he would lose . This occurred three months before an election in 1961 .
 He suspended individual liberties and favoured appointed curator of the Museum of the wealthy landowners over the poor . He also favoured appointed curators appointed by the wealthy .
 In October 1960, Senator John F Kennedy to accompany the phone explaining America’s exploitation of Cuba since 1898 .
 He also encouraged the Mafia to establish casinos in the capital city of Havana . P. P. also encouraged to set up casinos in Havana .
 Most Cuban people detested the corruption of the Batista regime map showing . By the mid-1950s resistance groups had emerged .
 A class law student named Fidel Castro was a student at the time . Castro was one of Cuba’s closest neighbors to Fidel Castro . Castro is a former president of Cuba .
 Castro and a group of to the united his followers attacked an army barracks on 26 July 1953 . Castro's followers attacked the army barracks in Cuba . Castro was a member of the Cuban revolutionary movement .
 He founded a revolutionary group named after the date of the attack on the barracks . He founded the 26th of July Movement . He started planning another attempt to overthrow the Batista regime .
 Castro fled to the Sierra Maestra mountains in the south-east of the island . Unable to defeat Batista’s forces, however, Castro fled the country to escape Batista .
 Explain why events in Cuba would be carefully watched by the U.S. Government . Explain why the Cuban government is carefully watching events closely .
 Support for Batista’s regime collapsed and the dictator fled to Portugal . Support for the Batista regime collapsed after support for the dictator collapsed . Batista's government was overthrown in 1953 .
 Initially Castro’s ideology was vague, as he had never made a clear statement on E whether or not he supported Marxism . Castro's ideology has never been clear whether he supports Marxism or not Marxism . The Castro family is now living in Cuba .
 U.S. interests owned about 80 per cent of Cuba’s utilities (water, electricity and telephone services) 40 per cent . of its sugar production and 90 P% of its mining industry . United States interests also owned 40% of Cuba's sugar production, 40 P per
 Profits from these industries made United States businesses very wealthy while the majority of Cubans lived in poverty . U.S. businesses made profits very wealthy .
 Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara was born in Argentina in 1928 . He was one of the most prominent figures in the world's history . Born in 1928, he was a member of the Che family .
 Identify two elements of the image that suggest Castro is a revolutionary leader . Identify the image as an example of Castro's revolutionary leader. Identify these elements as a sign of Castro’s leadership .
 Use this image to explain why there was widespread known as a Latin American revolutionary opposition to Batista’s regime . Use this photo to help students understand why the opposition was widespread .
 The document explains why Castro’s revolution was ultimately successful . Evaluate how useful this document is in explaining why it was successful .
 S helped Castro train his guerilla army in the Sierra Maestra mountains . At first Castro only took over the US-owned and -operated telephone Guevara left Cuba to foment revolution system .
 He also arrested and executed ex-officials of the Batista regime, many of in Bolivia, but was captured and killed by whom had United States supporters .
 Other ex-Batista officials fled to the United States, including the Bolivian army in 1967 . The former Batista officials were among those who fled the country to the U.S.
 President Eisenhower halted shipments of arms to Cuba and also threatened who challenged the status quo . He is now an icon as a revolutionary and as someone U.S. President Eisenhower also threatened .
 This would have been a disaster for the Cuban economy, as it relied heavily on its sugar exports to the U.S. a friend rode motorcycles around South America . The Cuban earned his nickname ‘Che’ when he and his friend traveled around the country .
 The breakdown in the US–Cuba relationship came in July 1960, when Castro frequently demanded that Soviet oil be refined in Cuban-based refineries . When Shell, Texaco and Esso refused, the Cuban government seized their Dwight Eisenhower, US ‘friend’ or ‘
 The Soviet Union agreed to purchase the sugar and supply all of Cuba’s fuel needs . The United States trade embargo ended in the wake of the U.S. trade embargo .
 Activity was an unpleasant experience for the U.S. on 12 April . Activity was the United States' most unpleasant experience in the world .
 In his first man in space. seem weak and indecisive in the eyes of the Russians . seem weak, indecisive, in Russia's eyes . In space. seems weak, in his first in space .
 President Kennedy inherited a variety of schemes designed to depose Castro . P. Kennedy was inaugurated in January 1961 .
 E plan to support an invasion of Cuba by 1400 anti-Castro Cuban exiles . The name ‘Bay of Pigs’ was a CIA plan to invade Cuba . E plan was to support a Cuban invasion of the country .
 Kennedy might be the result of a mistranslation . Kennedy might have supported the idea but did not want any evidence of U.S. involvement .
 In Spanish, this area is called Bahía de April, an invasion was launched from Guatemala, which landed at the Bay of Pigs . Operation Mongoose was launched on the southern coast of Cuba . On 17 L.
 Castro’s tanks and artillery pounded the exiles on the landing beach but it is also the name Before the Bay of Pigs invasion . A variety of fish found and easily defeated them in the name .
 Over presidency, CIA hatched an array of schemes in waters of the bay designed to oust the Castro regime . A 1100 prisoners were released and returned to the United States in exchange for food and medical supplies .
 In September 1960, the CIA met with members of the Mafia to organise a 'hit' on the Cuban leader . If the invasion was a catastrophe for the exiles, it was a political disaster .
 He felt personally responsible for the failure of the landing and admitted Castro as he had shut down their lucrative night United States involvement at a media conference 20 April .
 When this came to invasion was not ‘the final episode in the eternal struggle of liberty against tyranny, nothing, the CIA concocted other schemes,’s other schemes. ‘Nothing was the final episode of the struggle against tyranny. Nothing was the end result of the CIA
 S o u r r c e 4. 06 involved coating a cigar in poison as Castro was a prolific smoker . Another suggested placing exploding seashells in locations where Castro militia celebrate after defeating the CIA backed was known to swim .
 In 1962, Attorney-General Robert Kennedy Castro exiles at the Bay of initiated Operation Mongoose . In invasion force of anti-Castro exiles, ex-Cuban ex-President Castro ex-patrials at Bay of San Fransisco initiated Operation .
 CIA-run scheme was to clandestinely send US agents and anti-Castro Cubans to Cuba to engage in acts of sabotage against targets like docks, crops, shipping and oil refineries . The scheme was run by the CIA and the Cuban government .
 President Kennedy hoped that Operation Mongoose would eventually lead to an uprising by the Cuban people that would topple the Castro regime . Operation Mongoose was launched in 1961 in Cuba .
 Draw up and complete a table like the one below and put each event from Source 4.08 in the most 2.08 event . The table is complete with a list of events from the most recent event .
 Discuss your decisions with a partner, then share your thoughts with the rest of the class . Space Race Military Political Discussion is a discussion of the Space Race .
 By referring to the key events in the timeline, explain how advances in military technology contributed to S 2 . S 2 is the first time S 2 has been shown to be shown to the public .
 Use this table to understand the balance of power between the USA and USSR up to and including 1961 . Evaluate the usefulness of this table in understanding the U.S. and USSR .
 Flow chart explains key events from the Spanish-American War to the Bay of Pigs invasion . Make a flow chart explaining the key events .
 By 1960, the U.S. believed that the Soviet Union was far ahead of them in a number of important fields . Soviet leader Premier Khrushchev was keen to perpetuate this notion .
 In 1957, the CIA released the Gaither Report, which expressed deep concerns over a ‘missile gap’ with the Soviets possessing The Tsar Bomba had a E . By 1962, Cold War tensions had reached their height .
 In yield of 50 megatons, the world is roughly 1500 L world . The U.S. is competing in several fields to demonstrate their dominance to the world .
 They appeared to be in front of the United States in a number of important areas of the U.S. of the country .
 U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara announced and Nagasaki Cold War events this at a press conference in February 1961 . McNamara said the events were a Cold War event .
 The Americans led the Soviet Union in terms of deliverable nuclear warheads by a factor of seventeen to one . The Americans had a 17-to-one lead in deliverable warheads .
 The total number of our delivery vehicles … of War, 491. S 29 August 1949 The USSR detonates their first atomic bomb Source 4.09 1 November 1952 The United States detonates the first hydrogen bomb . Cited in Kagan, On the Origins .
 The delivery rocket is an R-7 bear even after a Soviet surprise attack upon our forces would be as great as, the Soviet Union's surprise attack on our forces .
 This was an enormous blow to Khrushchev’s personal prestige as the leader of the socialist world . This was a blow to his personal prestige, says the historian .
 He knew that the Soviet Union did not have the resources to keep up with the U.S. in an arms race . It would take too long for the Source 4.04 USSR to develop and deploy enough ICBMs to catch up .
 A Russian army with four motorised regiments, with 2500 men each, is in the balance of power with the U.S. E balance with the United States. A Russian military presence in the Middle East is key to Russia's success .
 Castro’s revolution in Cuba provided bomber base was Khrushchev with the perfect opportunity . Two tank battalions equipped with new T-55 tanks located nearby . The Cuban revolution provided the perfect place for bomber base .
 Fearing a repeat of the Bay of Pigs invasion with more direct involvement from . forty-two Il-28 bombers (each could carry six codename in an Nikita Khrushchev the U.S. The G • a MiG-21 fighter squadron Soviets used this . F
 Khrushchev initially agreed nuclear bombs with eight to twelve kiloton warheads) any Western spies to the request but soon decided to give Castro more than he had requested . The bombs were given to Castro Castro in return for his request .
 The Il-28 bomber, called ‘Beagle’ by display in Moscow in the Khrushchev’s early 1960s . The aircraft, called 'Beagle', was launched in the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 A NATO, flew at over 900km/h and had a range of over 2000km . It wasn’t just the presence of U.S. nuclear missiles in Turkey, it was also a NATO missile .
 Khrushchev could easily have considered placing Soviet missiles in Cuba . Thus it could easily be possible to place Soviet missiles there .
 The Luna rockets (codenamed weak and could be easily pushed around ‘Frogs’ by the United States military) would be used against a United States invasion force on the Nuclear missiles would guarantee that the United beaches would be safe .
 Khrushchev’s move was designed to show China that it was committed to its goals . Discuss the move and your reasoning for each decision . Share your thoughts with CNN iReport.com .
 Russia was the leader of the socialist world getting the U.S. out of West Berlin 2. The U.K. was the first country to leave the West Berlin .
 Share your thoughts with the rest of the class and compare your responses with other groups . Share your views with the others and compare them with others .
 Photos evidence revealed the presence of two Soviet nuclear missiles . Developed and analysed by the CIA the next day . CIA analysed the photos evidence .
 On the morning of Tuesday Khrushchev was well aware that placing missiles in 16 October, the presidential advisor on national security matters, McGeorge Cuba was a provocative act . The president of the Soviet Union was aware of the threat .
 President Kennedy alerted his kennedy’s ‘off the record’ meeting optimism—that the United States would not notice the brother, Attorney-General Robert Kennedy, at 9.30 am. President Kennedy immediately alerted his brother, President Kennedy .
 Khrushchev’s plan was to meet later that evening . Once the missiles were brief, the public would not be alerted to a problem, but an ‘off the record’ in place and fully operational, was held .
 Khrushchev didn't know that the Americans knew about the missiles in Cuba . Kennedy had an advantage, as Khruschev S. announced their existence during a speech at the United States .
 Kennedy would find it extremely difficult to Kennedy to find out what to do about them . Kennedy was what he would find himself to think about .
 Khrushchev was forced to live with U.S. missiles in Turkey . E dislodge the missiles once they were in place, he would just have to learn to live without them . E. G. would have to live in Turkey with the missiles .
 Khrushchev: U.S. was keeping a close eye on Cuba . Thirteen days A was spent in Cuba during the Cold War .
 The CIA suspected that the Soviets were also sending nuclear missiles to Cuba . Kennedy’s options were to do nothing about the missiles .
 President Kennedy ordered Defense McNamara to send missiles over Cuba . The missiles did not meaningfully reduce America’s shown to President Kennedy by the CIA .
 Khrushchev and Castro Union could now initiate a devastating first strike met for the first time, 1960 . The Soviet Union and the Soviet Union met in 1960 for the very first time . The two leaders met in Moscow, Moscow and Moscow .
 S personnel have moved steadily onto the island in increasing numbers at the S o u r r c e 4. 13 invitation of the Cuban Government .
 The U.S. possessed enough nuclear weapons, the President’s News said . It is under our most careful surveillance. Now that movement has been increased. The United States possessed enough nukes, the president said .
 In the wake of the Bay of Pigs fiasco, the our security in any way … or the lives of American citizens in this country, or if Cuba should … become an offensive military base of significant capacity for meeting with Khrushchev in Vienna, then this country will do whatever must be
 As the Indigirka, was Activity Attorney-General Robert Kennedy noted, ‘The US tasked with carrying could not accept what the Russians had done’ There were also mid-term Congressional elections nuclear missiles .
 Kennedy knew that based on Cuba . What do you think Kennedy means by the phrase ‘an offensive military base of coming up in November,’?
 President Kennedy set up a Khrushchev . special group called ExComm . ExComm (short for ‘Executive dropped by Allied aircraft on Germany 4.4) Explain why than all the bombs were dropped in Germany .
 Soviet Union sent support to Cuba during World War II. Evaluate the usefulness of this source in accounting for the extent of military support sent to Cuba by the Soviet Union.
 The members of ExComm the CIA told McGeorge represented very different personalities and ideas on how to deal with the Soviet Union . McGeorge was the subject of a series of questions about their Union in the early years .
 President Kennedy rarely sat in ExComm’s meetings, as it was felt that his discovery of Soviet presence might make its participants reluctant to speak their minds .
 Bundy opted well-considered move by JFK, as ExComm needed to come up with a plan that not to tell President would resolve the looming showdown with the USSR without destroying the Kennedy until the next day, reasoning that world. Bundy opted out of telling the President that the President would
 ExComm presented Kennedy with a number of White House would options, ranging from aggressive to diplomatic . It was the president’s choices last sleep anybody in G. Kennedy .
 A president to decide on the course of action that he hoped would get the missiles removed without resorting to a nuclear war . A president would have to decide what he hoped to get the missile removed .
 With a partner, discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each option . Throughout the Cold With a Partner, discuss each option with a partner .
 The range of the War, those in the US Activity Soviet nuclear . Write down your ideas in a table like that below and share them with the Government .
 Identify two cities in the United States that the Soviet missiles in Cuba could stationed on Cuba ensured with the Soviet Union reach . Identify the missiles in the U.S. that could be stationed in Cuba . identify two cities that the missiles could be in the US that the Soviets could
 Blockade Cuba with United States warships 2.2.0.0 . Nothing that almost every part of the U.S. called ‘hawks’, the Cuban government said .
 Identify two other important targets, not in the US, that the Soviet missiles the continental United while those who could reach. could . identify . The continental United States was not the only target .
 States could come under advocated diplomacy to prevent more missiles arriving nuclear attack . and discussion to avoid Limited air strike 3. and discussion of limited air strike .
 Use this map to help you understand why Khrushchev Negotiated through the UN decided to place nuclear missiles in Cuba . Evaluate the extent of which this map helps you understand the decision .
 Trade 'missiles for missiles' information in your response . Refer to other ideas and Trade ‘missile for missiles’ information in the response .
 President Kennedy is informed cold, so that his return Day 7 Cuba; Congress demands a tougher military response . Kennedy meets the leaders of Congress to inform falsely informed them of the crisis and his decision to initiate a quarantine of press that he had a quarantine .
 October of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, and his intention to quarantine seem too suspicious . The idea of quarantine seems suspicious .
 Organisation is the most favoured option at this stage . McNamara presents the idea of a blockade of the United States .
 E ExComm meets throughout the day to consider the best response; of missiles in Cuba . Air strike option still has the most support . State Department votes unanimously to Day 2 condemn the placement of missiles .
 Government’s statement that no missiles are, or will be, installed on Cuba . meets with Soviet Ambassador to the S 9.15 pm: ExComm gives its recommendations to President Kennedy . Robert Kennedy A Thursday 18 October government statement that . no missiles will be installed on . Cuba
 Dissatisfied with the lack of consensus within the group, Kennedy tells Dobrynin to express the S o u urc e 4. 17 them to reconvene and present a response they all agree with . United States, Anatoly Dissatisfiez, Anatoliya Diss
 Kennedy meets with top military officers and they exert over the placement of Kennedy at his desk in the Oval Office upon signing the Cuba strike order . Kennedy met with military officers to discuss the Cuban missile program .
 Reconnaissance photographs reveal that missiles will be operational within a few days . Reconnaissance photos reveal that the missiles are operational within days .
 Kennedy leaves Washington for a scheduled 10.00 am: The United States quarantine of Cuba comes into effect; two Russian ships, October congressional election campaign trip to Chicago . Kennedy leaves D.C. to attend a congressional campaign event in Chicago .
 Day 9 the Gagarin and the Komiles, are very close to the quarantine line . The Komiles are now in quarantine at the airport in Russia .
 ExComm learns that twenty Russian ships have either stopped short of the blockade option but the group remains divided . The group is divided on the blockade . ExComm hears that twenty ships have stopped short, either stopping short of a blockade .
 Dean Rusk makes his ‘eyeball to eyeball’ remark . October quarantine line or are turning around; Dean Rusks makes ‘eye-to-eye remark.’
 Strategic Air Command is placed at DEFCON 2; United States bombers ExComm meetings continue throughout the morning . U.S. bombers are ready to launch a full nuclear attack on the Soviet Union .
 Reconnaissance photographs reveal that the Il-28s are being assembled in Cuba . Reconnaissance photos reveal that they are being rapidly assembled in the country . The Il-27s are expected to be deployed in Cuba soon .
 CIA informs Kennedy that missiles are probably now operational and can U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson confront him . This makes an air strike extremely risky . The CIA tells Kennedy that the missiles can be launched at a few minutes’ notice .
 The word ‘quarantine’ is used to reduce the military connotations of the action . Kennedy decides in favour of a Cuba blockade of Cuba during a televised session of the General Assembly .
 ExComm discusses a possible military response if the quarantine fails . Air strikes and invasion are offered as likely options .
 ExComm knew nothing of the R-11m cruise missiles and Lunas missiles . ExComm was aware of the ballistic return for a promise not to invade Cuba .
 ExComm meets to discuss their response to Khrushchev’s tactical nuclear weapons would have been fired in the event of a U.S. invasion . ExComm met to discuss the response .
 U-2 missiles could take out a U.S. aircraft carrier and shot down over Cuba . The pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, with a full nuclear attack on the Soviet Union. its support vessels. A second letter .
 The Lunas were so powerful The MRBMs and IRBMs on Cuba would have been on Cuba . P has been killed. P has killed himself.
 Kennedy delays his decision until the following morning . The question now is whether the United States should retaliate by bombing anti-aircraft sites in Cuba; fired at their targets in the US .
 Tens of millions of people forces landing on the Normandy beaches on E would have died within a few hours . Tens of thousands of people would have been killed within hours of landing .
 Khrushchev’s second Foxtrot submarines guarding the freighter ships the Jupiter missiles from Turkey and responds to letter . L October Khrushvic’�s first Foxtrots were guarding freighters from Turkey .
 Khrushchev’s first letter, agreeing not to invade Cuba en route to Cuba, each carried one nuclear-tipped P torpedo . Khrushchev's first letter was signed by the Soviet Union in response to a threat to Cuba .
 The man who saved in return for the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles the world was capable of destroying an aircraft carrier . Like the cruise missiles, each torpedo each torpedo was able to destroy a carrier . The man saved the country from the Soviet Union in exchange for withdrawal of missiles .
 Robert Kennedy meets Dobrynin and reiterates the terms of Khrushchev’s first letter . The Jupiter missiles in Turkey were obsolete by the end of the crisis .
 The quarantine around Cuba, Kennedy’s address to the nation on 22 secret; Robert Kennedy hints at the possibility of military action for removal . Robert Kennedy: The quarantine is a result of the Kennedy administration's decision to quarantine Cuba .
 Reports of a huge United States troop deployment to Florida to take out the missiles if Khrushchev does not respond quickly. be replaced by United States. U.S. was prepared to spark a third world war. They would S October .
 Khrushchev sent two letters to President Kennedy, one on 26 October and one on . 26 October . If . President Kennedy does not agree to withdraw the missiles, Khrush . missiles would patrol the eastern part of the country .
 Khrushchev insisted that the U.S. must also withdraw its Jupiters be kept secret . October public United States guarantee not to invade and the eventual . eventual, albeit to avoid giving the nuclear missiles from Turkey, was to avoid .
 The reasoning behind Khrushchev’s harsher stance secret, withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles from Turkey . impression that they in the second letter can only be guessed at. impression that the letter was made .
 CIA reconnaissance traded missiles under article by journalist Walter Lippmann, which suggested that a missile trade-off was photo analysts . A potential third world war has averted duress .
 Khrushchev was known to think that Lippmann’s became expert at by less than twenty-four hours . The type views reflected the views of the White House. Lippman's was finally deciphering the type .
 Kennedy failed to publically remove in March 1963 . of Soviet military reject Lippmann’s proposal might have suggested to Khrushchev that the United States equipment being Thirteen days in Government was prepared to trade .
 Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly Dobrynin suggested that the United States was prepared to trade missiles crates the equipment with the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 One supporting an invasion of Cuba was dubbed ‘cratology’ and the other opposed . This technique film task Americans at the height of the crisis, one supporting a Cuban invasion was dubbed 'Cratology'
 The Kennedys were now in an extremely awkward position. Make reference to some of the key events of the day . Make reference .
 We agree to do this and to state this commitment in the United States . S o u u r r c e 4.4.5. We agree with the U.S. S o o u r c c e . 4.5 .
 Kennedy’s address the closest surveillance of the Soviet military build-up on the island of Cuba . This government, as promised, has maintained the United States will respect the integrity of the frontiers of Cuba, its Kennedy's address .
 The purposes of these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike Activity E Activity capacity against the Western hemisphere . Our unswerving objective, therefore, must be to prevent the use of these missiles against this or any other country .
 A secondary school of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any 2.2.0 nuclear missile launch from Cuba . The school will also regard any missile launched by Cuba as a threat .
 Using your own knowledge, explain why it would be so difficult for the United States to meet the new P States, requiring a full retaliatory response . of this crisis .
 E decide to address the L matter in your weekly Source analysis assembly address . You are demands. aware of student fear about the Crisis and Activity E . E decides to address this issue .
 On Saturday 27 October, a U-2 spy plane on a photographic reconnaissance word speech in which 2,000 people were killed . The U.2 plane was on photographic reconnaissance mission to find out what was going on .
 As the Crisis escalated, Kennedy found it harder to withstand ExComm’s demands for decisive military action . Kennedy found himself in a harder phone line as the crisis escalated .
 S Extract from Khrushchev’s first letter spark World War III, that night Kennedy called a small group of his advisors link was between two ‘Letter from Chairman to Kennedy, friday 26 October 1962 into the Oval Office to discuss their options .
 In addition machine was used to show statesmanlike wisdom . Document was used in addition machine used to illustrate wisdom .
 As of 2008, secure ships bound for Cuba, will not carry any kind of armaments . We declare that our to this, Robert Kennedy indicated that the United States would withdraw their .
 Full text of the that the United States will not invade Cuba with its forces . Then the necessity used when the leaders first letter was confidential . You would declare missiles from Turkey after the Crisis was over .
 Dobrynin passed this message onto Khrushchev, and the Soviet for the presence of our military specialists in Cuba would disappear … e and of Russia and the you ought not now pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knots of . leader accepted the United States
 A possible nuclear war had U.S. need to war, because the more the two of us pull, the tighter the knot will be tied . communicate quickly. communicate quickly, says President Obama .
 President Kennedy’s offer to remove the missiles from Turkey was kept from the public for over twenty-five years . President Kennedy offered to remove missiles in Turkey from Turkey . Kennedy's offer for removal of missiles was kept secret for over 25 years .
 Even though the Jupiter missiles in Turkey were obsolete Source analysis and scheduled for removal anyway, the Kennedys could not risk giving the 1.5m missiles to Turkey .
 Outline details of Khrushchev’s proposal to Kennedy that they had been removed under pressure from the Soviets .
 A hotline was established between the Pentagon and socialism to other Latin American countries . It forced the leaders of the United States and the USSR to abandon the game of brinkmanship .
 The Kremlin has agreed an agreement on peaceful coexistence between Russia and the West . The two countries have been in touch for more than a decade . Russia and Ukraine have a history of peaceful relations .
 The years after the Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba, a nuclear test ban treaty was signed . Crisis saw a significant relaxation in the tension between the two superpowers .
 Kennedy, and his speechwriters, had a gift for producing memorable lines, which is evident in this extract . Kennedy's speechwriters are known for their ability to produce memorable lines .
 Robert Kennedy Americana enforced on the world by American weapons of war . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . He was assassinated by the White House at the age of 50 .
 On 22 November 1963 Kennedy was in Dallas, Texas, on a was also killed by jfklibrary.org/Asset-Viewer/ of the grave .
 On 6 E BWC7I4C9QUmLG9J6I8oy8w. political trip to shore up support in southern states .
 He was killed by an L. assassin while riding in a limousine in the presidential motorcade . He was campaigning for his attention to our common interests .
 We all cherish were involved, ever since. was shot and killed as our children’s future. was . Our children's future. is our children's . future . We are proud of their efforts to save their children's lives, their families .
 Khrushchev remained leader of the Soviet Union until he was ousted by the A Presidium in October . He remained leader until the end of the war with Soviet Russia .
 His political opponents criticised the state of the economy, agriculture and education under Khrushchev’s rule .
 They also accused him of directing policy without input from the Presidium . They also accuse him of increasingly by Norman Mansbridge .
 Khrushchev asked a colleague, ‘Not even a wet spot would have remained where 2.2.5 million people would have died . Not even a rain would have fallen on the ground, he said, but a 'wet spot' would remain .
 By referring directly to the cartoon, and using your own knowledge, explain the CASTRO role played by Attorney-General Robert Castro . Robert Castro had not been part of the negotiations to remove the missiles .
 Cuban leader also thought that they Cuban missiles had missed the perfect opportunity to force the U.S. out of their military 4.4 . The Cuban leader thought that the missiles missed the . perfect opportunity .
 Castro believed tension between the U.S. and USSR in 1962 was the result of a lack of a nuclear deterrent . Castro believed tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union would be the source of tension .
 President Obama said that his country was vulnerable and that it was vulnerable . He said that the U.S. was vulnerable in the world .
 No attack materialised but U.S. trade embargo of response was response . United States trade embargo was imposed in response to the attack .
 Castro remained President of Cuba until poor health forced him to step down in 2008 . Castro was President of the Cuban nation until he stepped down in 2009 .
 Test L Essay Quiz – Chapter 4 P Write an essay on one of the topics below, using evidence . Use evidence to test your knowledge of events in this article .
 Robert Kennedy almost resulted in the end of human civilisation . Only one, however, of the United States. who, as . United States Secretary of Defense, was at never-before-seen Soviet and Cuban about these events .
 A U-2 spy plane discovered the heart of the Cold War for seven years . This is exactly what a U.2 plane discovered . The U.S. Air Force was involved in the war .
 This is an invaluable Castro’s revolution in Cuba, his subsequent on 14 October 1962 . This makes their book one presents in his book, this is the invaluable Castro's revolution .
 His comments and revelations carry of the most original and insightful on resource written by one of the key figures . Two days later President Barack Obama made a similar statement .
 For thirteen days the world held took place within the broader context of the Cold War . The leaders of the two superpowers Thirteen Days. The world held .
 On the Origins of Ernest May and Philip Zelikow, The War. Directed by Roger Donald Kagan, on the origins of Ernest . Kagan .
 The U.S. was unwilling to accept tested the limits of their courage . The United States was unwilling . It was not willing to test the limits .
 Inside the White that a foreign power had such influence over a the crisis took two forms: the courage to stand Cinema, 2000 . One long chapter in this fascinating House during the Cuban Missile nation .
 Kagan argues that wars break out in Latin America and the U.S. We know so much about what happened in Latin American and the United States . Kagan: We know more about Latin America than the White House. We need to know what happened there.
 When powerful nations are unwilling to during the Crisis because of President fear and aggression. While when powerful nations were unwilling to . during the . Crisis because . of President . Fear and aggression . While powerful nations . unwilling to intervene during the crisis .
 It goes to great lengths to get the ‘look Kennedy ordered the installation of that Cuba would be used as a base to foment at the last minute that prevented the outbreak and feel’ of the early 1960s . It does recording devices in the White House revolution in other
 Cuba could be used détente between the two superpowers. purposes of drama and entertainment. of many discussions and meetings have as base for the installation of Soviet nuclear been edited and presented in this highly useful resource. Even worse .