 Nikita Khrushchev’s decision to put nuclear missiles in Cuba was precipitated by two major developments . The decision was made in response to a series of major developments in the Soviet Union .
 The rise of the Cuban communist movement in 1959 overthrew President Fulgencio Batista and brought Fidel Castro to power . The first was the rise of Cuba's communist movement, which overthrew the Batista .
 The Cuban Revolution was an affront to the United States, which took control of the island following the Spanish-American War of 1898 . The U.S. was taken control of Cuba in 1898 after the Spanish War of Spain .
 The U.S. remained a close ally with Cuba after it was granted independence . The United States granted Cuba its independence several years later . Cuba's independence was granted in 1961 .
 The CIA prepared to overthrow the Castro government in Cuba . Under the directive of President Dwight D Eisenhower, the CIA prepared for overthrow of Castro government .
 The resulting Bay of Pigs Invasion saw the defeat of approximately 1,500 American-trained Cuban exiles at the hands of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces . President Kennedy ordered the invasion in April 1961 .
 The Soviet Union was motivated to assist the Cuban government that had come to power without any support or influence from Moscow . Fidel Castro and Che Guevara met in 1961 .
 The Soviets feared that the U.S. would continue to oppose and delegitimize the Castro regime . Despite the Americans’ humiliating defeat at the Bay of Pigs, the Soviets feared the United States would not back Castro .
 Khrushchev explained, “The fate of Cuba and the maintenance of Soviet prestige in that part of the world preoccupied me.” The fate of the Cuba preoccupied him.
 Khrushchev made the decision after the U.S. and Soviet nuclear capabilities were the disparity between the two countries' nuclear capabilities . The other factor was the disparity of American and Soviet capabilities in nuclear weapons .
 From the Soviet perspective, nuclearizing Cuba would also serve as an effective response to the American Jupiter missiles deployed in Turkey . Nuclearizing Cuba could also be a response to U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey, according to the Soviet leader .
 In May 1962, a special Soviet delegation made a secret trip to Cuba to work out the details of the operation . The operation was codenamed “Anadyr’s” with Castro . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were involved in the secret operation
 From July to October 1962, the Soviets secretly transported troops and equipment to Cuba . The Soviet Union sent troops and supplies to Cuba from July 1962 to October 1963 .
 If all went according to plan, the Americans would find out about the operation only after it was too late to stop it . 902 soldiers were deployed, most wearing civilian clothes and introduced as “agricultural specialists”
 The CIA was unaware of the operation until October, as it had little presence in Cuba following the Bay of Pigs fiasco . The operation took place in October .
 The U.S. put a five-week moratorium on aerial reconnaissance over Cuba over Cuba . A series of international incidents involving U-2 spy planes had caused the United States to put an international moratorium on U.2 .
 The missions resumed on October 14, when Air Force Major Richard Heyser flew over the island and recorded video evidence of R-12 sites .
 President Kennedy meets with the pilots who flew reconnaissance missions over Cuba in October 1962 . President Kennedy faced a pressing decision when Soviet missiles were on their way to Cuba .
 Kennedy wisely ruled out a military strike, noting that it was likely to miss at least some of the missiles . It would prompt Soviet retaliation, probably against a vulnerable West Berlin, he says .
 He ultimately chose the second option proposed by the CIA, but with one crucial difference . The CIA says the president would have to choose between the two .
 His military advisers nevertheless continued to push for an attack . Kennedy sardonically quipped, “These brass hats have one great advantage in their favor”
 Kennedy also ordered the Strategic Air Command into Defense Condition 3 and two days later upped it to DEFCON 2, only one step short of nuclear war . Kennedy also upped the Defense Condition 2, which is considered the highest level of alert .
 66 B-52s carrying hydrogen bombs were constantly airborne . They were replaced with a fresh crew every 24 hours . Among other preparations, 66 of the 66 were refueled with hydrogen bombs .
 U.S. officials made sure that the Soviets would pick up the communications ordering the American nuclear forces on high alert . The Soviets would order the American military forces to be on alert .
 American Ambassador Adlai Stevenson famously sparred with Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin over the crisis . At the U.N. at the United Nations, Stevenson famously exchanged words with Soviet ambassador . The crisis was the height of the Cold War .
 It was one of four submarines sent from the Soviet Union to Cuba . All four were detected and three were forced to surface . Three of the submarines were forced out of Cuba .
 The diesel-powered B-59 had lost contact with Moscow for several days, and thus was not informed of the escalating crisis . It was not the first time the plane had been in contact with Russia .
 Crew members fainted from heat exhaustion and rising carbon dioxide levels . Crew members also fainted due to heat exhaustion, officials say .
 American warships tracking the submarine dropped depth charges on either side of the B-59 as a warning . U.S. warships tracking down the Soviet submarine in October 1962 .
 The crew, unaware of the blockade, thought that perhaps war had been declared . The crew of the ship was unaware that the blockade had been imposed .
 Vadim Orlov, an intelligence officer aboard the submarine, recalled how the U.S. ships “surrounded us and started to tighten the circle, practicing attacks and dropping depth charges”
 The B-59 was equipped with a T-5 nuclear-tipped torpedo . Unbeknownst to the Americans, the plane had been equipped with the torpedo .
 The bomb was capable of a blast equivalent to 10 kilotons of TNT . It was two-thirds the strength of the bomb dropped on Hiroshima . The bomb dropped in 1945 was two thirds stronger than the Hiroshima bomb .
 Firing without a direct order from Moscow, however, required the consent of all three senior officers on board . Firing in violation of orders from Moscow required consent from senior officers in the ship .
 Political officer Ivan Semonovich Maslennikov agreed that they should launch the torpedo . The torpedo was launched by the Soviet Union in the early 1930s .
 The last remaining officer, Second Captain Vasili Alexandrovich Arkhipov, dissented . He dissented against the decision .
 The B-59 surfaced near the U.S. warships and the submarine set off north to return to the Soviet Union without incident . The submarine was able to make its way back to Russia .
 It took almost a week of tense negotiations following the institution of the blockade . Although the Americans and the Soviets ultimately reached an agreement, it took almost one week of negotiations .
 A deal was on the table, the Soviet Union would remove the missiles if the U.S. was willing to accept Castro’s communist regime in Cuba . The Soviet Union offered the United States a deal to remove missiles from Cuba .
 Khrushchev upped his demands in an address broadcast publicly via Radio Moscow . Khrushchevs demanded a U.S. Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile .
 The Soviet Union would stand down in Cuba only if the U.S. agreed to remove the Jupiter missiles deployed in Turkey . The United States would also agree to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey in Cuba .
 Later that day, an American U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba . The plane was later shot down by a Cuban fisherman .
 The pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, would end up being the only military fatality during the crisis . Anderson was the only person to die in the plane crash . Anderson died in the crash .
 U.S. officials mistakenly believed that the Kremlin had ordered the attack . They were demoralized by the turn of events . American officials thought the attack had been ordered by Russia .
 President instructed his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, to meet secretly with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . Unbeknownst to many of his advisors, the President instructed Robert Kennedy to meet with the ambassador in secret .
 The U.S. was willing to remove the missiles from Turkey within five months, but under the condition that it not be part of any public resolution to the conflict . The United States was willing remove the missile from Turkey in five months .
 Given that Turkey was a member of NATO, an admission that the U.S. was trading missiles in Turkey would have undermined the alliance .
 The Soviet Union began to dismantle the nuclear sites in Cuba within a day of the agreement . Six Soviet missile transporters are loaded onto a ship at the Port of Casilda in Cuba, November 6, 1962 .
 Fidel Castro refused to let in any U.N. inspectors to verify the removal of missiles . Castro was furious with Khrushchev’s decision to give in to American demands .
 The Soviets had to resort to loading missiles on ship decks and uncovering them at sea, where they could be photographed by American planes . U.S. planes were able to photograph missiles at sea .
 The United States lifted the blockade on November 20 and removed the Jupiter missiles from Turkey by April 1963 . The U.S. lifted the embargo on the missiles by November 20 .
 In the end, the removal of the missiles was a fairly meaningless gesture as the new Minuteman ICBMs had rendered the Jupiters obsolete .
 Khrushchev affirmed only days after the end of the crisis, “We fully agree with regard to . regard to three types of tests or, so to say, tests in three environments.”
 Less than a year later, the two superpowers signed the Limited Test Ban Treaty . The treaty included the principles outlined by Khrushchev .
 The years after the crisis also saw a massive increase in the construction of nuclear weapons in the Soviet Union . Nevertheless, the years following the crisis, the Soviets continued to build nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet stockpile tripled by the end of the decade and peaked at over 40,000 warheads during the 1980s . The stockpile peaked at 40,500 warheads during that period .
 Soviet leaders felt they had little choice but to capitulate during the crisis given the comparative weakness of their nuclear arsenal . This phenomenon can be explained in part by the fact that . Soviet leaders feel they had . little choice . but to surrender during crisis .
 The crisis prompted the creation of the Moscow-Washington hotline . The hotline is a direct telephone link between the Kremlin and Washington .
 Kennedy also ordered the creation of the nuclear “football” which would give him and future presidents the means to order a nuclear strike within minutes . Kennedy also created the "football" which would allow him and other presidents to order nuclear strikes within minutes.