 Hitler's Third Reich ended in Berlin on April 30, 1945 . Part of a three-part documentary exploring the history of the Third Reich . Epilogue begins with the opening page of the book, "Hitler's third Reich"
 The day before, along with the incoming shells, came particularly bad news for the fuehrer . By this late date in World War II, he was confined to his underground bunker beneath the Reich chancellery . The day after .
 Hitler learned that his Axis partner, Italy's Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini, had been captured by paramilitary Italian resistance fighters . Hitler had learned that two days earlier his Fascist partner, Mussolini was captured by resistance fighters in Italy .
 Mussolini and his mistress, Clara Petacci, were executed and their bodies were left hanging from lampposts in a Milan piazza . Mussolini's mistress was also executed and his body was left hanging hanging from a Milan street . The bodies of the two were hung from
 Hitler had married Eva Braun just hours earlier in a small civil ceremony inside the Fuehrerbunker . Hitler was especially worried because he had married Braun in a civil ceremony .
 He handed out poison capsules to his remaining female secretaries and had Blondi, his favorite Alsatian dog, poisoned . The former president handed out poisoned capsules to all female secretaries .
 Hitler, decorated World War I soldier and hardened political fighter, made it clear that he and his philosophies would not leave the world stage quietly . Hitler, a decorated WWI soldier, would not be able to leave the country quietly .
 Hitler then passed along a line of his entourage, mostly women, and shook their hands while mumbling inaudibly . Hitler then shook hands with the hands of some of the women .
 At about three P.M. on April 30, members of H itier's entourage heard a single shot from their leader's quarters . Members of the entourage say they heard the shot from Hier's quarters at about three p.m. ET .
 Hitler's valet, SS Sturmbannfuehrer Heinz Linge, and an orderly emerged with a blanket-covered body . Hitler's body was covered in a blanket by a blanket . Linge was a member of the SS .
 The corpses were carried up to a garden area, placed in a shell crater, and burned with gasoline . The bodies were carried out of the garden area and burned in a crater .
 Remains were never found, reportedly due to the constant shelling . H owever, these remains were never recovered .
 It was well known that H itier often made use of doubles, men who closely resembled him, for public presentations .
 Pauline Koehler, a maid at H itier's B erghof in Berchtesgaden, insisted she knew of at least three men who doubled for Hitler .
 The few persons who testified that he was dead were ardent N azis who were eager to please their captors— whether Russian, British, or American— with accounts of the leader's death . After all, the few people who testified to the death of the N. azis were
 F egelein had left the bunker but protested when captured by an S S search party that he planned to return . He had been captured by the search party but protested that he would return .
 He was shot by a firing squad in the chancellery garden for desertion . He was later shot by the firing squad for deserting .
 Kristina Reiman, an actress who met with Fegelein in Berlin, met with him April 27 . Reiman says she was privy to secret knowledge about the affair . Fegelelele met with Reiman in Berlin in April .
 Fegelein said that if the fuehrer ever discovered that he knew his secret, he would kill him if he ever discovered it .
 A H itIer double could have been secreted into the bunker any time prior to his reported suicide . A double could be secreted in the bunker prior to the reported suicide of A HIer .
 The double, dressed in the fuehrer's clothing, could have been shot, a poison capsule placed in his mouth, and left to be covered by Bormann and retrieved by the unsuspecting valet Linge .
 Hitler could have then passed from the study through his living quarters to a small conference room containing a stairway to the garden above . Hitler could then have passed through the living quarters of his home to the conference room . Hitler’s study could have led him to a room with a
 Hitler's party and an armed SS escort could have made their way to a secluded spot . Linge and others from the entourage waited in the hallway outside Hitler's study .
 Hitler could have moved along Hermann Goering Strasse, then cut across the Tiergarten to the Zoo Station near Adolf H itier P latz . Hitler could also have cut across Hermann . Goering . Strasse and Adolf H. itier .
 F rom there, they could have followed the rail lines to the Reichssportfeld and crossed the Scharndorfestrasse to the Piechelsdorf Bridge, a short walk to the Havel River, where a J u-52 floatplane would have been waiting
 A J u-52 pontoon plane had landed on the Havel the previous night, at the radioed request of someone in the Fuehrerbunker . The plane landed at the request of a request from a bunker bunker .
 Author Infield suspected this was a practice run for the following night . Infield has suspected it was an attempt to win the game .
 Once away from Berlin, an airplane could have taken Hitler almost anywhere in territory not under direct control of the Allies . Switzerland, Spain, or any number of other friendly locations .
 Conventional history says that Hitler and Eva Braun committed suicide in the bunker . Despite tantalizing tidbits of information that have surfaced since the war, there is no conclusive evidence .
 On J uly 17, 1945, during the Potsdam Conference, Soviet leader] oseph Stalin reportedly told U.S. president Harry S Truman that Hitler did not commit suicide but probably escaped . Stalin reportedly said that Hitler 'probably escaped'
 Years later, the Russians produced photos purporting to be of Hitler's dead body . The photos contradicted their earlier accounts that the bodies of H itIer and his mistress had been immediately burned .
 Today, while H itier's fate may be intriguing and undoubtedly will be argued for years, it is immaterial, a moot point . The fate of Hier will be debated for years but it's immaterial today .
 World War II is perhaps the greatest untold story of the twentieth century . The Nazis, armed with advanced technology and the greatest hoard of treasure in history, were able to escape justice .
 This might not be so far from the truth. Unfortunately, as shall be seen, this might not have been so true .
 They escaped with the loot of Europe as well as rocket science and even more exotic technologies . The group escaped with some of the world's most famous inventions .
 Both Nazi science and ideology were brought to America in the aftermath of World War II with the aid and assistance of the very same self-styled globalists who created National Socialism in the first place .
 Their agenda matches that of the old Bavarian llluminati, who were long thought to have perished soon after the time of Gorge Washington .
 If the order died, its credo lives on— power and control through wealth through wealth, any means possible . The order died but the credo still lives on: Power and control is through wealth by any means .
 From the seeds of Nazism planted in America during the Cold War sprang a whole new nation, one that today has become the greatest superpower in history . America has incurred a growing hatred among the nations of the world as well as alienation and dissension among its own citizens .
 At the beginning of the third millennium after Crist, by most criteria, the once-free constitutional republic of the United States had become a National Socialist nation, an empire of the creators of the Third Reich .
 This work has no political conviction to advocate, no conspiracy theory to press, and no hidden agenda . Be advised that this work has . no political convictions to advocate .
 It is a collection of supportable facts that leads to certain conclusions, uncomfortable and unconventional as they may be . It is the collection of supporting facts that lead to the conclusion, uncomfortable or unconventional .
 The terms under consideration are the definition of the term under consideration here . But first, one must understand the definition .
 The First Reich is known as the Holy Roman Empire, although it was neither holy, nor Roman, nor an empire . The first Reich was not an empire, but a holy, Roman, or an empire. It was neither Roman nor Holy nor Holy Roman .
 This monarchial empire was modeled after the Roman Empire and ruled by kaisers, or caesars, until 1806 . Napoleon marched his troops into Berlin when he invaded Berlin .
 The S econd R eich was created by P rince Otto von B ismarck, who as premier of P russia defeated Napoleon III in 1871 and became the ""Iron Chancellor"" over about three hundred independent states .
 Nationalosozialistiche Deutsche Arbeiterpartei, the National Socialist German Workers P arty. This was derived by combining the first syllable of ""NAtional"" and the second syllable  of ""soZlalist"" in the name Nationalososoz
 This was the small radical political party H itier built into a fascist system that threatened the entire world . Hier built a small radical party that threatened to destroy the world, he says .
 "A typical attribute of fascism is the merging of state and business leadership," says Julian Zelizer . "Fascism is a form of fascism," says Zelizer. "It's a sign that fascism is a state-led state, not a business, it's a way of
 Benito Mussolini is credited with coining the word "fascism" Mussolini's fascist Blacks hirts called F ascisti are a name taken from his fascist Black hirts . Mussolini coined the term "Fascism," a term taken from the fascist Blacks
 This term derived from the ancient R oman symbol of the fasces, a bundle of rods with a protruding axe blade . Fasces is the symbol of an axe with protruding blade . This term is derived from an ancient R Oman symbol .
 Under fascism, the individual is subordinate to the state, usually headed by a single leader . The individual must be subordinate to a single state in order to survive the fascist state .
 For the rest of this work, fascism will be defined as the merger of state and corporate power . Fascism is defined as merging state with corporate power, the author says . fascism will continue to be defined in the coming years .
 In fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, the state gained control over the corporations . The state took control of corporations in Nazi Germany and Italy .
 As an economic system, fascism was widely accepted in the 1920s and 30s . Professor DiLorenzo, professor of economics at Loyola College in Baltimore, Maryland, wrote, .
 They seek to gain and maintain the controlling power that comes from great wealth, usually gained through the monopoly of ownership over basic resources . They are seeking to gain control of the majority of the world's resources .
 Politics and social issues matter little to the globalist ruling elite . Globalists move smoothly between corporate business and government service . Globalist ruling elites move smoothly from business to government service.
 The desire for wealth with its attendant power and control drives their activities . The desire to be rich and powerful drives many of the world's most powerful .
 It is this unswerving attention to commerce and banking that lies behind nearly all modern world events . It is the unswerve attention to banking and banking .
 This may be a covert plan being carried out by individuals following a definite agenda . But this also may be an attempt to carry out a covert agenda .
 Financial powers that built the U.S. into the world's foremost superpower also created communism . As documented in Rule by Secrecy, the same financial powers built the United States into a superpower .
 After an aborted revolution in 1905, thousands of Russian activists had been exiled, including Leon Trotsky and Vladimir Lenin . Thousands of Russians were exiled after the failed revolution .
 The czar was forced to abdicate on March 15, 1917, following riots in Saint-Petersburg believed by many to have been instigated by British agents . After years of attempts at reform, the czar's attempts to reform were unsuccessful .
 Leon Trotsky, a fervent follower of Karl Marx, was living rent-free on Standard Oil property in Bayonne, New Jersey .
 Trotsky had escaped Russia in 1905 and fled to France, from where he was expelled for his revolutionary behavior . Trotsky was expelled from France in 1905 after being expelled from the country .
 J acob Schiff was a banker who lived with the Rothschild family in Frankfurt, Germany . Schiff's family was one of the bankers who worked with the family of the Rothschilds in Frankfurt .
 Rockefeller banker Schiff financed the 1904-05 Russo-J apanese War for control of Manchuria . Schiff had sent his emissary George Kennan to Russia to promote revolution against the czar .
 Senator Elihu Root is attorney for Federal Reserve cofounder Paul Warburg's Kuhn, Loeb & C ompany . Senator Root is also a lawyer for Warburg, who founded the Federal Reserve Reserve .
 The American International Corporation also helped fund the Russian Revolution . The company was formed in 1915 .
 Trotsky left the United States by ship on March 27, 1917 — just days before America entered the war . AlC directors represented the interests of the, • Rockefellers • Rothschilds . Rothschilds • Du Ponts • Kuhns • Loebs • Harrimans •
 Trotsky, whose real name was Lev Davidovich Bronstein, was being trailed by British agents . British agents suspected him of working with German intelligence since his stay in prewar Vienna . Trotsky was being followed by agents who suspected him working with the Germans .
 When the ship carrying Trotsky and his entourage stopped in Halifax, Nova Scotia, they and their funds were impounded by Canadian authorities . They feared that a revolution in Russia might free German troops to fight their soldiers on the Western Front .
 Wilson's alter ego, C olonel Edward Mandell House, told the Secret Service chief of the British Secret Service, Sir William Wiseman, that Wilson wanted Trotsky released . But this wellgrounded concern was overcome by the alter ego of Woodrow Wilson's .
 On April 21, 1917, less than a month after the U.S. entered the war, the British Admiralty ordered the release of Trotsky . Trotsky, armed with an American passport authorized by Wilson, continued on his journey to Russia .
 The train passed through Germany unhindered, as arranged by Max Warburg and the German High Command . Warburg was the brother of Paul Warburg, who handled U.S. financing during World War I .
 Lenin, like Trotsky, was labeled a German agent by the government of Alexander Kerensky, the second provisional government created following the czar's abdication . Lenin and Trotsky were both labeled as German agents by the second government of the second .
 By November 1917, Lenin and Trotsky, backed by Western funds, had instigated a successful revolt and seized the Russian government for the Bolsheviks . The revolt took place in November 1917 .
 Internal strife between the ""reds"" and the ""whites"" lasted until 1922 and cost some 28 million Russian lives, many times the war loss . Internal strife in Russia cost 28 million lives .
 Lenin died in 1924 from a series of strokes after establishing the Third International, or Comintern . Comintern was an organization formed to export communism worldwide . Lenin died from stroke in 1924 .
 Trotsky fled Russia when J oseph Stalin took dictatorial control, and, in 1940, was murdered in Mexico by an agent of Stalin's . He fled Russia and was killed in Mexico .
 Some conspiracy authors have seen a dual purpose to the funding of the Bolsheviks . The Bolsheviks were funded by the Communist Party .
 Lenin and Trotsky were being used to get R. ussia out of the war, to the benefit of Germany . It is clear that revolutionaries like Lenin and . Trotsky were using them to get the war out, to benefit of the German .
 Communism was being supported by the globalists to advance their plan of creating tension between the capitalist West and socialist East . The globalists wanted to create tension between capitalism and socialism in the East, the author says .
 Right-wing Britisli journalist and politician, who in 1933 joined Oswald Moseley's British Union of Fascists, observed thatto understand politics, one must make a study of power elites .
 Because of the warring factions in post-revolution Russia, sending an official delegation to Russia was problematic . Sending official delegation was difficult because of the conflict between factions in Russia .
 American financiers came in the form of the American Red Cross Mission . The mission was created by the Red Cross .
 The flight of the privileged elite from R ussia in 1918 sent Shockwaves through the capitals of E urope and America and prompted a backlash that lasted for de cades .
 This fear trickled through their political representatives, employees, and on into virtually every home . The fear of terrorism has trickled into their families, and into their homes, according to CNN iReport .
 Author Gary Allen said in the Bolshevik Revolution we have some of the world's richest and most powerful men financing a movement which claims its very existence is based on the concept of stripping of their wealth men like the Rothschilds, Rockefellers, Schiffs, Warburgs, Morg
 The manufactured animosity between the democracies of the West and the communism of the East produced continuous tension from 1918 through the end of the twentieth century . The West and Communism produced tension between 1918 and 1950 .
 They funded the rise of National Socialism in Germany and saw an armed Greater Germany as a barrier to communism in Europe . An armed Germany would have been a 'barrier' to communism, they said .
 National Socialism was a form of socialism almost indistinguishable from communism . Only it was confined to national geographic boundaries . National socialism was almost identical to communism .
 Under National Socialism, the globalists could pit the various nations against each other . Under National Socialist, they would pit the nations against other nations .
 Following Germany's military successes in Poland, the Low Countries, and France, these globalists realized they faced the same problem they had with the communists . But following Germany's success in Poland and the Low . Countries, the globalists faced a similar problem they faced with the communist .
 A total German victory would result in a worldwide National Socialist system unable to produce the tensions and conflicts necessary for maximizing profit and control . A total Germany victory would end up being unable to create tension and conflicts .
 They may have feared that Stalin's S oviet U nion was about to launch an attack on Western Europe . They also may have also feared that S.I. U.N. might be launching an attack .
 At some point, the globalists determined that the Axis, after blocking Russia's invasion of Europe, should lose the war . The globalists decided that after blocking the invasion of Russia, the Axis should lose it .
 They also began drawing up plans for a new form of National Socialism, one not dependent on racism and ethnicity . They also drew up plans to renew National Socialism .
 Working with the same financiers and capitalists that had helped create German Nazism, these globalists began laying the foundation for a Fourth Reich . The globalists were laying the foundations for the Fourth Reich, they say .
 The Order was brought from Germany to Yale in 1832 by General William Huntington Russell and Alphonso Taft . Known variously as Chapter 322, the Brotherhood of Death, the Order, or, more popularly, as Skull and Bones or simply Bones, was brought to Yale by General
 Taft was secretary of war in 1876 and U.S. attorney general and ambassador to Russia . He was the father of William Howard Taft, the only person to serve as both president and chief justice of the United States . Taft also served as attorney general, ambassador to
 A pamphlet detailing an 1876 investigation of Skull and Bones headquarters at Yale, known as ""the Tomb" by a rival secret society, stated that its founder was in Germany before Senior Year and formed a warm friendship with a leading member of a G erman society .
 H e brought back with him to college authority to found a chapter here . He brought back authority to find a chapter of authority in the college .
 The secret German society may have been none other than the mysterious and infamous llluminati . The society may be a secret German secret society .
 The official skull-and-crossbones emblem of the Order was also the official crest of the llluminati . Ron Rosenbaum, a former Yale student and one of the few journalists to take a serious look at Skull and Bones, noted that the official skull and crossbones emblem was
 His llluminati were opposed to what they saw as the tyranny of the Catholic Church and the national governments it supported . They opposed what they thought were the tyranny .
 Weishaupt also evoked a philosophy that has been used with terrible results down through the years by H itier and many other tyrants . The German dictator evoked the same philosophy .
 For the enlightened, any means to gain their ends is acceptable, whether this includes deceit, theft, murder, or war . Thus, for the enlightened— or ""illuminated" -- any means of gaining their ends are acceptable .
 "Let it never appear in any place in its own name, but always covered by another name, and another occupation,"" stated Weishaupt .
 In 1777, Weishaupt rolled his brand of llluminism into Freemasonry after joining the Masonic Order's Lodge Theodore of Good Counsel .
 By 1783, the Bavarian government saw the llluminati as a direct threat to the established order and outlawed the organization . Many members of the organization fled Germany, only spreading their philosophies farther .
 The Protocols of the Elders of Zion was used widely since its publication in 1864 to justify anti-S emitism . This belief partially comes from the intriguing notion that it was actually an llluminati document with Jwish elements added later for disinformation purposes .
 Socialism is the cornerstone of Nazi philosophy . No one can doubt that socialism, whether llluminati-inspired or not, has come to America .
 Nearly every aspect of life today involves the centralized federal government . Social Security, Medicare, farm subsidies, food stamps, and student entitlements all involve government programs .
 A record increase in the number of Americans receiving federal government benefits such as college aid, food stamps and health care . USA Today reported, "A sweeping expansion of social programs since 2000"
 Socialism has come to America because the National Socialists of the New World Order recognize that any social program requires central authority . Socialists have come to the U.S. because they want to central authority in order to implement social programs . The Socialists want to impose central authority on social
 They know full well that with their immense wealth and power, they can control any central authority . And they know full . well well that . with their . immense wealth, power they can . control any . central authority, they say . They say .
 Over the years, they have masked this creep of socialism by distracting appeals to nationalism . Over the past decade, they've masked it by appealing to nationalism, says David Cameron .
 Americans are constantly reminded that the U.S. is God's gift to the world, the epitome of freedom and democracy . Americans are also reminded that they are God's "gift to the the world," the nation's most powerful president .
 P atriotism has been used to fan the flames of nationalism among Americans among Americans .
 Anyone who criticizes foreign policy, overseas military interventions, or questions national policies opens themselves to charges of being unpatriotic . Today, anyone who questions foreign policy can be charged with being an anti-war critic .
 It is possible that the U nited States is indeed becoming the F ourth R eich, the continuation of a philosophy of National Socialism thought to have been vanquished more than half a century ago .
 Many today describe what they see as ""neo-Nazism,""the movement to revive National Socialism" Many today see what they call as "neo -Nazism" The Neo-Nazi movement is a revival of National Socialism .
 Younger generations cannot understand the nuances of differences between fascism, corporate power, democracy, and a democratic republic . Unfortunately, younger generations can't understand the differences in fascism and democracy .
 The U.S. helped defeat the Germans in World War II, but failed to defeat the Nazis . While the USA helped defeat Germany in WWII, the U.N. didn't win the war .
 Many other Nazis and war criminals set up shop in a variety of other nations . Many traveled on passports issued by the Vatican . Many other Nazi war criminals traveled on Vatican passports .
 The Nazis brought with them miraculous technology, such as the V-2 rockets, with them with them Nazi ideology . But they also brought Nazi ideology with them, with Nazi ideology, says historian .
 The Nazis used the loot of Europe to create corporate front companies in many countries . More than two hundred fronts were created in Switzerland, thatbanl<ing hub that handled Nazi money before, during, and after war .
 Men with both Nazi backgrounds and Nazi mentality wormed their way into corporate America, slowly buying up and consolidating companies into giant multinational conglomerates . Utilizing the stolen wealth of Europe, which may have included the legendary treasure of Solomon .
 They met little resistance from corporate leaders who had supported them in previous years . They could not resist the temptation of obscene profits, they said .
 German soldiers returned home, to a country economically devastated by the war . A new Reich BEGINS HITLER'S SUPPORTGROUP . The Third Reich led to the creation of the Third Reich .
 The Bavarian city of Munich was hit particularly hard, with jobless exsoldiers wandering the streets . A number of splinter political parties are vying for membership in the city .
 Hitler came into contact with members of theThule Gesellschaft, orThule Society . The society was ostensibly an innocent reading group dedicated to the study and promotion of older German literature . Hitler was a twenty-nine-year-old veteran .
 The society was composed mostly of wealthy conservatives, ardent nationalists, and anti-Semites . It delved into radical politics, race mysticism, and the occult under its emblem— a swastika superimposed over a sword .
 The society also served as a front for the even more secretive Germanenorden, or German Order, a reincarnation of the old Teutonic Knights . The society had branches throughout G ermany patterned after Masonic lodges .
 Members of society should pretend to be anything or anybody, adopt any philosophy, tell any lie, steal, cheat, even kill as long as it accomplishes the society's objectives . In other words, members should tell any truth, lie, cheat or kill to achieve objectives .
 M embers of the Thule S ociety encouraged a locksmith and toolmaker named Anton Drexler to bring workers into the political process . Anton was an engineer and locksmith in M unich and a toolmaker in the process .
 Hitler, unable to make a living as an artist, turned to earning extra money by serving as an army intelligence agent . Hitler was able to earn extra money as a soldier in the army .
 "I was to go there and look at the society and report upon it,"" Hitler recalled in Mein Kampf . Hitler was to report on the society "and look at it"
 H owever, a young military agent, argued against a proposal that Bavaria break ties with Prus sia. H owevers argued against the proposal . The young soldier was the only person in Bavaria to argue against the break .
 Military authorities allowed H itier to join and began funding the party's work . Impressed with the nationalistic and anti-Semitic views of the party, military authorities allowed it to join .
 Hitler's work in the party was initially supported by funds from Captain Mayr's army intelligence unit and the dedicated anticommunists and occultists of theThule Society . The Thule Society also supported Hitler's efforts .
 Eckartwas soon introducing the new member to the right social circles in M unich and his intellectual friends in the Thule S ociety. Eckart was soon introducing him to the new social circles . Eckart became a member of the family and became a friend of the Th
 It was wealthy businessmen in Western industrial and banking circles who guaranteed Hitler's success . It was, in fact, wealthy businessmen who guaranteed his success .
 Aft er Hitler lost a popular election to Hindenburg in 1932, thirty-nine business leaders, with familiar names like Krupp, Siemens, Thyssen, and Bosch, signed a petition to name Hitler chancellor .
 In J anuary 1933, through a compromise with German aristocrats, industrialists, and army officers, Hitler was appointed chancellor of Germany . The compromise was brokered by banker Baron Kurt Freiherr von Schroeder .
 The deal to name Hitler chancellor of Germany was cut at von Schroeder's home on J anuary 4, 1933 . The deal was made at von Schroeder's home in 1933 .
 Germany was a free republic with one of the most educated and cultured populations in the world . At that time, Germany was one of Germany's most educated citizens .
 The country was at peace and enjoying a blossoming of democratic freedom under a coalition government of the Weimar Republic . It was also at peace under the coalition government .
 Hitler went against tradition by choosing not to work out of an office in the German Reichstag, or parliament building . On February 27, 1933, Hitler's office was gutted by fire, and he never worked out there .
 In those slower, gentler times, this act was as great a shock to the G erman people as the destruction of the World Trade Center towers was to Americans in 2001 . In those times, it was as shocking to Americans as it was in 2001, the author says .
 Police arrested an incoherent, half-naked retarded Dutch youth named Marinus van der Lubbe . The youth was arrested inside the building, police say . Police arrested the youth, who was incoherent and naked .
 Later investigation found that one person could not have started the mammoth blaze . Investigators found that incendiary devices had been carried into the building through a tunnel that led to the offices of H ermann G oering's closest partner .
 Law enforcement agencies quickly moved against not only the communists but also pacifists, liberals, and democrats . The communists were among those killed .
 As a result of the E nabling Act, the N azi government required national identity cards, racial profiling, gun confiscation, and, later, mass murders and incarcerations in concentration camps . The act was the equivalent of a national homeland security chief .
 Three million Sturmabteilung or Storm Detachment Brown Shirts under the command of Hitler's SA chief Ernst Roehm awaiting orders . Hitler's financiers and especially P russian military officers were becoming alarmed over H itier's growing power, especially with some three million
 If the power of the S A was broken, the military would pledge loyalty to Hitler . The army proposed a deal with Hitler if power was broken .
 Hitler agreed, and on J une 30, 1934, trumped-up charges of plotting a revolution . Roehm and hundreds of Brown Shirts were fatally purged and the SA quietly faded away .
 The German military began pledging their allegiance not to their nation but to Hitler . The German army pledged their allegiance to Hitler in order to get Hitler .
 With the German population firmly under control due to massive propaganda and fear of government retaliation, the government is keeping the population under control .
 Hitler was free to launch invasions into former German territories as well as Poland . Hitler was also free to invade former German territory as well .
 SS men dressed in Polish uniforms fabricated an attack on a German radio station at Gleiwitz . The attack allowed Hitler to announce that a counterattack had been launched against Polish soldiers who had invaded Germany .
 Hitler merged the offices of president and cliancellor and proclaimed liimself commander in cliief of tine armed forces, tine absolute leader— fuehrer— of all Germany . Hitler became absolute leader after the death of the eighty-seven-year-old Hindenburg
 He found a huge and powerful industrial base geared for war production already in place and awaiting his command . The industrial base was already ready and ready to be ready for war .
 It was put in place at the end of World War I thanks to an influx of Western capital investment . It had been put into place after the war but was put back in place by World War II .
 No final reparation amount was ever announced . It caused anger and frustration among the Germans, because it meant foreign control of Germany's finances .
 P. Morgan agent Owen D Young, required burdensome monetary payments from Germany . Young, a JP Morgan agent, was forced to pay out of Germany for his services .
 Financing the rearmament of Germany in violation of the Versailles Treaty proved as profitable as it was dangerous to European peace . Financing of Germany's rearmarmament was profitable as well as dangerous to Europe .
 Finance between Germany and the Allied nations was controlled by the Bank of International Settlements . The bank was headquartered in Basel, Switzerland, and controlled by Germany and France .
 The Young Plan was the brainchild of Hjalmar Horace Greeley Schacht, president of the Reichsbank . Schacht resigned in protest to the Young Plan but was reappointed by Hitler in 1933 .
 Hjalmar was born in Germany during his mother's return there and named after the famous American editor and politician . Although his father was an American citizen, Hjalmmar was a German citizen .
 It was S chacht who provided an ongoing link between Hitler and Germany's industrialists . Hitler and industrialists were involved in the S chachach .
 The BIS was administered by a multinational staff, which historian Ouigley called the ""apex of the system"" of bankers, to secretly exchange information and plan for the coming war . The staff was called the "apex" of the banking system .
 Created in 1926 by combining six existing cliemical companies . It was brainchild of Hermann Sclimitz, wlio became president of the firm .
 Farben became tine largest cliemical manufacturing enterprise in tine world . Farben Farben is now the world's largest manufacturer of clams .
 Farben had subsidiaries, offices, and representatives in ninety-three countries, including the U.S. Farben . Farben was founded in 1903 .
 This growth was made possible by bond sales in America, including one for $30 million . National City Bank, a forerunner of today's Citibank, sold the bond at the time .
 Zyklon-B, a prussic acid poison gas, was used to kill victims in the ""shower baths"" of Auschwitz, Maidanek, and Treblinka . Zykon-B was a patented poison gas that was used in the shower baths of Auschwitz
 Previously, the firm had received a contract to produce carbon monoxide, used to gas the sick and mentally deficient under Germany's euthanasia program . Previously, it had been given a contract by the firm to gas sick and mental deficient .
 One example of the close business ties between the U.S. and Nazi Germany was Walter C Teagle, chairman of Standard Oil of NewJ ersey, which was owned by Rockefeller's Chase Bank . Teagle was chairman of the Standard Oil company, owned by Chase Bank, which
 General Aniline and Film changed its name in an effort to distance itself from its German owners . Farben Farben, which changed its own name, is a German-owned company .
 Teagle, through Rockefeller banking and oil interests, made his superiors a handsome profit just prior to the war . Teagle remained in partnership with Farben in the matter of tetraethyl lead .
 Next year, Schmitz and his partners returned to London and obtained $15 million worth . The next year, they returned to the U.S. to obtain $15million worth .
 The result was that H itier's air force was rendered capable of bombing London, the city that had provided the supplies . The result of the bombing was that the air force could be capable of attacking London .
 Teagle resigned from the board of GAF to be replaced by future Secretary of Defense] ames V Forrestal . Teagle was replaced by Forrestal, who was Teagle's successor .
 Walter Teagle helped create the N. ational R.E. Administration, one of President Roosevelt's New Deal agencies . Teagle was the same man who created the agency that regulated American business .
 This was an odd choice if the captains of American industry were as opposed to socialism as they publicly claimed . This was not the case for the president of the U.S.
 By the mid-1930s, with the government, military, and the German cartels now firmly in hand, the war was over .
 Hitler knew it was time to strengthen his influence over international bankers and businessmen . Hitler knew he needed to strengthen influence over the world's top businessmen .
 Despite his declared intentions to nationalize German businesses and curtail the power of international business and finance, he has declared intentions of nationalizing German businesses .
 Hitler initially had little trouble getting funds from corporate sponsors who saw his National Socialism as a necessary alternative to worldwide communism . ""is appeal to the common people offered a chance to win the working class away from communism," noted J ames Pool, author of Who Financed Hitler .
 In America, efforts were under way to market Nazism to tine public while simultaneously practicing economic espionage . In America it was under way in the 1930s to promote Nazism in the United States .
 By the late 1930s, Lee was being paid $25,000 a year for disseminating pro-Nazi propaganda in America . Lee was paid by the Nazis in the 1930s to disseminate pro-Nazis propaganda in the US .
 Hamburg-Amerika shipping line was a solid conduit for Nazi propaganda and intelligence activities . The Hamburg line was used as a conduit for propaganda by the Nazis .
 PrescottBush sat on the board of Hamburg-Amerika Steamship Line along with PrescottBush, father and grandfather of two future U.S. presidents . Max Warburg, a leader of Deutsche Bank, sat on board . PrescottBush was PrescottBush's grandfather .
 The banking industry, including foreign financial houses, provided Hitler and his Nazis with the funds to both consolidate and spread their National Socialist doctrine .
 Baron von Schroeder's bank acted as financial agents for Germany in both Britain and the U.S. Throughout World War II, the bank of Baron von . Schroeder acted as a financial agent for Germany throughout the war .
 Dulles sat on the board of directors of General Aniline and Film from 1927 to 1934 . Dulles, in addition to providing legal services to a joint investment firm, the Schroeder-Rockefeller Company .
 H Stein & Company banking house of Cologne, had long provided financial support to the N azis in hopes they would counteract the spread of communism . H Stein and Company had hoped to counter communism .
 Hitler had given his word to von Schroeder that he would not attack banking practices except in rhetoric . National Socialism would engage in no foolish economic experiments, he said .
 He then proposed to open a German credit bank second to the Reichsbank, but one that would issue notes in pound sterling . The bank would also be issuing notes in the pound .
 M ontagu N orman, governor of the B ank of E n gland, told a select group of London financiers Hitler's regime was a good future .
 Norman Norman persuaded the British government to abandon its pro-French policy to one more favorable to Germany . With no opposition, it was decided to provide covert financial help to Hitler . Norman's plan was to provide financial help until he could persuade the government to change its policy .
 A curious relationship developed between these powerful banks of two supposedly belligerent nations, which continued throughout the war . Thus, the relationship developed .
 Of course, it only appears curious to those who do not understand the economic cooperation among the world's ruling elite . The world's economic cooperation appears to be curious to some .
 In December 1938, Schacht came to England as a guest at Montagu Norman's home . Schacht was a guest in December 1938 .
 Norman stopped over in Berlin for a visit with Schacht on his way to Switzerland . One month later, the hospitality was returned when he stopped over to Berlin .
 There was no public announcement as to what the two men discussed . It was rumored that they were attempting to create a common policy of settling Germany's foreign debts and expanding its markets .
 There are rumors that Britain's bankers might extend to Germany some $375 million in export credits . There are also rumors that the British government might extend the credits to Germany .
 Funds for this financial control were channeled through the Bank of International Settlements . The bank's charter and with the agreement of the respective governments, was immune from seizure, closure, or censure .
 By the start of World War II, the BIS was under Nazi control with the bank's directors including Schmitz, Schroeder, Dr. Schroeder and Dr. Dr. Martin Schmitt .
 Officials of the Czech National Bank removed $48 million in gold reserves to the B ank of E n gland for safekeeping . In 1939, when the Nazis moved into Czechoslovaki a, officials of the bank removed the money .
 Bank of England governor Montagu Norman unhesitatingly agreed to move the gold to Switzerland . The gold went into Nazi accounts to purchase essential war materials for Germany .
 Despite the obvious rearmament in G ermany in tine late 1930s, tine N azis continued to find support in Britain . Even witliin tine Rotliscliild dominated Banl< of England .
 This pro-Nazi proclivity by Bank of En gland officials will assume even more relevance in the events described in the next section . The Bank's anti-Nazi behavior will be even more relevant when the events take place .
 International Telephone and Telegraph German chairman Gerhardt Westrick was a close associate of J ohn Foster Dulles, who was a partner to Dr. Dr. Dulles . Dr Dulles was a business partner of Dr. Westrick, who died in 1953 .
 ITT directors were German banker Schroeder and head of counterintelligence for the Nazi Gestapo . Walter Schellenberg was head of the Nazi Geheime Staatspolizei or Secret State Police .
 America's International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation sold as many as fifty thousand artillery fuses per month, more than three years after Pearl Harbor . As many as 50,000 fuses were sold per month .
 The Rocke feller-owned Chase National Bank, now J PMorgan Chase Bank, is the largest corporate bank in the U.S. More interconnecting business ties between America and the Nazis can be seen .
 Karl Lindemann and Emil Helfferich were prominent figures in Himmler's Circle of Friends of the Gestapo . They were close friends and colleagues of the BIS's Baron von Schroeder . The two men were also close friends of Baron von Schreder .
 M ax Warburg and his brother Paul Warburg had been instrumental in establishing the Federal Reserve System in the United States . F urther banking connections, noted by author William B ramley, involved G erman banker M ax warburg .
 Farben was a director of the Warburg Bank of Manhattan, which later became part of the Rockefeller Chase Manhattan Bank . Farben died at the age of 92 .
 Hermann Schmitz served on the boards of Deutsche Bank and the Bank for International Settlements . Hermann Farben was president of the German industrial giant .
 In 1929, Schmitz was voted president of the board of National City Bank, now Citibank . In 1929 he was voted President of the bank's board . In 1932, he was elected to the National City bank board .
 In the 1930s, many people in both Britain and America were in agreement with Nazi ideology . In America and Britain, Nazi ideology was strong enough to support Hitler .
 Automobile-maker H enry F ord became a guiding light to H itier, especially in the realm of anti-Semitic anti-Semitism .
 In 1920, Ford published an anti-J ewish book titled The International J ew . Ford published the book in 1920, "The International J w ew" Ford also published a book called The International W ew.
 The Fords were not alone in providing Nazi Germany witli tine means to wage war .
 General Motors' synthetic fuel technology provided by General Motors . Bradford Snell told the Washington P ost in 1998 that N azi armaments minister Albert S peer once told him that H itier would never have considered invading Poland without the synthetic fuel fuel technology .
 One future American corporate giant provided the means of registering, correlating, and assigning shipment schedules to the millions of J ews and others that were rounded up .
 According to author E dwin B lack, H itier's desire to tabulate then eliminate these people was, ""greatly enhanced and energized by the ingenuity and craving for profit of a single American company and its legendary, autocratic chairman"
 Using recently discovered Nazi documents and the testimony of former Polish workers . Using recently found Nazi documents . Former Polish workers' testimony .
 Watson kept in close contact with his G erman subordinates . Watson traveled to B eriin at least twice a year from 1933 to 1939 . Watson kept a close eye on B erman .
 All machines were dependent on IBM punch cards, parts, and servicing . This meant that all machines had to be dependent on punch cards and parts . IBM punched cards were used to provide parts and parts for machines .
 IBM services coursed through the entire German infrastructure in Europe,"" noted Black . Indeed, IBM services . coursed . through the . entire German . infrastructure . in Europe .
 After America's entry into the war, N azi H ermann F ellinger was appointed as G erman enemy-property custodian .
 Watson proclaimed ""World Peace Through World Trade" in 1937 . Watson was president of the International Chamber of Commerce . Watson is a well-connected Freemason . Watson proclaimed 'World Peace through World Trade'
 Kennedy was appointed U.S. ambassador to Britain in 1939 but was recalled in November 1940 for voicing his sympathies for Hitler . Kennedy was recalled for voicing sympathy for Hitler in 1940 .
 An important example of a prewar effort to install a fascist dictatorship within the United States is the attempted overthrow of Roosevelt early in his presidency . Roosevelt was overthrown in the early stages of the war .
 Many wealthy Americans looked with favor on a fascist system to counteract international communism . Only a year after Hitler came to power in Germany, many wealthy Americans had favored fascism .
 M any were disgruntled with P. Roosevelt's social policies and felt he was secretly a communist . M. Roosevelt was the subject of a series of scandals .
 Knudsen planned to finance a coup d'etat that would overthrow the president with the aid of a $3 million-funded army of terrorists . The plan was modeled on the fascist movement in Paris known as the Croix de Feu . Knudson in early 1934 planned
 Retired Marine Corps major general Smedley Butler was the most decorated marine in U.S. history . Butler was approached by the plotters and urged to head the new military government . Butler's undoing of this scheme was that he was offered to head a new government by the
 Butler, who had openly attacked Roosevelt's New Deal programs, proved to be a loyal citizen and immediately informed Roosevelt of the treasonous conspiracy . Butler was a loyal member of the House of Representatives .
 "Not for the first or last time in his career, he was aware that there were powers greater than he in the United States,"" noted Higham .
 R. R oosevelt decided to leak the story to the press, which generally discounted it as a ""ridiculous"" rumor .
 Some of the primary plotters skipped the country until the furor died down . N evertheless, some of the main plotters stayed in the country .
 Congress has appointed a special committee to look into the matter . The story prompted Congress to appoint a special panel of experts .
 It was a scheme to paint FDR as an opponent of Wall Street and gain public support for his policies . The scheme was intended to portray FDR as a Wall Street opponent and win public support .
 If this plot was legitimate, it was the last overt move against an American president by powerful business interests until 1963 . The plot was the first overt move by powerful businesses against President Richard Nixon .
 The lengths to which powerful persons will go to subvert the principles of the U.S. history, including the lengths they will go .
 Even at the time, some astute Americans could clearly see the connections between powerful national business leaders and Nazi Germany . Even in the 1930s, the connections were obvious .
 S.S. industrialists is hell-bent to bring a fascist state to supplant our democratic government . They are working closely with the fascist regime in Germany and Italy, they say .
 It was not just the ruling families that looked favorably on N ational S ocialism and a fascist government . The ruling families were not impressed with the government's policies .
 Smith's planned religious theme park in the 1960s was never completed, but his ""Christ of the Ozarks"" draws tourists to Eureka Springs, Arkansas, to this day . Smith planned to build a theme park, but it was never finished .
 Prior to the war, no one paid serious attention to warnings against the spread of fascism, just as few people seem willing to consider the possibility of a fascist takeover of the USA today .
 Hitler's rise to power rested heavily on the support of the major German banks . Allianz, Schroeder's Cologne banking firm, the Deutsche Bank, Deutsche KreditGesellschaft, and the huge insurance firm Allianzer . The banks' interconnecting ties to
 By 1941, the international order had turned against Hitler . But all the tightest business connections came to naught, for by 1941 .
 Germany's blitzkrieg shocked the ruling elite, as first Poland, then the rest of Europe, came under Nazi control . Germany's Blitzkrieg had shocked the . ruling elite .
 Hitler was already making preparations for a preemptive attack on the S oviet U nion . Britain was helpless to stop Hitler, who was making preparations to attack .
 The strange case of Nazi deputy fuehrer Rudolf Hess in 1941 provides a rare glimpse of the elitist control over events during World War II .
 The bushy-eyebrowed Hess flew alone to En gland in May 1941, in an effort to make peace . Hess flew to En En gland alone to try and make peace with the Nazis .
 The conventional view of the H ess flight is that of an increasingly marginalized member of H itier's inner circle . He sought to regain favor with his fuehrer by making an unauthorized visit to Britain in the hope of personally negotiating an end to the war .
 At the N. uremberg trials, H ess was found guilty of ""crimes against peace" and spent the rest of his life a prisoner in Berlin's Spandau Prison .
 In August 1987, British military authorities announced that Hess had committed suicide, a judgment that continues to be disputed . Hess committed suicide in August 1987 .
 Recent studies show there was much deeper meaning to this intriguing story, which was only magnified by his sudden and mysterious death just as his release from captivity seemed imminent .
 Adolf Hier served in the same regiment as C orporal Adolf H itier . He was well schooled and well traveled by the time he joined the German Army during World War I .
 H e was wounded twice and later became a fighter pilot, but the war ended before he could experience much combat . H e e was shot twice and wounded twice . He was wounded in World War II .
 Hess helped other ex-servicemen in the paramilitary Freikorps to oust a short-lived Cmmunist local government . Hess returned to Munich after the war and helped others to oust the CMMunist .
 P rofessor H aushofer was a member of the Vril, another secret society based on a book by British Rosicrucian Lord Bulward Litton, about the visit of an Aryan super race to earth in the distant past . According to author William B
 H aushofer had traveled extensively in the F ar E ast before becoming a general in the kaiser's army of World War I . His early associations with influential businessmen and statesmen were crucial in forming the German-J apanese alliance of World World War II .
 Haushofer became the first ranking Nazi to form relationships with South American governments in anticipation of a war with America . Haushorf was the first to form relations with South America governments in order to prepare for a war .
 These relationships would prove instrumental in the escape of war criminals from Europe . The relationships would be instrumental to the later escape of the war criminals .
 H aushofer, as a professor at the U niversity of M unich, worked out H itier's policy of Lebensraum, ""living space" for a hemmed-in Germany .
 H aushofer's views on geopolitics were largely accepted by H itIer, but only after they came from the mouth of Hess . Hess gained a reputation as the ""man behind Hitler"
 When the coup failed, Hess drove off to Austria, where he was sheltered by members of a paramilitary wing of the Thule S ociety . Hess was sheltered in Austria by paramilitary wing .
 H ess joined H itIer in Landsberg P rison after being convicted of conspiracy to commit treason . Voluntarily returning to G ermany, H ess returned to H itItIer . H ess was convicted of conspiring to commit murder .
 Due to the political climate at the time, both men were released within a year . Both men were later released .
 During their months of imprisonment, H ess became a close confidant to H itIer and helped produce Hitler's book, Mein Kampf . H ess helped produce the book, which was published by Adolf Hitler .
 He moved upward through other major party positions until 1933, shortly after Hitler became chancellor of Germany, when he was appointed deputy fuehrer . He then became a member of the Nazi Party in 1933 .
 As a member of the Geheimer Kabinettsrat— the Nazi Secret Cabinet Council— and the M inisterial C ouncil for the defense of the R eich, H ess was well aware of the secret work to develop a German atomic bomb .
 Hess: "I can only say that it will be more terrible than anything that has gone before" Hess revealed. "It will be terrible," Hess said .
 It is clear that H.E. was much more powerful and well connected than he was reported .
 H e was the person closest to Hitler, one who shared his aspirations and beliefs . H e e was one of Hitler's closest friends and confidantes .
 On the eve of war in 1939, Hess was even named the successor to Hitler after Reichsmarschall Hermann Goering . Hess was named as successor to Goering after Goering in 1939 . Hess died at the hands of a German army in August 1944 .
 Rudolf Hess's power and position demands close scrutiny of his ill-fated flight to En gland and its consequences . Hess was an exceptional leader of the Nazi Party .
 Study was undertaken in 2001 by three British authors— Lynn Picknett, Clive Prince, and Stephen Prior .
 A detailed study of H ess's flight clearly indicates that it was not just a sudden whim of an unstable individual . Hess's flight was not a sudden decision to fly, but a detailed study shows it was a deliberate effort .
 H ess prepared for the flight meticulously over a period of months, even having famed aircraft designer Willy Messerschmitt modify a twin engine . The flight was the first of its kind in the history of the flight .
 H ess also received special flight training from M esserschmitt's chief test pilot, as well as H itier's personal pilot, Hans Baur . Evidence that Hitler had knowledge of Hess's plans is evidence that he knew about the plans .
 On his flight, Hess carried the visiting cards of both H aushofer and his son, Albrecht . The elder Haushofer had long been advocate of maintaining friendly relations with Britain as a cornerstone of German politics .
 Haushofer passed along to Hess the names of members of the Order of the Golden Dawn, an occult society in England, as well as supporters of a peace initiative .
 The G olden Dawn was an outgrowth of theTheosophical Society, from which much Nazi mysticism was derived, and had close ties with the Thule Society . Aleister C rowley ""the Beast" was a leading occultist, most popularly connected to Aleister
 Some theories claim that British Intelligence manipulated Hess's belief in the occult to provoke his flight to En gland . Hess believed to have been influenced by the occult .
 The scheme involved Crowley as well as British Intelligence agent Ian Fleming, who would later write the popular] ames Bond novels . Crowley and Fleming were involved in the scheme .
 Ernst Schulte-Strathaus, an astrological adviser and occultist on Hess's staff since 1935, advocated a peace mission to E. n gland .
 Hess's flight was pre-planned, but foreknowledge of his flight existed in Britain as well as Germany . Hess's motivation was unclear, but it is clear that foreknowledge existed in both countries .
 Haushofer's letter was shown to British foreign secretary Lord Halifax and air minister Sir Archibald Sinclair . However, one letter to Hamilton from the younger Haushfer was shown .
 Windsor family have always been sensitive about their German extraction . It should be recalled that the Windsor family are always sensitive .
 P eace with their relatives would have been very desirable during the war years . The war years were a tough time for British soldiers to leave the country .
 In 2000, senior British government sources confirmed that private letters between the Oueen Mother and Lord Halifax showed hostility toward Churchill and even a willingness to submit to Nazi occupation if the monarchy was preserved .
 The object of the war was to stop G ermany— not the N azis, says Churchill . Even Churchill, who was tightly connected to the empire-builders of Britain, made it clear that the object .
 Churchill said Germany's 'unforgivable crime' was her attempt to extricate her economic power from the world's trading system . In 1941, despite the successful Battle of Britain, the economy was economically strangled and near defeat .
 At the time H. itier seemed unstoppable and it was quite easy to envision a Nazi victory . At the same time, the Nazis seemed unstoppable .
 The aristocracy, industrialists, bankers, and even the royal family were eager for peace . The aristocracy and industrialists were eager to peace .
 Hitler wanted En gland as an ally against communism . He did not want a two-front war, the very situation that caused Germany's defeat in World War I .
 Hitler needed peace with Britain before undertaking an attack on Russia, Hitler said . Hitler needed to secure a deal with the UK before attacking Russia, he said .
 Securing peace on the Western Front may have become an urgent priority for Hitler . Hitler may have been worried about the situation on the western front .
 Hitler was forced to launch a preemptive assault against the Soviet Union in J une 1941, to forestall an attack on Western E urope by Stalin in J uly. According to former Soviet military intelligence officer Vladimir Rezun . Hitler launched the attack in June 1941 to forest
 Suvorov's assertions turn conventional history upside down, but he has received virtually no mention in the U.S. corporate mass media, despite the fact that his assertions change conventional history . Suvorovsky's worl< lias has been publislied in eiglity
 People have been taught that Stalin naively trusted H itier and was totally surprised by Hitler's attack . Stalin naively trusted Hitler and was surprised by the attack .
 V. Stalin made preparations for war... wide and varied preparations... beginning with dates . Stalin had himself selected dates... which he himself had selected .
 Suvorov's conclusions grate against the conventional view of Hitler's attack on Russia . He has provided a compelling argument for his views on the attack .
 Stalin massed vast numbers of troops and equipment along Russia's European frontier, not to defend the Motherland, but to prepare for an attack westward . Suvorov pointed out that by J une 1941, Stalin had massed .
 Stalin's motive was to bring communism to Europe by force, a plan he expressed in a 1939 speech . Stalin planned to take over Europe in order to bring Communism to the West by force .
 The dictatorship of such a party will only become possible as the result of a major war,"" stated Stalin . Stalin. Stalin .
 When the G erman attack began on J une 22, 1941, they could field a mere 3,350 tanks, mostly lightly armored and gunned, as compared to the Russians 24,000 tanks, many of superior armor and armament .
 Retired U.S. Department of Defense official Daniel W Michaels wrote, ""Stalin elected to strike at a time and place of his choosing"
 Russian troops were prepared to attack, not defend, which led to the early German victories . None of Stalin's top commanders were ever held accountable for the Barbarossa debacle .
 Suvorov concludes, "Stalin became the absolute ruler of a vast empire hostile to the West" The Russian Empire had been created with the help of the West, he writes .
 Stalin was able to preserve his reputation as naive and trusting, while Hitler went down in history as the ultimate aggressor . For all that, Stalin's reputation was preserved, he preserved his reputation .
 He also said the resources of Stalin's war machine have been underestimated . The resources of the Stalinist war machine were underestimated .
 Perhaps the best support for Suvorov's claims came from Hitler himself, Hitler himself . Hitler himself was a member of the Nazi Party .
 I have already told the nation of the build-up of Soviet Russian military power in the East, during a period when Germany had only a few divisions in the provinces bordering Soviet Russia .
 Only a blind person could fail to see that a military build-up of unique world-historical dimensions was being carried out . Only blind person failed to fail to notice that the military build up was taking place in the world .
 Whether H. itier's attack on the S oviet U nion was sheer aggression or a necessary preemptive strike will probably be argued for many years . Of course, the victors always write history, so whether H. Itier's strike on the U.N. was
 If it proves true Hitler was merely forestalling an imminent attack by the Soviet Union, it places the history of World War II in an entirely different context . But, if it is true, it would be a significant change in the history .
 It would go far in explaining Hitler's otherwise inexplicable actions in starting a two-front war, the very situation he had warned against in Mein Kampf . It would certainly go far to explain Hitler's inexplicable actions .
 It also would help explain why F. R. R oosevelt, at the bidding of the globalists, was arming the Soviet Union in blatant violation of the Neutrality Acts .
 By the end of 1940, with all Europe under German control and Britain threatened, the Germans may have determined to stop Hitler .
 Hitler indicated what he saw as the machinations undertaken to prevent any negotiated end to hostilities in 1941 . Hitler clearly indicated that he saw what he thought was a plan to prevent an end to the war .
 P icknett, P rince, and P rior argue that S eelowe— or S ea Lion, the code name for the proposed German invasion of England— was a ""sham right from the beginning,"" an effort by Hitler to distract Stalin by
 It was merely a cover for the mobilization of men and equipment needed for the invasion of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union invasion was only a pretext for the operation .
 Hitler was known for constantly interfering with his generals on the smallest of details . He never showed any real interest in the plans for an invasion of England, according to historian EgbertKieser .
 Hitler's strange order to halt the German advance at Dunkirk allowed the British Army to escape the continent . Author: Hitler's order to stop German advance allowed British army to escape continent .
 Hess's ME110 arrived over Scotland on May 10, 1941, to negotiate peace terms with anti-Churchill faction . He was to have landed at an airstrip near the Hamilton ancestral home .
 This faction was prepared to oust Churchill and agree to a ceasefire with Germany . It was also prepared to agree to an immediate ceasefire with the Germans . This faction of Churchill's supporters were prepared to topple him .
 Hess's flight brought him through the weakest section of the British coastal radar net, plus he overflew a R oyal Air F orce base twice without provoking any response . Hess's actions suggest that orders were given somewhere along the chain of command to facilitate his arrival .
 He was forced to bail out over a farm just south of Glasgow . He missed his landing spot and, low on fuel, had to abandon his plane .
 Unarmed, his ankle broken from the jump, he was captured by a farmer with a pitchfork . He was captured unarmed, with a broken ankle, by farmer with pitchfork.
 Home Guard quickly became involved and the whole secret operation was blown . The Home Guard became involved in the secret operation .
 Although Hess initially claimed to be a Luftwaffe pilot named Alfred Horn, this subterfuge quickly failed . Hess claimed to have been a pilot called Alfred Horn . This subterfudge quickly failed.
 Everyone, including Hitler, had to disavow any connection with the plot . Hitler had to have disavowed any connection to the plot, including himself . Hitler was assassinated in 1944 .
 For H itier to admit that he was preparing to make peace with B ritain would have tipped off Stalin that a G erman attack on R ussia was imminent .
 He was moved to a variety of locations, some recollections of his whereabouts conflicting with others . He was later moved to various locations, including a number of locations .
 There was every opportunity for pulling a switch before H.E. was finally locked up in the Tower of London .
 The Duke of Kent is the first member of the royal family to die while on active military service since the fifteenth century . Picknett, Prince, and Prior introduced yet another mystery .
 The duke, like others in the royal family, was an admirer of the Nazis . He was likely to have joined a peace group in a negotiated peace with the Nazis in the war .
 He also served as an unofficial intelligence officer to his brother, the king . He was also a member of the royal family .
 The duke's death on August 25, 1942, was the result of a routine wartime air accident . Superficially, the duke died in a routine war air crash .
 Sunderland flying boat crashed into a low hill called Eagles Rock, in Caithness, Scotland . It is reported that the Sunderland plane crashed into the hill in a bid to save his life .
 The official account of the accident said the seaplane was taking the duke on a morale-boosting mission to Iceland when the pilot changed course ""for reasons unknown,"" descended through clouds without making sure he was above water, and crashed into a hillside .
 The duke's plane was in the process of ascending when it crashed . It may have lifted off from nearby Loch More near Braemore Lodge, where accounts place Hess .
 The anti-Churchill peace group waited until mid-1942, a low ebb in Britain's war fortunes, before attempting to fly the duke of Kent and Rudolf Hess to Sweden to announce a peace plan .
 Whether this was sabotage or an accident has not been clearly established . Whether this is sabotage or not an accident is not clear .
 If H ess died in the duke's plane, it would have presented a thorny problem for C hurchill . How to explain the mangled corpse of a man who was supposed to be their prized prisoner?
 Any investigation would have revealed the involvement of ranking members of British society, even the royals, in the peace initiative .
 Evidence gathered by Picknett, Prince, and Prior indicated that a duplicate H ess may have been prepared prior to the crash .
 The real H ess died in the crash and the double lived to stand trial at N uremberg and serve his sentence atSpandau . The double was sentenced to life behind bars in Germany .
 Even astute authors acknowledged a huge problem with such a scenario . But even these astute . authors acknowledged that such a . scenario is a problem .
 The idea of a Rudolf Hess double is not new, and various theories have been advanced . Various theories have also been advanced, including a Hess double .
 One suggested that the lookalike was forced to play H.E. out of fear for his family . Another suggested that he may have been forced to do it for fear for the family .
 The Hess double was a German, who was convinced it was necessary to the party that he maintained the subterfuge, especially since he might become the founder of a Fourth Reich . Another was that the man was an ardent Nazi, who might become a leader .
 Picknett, Prince, Prior, and Prior learned that former CIA director Allen Dulles, a founder of the Council on Foreign Relations and high commissioner of Germany after the war, had dispatched Dr. Dr. Prior . Dulles was a high-ranking German high commissioner and CIA director
 Dulles expressed to Cameron his belief that the Hess being held in Germany was an impostor and that the real H ess had been secretly executed on orders from C hurchill .
 Dulles wanted Cameron to especially note if there were any scars on the prisoner's chest . Dulles also wanted to find out if the prisoner had any scars .
 British military authorities in Nuremberg refused to allow such an examination . The examination would have been carried out by the Nazis .
 H e went on to become president of the American P sychiatric Association as well as the first president . H e was also the president of World P sy chiatric Association and first president of Psychiatric World Association .
 He also became part of the CIA's notorious MKULTRA mind-control program . He was also a member of the notorious mind-controlled program .
 C ameron to study H ess might have grown from the knowledge or suspicion that the man posing as Hess had been brainwashed into believing he was the N azi deputy fuehrer .
 M ind-control experimentation was much further along, particularly in Europe, than most people realize . M-control experiments were much more advanced in Europe than they are now .
 Hess claimed he had lost his memory at the N. uremberg trials . This subterfuge could account for H ess's eccentric behavior at the trials .
 Documents disappeared or were locked away from public scrutiny, witnesses were coerced into silence, and multiple ""theories"" from authoritative sources were spread .
 The last person to dine with the duke of Kent prior to the fatal crash that killed him was the last person who had dined with him . Perhaps the real Hess was a foreign exile, perhaps the foreign exile .
 The dinner represented an unusual gathering of the British royals at Balmoral Castle in Scotland . The dinner included King George VI and Oueen Elizabeth, who also attended .
 Prince Bernhard originated meetings of the Bilderberg Group . The group is a collection of world movers and shakers so secretive they have no proper name . It is so secretive that it has no name .
 In 1937, he married Princess J uliana of the Netherlands and became a major shareholder and offi cer in Dutch Shell Oil, along with Britain's Lord Victor Rothschild . He was married to the Dutch princess of 1937 .
 Dr. R othschild and founder of the E urope an M ovement for U nity, Dr. Dr. P olish socialist Dr. M. Oththchild . Dr. Othschild was born in the U.S.
 J oseph H ieronim Retinger, encouraged Prince Bernhard to create the Bilderberg Group . Retinger created the group after he was forced to attend the group's first meeting .
 The prince personally chaired the group until 1976, when he resigned following revelations that he accepted large payoffs from Lockheed to promote the sale of its aircraft in H olland . The prince resigned after revelations he had accepted payoffs .
 It is impossible to know for certain whether Prince Bernhard sided with the British royal family or was monitoring their activities for the prowar Churchill clique .
 The peace initiative was stopped and the globalists' decision to stop National Socialism at all costs proceeded . The globalists stopped the peace initiative and stopped National Socialism .
 The failure of Hess's peace mission to Britain on the eve of the attack on Russia created the unwanted two-front war that cost Hitler the victory .
 Hess's place in the Nazi hierarchy was taken by Martin Bormann . After the failure of Hess's ill-fated flight, he was taken over by the Nazi leader .
 Some Nazi leaders, including Himmler and Bormann, became uncertain of victory and began laying plans for their survival . Some of the plans were laid out in the aftermath of the Nazi invasion .
 Wunderwaffen, or wonder weapons, might turn the tide of war in their favor . They also turned to science for new Wunder wannabe weapons that might change the tide in war .
 Residents of London were startled to hear a droning buzz in the skies over their city . Six days after the D-Day invasion of Europe, the residents of London heard a buzz .
 A huge explosion rocked the East London neighborhood of Mile End, killing eight civilians . They were more startled when the sound suddenly stopped and moments later a huge explosion .
 The V-1 Buzz bombs were a forerunner of today's cruise missiles . They were the first of the V-2 Buzz bombs . The bombs were also a precursor to today's missiles .
 The V-1 and the later V-2 rockets that terrorized London are two of the more famous examples of German war technology . They were the first German rockets to terrorize London in WWII .
 The retaliation weapons were developed at the secret G erman rocket facility P eenemunde and put into operation just after the D-Day landings in Normandy, France .
 More than eight thousand of the V-1 rockets (each carrying a ton of explosives) rained down on London, inflicting 45,479 casualties and destroying 75,000 buildings . Each of the rockets was carrying a tons of explosives .
 V-2 rockets produced more than 10,000 casualties in the British capital . V-1 rockets could not be seen, heard, or intercepted in flight . Unlike the V1 rockets, they were not intercepted in their flight .
 German ingenuity and efficiency appeared capable of overcoming almost any obstacle . German ingenuity seemed to be able to overcome almost any obstacles .
 One clear example may be found simply by comparing figures from armaments industry to armaments production .
 Despite constant bombing by the Allies, overall production of tanks, small arms, ships, and aircraft was higher at the beginning of 1945 than in 1941 . Germany was victorious on all fronts and America had not yet entered the war .
 Plastics only came into general use in the U.S. during the 1950s . Plastics were developed in Nazi Germany during the war .
 Bakelite, polystyrene, Plexiglas, polyethylene (forerunner of today's plastic Baggies and syringes), polyamide , polyamide and aldols all produced during wartime .
 Television was highly developed in Nazi Germany . Most Americans didn't get to see it until the early 1950s .
 More than 150,000 persons in twenty-eight public viewing rooms in Berlin saw clear television broadcasts of the 1936 Olympics in Berlin .
 In 1939, the German firm Fernseh began developing a miniaturized TV system that allowed pilots to guide both bombs and missiles after launching . The system was developed by the company in 1939, and was used in World War II .
 This system was used in the anti-aircraft rocket Wasserfall, or waterfall . It was used by the Wasserfrau in the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 Tanks began the war as little more than armor-plated bulldozers designed to support infantry . Tanks were developed into independent, thickly armored machines powered by gas turbines . They were developed with guns stabilized while moving, hydrokinetic power transmissions and defenses against chemical and biological attacks .
 S ome G erman tanks were so far ahead of their time, they were still being utilized in other nations as late as battles in the 1970s . The tanks were still used in battles in other countries as late .
 The innovative 9-mm German MP-40 Schmeisser machine pistol saw extensive use during the war . The MP-43 and MP44 assault rifles became the forerunners of today's ubiquitous AK-47 assault rifles .
 Late in the war, some MP -44s carried an early but effective nightvision light and scope called the Vampyr, or Vampire . Some MP-44s were carried with an early, effective night-vision light .
 Allied forces overran German research facilities during the war in 1945 . American military intelligence officers were shocked by the technology they found as Allied forces .
 N azi laboratories, workshops, factories and factories were being developed in N.Azi labs, workshops and factories . Supersonic rockets, nerve gas, jet aircraft, guided missiles, stealth technology, hardened armor even flying saucers were just some of the groundbreaking technologies .
 As respected British historian Barrie Pitt noted, "he N azi war machine swung into action utilizing as much as it could of the most up-to-date scientific knowledge available" As the war developed, the list of further achievements grew to staggering proportions .
 He said the Germans ignored Einstein and developed a new approach to science based on quantum theories .
 The Germans were looking at gravity from a different perspective to everyone else . The Germans looked at gravity in a different way than everyone else.
 Witkowski had unprecedented access to German wartime documents that only recently because available, due to the collapse of communism . Witkowski: "Maybe it gave them answers to things that pro-relativity scientists hadn't even thought of"
 C onsider that at the beginning of the war, aircraft were made of canvas stretched over a wooden frame . At the start of the World War II, planes were made out of canvas .
 By 1945, Germany had become the first nation in the world to put into service an all-metal, jetpropelled jet fighter . The Messerschmitt-262 .
 SS chief Heinrich Himmler was taking steps to separate his SS from normal party and state control . The SS chief was working feverishly to perfect the V-2 rockets and other secret weapons .
 SS leaders created a number of business fronts and other organizations many using concentration camp labor . SS leaders used methods later used by the CIA to produce revenue for SS activities .
 Tliese liiglily compartmentalized groups lieaded by young, ambitious SS officers neitlier required nor desired any connection witli Germany's liigli-profile leaders . The groups were led by young and ambitious young officers .
 The Nazis wanted to continue pursuing Nazi goals long after the defeat of Germany . Their purpose was to create an economic base that could continue to pursue Nazi goals . The Nazis' economic base was created in order to pursue their Nazi goals.
 Armaments minister S peer conceded that he knew nothing about weapons development programs . Armaments Minister S peer admitted that he was unaware of the weapons programs .
 H e admitted that an S S scheme in 1944 to construct a secret weapons plant requiring 3,500 concentration camp workers had been concealed from him . H e admits that he had been told of the plan to build the plant in 1944 .
 The V-2 rocket program began under the aegis of the German Army, and the ME-262 jet fighter under the Luftwaffe . They were ultimately transferred to SS control .
 With secret projects in the hands of hardcore SS fanatics, it is entirely conceivable that weapons far in advance of V rockets could have been developed without the knowledge of anyone except H immler and his top lieutenants .
 Other notable secret Nazi weapons nearing completion in 1945 included the Messerschmitt-163 Komet and the vertically launched Natter rocket fighters . The Horten Ho-IX and the delta-winged Lippisch DM-1 were also nearing completion .
 Some of top-secret Nazi weaponry development was moved outside Germany, to such places as Blizna, Poland . Allied aircrews first encountered the infamous ""foo-fighters,"" small glowing balls of light that shadowed Allied bombers .
 The ""foo-fighters"" soon caught the attention of the American news media . The "foo-fighter" soon caught up with the American media .
 Airmen of the American Air F orce report they are encountering silver-colored spheres in the air over German territory . The spheres appear to be flying over German airspace .
 The device resembles the huge glass balls that adorn Christmas trees . The device is apparently an air defense weapon .
 No information available as to what holds them up like stars in the sky, what is in them or what their purpose is supposed to be .
 H e said this innovative craft was destroyed after a ""single lucl<y wartime mission"" by retreating S S troops . H e e said it was destroyed in a single mission by retreating troops .
 Even tliougli tine public has been conditioned for more than sixty years to dismiss any notion of flying saucers, or UFOs . The accumulation of evidence available today makes it impossible to reject the reality of such craft out of hand .
 Obviously, the Nazis were experimenting with new and exotic energy technology . Obviously, they were experimenting .
 The extraordinary development of the Feuerball may have provided the fi rst public glimpse into the heart of Nazi super-science .
 Several writers have produced articles about the Nazi development of flying saucers . Several articles have been produced about the development of the Nazi saucer program .
 British author W A Harbinson claimed that he got his ideas after discovering postwar German articles mentioning a former Luftwaffe engineer, Flugkapitan Rudolph Schriever .
 Schriever claimed to have designed a ""flying top"" prototype in 1941 . The prototype was actually test-flown in 1942 .
 In 1944, Schriever said he constructed a larger, jet version of his circular craft . The craft was built with the help of scientists Klaus Habermohl, Otto Miethe, and an Italian doctor .
 Drawings of this saucer were published in the 1959 British book German Secret Weapons of the Second World War and Their Later Development, by Major Rudolph Lusar .
 Lusar described the saucer as a ring of separate disks carrying adjustable jets rotating around a fixed cockpit . The saucer was designed by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Schriever later said the Allied advance into Germany put an end to his ""flying disc"" experiments, with all equipment and designs lost or destroyed . All equipment was destroyed or destroyed in the war .
 A Georg Klein told the postwar German press that he had witnessed the Schriever disc, or something like it, test-flown in February 1945 . However, a Georg Klein said he had seen the disc in a test flight in 1945 . The disc is believed to have been the
 Schriever reportedly died in the late 1950s . According to a 1975 issue of Luftfahrt International, notes and sketches related to a large flying saucer were found .
 The periodical also stated that Schriever maintained until his death that his original saucer concept must have been made operational prior to war's end . Schriev maintained until he death that until he died that he believed his original concept was operational .
 C lA report dated M ay 27, 1954. These accounts would seem to be corroborated by a report from 1954 .
 Klein said he was present when the first piloted 'flying saucer' took off and reached a speed of 1,300 miles per hour within three minutes . Klein said the saucer reached speeds of over 1,000mph in three minutes and reached 1,200mph in 3 minutes
 When the Soviets occupied Prague, the Germans destroyed every trace of the 'flying saucer' project . Nothing more was heard of Habermohl and his assistants .
 In Breslau, the Soviets managed to capture one of the saucers built by Miethe, who escaped to France .
 The U.S. government paid a short time to pay tribute to the war hero . He died of natural causes after the war .
 P rior to his death, he was quoted as saying, 'They took everything from me' He was quoted in the days before his death as saying he was 'taken everything from him'
 In mid-1947, two years after the war ended, ""flying saucers" were being reported both in Europe and America .
 If technical knowledge in the 1940s was advanced enough to construct a workable flying saucer, the public would never hear about it . The public was never to hear about the project .
 Beginning in the late 1940s, a national security ""lid" was placed on the subject .
 One of the first documented cases of mysterious abductions took place in September 1961 . Betty and Barney Hill were taken under hypnosis by men in black uniforms . Barney Hill recalls being taken under hypnotic hypnosis .
 Barney Hill described the leader as a ""German Nazi"" wearing a shiny black jacket, scarf, and cap . Barney Hill said the leader was a 'German Nazi' with a shiny, black jacket and scarf .
 Some saucers, especially in the years following World War II, may indeed have been Nazi test vehicles . But any objective review of the material suggests the presence of some unconventional source as well .
 Another amazing and chilling aspect of N azi technology involved their development of nuclear weapons . N.Azi technology was used to develop nuclear weapons in the 1970s .
 Author Farrell concluded from new material released from the former East Germany that the Nazis were much closer to developing an atomic bomb than previously accepted by postwar writers .
 KurtDiebner, a physicist involved with the Nazi atomic bomb project, made the remark . Plus, there is a cryptic remark made by a physicist working on the Nazi bomb project .
 Diebner mentioned a ""photochemical process"" to enrich uranium bypassing the need for a centrifuge . British intelligence recorded the discovery during internment at Farm Hall .
 Diebner may have discovered a method of isotope separation and uranium enrichment that even now remains classified . Since no modern researcher understands what process was referred to, this may mean that the Nazis discovered the method .
 N azis already had perfected a method of enriching uranium, says Karl Wirtz . The N. azis were also secretly taped at Farm Hall . The nuclear scientist was also secretly recorded .
 Wirtz agreed by responding by responding, 'They have it too,"" a clear indication that he knew of a G erman separation process .
 American progress in the plutonium bomb appeared to be running fairly smoothly, until late in the war, when it was discovered that in order to make a bomb from plutonium, the critical mass would have to be assembled much faster than any existing Allied technologies could accomplish .
 "I believe a strong prima facie case has been outlined that Nazi Germany developed and successfully tested, and perhaps used, a uranium atom bomb before the end of World War II," says Farrell .
 In 2005, Berlin historian Rainer Karlsch claimed that the Nazis indeed tested nuclear weapons on Rugen Island near Ohrdruf, Thuringia, site of a subsidiary concentration camp to the infamous Buchenwald .
 Karlsch's primary evidence consists of ""vouchers"" for ""tests"" and a patent for a plutonium weapon dated 1941 . Karlsch is the author of a book about nuclear weapons .
 He claims to have found traces of radioactivity in soil from the site . He also claimed to have also found traces in soil in soil .
 In February 2006, the German government reported no abnormal radiation levels at the site . This was after taking into account elevated levels due to the 1986 Chernobyl disaster in Russia .
 Nazi armaments ministers peer was questioned about a mysterious blast at Ohrdruf during the Nuremberg war crimes trials . No significant information on a nuclear test was found, either because it never happened or because of a postwar cover-up .
 Mainstream historians have remained skeptical that Nazi scientists could have advanced their nuclear knowledge to the point of actual testing . The U.S. government and German government have denied the claims .
 F orty giant bombers with a 7,000-mile range were found on this base . One officer said it was ""the largest Luftwaff e field I have ever seen""
 It should also be noted that the N azis had two prototypes of the J unkers390, a massive sixengine modification of the . J unkerkera-290, known to have made flights to Manchuria bases .
 After the war, authorities discovered a feasibility study by the Luftwaffe detailing the blast effects of an atomic bomb over N ew York's Manhattan Island .
 The Nazi study was based on an atomic bomb in the fifteen-to seventeenkiloton range . It was approximately the same yield as the Little Boy uranium bomb dropped on Hiroshima . The Little Boy bomb was dropped in Hiroshima .
 If N azi G ermany had a nuclear weapon, they surely must have tested it . A collection of disparate sources seems to indicate this was accomplished this was done .
 Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, in a ""Political Testament"" written shortly before his death at the hands of partisans in April 1945, stated, 'The wonder weapons are the hope' Mussolini .
 It is laughable and senseless for us to threaten at this moment, without a basis in reality for these threats . It is not the first time we have threatened to kill people in the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 It appears there are three bombs and each has an astonishing operation, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 M ussolini's mention of three bombs is intriguing because of a statement of a former military translator who served on the staff of Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, the officer who tookj apan's surrender to Soviet Union in 1945 .
 P iotr Titarenko had written a letter to the C ommunist P arty C entral in 1992, in which he stated that the three atomic bombs were dropped on J apan .
 One of these failed to detonate and subsequently was given to the Soviet Union by apanese officials . One of the bombs was dropped on Nagasaki prior to the blast of August 9, 1945, .
 IfTitarenko's account is accurate, this would mean that America had three atomic bombs on hand in the summer of 1945 .
 A report to Manhattan Project leader Robert Oppenheimer just days after R oosevelt died on April 12, 1945, stated that not enough enriched uranium existed to create a viable critical mass for even one atomic bomb . Yet, a report just days later in 1945, said not enough uranium
 N ews stories in B ritain point to a possible N azi atomic bomb test in 1944 . Bomb test could have taken place in 1944, according to reports .
 An August 11, 1945, article in London's Daily Telegraph reported, "B ritain prepared for the possibility of an atomic bomb attack on this country by G ermany in August 1944 .
 A modern readership would know that such disruption can be caused by the electromagnetic pulse associated with a nuclear detonation . Such disruption is caused by an electromagnetic pulse .
 Other intriguing hints of a German atomic test came in the form of three separate intelligence reports . The reports suggest a German nuclear test could have taken place in the 1950s .
 A once-classified U.S. military intelligence report dated August 19, 1945, and titled ""Investigations, R esearch.com" was dated August 18, 1945 . The report was published in 1945 and was classified as a classified classified document .
 A German pilot named Hans Zinsser was piloting a Heinkel bomber over northern Germany . He was killed by a German Air Force jetliner .
 Note that his experience coincides with the dates of the Berlin telephone blackout . Note that he was in Berlin at the time .
 At the beginning of October 1944, I flew from Ludwigslust about 12 to 15 km from an atomic bomb test station, when I noticed a strong, bright illumination of the whole atmosphere, lasting about 2 seconds .
 Pressure wave escaped the approaching and following cloud formed by the explosion . The clearly visible pressure wave escaped from approaching clouds .
 Personal observations of the colors of the explosion cloud found an almost blue-violet shade . The explosion cloud was almost blue, according to the observations .
 During this manifestation reddish-colored rims were to be seen, changing to a dirty-like shade in very rapid succession . During this time, the rims appeared to be reddish .
 A cloud shaped like a mushroom with turbulent billowing sections (at about 7,000 meters altitude) stood, without any seeming connections, over the spot where the explosion took place . The cloud was shaped like an explosion shaped like mushroom .
 Electrical disturbances and impossibility to continue radio communications turned up . Strong electrical disturbances and the impossibility to . continue radio communication turned up. Strong electrical disturbance and the inability to continue . communications .
 It does not seem very clear to me why these experiments took place in such crowded areas . The experiments were carried out in crowded areas of the city .
 Romersa was granted a special pass from Oberkommando Der Wehrmacht, or German High Command, to visit tlie test site on tine island of Rugen . Romersas was granted special pass to visit the site .
 I cannot say what the material was made of, but I had the impression that it could have been asbestos . The material was not made of the material, but it was thought to be asbestos, he said .
 'The houses that I had seen only an hour earlier had disappeared, broken into little pebbles of debris,' R omersa said .
 Romersa's credibility is supported by the fact that he eventually came to the United States, where he was granted a high-security clearance . He eventually came back to the U.S. where he had a high security clearance .
 This purports to be a decoded intercept of a message from the J apanese embassy in Stockholm to headquarters in Tokyo . The message is said to have been sent from Stockholm to Tokyo headquarters .
 This bomb is revolutionary in its results, and will upset all ordinary precepts of warfare hitherto established . This bomb will be revolutionary in his results, he wrote .
 I'm sending you, in one group, all those reports on what is called the atomsplitting bomb . I am sending you all the reports on the atomplitting bombs .
 The entire 19th Infantry Regiment of the Russians was attacked . Only a few bombs sufficed to wipe them out to the last man .
 M oreover, it is a fact that the same type of war material was tried out in the C rimea too . The same material was used in the same war material as the C.Rimea also .
 Recently the British authorities warned their people of the possibility that they might undergo attack by G erman atomsplitting bombs .
 The J apanese report goes into a remarkably accurate description of the splitting of the atom, ending with the statement, ""he German atom-splitting device is the Neuman disintegrator"
 Enormous energy is directed into the central part of the atom and this generates an atomic pressure of several tens of thousands of tons per square inch .
 This device can split the relatively unstable atoms of such elements as uranium . It can also split unstable atoms such as uranium, which are unstable .
 Some elements of the J apanese report were obviously in error, such as the confusion over descriptions of a fission versus a fusion bomb . The date of the Kursk offensive, which did not begin until J uly 5, 1943, was incorrect .
 It is clear that J apanese intelligence was convinced that the Germans had used a revolutionary type of weapon on the Eastern Front .
 Farrell pointed out that had Nazi Germany used such a weapon, it would most likely have been against the Russians, whom the Nazis considered "subhuman" in Nazi ideology . Farrell said the Russians were considered 'subhuman' in Nazi ideologies .
 One-half of the 50 million casualties of the war occurred in Russia . Several massive explosions, such as the one that destroyed a section of Sevastopol, never fully explained .
 A hundred-foot below-ground ammunition bunker was destroyed after being struck by a lucky shot from Dora, a 311/2inch G erman railway gun . Dora is considered the largest in the world .
 Such attacks were never reported by Soviet leader] oseph Stalin, due to the fear of losing control over the panicked and war-weary Russian population . Stalin feared losing control of the panicked Russian population, according to the Soviet leader . Such attacks never reported .
 The use of a super-weapon on the Eastern Front also might explain why more is not known about this issue . It might also explain why there is not more to be known about the issue .
 Accurate war news from Russia was extremely hard to come by during the Cold War . Accurate news from the Soviet Union was extremely difficult to obtain during the war .
 To make public the use of a nuclear or unconventional weapon ""would have been a propaganda disaster for Stalin's government,"" noted Farrell . To use such a weapon would have been "a propaganda disaster"
 Some have speculated that the U.S. used a Nazi bomb or used Nazi enriched uranium to manufacture its bombs . The United States may have used the bomb to make bombs .
 Trinity bomb exploded near Alamogordo, New Mexico, on J uly 16, 1945, was a plutonium bomb . Trinity bomb was the first to explode in New Mexico .
 The idea would fly in the face of the longaccepted Allied Legend that Germany simply couldn't manufacture an atomic bomb by the end of the war .
 Baron Manfred von Ardenne's underground laboratory contained a 2-million-volt electrostatic generator and a cyclotron . Baron von Ardenne built in Lichterfelde outside Berlin, Germany, in an underground laboratory .
 In 1941, von Ardenne, along with Fritz Houtermans, had calculated the critical mass needed to create U235 . The U235 was created by U.N. scientists .
 H itier visited the laboratory toward the end of the war, at a time when he spoke enthusiastically of a new wonder weapon that would turn the tide in the war .
 R eportedly, H itIer once remarked that while his party and military leadership worried about how to win the war, it was his postal minister who brought him the solution . He said that while he was worried about winning the war in Afghanistan, the postal minister was the solution
 The site was chosen for its proximity to transportation hubs, both rail lines and rivers, as well as the nearby supply of slave labor found at the Auschwitz camp . The site is located near the Auschwitz concentration camp .
 This site was selected with the idea that the Allies would not bomb a concentration camp, a supposition that proved correct . This site probably was also selected because it was believed the Allies wouldn't bomb the camp .
 Not one pound of buna, or synthetic rubber, was ever produced . $2 billion in today's dollars was spent . 300,000 slave laborers were used in construction and operation of plant .
 A theory has been offered that, late in the war, certain Nazis arranged the transfer of enriched uranium to the U.S. in exchange for immunity from prosecution .
 At the heart of this transfer theory lies the saga of a Nazi submarine the U-234 . The submarine is believed to have been the U.234 .
 Dr. Dr. Hans-Joachim von von Stauchner was the last German official to sail from Kiel in 1945 . He was accompanied by several high-level German officials, including Dr. Stauckner .
 Heinz Schlicke, the inventor of fuses for atomic bombs, and two J apanese officers . Air Force Colonel Genzo Shosi and Navy Captain Hideo Tomonaga. Air Force .
 On May 14, 1945, six days after the German surrender, the U-234 was intercepted by the USS Sutton . It was taken into captivity by the U.S. Navy .
 The sub had overflown several times by Allied aircraft but never fired upon . Oddly enough, the sub had been overflown by Allied planes but never shot at .
 Some of the boat's cargo was missing when it arrived at P ortsmouth, N ew H ampshire .
 The two J apanese officers, after learning that the ship's captain planned to surrender, had committed suicide and were buried at sea with full honors . The two officers were buried in full honors at sea .
 The two ME-262s were missing, as well as the uranium oxide . But, suspiciously, they were also missing, according to the report .
 The U.S. Navy prepared its own manifest for the U-234, but there was no accounting for seventy tons of cargo . In fact, the U.N. Navy had to account for the cargo .
 The U-boat made a secret stop at South Portland, Maine, sometime between May 14 and May 17, 1945 . Velma Hunt, a Colorado environmental scientist, says the cargo could have been unloaded .
 There has been controversy as to whether uranium had been enriched enough for use as a weapon . There has also been controversy over whether this uranium was enriched enough .
 Gold-lined cylinders indicated the uranium was emitting gamma radiation, which meant the normally harmless uranium oxide had been brought to enrichment through the use of a working nuclear reactor .
 Use of gold-lined cylinders is explainable by the fact that uranium, a highly corrosive metal, is easily contaminated if it comes into contact with other unstable elements .
 G old, whose radioactive shielding properties are as great as lead, is also, unlike lead, a highly pure and stable element . It is therefore the element of choice when storing or shipping highly enriched uranium for long periods of time .
 Farrell's deduction is based on an anecdote from the German crew of the U-234 . The story is said to be true .
 They apparently thought their J apanese guests couldn't even get the number of the boat correct .
 Some now believe the labels indicated the presence of uranium 235, the only isotope found in nature that has the ability to cause an expanding fission chain reaction in other words, the element needed for a uranium fission bomb . Some now think the labels indicate uranium 235 .
 Uranium that has undergone an extraction process to boost its U-235 proportion is known as enriched uranium . Uranium has undergone a process of extraction process that boosts its U.235 proportion .
 Wolfgang Hirschfeld, a radioman on the U-234, stated the submarine's orders were ""only to sail on the orders of the highest level" U.234 .
 F uehrer H ■"" H e also revealed after the war that crew members believed J apan had succeeded in testing an atomic weapon before their departure from Germany in 1945 .
 The U-234 met an inglorious end in November 1947, when it was used as a torpedo target and sunk off Cape Cod . The U.234 was the first U.S. Navy ship to be sunk in the war years .
 Hydrick published copies of documents from the National Archives to show a connection between the Manhattan Project and the U-234 . Hydrick: "The Manhattan Project is a connection to the U.234"
 One such document is a secret cable from the commander of naval operations directing tliata tliree-man party tal<e possession of tine sub's cargo . One such cable is from a commander of the naval operations .
 In addition to two naval officers was the name of Major J ohn E Vance with the Army Corps of Engineers . Vance was with the department of the army under which the M anhattan P roject operated .
 A few days after the visit by Vance, the cargo was no longer in navy possession . A manifest of the cargo indicated the uranium had been removed from the ship .
 National Archives denied that any canisters containing fissionable material was onboard the U234 . Stevens wrote to the Naval Historical Center at the Washington Navy Yard requesting a cargo manifest from the U-234 .
 For a $5 microfiche charge, Stevens received a manifest that was identical to the one from the N. ational Archives . Stevens received the manifest from the Archives except that uranium oxide canisters were listed .
 This discrepancy in the manifests can only be explained by someone altering the documents . This discrepancy is only the result of a change in the documents.
 A Plutonium bomb, such as the one Manhattan scientists were developing, required a critical mass to be achieved within l/3000th of a second, a speed far exceeding the capabilities of fuses available at that time . Plutonium bombs were developed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 F arrell says there is evidence to support the idea that the necessary fuses were obtained from U-234 passenger Dr. Dr. Martin . Dr Martin was killed in the crash of the plane .
 A message from the chief of Naval Operations to the authorities in Portsmouth, where the U-234 was taken after its surrender, indicated that Dr. Dr. John Sutter had been killed . Dr. Sutter was killed in the U.S.
 Schlicke along with his fuses were to be taken to Washington accompanied by naval officers . The fuses had to be transported to Washington with the help of naval officers in Washington .
 Dr. Alvarez was scheduled to present a lecture on his fuses in the presence of a "Mr Alvarez" The doctor was apparently scheduled to give the lecture on fuses . The lecture was held in front of a group of people .
 Luis Walter Alvarez is credited with producing fuses for the plutonium bomb . Alvarez was credited with making the bomb's fuses . Alvarez is the man who produced the fuses responsible for the bomb .
 Alvarez and his student Lawrence J ohnson are credited with designing the exploding-bridgewire detonators for the spherical implosives used in the Trinity bomb test as well as the N agasaki bomb . Alvarez and Lawrence Johnson were credited with developing the detonators used
 On March 3, 1945, President Roosevelt received an ominous memo from Senator Byrnes, a longtime confidant to the president . Byrnes was a Democrat from South Carolina and a longtime friend to Roosevelt .
 Byrnes voiced the concern of many that the atom bomb project was foundering and might even prove a failure . Byrnes, who went on to become a secretary of state and a S upreme C ourt justice, was voicing the concerns of many .
 Eric J ette, chief metallurgist at Los Alamos, expressed reservations over the lack of sufficient amounts of uranium for the atomic bomb in 1944 .
 Edward Hammel, a metallurgist who worked at Los Alamos, reported very little enriched uranium was received there until less than a month before the bomb was dropped on Hiroshima .
 Little Boy, the bomb dropped on Hiroshima, carried 64.15 kilograms of enriched uranium . Little Boy carried virtually the entire quantity that could have been produced since mid-1944 by the enrichment facilities at Oak Ridge, Tennessee .
 Some of this fissionable material had been used to produce plutonium in E nrico F ermi's breeder reactors at Hanford .
 The mounting pressure on Manhattan Project directors to produce a bomb before the planned invasion of the J apanese home islands must have been terrific .
 Schlicke's fuses, its acquisition by the U.S. solved two pressing problems of the M anhattan atomic bomb project a lack of sufficient amounts of uranium and adequate fuses . The fuses were used to make the atomic bomb .
 The U-234 surrendered to the U.S. during World War II . The U.234 was one of the two major problems facing the Manhattan Project .
 Evidence strongly indicates the U-234 was a planned transfer of technology from Germany to the U.S. The U.234 was captured in 1941 . It is unclear whether it was a fortuitous capture or the planned transfer .
 If additional uranium was obtained from the U-234, this would have provided more than could ever have been produced by the M anhattan P roject . This would be the equivalent of about eight H iroshima bombs .
 It means the German nuclear program was much further advanced than believed by historians . It also means it was much more advanced than thought by conventional historians . Germany's nuclear program is believed to have been much further ahead than thought .
 In late 1945, atomic bomb components and perhaps additional German uranium bombs were delivered to Tinian Island in the P.A. P acific following a secret and rushed voyage from California by the USS Indianapolis . The USS Indianapolis made a secret voyage to the island .
 The last American ship sunk in World War II was torpedoed by a J apanese submarine in the Philippines . The Portlandclass heavy cruiser suffered the largest single at-sea loss of life in United States naval history .
 Farrell voiced the suspicion that the Indianapolis may have delivered much more than America's atomic bomb it may have carried a German bomb in addition to its cargo of uranium and fuses .
 Unexploded German atomic bombs fell into the hands of the Americans at the end of the war in Europe in May 1945, two months before the 'first' explosion of an atomic weapon in the New Mexico desert . Stevens was supported by Stevens, who wrote that the, ""unexpl
 All they did was put new tail fins on the bombs, repaint them, and drop them on J apan . The bombs were dropped on Japan .
 One answer seems to be that they did not have a reliable delivery system in place . One answer is that they failed to deliver reliable delivery systems .
 Witkowski voiced his suspicions that the fatal flight of Lieutenant J oseph Kennedy, older brother to the future president, might have been an ill-fated attempt to destroy the V-3 complex at Moyecques .
 The giant airfield in N orway, liome to tine massive six-engine bombers, liaci not yet been completed .
 Stevens became convinced that the Third Reich produced an atomic bomb . Stevens believes that the Nazis produced the atomic bomb during the Second World War .
 What the Germans could not do, in these dying days of the Third Reich, was to match up one of these nuclear weapons with an effective delivery system . The Germans were not able to do this in these days, and it was not possible to do so .
 One thought that must have crossed the minds of Nazi leaders was the total destruction of Germany that would have resulted from the use of a nuclear weapon . Nazi leaders would have thought that would be the result of using a nuclear bomb .
 Hitler's secretary Martin Bormann used advanced technology as a bargaining chip with the Western allies . By war's end, Hitler had become the second most powerful man in Nazi Germany . The technology was used as bargaining chips for the Western Allies .
 Documentary detailing transfer of nuclear technology from Germany to America is compelling . Hydrick was critical of the atomic bomb and its detonators .
 Farrell had an even more horrifying thought about why the Nazis did not drop an atomic bomb . Farrell had a horrifying idea about why they didn't drop a bomb .
 The man in charge of Germany's high-tech weapons programs answers the question . The answer to the question may be found by studying the man behind Germany's weapons programs .
 Kammler, whose name has been largely lost to history, may have played a large role in developing and hiding away the technology secrets of Hitler's Third Reich .
 Kammler did not have higher purposes in mind when he set out to develop rockets and energy manipulation . He wanted to use his rockets as a way to get the world to use energy manipulation in space .
 Kammler completed engineering studies at a technical university and began working for the German Air Ministry . He was born in 1901 and worked for the Air Ministry in Germany .
 He managed finances and construction for the SS until 1942, when he became chief of Goup C under the Wirtschafts und Verwaltungshauptamt, or the Economic and Administrative Central Offi ce of the SS, one of five key branches of the Black
 This branch controlled all economic enterprises as well as all concentration and extermination camps . The branch controlled economic enterprises and concentration camps as well .
 Beginning in 1943, Kammler took control of all ""special tasks,"" which included the creation of secret underground facilities as well as exotic weapons programs .
 His official title was SS Obergruppenfuehrer, or lieutenant general . He had worked his way up to command the Third Reich's most precious wartime secrets .
 In mid-1943, SS chief Heinrich Himmler sent a letter to armaments minister S.Himmler . SS chief sent the letter to S.P.S. Minister of Defense in 1945 .
 Himmler placed Kammlerin in charge of the project, one of Germany's most secret high-tech weapons systems . The project was one of the most secret weapons systems in the world .
 By the end of 1944, Kammler had taken control of weapons research as well as the construction of underground factories and concentration camps .
 In connection with his new responsibilities, Kammler created an SS Sonderkommando, or special command, independent from the normal German military and bureaucracy . The SS was responsible for the deaths of more than 1,000 German soldiers .
 It was ""a place where imagination could run free, unfettered by the restraints of accountability," says the BBC .
 Kammler also had use of computer technology that was only dreamed of in American science fiction stories . The film was based on a series of science fiction novels .
 Kammler had the benefit of knowledge of hardware and software that was developed by the computing pioneer .
 Zuse built the first digital computer in 1938 and the first programmable software language, Plankaikuel . Zuse also built the world's first programable software language .
 He was instrumental in developing magnetic tape as a computer storage medium . He also developed magnetic tape for computers .
 Kammler and his Sonderkommando became repository for the Reich's most advanced technology . Kammlers was responsible for the development of the most advanced weapons in Germany .
 Kammler worked closely with Wernhervon Braun and his superior, Luftwaffe Major General Walter Dornberger . He worked with Braun and Dornberg, who was a major air force commander .
 Von Braun, who had been a member of the SS since 1940, carried the rank of SS Sturmbannfuehrer, or major . Von Braun was a major at the time of his death .
 Because of a navigation ""blunder,"" much of the underground and well-camouflaged Peenemunde site was left undamaged . Much of the well-couflaged site was unharmed .
 Apollo and the Whistleblowers, speculated that the B ritish air raid on P eenemunde was designed not to knock out the V-rocket site but to force it to move to safer envirirons, to ensure the safety of the program .
 They showed how the raid bombed the site's northern peninsula rather than the main facility, due to misplaced target indicators . The site was bombed due to a misplaced target indicator, they said .
 Of the eight hundred personnel who died in the air raid, about half were mostly R. ussians from the prisoner labor force . The other half were technicians and their families, authors say .
 Hermann berth was transferred to the safety of the Reinsdorf works near Wittenberg, to continue his work . After this raid, the irreplaceable berth was moved to a safe location . Hermann was transferred from his work to continue to work .
 It was "clearly CRUCIAL that these rockets, plans and parts were spared,"" they stated .
 Someone with high authority wanted this Nazi technology available to them after the war . The technology was available to be used by the Nazis in Nazi Germany .
 Nick Cook also saw the connection between such exotic technology and Hans Kammler . Nick Cook saw a connection between the technology and the mysterious Hans Kamler .
 Walter Gerlach, one of the Nazi scientists brought to the U.S. after the war, was captured in 1945 . He was captured by the United States in 1945 and brought back to the country . He is believed to be working on a new type of technology .
 Gerlach has been connected with the German attempts to build an atomic bomb, yet his background indicated even more esoteric knowledge . He has also been connected to the efforts to build the atomic bomb .
 Gerlach received the Nobel Prize for magnetic spin polarization in 1921 . He was awarded for his work dealing with the momentum of electrons of atoms situated in a magnetic field . In 1921 he received a Nobel Prize in physics .
 Such work had little to do with the atomic bomb but much of it had energy manipulation to include antigravity . Such work was done in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Hilgenberg, a student of Gerlach, indicated the focus of his work . Gerlacher's work was based on the work of a former student . Hilgenenberg was Gerlache's first major work .
 Gerlach's wartime work diaries were confiscated by U.S. authorities . They remain classified today . The diaries remain classified .
 The location was perfect for security purposes as it was outside Germany yet within the Greater Third Reich . The location of the bunker was located in the German city was outside of Germany .
 Witkowski revealed his access to a formerly classified Soviet document detailing the interrogation at the end of the war of a Rudolf Schuster, who had been a member of the R eichssicherheitshauptamt . Witkowski reveals the interrogation of Schuster at
 Schuster revealed that in J une of 1944, he was transferred to a special evacuation Kommando called General Plan 1945, formed by Martin Bormann to evacuate valuable science and technology from the R eich . Schuster reveals that in 1945, General Plan was formed by Borm
 Suster located much of the evacuation activities in the area of the Wenzeslaus Mine .
 Schuster's testimony convinced Cook that the Bormann evacuation plan had been one of the N azis' greatest secrets . Schuster testified that the evacuation plan was one of Cook's top secrets .
 It was this unacknowledged evacuation operation that saved the Reich's most precious technology . It was the evacuation operation which saved the Germans' most valuable technology .
 Cook and Witkowski found remnants of what once had been a secret SS testing and production facility . They may have even included a giant early superconductor . The SS testing facility may even have included an early superconducting device .
 In 1931, the Wenzeslaus Mine suffered an accident that caused bankruptcy and a takeover by the P olish government . The mine was taken over by the government .
 With the occupation of P oland, the mine was reconditioned by the N azis as a gigantic science center .
 This valley, about three hundred yards across, was bisected by rail lines and lined with a variety of structures, concrete bunkers, and guard stations . Many covered with dirt and trees to act as camouflage .
 Today the site is virtually ruins and overgrown with trees and vegetation . The site is now overgrown and covered in vegetation .
 Sporrenberg's testimony and affidavits, the only known description of the strange experiments at the mine, were given during a postwar trial in P oland .
 In the closing days of the war, most of the local population was evacuated westward . Most of the town's residents were evacuated west .
 In fleeing the Russians, many of these refugees died during the fighting or froze in one of the coldest winters on record . Many of the refugees also froze in the winter, and many died in the fighting .
 Most of the local residents are newcomers with no recollection of what transpired at the mine during the war . Today, most of the locals are newcomers .
 A central shaft led downward to the original mine as well as a labyrinth of additional underground facilities dug by Germans . The mine shafts were dug by the Germans in Germany .
 Cook and Witkowski designed a circular concrete structure in a bid to build a new home . The project was inspired by the idea of a circular structure in the shape of a house .
 The circular structure was formed by twelve thick columns supporting a dodecagon-shaped reinforcing concrete ring . The ring is about ninety feet in diameter and is 90 feet wide .
 Witkowski initially thought this might be the remains of a cooling tower . Witkowski thought it might be a decomposing tower .
 He abandoned this idea once he saw cooling towers at a different location on photographs of the area, taken in 1934 .
 Cook and Witkowski determined that the structure had nothing to do with mining but was used in connection with the strange experiments described to his captors by the SS officer Sporrenberg . High-voltage current cannot be used in mines with potential for flammable gas .
 Die Glocke, or the Bell, was housed in a concrete chamber hundreds of feet underground . These experiments centered around a bell-shaped object . The Bell was housed . in a . concrete chamber located in a basement .
 The Bell was made from hard, heavy metal and cylindrical in shape with semicircular cap and hook or clamping device on top . Witkowski and Cook made the Bell from hard metal .
 Huge quantities of electricity were fed into it through thick cables dropping into the housing chamber from the outside . Huge amounts of electricity was fed into the chamber by thick cables dropped into it .
 Inside the Bell was a thermos-like tube encased in lead and filled with a metallic liquid . The Bell was the first time the Bell had been made into a prototype .
 During operation, the Bell was covered by a ceramic material, apparently to act as insulation . The material was apparently used as insulation during the operation .
 Inside, two contra-rotating cylinders filled with mercury-like and violet-colored substance spun a vortex of energy . The Bienenstock, or beehive, emitted a strange phosphorescent blue light and made such a buzzing sound that operators nicknamed it the Beehive .
 Witkowski concluded the Bell's operation involved iodizing radiation as well as a very strong magnetic field of energy . Operators suffered from nervous-system disruption, headaches and metallic taste .
 Scientists experimenting with the Bell would place various plants, animals, and animal tissue within its energy field . The Bell would be placed in various areas of the Bell's energy fields .
 It was given the highest and perhaps most unique classification possible in the Third Reich . H owever, it was given a unique classification .
 In a few captured documents, experimenters with the B ell were said to be working on something Kriegsentscheidend, or decisive for the war . The B ell is said to have been working on a breakthrough that could be decisive .
 M ost topsecret G erman weapons, including the V rockets, were classified Kriegswichtig, or important to the war . The V rockets were classified as "important or important" in the war.
 Little is known about the Bell because of the loss of the scientists involved in the project . One major reason that so little is known is that the Bell was lost to scientists .
 N azis tinkering with the building blocks of the universe. The whole concept is a nightmare. The concept is the whole concept. The idea is to create a universe in space .
 TO TRY AND understand the purpose of the Bell requires a brief side trip into the amazing world of cutting-edge science and quantum physics .
 Cold fusion, antigravity, or free energy have been generally discouraged as science fiction in mainstream America . Many credible writers have dealt with the subject .
 A potential link between superconductor quantum mechanics and gravity has been inferred from recent quantum gravity research .
 Another approach to modifying gravity involved the manipulation of the quantum vacuum ZPE field . The quantum vacuum field is manipulated by quantum vacuum particles .
 A proposed experiment to manipulate the ZPE involves the use of ultrahigh-intensit/ lasers to irradiate a magnetized vacuum . The ZPE has been described as a 'highly sensitive' experiment .
 The idea of gaining mastery and power from the environment around us is nothing new . It's not the first time people have tried to gain control of their environment .
 American physicist Thomas Townsend Brown experimented with antigravity based on his understanding that a charged capacitor tended to move toward a positive plate when sufficiently energized in the hundred kilovoltand upward range . Such ideas were advanced by American physicist .
 Brown's theories echoed those of United States electrical engineer Nikola Tesia . Tesia's discovery in 1888 of the rotating magnetic field led to alternating-current electricity transmission .
 TesIa foresaw limitless free energy by simply tapping into the Earth's natural magnetic energy field . The Earth's magnetic field is thought to be the source of unlimited free energy . TesIA foresaw the future by tapping into its magnetic field .
 Every ponderable atom is differentiated from a tenuous fluid, filling all space merely by spinning motion, as a whirl of water in a lake .
 It appears possible for man through harnessed energy of the medium and suitable agencies for starting and stopping ether whirls to cause matter to form and disappear .
 At his command, almost without effort, old worlds would vanish and new ones spring into being . He would command the creation of new worlds at his command without effort .
 H e could alter the size of this planet, control its seasons, adjust its distance from the sun . He could guide it on its eternal journey along any path he might choose to choose .
 He could make planets collide and produce his suns and stars, his heat and light, he could originate life in all its infinite forms, he says . He could also originate life from all its forms .
 To cause at will the birth and death of matter would be man's grandest deed . It would make him the master of physical creation, make him fulfill his ultimate destiny .
 The belief that antigravity or other exotic technologies were passed from the N azis to the Allies has been supported by sporadic periodical coverage in the late 1940s and early 1950s . Antigravity was first developed in the mid-century .
 'There are gravity research projects in every major country of the world,' said the article .
 The weight of some materials utilized in this research had been reduced by as much as 30 percent by ""energizing"" them . The weight was reduced by 30 percent .
 Some of the companies involved in this cuttingedge research included Lear, Inc. Lear and Lear . The research was conducted by Interavia Aerospace Review .
 During the 1960s and 1970s, public discussion of energy manipulation such as antigravity was virtually closed off, scorned as fantasy or conspiracy theory . Public discussion of such an energy manipulation was largely closed off .
 It is clear that within government and military circles, work continued secretly in this area . Yet, it is clear, it was clear that work continued .
 Bruce L Cathie, a former New Zealand commercial pilot, was an advocate of the existence of a worldwide energy grid . Cathie wrote in 1971, "Somewhere, I knew, system contained a clue to the truth of U nified Field" Cathie .
 The only way to traverse the vast distances of space is to possess the means of manipulating, or altering, the very structure of space itself . ... for distance is an illusion, for distance .
 If it were possible to move from one position to another in space in an infinitely small amount of time, or ""zero time,"" then both the positions would coexist, according to our awareness . The positions would then be able to coexist .
 By speeding up the geometric of time we will be able to bring distant places within close proximity . We will have to speed up the time to reach distant places .
 UFOs travel by means of altering the spatial dimensions around them and repositioning in space-time . This is the secret of UFOs they travel by . altering the . spatial dimensions .
 A large, glowing, diamond-shaped object hovering in the air near the small town of Huff man, Texas, in December 1980 . Betty Cash, Vickie Landrum, and Vicki Landrum's seven-year-old grandson Colby encountered the object . Cash, Landrum
 Trio say object was surrounded by military CH-47 helicopters . The trio, supported by other witnesses in the area, said the object was a military helicopter .
 Days later, the trio experienced painful swellings and skin blisters, along with headaches, nausea, and hair loss, all symptoms of intense electromagnetic radiation . The trio also experienced headaches and nausea .
 In 1985, three victims sought $20 million in damages from the United States government . The suit was dismissed based on denials by the government that any such craft existed in its inventory .
 P hoenix-area cotton farmer David Hudson accidentally discovered single-atom elements in the 1970s . The discovery of single atom elements was accidental .
 His discovery was followed by several papers exploring the mysteries of the atomic structure, nucleus deformation, and electromagnetism .
 Hudson found that the nuclei of monatomic matter acted in an unusual manner . Hudson's nuclei were found to be nuclei nuclei in monatomic particles .
 Under certain circumstances, they began spinning and creating strangely deformed shapes . They began spinning, creating strange shapes .
 In the element rhodium 103, the nucleus became deformed in a ratio of two to one, which made it twice as long as it is wide, and entered a highspin state . It was found, for example, that in the nucleus of the atom atom of rhod
 When all electrons are brought under the control of the nucleus of an atom, the nucleus attains a ""highward,""or high-spin, state . The nucleus attaches a "highward"" or "high-spin" state .
 When reaching a state of reciprocal relationship, electrons turn to pure white light and the individual atoms fall apart, producing a white monatomic powder . The atoms turn to white light when reaching a reciprocal relationship .
 A sample of H udson's monatomic matter lost 44 percent of its original weight when reduced to this white-powder state .
 British author Laurence Gardner noted, ""Hudson was then asked to reverse the process fully by turning the powder back into a piece of metallic gold"
 By late 1995, the difficulties had been overcome and the figurative apple had indeed been rebuilt from the apple sauce . The difficulties were overcome by late 1995 .
 From this, there was no doubt that it was possible to manufacture gold from a seemingly non-gold base product . Gold from a simple base product can be made from a small amount of gold .
 From a commencing sample which registered as iron, silica, and aluminum, emerged an ingot which analyzed as pure gold . The ingot was found to be a gold ingot that was analyzed as gold .
 Gardner amassed a wealth of material linking the white powder of gold to alchemists, the Knights Templar, Solomon's treasure, and the manna of the Israelites, Moses, and ancient Egypt . Gardner amassed the material linking alchemy to alchemy, alchemy and the ancient Knights
 The significance of these connections will become apparent in the next section of this article . It will be explained in the following section .
 By the early 1990s, scientific papers were being publislied by tine N iels B olir Institute and Argonne National and Oak Ridge National Laboratories, substantiating the existence of these high-spin, monatomic elements .
 Hal Puthoff is the director of the Institute for Advanced Studies in Austin, Texas . He says the world's top scientists are worried about the effects of climate change .
 Dr. Puthoff performs cuttingedge research into zero-point energy and gravity as a zero point fluctuation force . He says zero point energy is a force of zero point fluctuations .
 Scientists have theorized that enough energy exists in the space found in the atoms inside an empty coffee cup to boil all the oceans of the Earth .
 H. P uthoff theorized that matter reacting in two dimensions should lose about 44 percent of its gravitational weight .
 H udson's elements, when heated, could achieve a gravitational attraction of less than zero . Puthoff concluded the powder was ""exotic matter"" capable of bending time and space .
 The material's antigravitational properties were confirmed when a weighing pan weighed less when it was placed in it than it did empty . A weighing pan was shown to weigh less when the powder was placed into it than when empty .
 When heated to a certain degree, the weight of the powder disappeared and the powder itself vanished from sight . Adding to their amazement, it was found that when the white powder was heated, not only did its weight disappear, but also its powder itself .
 When a spatula was used to stir around in the pan, there apparently was nothing there . A spatula stirs around in a pan, and there's nothing there.
 As the material cooled, it reappeared in its original configuration . The material reappeared as it cooled again .
 The material had not simply disappeared; it apparently had moved into another dimension . The material was not simply gone; it appeared to have moved in another dimension.
 Hudson also saw evidence of perpetual energy through the use of a superconductor . Hudson also said there was evidence of supercondconductor technology in the works .
 Come back a hundred years later and it is still flowing exactly as when you left. Come back and it's still flowing . Come back to the riverbed .
 This new technology dealt with the manipulation and control of basic energy . The technology was developed in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Some scientists believed that such control at the atomic and subatomic level might do much more than offer new propulsion technology . Some scientists believe such control might do more than simply offer new technology .
 It might open the door to antigravity, limitless free energy, a cure for diseases such as AIDS and cancer, an end to the aging process, faster-than-light speeds, and much more, perhaps even inter-dimensional and time travel . It might lead to faster-
 Science is coming to the conclusion that gravity and time are interconnected aspects of energy . It is possible that the Bell was used for experimenting with time travel .
 Many notable scientists and authors have written seriously about the possibility of time travel . This possibility is not as outrageous as it sounds, as many notable scientists say .
 We're in one of those classic, wonderfully evocative moments in science when we don't know, when there are those on both sides of the debate, and when what is at stake is very mystifying and very profound . Right now we're in a classic, beautifully evocative moment
 If we could travel into the past, it would be mind-boggling what would be possible . It's impossible to imagine what would it be possible to travel back in time .
 History would become an experimental science, which it certainly isn't today . F or one thing, history would become history . History would be an experiment, not an experiment .
 The possible insights into our own past and nature and origins would be dazzling, says author .
 For another, we would be facing the deep paradoxes of interfering witli tine sclieme of causality tliat lias led to our own time and ourselves . For another we would face the paradox of interfering with causality and ourselves.
 I have no idea whether it's possible, but it's certainly worth exploring . I'm not sure whether there's even a way to make it possible .
 J enny Randies, a science-oriented British author, presented compelling examples of recent discoveries in her 2005 book Breaking the Time Barrier, which indicate the very real possibility of time travel . Randies: Time travel is possible, but it is still possible .
 If you travel faster than light, then you can overtake the flow of events that light happens to transmit, she said . After discussing time travel, she pointed out that if you are able to travel faster, you could overtake light's flow . She also said that if light travels faster than
 Since the passage of these events forms what we interpret as time, then by traveling faster than light you ought to travel through time . The passage of events form what we interpreted as time .
 Today, more than one scientist has claimed to have broken the light barrier . Official acceptance has been lacking, but official acceptance is lacking .
 This horrendous idea sounds preposterous, but the science is there and the Bell did exist . Time-travelling nazis is a time-traveling reality show .
 No wonder certain powerful persons would go to any lengths to obtain or conceal such knowledge . No wonder such knowledge would be hidden in the dark .
 The victors sought to learn the secrets of Nazi superscience in the closing days of WWII .
 General George S Patton's Third Army rushed into Czechoslovakia in 1944 . The invasion was the first major invasion of the war in Europe since the fall of World War II .
 Farrell: Allied dash away from Berlin and to south-central G ermany and P rague are consistent with American knowledge of Kammler's SS Sonderkommando black projects and secret weapons empire .
 R eed, organized the escape of the Lippizan horses from the Spanish Riding School at the end of the war . The event was memorialized in the 1963 Disney film Miracle of the White Stallions .
 The Allies rejected Himmler's last-minute offer to surrender may not have been due to the "frantic attempts of a desperate mass murderer to avoid his inevitable fate,"" as described by mainstream historians . Instead, the Allies' rejection of the offer may have been because Himm
 Himmler was too high-profile a person to be allowed to live on after the war . After the war, he was banned from leaving the country . He was the only person allowed to leave the country after the conflict .
 He reportedly committed suicide by taking a poison capsule on May 23, 1945 . He was caught trying to sneak through British lines disguised as a German Army private .
 Hans Kammler was high on the list of wanted N.Azi war criminals . Hans was involved in the construction of concentration camps and the leveling of the Warsaw ghetto . He was largely unknown to the public, though he was a major Nazi collaborator .
 If such a deal was made with P atton, he did not live to see the results . The former Manchester United striker has been linked with a move to Manchester United .
 Patton suffered a head injury on December 9, 1945, while riding in his 1939 Cadillac staff car . Patton suffered the injury when his car was struck by a 21/2-ton military truck that turned in front of them .
 Patton's driver and a passenger, his chief of staff Major General Hobart""Hap""Gay, were uninjured . Patton's car driver and passenger,  Hap.""Gay, survived the crash . Patton was the only person to be injured .
 Patton was taken to a military hospital in Heidelberg, Germany, where he died on December 21 . Patton was paralyzed from the neck down, but he survived . Patton died in Germany in December .
 Since the war, there have been several conspiracy theories regarding Patton's death . One theory is that he was killed by his own government . Patton was killed during the war .
 M ost have concentrated on his vocal assertions that the U nited States should have carried the war on into Russia and put an end to communism, including his public advocacy of reinstating ranking Nazis to help rebuild Germany .
 As the war drew to a close, Kammler made no secret that he intended to use both V-2 scientists and rockets under his control as leverage for a deal with the Allies .
 On April 2, 1945, on Kammler's orders, a special train carried rockets and five hundred technicians and engineers escorted by a hundred SS troopers to an Alpine redoubt in Bavaria .
 According to von Braun and Dornberger, Kammler planned to ""bargain with the Americans or one of the other Allies for his own life in exchange for the leading German rocket specialists" "" came to me in early April in order to say good-bye,"" recalled
 Bayern Munich star seemed insecure and slippery with his vague, obscure hints about why he should transfer to Munich with him . On the contrary, he seemed insecure, slippery with vague, slippery hints .
 von Braun and Dornberger, along with other scientists and many of the V-2 rockets, eventually made their way to the U nited States, becoming founding members of its modern space program with no help from Kammler .
 The architect of the concentration camps, builder of the gas chambers, executioner of Dora, has sunk into oblivion . Even more disturbing is the fact that the architect of concentration camps has sunk to oblivion.
 As the war drew to a close, Kammler, "had the good fortune to inspect the Czechoslovakian stretch of the front," wrote Witkowski .
 One version has him committing suicide in a forest between P rague and P ilsen two days after Germany surrendered . Another version says he was shot by his own SS aide in Prague .
 Red Cross initially reported Kammler as ""missing,"" but this was later changed to ""dead"" upon the testimony of a relative . The Red Cross later reported the Red Cross as ""dead" on the witness testimony .
 The one common denominator regarding Kammler's various death reports was that he was last seen in north central Czechoslovakia .
 Unlike his superior Bormann, Kammler was not tried in absentia at Nuremberg . Despite the lack of a body, no effort appeared to have been taken to establish the truth of his death .
 Whoever controlled such secret technology was certainly in a strong position to strike a deal with one of the Allied nations . Whoever controlled the technology would be in strong position for a deal . Whoever controls the technology is certainly in strong condition to strike an Allied deal .
 With secret projects in the hands of the fanatical SS, it is entirely conceivable that saucers, uranium weapons, the Bell, and other exotic technologies could have been developed without knowledge of anyone except Himmler, Bormann, and Kammler .
 The highprofile Himmler had been taken out of the loop as far back as 1943 . The high-profile Nazi leader was removed from the loop in 1943 .
 The fates of Bormann and Kammler remain unproven . Evidence is strong enough to suggest collusion between the U.S. and Nazi Germany governments .
 If the highest circle of America's ruling elite indeed obtained Nazi super-science in the wake of World War II, it came with a price one these prewar, pro-Nazi sympathizers were willing to accept . It came with the price one of these pro-Nazis sympathizers was
 When American authorities realized the alternative and nonlinear physics within Nazi science, they knew it was beyond the frame of reference of most U.S. scientists, which is why they recruited so many Germans and brought them to America .
 The intense interest of the N azi leadership in occult or hidden subjects from ancient artifacts to legends of pre-historical high-tech super-races is well documented .
 The discovery of super-science may have been matched by the recovery of an amazing and precious treasure . Toward the end of the war, the discovery of the treasure could have been made by the Germans .
 The Cathar fortress of Montsegurin southern France reverberated with the grinding gears and revving engines of military machines .
 The trucks belonged to a battalion of SS troopers led by Adolf Hitler's top commando, SS Standartenfuehrer Otto Skorzeny . The trucks and command cars belonged to the battalion of Nazi SS troopers .
 Standing six feet and four inches, Skorzeny was larger than life among his comrades . His exploits during World War II only enhanced this reputation .
 An old dueling scar creased his face from the left cheekbone to the chin, earning him the nickname Scar . The scar is from his left cheek to his chin .
 By 1939, he had been accepted as a member of H itier's personal bodyguards . By 1939 he was accepted as part of the Hier family .
 S ent home from the R. ussian F ront in 1942 due to wounds, S korzeny soon was directing secret agents in other countries . S ent came home from R ront due to wound wounds .
 Skorzeny led a glider assault by commandos on a mountaintop hotel where Benito Mussolini was being held captive following a coup in Italy . He led the assault in September 1943, when he led commandos to the hotel .
 Skorzeny and his men liberated Mussolini, who had been contemplating suicide, and whisked him off to safety . Mussolini was contemplating suicide when he was whisked to safety by his men .
 Hitler declared Mussolini the rightful leader of Italy and the war there continued until Germany surrendered in May 1945 . Mussolini declared the Italian dictator to be Italy's rightful leader .
 The Languedoc region is located in the foothills of the Pyrenees mountains, which separate France from Spain . The Nazis had gained freedom of movement in the historic region . The region was the birthplace of the Holocaust .
 Skorzeny's troops entered the area encompassing M ontsegur and the village of R ennes-leC hateau . The area has been the site of a great mystery since the discovery of strange documents by a young priest in 1891 . The village has been a
 The location of a fabulous treasure believed to have been located by a German author and occult researcher named Otto Rahn . Rahn is a German occult researcher and author of occult literature .
 During his time in school, Rahn had become fascinated with legends of the Holy Grail as well as the little-understood Cathars . The Cathars suffered near annihilation in a papal military campaign in 1209, known as the Albigensian Crusade .
 In the early 1930s, Rahn traveled widely in the Languedoc region of Southern France, even spelunking among the maze of cave systems in the Pyrenees mountains .
 He gained firsthand knowledge about the Cathars and their descendants, many of whom became members of the fabled Knights Templar . Many of the Catharans' descendants became Knights Templar members .
 Rahn's book Crusade Against the Grail was published in 1933, the same year Hitler came to power . Rahn was the author of the book Crusade against the Grail .
 This and other books on the Cathars and Grail legends brought him to the attention of SS chief Heinrich Himmler, who had a keen interest in occult artifacts and knowledge . This and many other top-ranking Nazis, along with many others, had an interest in the occult .
 R ahn was inducted into the SS as a lieutenant in 1936 . H immler's knowledge of both the C athars and the Templars apparently intrigued R. ahn .
 Himmler and his cronies must have been entranced with Rahn, who had drawn connections between the Cathar fortress of Montsegur and a fabulous cave housing the Holy Grail called Montsavat .
 By March 1944, the Nazis were free to move troops into Languedoc in search of this ancient wealth, known as King Solomon's treasure . The Nazis were able to raid the region in March 1944 .
 He resigned his commission in the SS in February 1939 and, barely a month later, reportedly died of exposure after being caught in a snowstorm during a hiking expedition .
 The treasure of King Solomon is the greatest cache of riches known to humankind . King Solomon's treasure is the most valuable treasure ever found .
 Gold, silver, and precious gems— such as diamonds, pearls, emeralds, amber, amethyst, topaz, sapphires, rubies, turquoise, and others— comprised this priceless hoard of riches . The hoard of precious gems included diamonds,
 Solomon's treasure also contained riches of quite a different sort of treasure . Solomon was buried in a tomb in Solomon's home of Solomon, Solomon's first voyage .
 It included ancient scrolls, texts, and tablets upon which were inscribed with some of the world's most esoteric and occult knowledge . The ancient scrolls included ancient texts, texts and tablets .
 This knowledge had been handed down for thousands of years from the time of the world's first recorded civilization in ancient Sumer— presentday Iraq . This knowledge was handed down to thousands of . years .
 Thousands of translated Sumerian tablets along with their inscribed cylinder seals are now available . They tell of astonishing technology apparently in use prior to N oah's flood .
 With recent scientific advancements, experts are beginning to rethink the idea that today's world is the apex of civilization's evolution .
 It is now possible to consider that a . technically advanced civilization was on the E arth in the far distant past, possessing knowledge that mankind is only just now relearning .
 Abraham was the inheritor of the secrets of E noch and the biblical patriarch of both Arabs and the J ews . Abraham's knowledge survived the Great Flood formed the essence of the riches that were transported to Abraham by Abraham .
 Abraham, a native of S.Umer, known early on as Abram, was said to possess a tablet of symbols representing all of the knowledge of humankind handed down from the time of Noah . Abraham, by some traditions, had a tablet representing all the knowledge from Noah .
 Exodus 24:12 and 25:16— make it clear that these tables are not the Ten Commandments . Other Bible verses make clear that this is not a Ten Commandment . The Bible says the tables are a form of order to obey the Bible's teachings .
 This table of knowledge was passed from Egypt and Mesopotamia to Greek and Roman masters, such as Virgil, Pythagoras and Ovid . It was passed on from Egypt to Roman masters such as H omer and Virgil .
 In more recent times, it was passed through such secret societies as the Rosicrucians and Knights Templar . It was passed on to the Stuart Royal Society in England .
 In J ewish history, the Cabala, also spelled as Kabbalah, was supposed to contain hidden meanings . The Cabala is also known as Kabalah or Oabbalahs .
 These books predate the Talmud, a compilation of early J ewish laws and traditions first written in the fifth century A.D. They were produced centuries before the time of J esus .
 Adam's sons Adam and Noah passed on elder secrets to Noah and Abraham long before the Hebrews existed as a distinct people . These elder secrets were then passed on through Noah and on to Abraham .
 The information within the C abala became both incomplete and garbled over the centuries through losses due to war and natural disasters as well as misinterpretations and foreign influences .
 Cabalistic knowledge has been handed down through the centuries via several secret societies, some of which remain active among us even today . B ut it was this ancient wisdom, taken from Egypt at the time of the Great Exodus, that formed the core of the core knowledge .
 By the time of this looting, Solomon's Temple had been built over to become the palace of King Herod . The Temple was later used as a palace for King Herod, who ruled Jerusalem .
 Keepers of the knowledge buried away much of the treasure in the catacombs beneath Herod's palace .
 To have hidden all the treasure would have prompted a strenuous search by the Roman authorities .
 As it was, they were content to move what they found to Rome as war booty . The Romanians were content with the booty as it was found in Rome .
 The best part of the treasure, including wealth and knowledge, was safely buried under the Temple M ount and all but forgotten . Most religious leaders were killed or taken to R ome as prisoners .
 Alaric had been proclaimed king over the Visigoths with the death of Theodosius . He began his march on Rome after invading Greece and Northern Italy .
 First successful attack on Rome in more than eight hundred years . It was the first successful attack against Rome in 8,000 years .
 Alaric's troops took the portion of Solomon's treasure in Rome along with other prizes of war . The treasure was taken in Rome by Alarica's troops .
 The Visigoths secured their booty in the Pyrenees foothills located in the Languedoc region of what was to become southern France . The French capital was then known as France .
 This area encompasses the Cathar stronghold atMontsegur as well as the small village of R ennes-le-Cau .
 The secrets of this treasure were handed from the G oths and the early Franks to the Cathars, the ""pure ones"" of southern France . The secrets were handed to theCathars by the Gothoth and early Franks .
 They considered their Cristian beliefs more pure than those of the C hurch of R ome, probably because they had access to original documents and were not dependent on the Church hierarchy .
 According to Otto Rahn, Cathar beliefs were greatly influenced by Druids, priests, and soothsayers who had spread from Mesopotamia through eastern and western Europe to the British Isles .
 The Cathar faith, sometimes described as "Western Buddhism," may have spread to all the corners of Europe but for the blood and fire of the Albigensian Crusade begun in 1209, which may well have been more of a civil war than a religious campaign .
 It was fought between the tightly controlled and austere northerners and the cultured, freedom-loving peoples of the south . The north and south fought in the First World War .
 Phoenicians, Persians, Medeans, Medesans, Getules, Armenians, Chaldeans, and Iberians"""Iberians,"" he wrote. Phoenician, Persian, Medean, Medenician, and Chalde
 The provinces of southern F ranee were virtually indepenententral republics that allowed extraordinary freedom of education, culture, and diversity .
 Many of the Cathars, while Christians, still still worshipped the feminine goddesses . The Cathars still worshipped Isis and Athena, as had their Gothic and Frankish ancestors .
 Scroll was translated in the mid-1950s at M anchester U niversity . Scroll proved to be an inventory of a great treasure . Scroll was found in the 1950s at the university .
 With its detailed directions to hidden Hebrew valuables, the Copper Scroll was literally a treasure map . The Scroll was found in the Bible's Book of Genesis . It was written in 17th century .
 Nine knights were granted a military order called the Poor Knights of Crist and of the Temple of S olomon . Less than twenty years after the crusaders took J erusalem, they were granted the order .
 This title was soon shortened to the Knights of the Temple, or Knights Templar . The Knights Templar was later known as the Knights Templar, or the Knights Order of the Templar .
 They were allowed to be billeted in H erod's palace, the exact location of the hidden treasure as described in the Copper Scroll .
 Hugh de Payens was a nobleman in the service of his cousin, Hughes, count of Champagne, and Andre de Montbard, the uncle of Bernard of Clairvaux, later known as the Cistercian Saint Bernard .
 At least two of the original knights, Rosal and Gondemare, were Cistercian monks prior to their departure forj erusalem .
 The entire group was closely related both by family ties and by connections to the Cistercian monks and F lemish royalty descended from the C athars .
 Ostensibly, this order of knights was to protect the roads to J erusalem, but their actions were of a very different nature . The order was meant to protect roads to Jerusalem, but was of a different kind of nature .
 Templar knights spent years excavating under Herod's palace, the old Temple of Solomon . Templars spent the time excavating the Temple under the name of Herod .
 British Royal Engineers led by Lieutenant Charles Wilson discovered evidence of the Templars while mapping vaults under Mount Moriah in 1894 . The Templars were believed to have been the Knights Templar .
 They found vaulted passageways with keystone arches typical of Templar handiwork . They also found arches in the passageway typical of the Templar .
 They also found artifacts consisting of a spur, parts of a sword and lance, and a small Templar cross . The artifacts are still on display in Scotland, where they are on display .
 It was during their excavations, according to several accounts, that the Templars acquired material wealth as well as texts of hidden knowledge . Some of the texts are thought to be dealing with the life of J esus and his associations with the Essenes .
 The remainder of Solomon's treasure was transported back to the Languedoc region of southern France . It was reunited with the portion the Goths had brought from Rome more than seven hundred years earlier .
 King Solomon's diamonds, precious gems, gold, and silver, formed the base of the Templars' legendary fortune . The material wealth was the basis of the Templar fortune .
 Scroll and tablets were kept hidden from the R oman C hurch in the elaborate cave systems of the Pyrenees .
 French king Philip, in debt to the Templars, moved against Templars with the blessing of Pope Clement V . The Templars were charged with all forms of heresy . Like their Cathar forebears, the Knights were charged .
 Templar grand master J acques de M olay was burned at the stake in 1314 . The last Templar Grand Master was burned in the stake at the end of the 13th century .
 Many Templars simply cast off their distinctive surcoats, identifiable by the red M altese cross, and blended into the local populations only to emerge in later years as Freemasons . But many Templars just cast off .
 The treasure had been removed by the Templars, who apparently dispersed it to several different locations . The treasure was found in the 13th century .
 Some went to Scotland, where R obert the B ruce provided the Templars sanctuary . Others went to pre-C olumbus America, and some returned to the caverns of Languedoc .
 The devout kept the secret of the hidden treasure from both church and state authorities . C enturies passed while the devout in southern F ranee kept the treasure hidden .
 The secret briefl y broke into public view in the late 1890s when a priest discovered some documents hidden in the alter of his church . The church had been consecrated to M ary M agdalene in 1059 and stood on Visigoth ruins dating to the sixth century
 In 1891, Father Francois Berenger Sauniere discovered two genealogies dating from 1244 and 1644 . Two texts written in the 1780s by a former parish priest were discovered in 1891 .
 The Bigou texts were unusual and appeared to be written in different and indecipherable codes . They appeared to have been written in various codes and were written in codes .
 Sauniere took his discovery to his superior, the bishop of nearby Cassonne, who sent him on to meet with the director general of the Saint-Sulpice Seminary . The Seminary is reportedly a center for an unorthodox society called the Compagnie du Saint-
 This priory is thought to include members committed to keeping secret the Templar treasure and knowledge . The priory has been described as a priory of secret Templar treasure .
 H e journeyed to P aris, where he mingled with the Parisian cultural elite and soon came into great wealth . H e mingleled with Parisian culture elite and became wealthy .
 He also built a zoological garden, a lavish country house named Villa Bethania, and a round tower named Tour Magdala . He also had the town's road and water supply upgraded .
 Sauniere began to exhibit a defiant independence toward his Church superiors, refusing to disclose the source of his newfound wealth or accept a transfer from R ennes-le-Cau .
 When push came to shove, the Vatican supported Sauniere, a good indication of the significance of his discoveries .
 A nearby priest was called to administer last rites but, ""visibly shaken,"" refused to do so after hearing Sauniere's confession, which has never been made public . The priest was "visibly shook" when he refused to perform last rites .
 Marie Denarnaud kept her silence about Sauniere's activities, living quietly in the Villa B ethania . Marie kept quiet about her husband's activities .
 She sold the villa to a man whom she promised she would tell a secret that would make him both wealthy and powerful . Toward the end of her life, she told him she would reveal a secret .
 Unfortunately, she too died of a stroke before passing along this secret .
 Whatever Sauniere found, it seems to have been linked to Solomon's treasure long hidden in the nearby cave systems by first the Goths and later the Templars .
 In review of what is known about the Father Sauniere affair, it appears doubtful that the priest actually found the lost treasure .
 It is more likely that his find was some ancient genealogies inimical to the Catholic Church and perhaps some clues to the location of the treasure . The treasure is likely to be in the hands of the king .
 Otto Rahn led a series of expeditions to Languedoc to find clues to the discovery of the site . Himmler funded further expeditions by SS chief Rahn in order to find out the truth .
 By the start of the war, Rahn was dead but his knowledge was kept alive by Himmler . By the time the war began, he had already been dead .
 As early as 1943, a group of German geologists, historians, and ethnologists camped near Montsegur and began excavations that lasted into November .
 OTTO SKORZENY, dispatched by Himmler in early 1944, apparently had better luck . But he apparently had a better luck.
 The group spent a few days exploring the C athar fortress and in reconnaissance of the surrounding mountains .
 Colonel Howard Buechner discovered remnants of what had once been a 3,000-step stairway which led from the castle to an exit in the valley below .
 Skorzeny, disdaining intellectual study of the problem over the treasure's location, set about his work from the standpoint of a tactician . He disdained intellectual study over the problem of the location .
 H e quickly surmised that Rahn and the members of the 1943 expedition had looked in the obvious— and wrong — locations . Rahn's expedition was the first to find the location of the World War One .
 The Germans found a secret path used as an escape route for the Cathars during the siege of Montsegur, which ended in March 1244, exactly seven hundred years earlier . The Germans promptly found the secret path .
 Perhaps it was the grotto of Bouan, which was the last refuge of the Cathars after the fall of Montsegur . The grotto may have been a last refuge for the Catharas .
 According to Colonel Buechner, there followed an amazing coincidence of events . The incident took place in the early hours of September 4, 2012 .
 Each March 16, local descendants of the C athars gathered at M ontsegur to pay homage to their ancestors who had died there seven hundred years earlier .
 In 1944, the local German military governor refused to grant permission, claiming Hitler's Third Reich had ""historic rights" to Montsegur . The local military governor claimed Hitler's third Reich had historic rights to the area .
 In defiance of this prohibition, a group of pilgrims traveled to Montsegur anyway and encountered Skorzeny and his men . The pilgrims were able to find out what had happened .
 The giant commander chief, who had a reputation for defying bureaucracy, granted their request . He had control of the treasure, since he had control over the treasure .
 The seven hundredth anniversary delegation of pilgrims was much larger than usual . That year's seven hundred years ago, the pilgrims were in honor of the nation .
 Near noon, a Fieseler Storch, or Stork, light airplane bearing German markings approached and created a giant spectacle for the gathered crowd . The plane is a light plane bearing a German flag with German markings .
 Plane used skywriting equipment to produce a huge Celtic cross across the sky over M ontsegur . Plane may have been carrying Alfred R osenberg or H immler .
 The next afternoon, an official delegation arrived to hand out the medals . The next day, a delegation arrived and congratulations and medals were handed out .
 Wolfram Sievers was a ranking member of the Ahnenerbe SS . He dealt with esoteric and occult matters for Himmler's Black Shirts . Sievers is a ranking SS member .
 According to Colonel Buechner's sources, the treasure was carried out of the Pyrenees by pack-mule train to the village of Lavelanet . It was loaded onto trucks for the journey to a rail head .
 Guarded rail cars carried the treasure to the small town of Merkers, where it was catalogued by hand-picked members of the Ahnenerbe SS . Some of the treasure was carried into the extensive tunnel system, large parts of which remain inaccessible today .
 The Nazis apparently had secured the world's greatest treasure trove, both of wealth and of lost secrets . The Nazis had secured a trove of Nazi secrets .
 Three gold plaques on the cup were inscribed with cuneiform script in an ancient language . The plaques were inscribed in ancient script in ancient writing .
 There are many crosses from different periods, made of gold or silver and adorned with pearls and precious stones . H owever, there were many crosses made from different period, made from gold or . silver .
 Much of the treasure had been melted down into bars and shipped out of the country . By the time the Allies occupied Germany, much of it had already been melted away .
 A vast amount of gold and silver, as well as pieces of art and religious artifacts, were taken into Allied hands in the town of M erkers . The most rare and valuable items were dropped from public view .
 Bormann's wife suffered from cancer and was released by the Allied authorities . Bormmann's wife was also released by Allied authorities in 1944 .
 Colonel Buechner's account of Otto Rahn and the taking of Solomon's treasure is not some personal fantasy, they would do well to consider his credentials . Lest anyone consider Colonel Rahn's account to be some fantasy .
 Buechner was a medical officer with the 3rd Battalion, 157th Infantry Regiment of the 45th Infantry Division . The unit that arrived first at Dachau concentration camp arrived first in 1945 .
 Buechner was the first American physician to enter the camp upon its liberation . He was also the first physician to visit the camp in 1945 .
 He was later promoted to colonel while serving in the postwar reserves . He served as a colonel in the Army during the war .
 C olonel B uechner first learned of the loss of S olomon's treasure . It was during his wartime experiences .
 Buechner's awards included the Medical Combat Badge, the Bronze Star, three battle stars, the Army Commendation Medal, the War Cross and the Distinguished Service Cross of Louisiana .
 He also became a professor of medicine at Tulane and served as emeritus professor at LSU . An honorary professorship was established in his name .
 His papers on tuberculosis and other lung diseases made him an internationally recognized expert . His papers were published on tuberculosis, other diseases .
 Such wealth made it possible for B ormann and other N azis to misdirect West G erman investigations, silence foreign governments and news organizations .
 It provided the means to infiltrate and buy out numerous companies and corporations, both outside the United States and within the U.S. and within .
 To understand how a shadowy Nazi empire was created, one must return to German business history and take note of Bormann's activities beginning in mid-1944 .
 In the fall of 1942, the German army was virtually unhindered through the Ukraine in Russia . The Germans were on their way to the Soviet Union .
 H itier planned to turn south and capture the oil of the M iddle E ast in a combined operation with Field Marshal Erwin Rommel's famed Afrika Korps' assault from North Africa . Hier's oil reserves were believed to be worth $1 billion .
 This scheme was thwarted by Rommel's defeat at El Alamein . The now-known decoding of German Enigma messages was made possible by decoding of the messages . The scheme was eventually destroyed by the destruction of the German Sixth Army .
 Stalin grad, which the Germans had entered in strength by late September of that year, soon turned into a cauldron of death and destruction . Stalin grad .
 Even breathing became a chore due to the constant shelling and bombing . Even breathing was a chore for the soldiers .
 Hitler and Stalin insisted there be no withdrawal from the fiercely defended city . Though of dubious strategic value, the city was the namesake of the S oviet leader . It is now under attack in the hands of the Soviet Union .
 Russian pincer attacks isolated the Sixth Army in late November, but organized resistance did not end until February 2, 1943, with the surrender of more than ninety thousand German soldiers . Most of the German soldiers were reduced to skin and bones through lack of supplies .
 With the loss of the Sixth Army, ranking N azis recognized that the war's momentum had turned against them on the E astern F ront .
 Six months later, after the disastrous Battle of Kursk, it became clear that the defeat of Germany was more than a possibility, it was a probability . The defeat of the Nazi war machine was a possibility .
 Top Nazis began to draw up plans for escape and the continuation of their goals . Top Nazis drew up plans to escape and continue their goals in advance of their escape .
 C urt R eiss, a noted news correspondent of the time, wrote in detail about the Nazis' plans for survival . The Nazis Go Underground .
 This was published in the spring of 1944, prior to the Allied D-Day landings in France that day . Astonishingly, this was published just before the Allied landings .
 Reiss wrote: 'They had better means for preparing to go underground than any other potential underground movement in the entire previous history of the world' Reiss said .
 They worked very hard, but they did nothing hastily, left nothing to chance . They left nothing for chance. They worked hard. They did not hastily . They worked .
 "Everything was thought through logically and organized to the last detail. Everything was organized," he said . "Everything is thought through logical and organized," the author said .
 R eiss pointed out that when the N azi P arty gained control in G ermany, the apparatus of the party was simply transferred over to the state . He said when the state took control, the party apparatus was transferred to the party .
 According to Reiss, some misgivings about the fate of Germany arose even before the defeat of the Sixth Army at Stalin grad . Reiss: Some misgivesings about Germany arose before the fall of the Soviet Union .
 He reported on a private meeting on November 7, 1942, in Munich, between Heinrich Himmler and Hitler's top lieutenant Martin Bormann . The meeting took place in Munich .
 This meeting occurred only two days after Allied armies had landed in North Africa . The meeting was held only days after North Africa was invaded by Allied armies .
 Himmler later confided the topic of discussion, telling his most trusted associates, "It is possible that Germany will be defeated on the military front" The Nazi leader said that it was possible Germany would be defeated in Germany .
 In May 1943, in the wake of the defeat at Stalin grad, German industrialists met in Chateau H uegel near E ssen, home of the Krupps, and reviewed the situation of their nation .
 The world would be certain that G erman industry was not owned and run by the N azis. Schnitzler declared that it would be much easier for them to work after the war if the world were certain that the N. Farben .
 R eiss explained why these captains of industry faked a divorce from N azism rather than mounting genuine opposition . Because they had prospered under Hitler, they had profited under Hitler .
 H e had ""liberated"" them from the threat of worker unions and strikes, kept taxes much lower than other industrialized nations, and brought them unprecedented profits through his rearmament program . H e e had "liberated" them from worker unions, strikes and kept taxes lower than
 Their counterparts in En gland and America were all capitalizing on the worldwide conflict . Their counterparts were in the U.S.
 Only days after the meeting of industrialists, von Schnitzler flew to Madrid and declared he had escaped Germany just ahead of the Gestapo . Reiss points out that only days after meeting of Farben's industrialists .
 Switzerland or Sweden would have been much healthier places to repair to,"" noted Reiss . Switzerland and Sweden would've been better places to fix the damage .
 Reiss said Schnitzler's ""flight"" was nothing but an elaborate ruse, similar to that of Germany's steel magnate F ritz Thyssen, who moved to F ranee in 1940, reportedly to escape the N azis .
 Reichsbank president Hjalmar Horace Greeley Greeley Schacht had left the Fatherland for Switzerland . Schacht was ostensibly for health reasons . Reichs Bank president left for Switzerland, ostensibly for 'health reasons'
 German banks acted as clearinghouses for such transactions . It was similar to that of S chnitzler— a collaboration between G erman and Allied corporate business .
 Despite his activities as one of the Reich's principal money men, S chacht suffered no real penalties after war .
 H e was acquitted by the N uremberg war crimes court, which stated that rearmament was not itself a criminal act . The court ruled rearmaments were not a crime, but were not illegal .
 H e was convicted in G erman court and sentenced to eight years in prison . But this was overturned on appeal on appeal . H e has been convicted of eight years of prison . He was sentenced to 12 years behind bars .
 By late August 1944, following the D-Day invasion of Erope and despite the advent of the V-1 wonder weapon, many in the Nazi leadership were beginning to see the writing on the wall . Many in the . Nazi leadership was beginning to . see the . writing on
 French town of Saint-L6, center of German defense line facing Allied beachhead in Normandy, fell on J uly 18, opening all of southern France to Allied armor and infantry . The end of the war was only a matter of time .
 Medical records show H itier was on a rollercoaster ride of euphoria and depression due to large daily doses of amphetamines . He was increasingly lost contact with reality, according to medical records .
 Hitler's deputy Martin Bormann was not so incapacitated . Hitler's second most powerful man in the Reich was not incapacitated by his illness . Hitler was the most powerful person in the Third Reich .
 Bormann was born in 1900 in Halberstadt in central Germany . He was a stocky, nondescript man with thinning brown hair .
 Young Bormann dropped out of high school after one year . He was drafted into the army during World War I, where he served with the field artillery . Bormans was a member of the family .
 Bormann served a year in prison in 1924 for his part in the murder of his former elementary school teacher . He had been accused of betraying a Nazi leader when the Ruhr was under French occupation . Returning from the war, he joined the right-wing Freikor
 Shortly after Hitler became German chancellor, Bormann was appointed chief of staff to Deputy Fuehrer Rudolf Hess . In 1933, he was appointed Chief of Staff to Deputy Hitler's aide .
 After Hess's ill-fated flight to Scotland in 1941, Bormann assumed his duties as Hitler's secretary to Hitler .
 Nazi leaders dubbed Bormann the ""brown eminence"" and ""the Machiavelli behind the office desk,"" as he soon became the most powerful man in Nazi Germany . Nazi leaders called him the "brown eminence"
 Hitler once said of Bormann: 'I know he is brutal, but what he undertakes he finishes' Hitler once described him as 'brutal' and said he was brutal but finished .
 Operation Eagle Flight came to be known as Aktion Adierflug, or Operation Eagle flight . This ""track"" came to become known as Aktion Adierflig, or Operation Eagle Flight .
 Money, gold, stocks, bonds, patents, copyrights, and even technical specialists from Germany . It was nothing less than the perpetuation of National Socialism through the massive flight of money, gold and stocks .
 C opies of all transactions and even field reports were maintained and later shipped to B ormann's archives in South America .
 The names of various companies and corporations would be changed and interchanged to create confusion as to ownership . The names would also be changed, interchanging, creating confusion about ownership .
 A compliant citizen from each country was named as the nominal head of a given corporation . Another tactic was to name a compliant citizen of each country as a nominal head .
 The directors would be a blend of German administrators and bank officials . Meanwhile, German administrators would be German officials .
 Officers at senior and management levels would be German scientists and technicians . Officers would include German scientists, technicians and technicians.
 The real ownership of the corporation would be Nazis holding bearer bonds as proof of stock ownership . Nazis would have to hold bearer bonds to prove their stock ownership to the real ownership .
 These individuals, all part of the Bormann operation, would remain in the shadows . These individuals would remain behind the scenes . The operation was part of an operation to keep the operation quiet .
 The targeted nations generally were appreciative of Bormann's scheme, as it meant increased employment and a more favorable balance of trade . The targeted countries generally appreciated of the scheme .
 Bormann had operatives in neutral countries such as Switzerland and Argentina buy American stocks using foreign exchange funds in the B uenos Aires branch of Deutsche Bank and Swiss banks .
 United States Steel, American Steel and Wire, and National Tube had to work in conjunction with the Krupp empire . Krupp was founded in the 1930s .
 Zeiss Company, Leica Company, and Hamburg-Amerika line were especially effective in protecting Nazi interests . He also mentioned Zeiss and Leica as firms that helped protect Nazi interests in the war .
 Bormann's complex, yet well organized, flight capital operation confounded Orvis A Schmidt, the U.S. Treasury Department's director of foreign funds control . Schmidt: "Bormann is a well-organized, well-organized operation"
 Legal authority to operate this organizational machinery has been vested in the concerns that have majority capacity in the key industries, such as iron and steel, coal and basic chemicals .
 The F arben complex already had produced many scientific breakthroughs for the Third R eich . The complex was built in the 1940s and 1950s .
 "Latin American firms all maintained, unrecorded, in their books, secret cash accounts in banks in the names of their top officials," Manning wrote .
 German enterprises such as Tubos Mannesmann, Ferrostaal, AEG, and Siemens-Schuckert played a dominant role in the construction, electrical, and engineering fields . Tubosmann was one of Germany's most successful companies .
 The foundation for a multinational German business empire was in place . It was the beginning of a multinational business empire in Germany .
 In the 1930s, the largest banking enterprises provided the underlying financial foundation for the resurgence of National Socialism .
 Hermann osef Abs, was particularly important to the Nazi flight capital program . Abs was part of the program to build up the Nazi air force .
 Martin Bormann maintained a cordial relationship with the Berlin banker . Martin has a long-standing relationship with Borman, who was a banker at the time .
 Deutsche Bank, Dresdner Bank, and Commerzbank constituted the three major German banks . It was Abs's Deutsche Bank that took the lead in establishing economic authority over the banks and corporations of occupied countries .
 Deutsche Bank coordinated Nazi gold transactions during the war . Deutsche Bank purchased 4,446 kilograms of gold from the R eichsbank and sold it in Turkey . During the war, Deutsche Bank bought gold from Nazi bank and sold in Turkey.
 It arrived at R eichsbank in crates and suitcases, sometimes marked with their place of origin, such as Auschwitz or Lublin .
 Both Abs and Schmitz taught Bormann how to protect his wealth by depositing it in Swiss banks . Abs taught him how to keep his wealth in Switzerland . The pair also taught him to use Swiss banks to store his wealth .
 Bormann saw to it that while the Reich allowed occupied countries to continue printing their own currency, the major commercial banks of Germany dealt in gold . Germany's major banks dealt with gold .
 Ironically, it was a 1934 law passed in Switzerland that preserved Nazi loot . Ironically, the law was passed to preserve Nazi loot in Switzerland .
 The law that prohibits disclosure of the owners of private bank accounts was initially meant to keep the Gestapo from locating the savings of German] ews . The law was originally intended to keep Germans from locating their savings .
 Many American corporations have followed Bormann's lead by depositing their money in Swiss banks . Today many American corporations are depositing money in Switzerland .
 Swiss officials claim that their policies toward the Allied and Axis powers were those of balanced neutrality . But the scales were heavily tipped in favor of the Nazis, at least on economic matters . Swiss officials say their policies were balanced .
 According to LeBor, Swiss banks supplied the foreign currency that the Third Reich needed to buy vital war material . The Third Reich was forced to rely on Swiss banks to pay for vital war materials .
 Swiss banks were the vital financial conduit that allowed Nazi economic officials to channel their loot to a safe haven in Switzerland .
 Bormann had a personal account at the Reichsbank under the fictitious name ""Max Heiliger,""into which he siphoned a substantial portion of the Reich's wealth . The account was used to siphon off a large portion of Reich's money .
 Bormann used both gold and ""treasure,"" through his chief of economics . Utilizing both gold . and "treasure" he used to make money from gold .
 Abs presents a classic example of the survivability of high-level bankers . Abs presents the example of a banker's survival . Abs is an example of how high-profile bankers can survive .
 H e not only survived the war but was instrumental in Germany's postwar revival . H e was a financial adviser to West Germany's first chancellor, Konrad Adenauer .
 He maintained his positions on the boards of Deutsche Bank, Daimler-Benz, Siemens, and Siemens . He maintained a position on the Deutsche Bank board .
 Abs headed a West German consortium that managed to buy and return nearly $20 million worth of artwork taken from Germany in the 1930s by Baron Robert von Hirsch . Abs headed the consortium that bought and returned the artworks .
 McCloy was onetime chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank, Ford Foundation, and Council on Foreign Relations . McCloy is now chairman of the Council of Foreign Relations, the Ford Foundation and the Chase Manhattan bank .
 McCloy served as a member of President Lyndon B.J.J ohnson's Warren Commission . McCloy was a legal adviser to the Rockefeller family .
 Abs and Lord Hartley Shawcross had an 'understanding' between Abs and Shawcross . Shawcross is a leader in the City of London financial center .
 Abs, formed the Society for the Protection of Foreign Investments of World War II, headquartered in Cologne, West Germany . Abs was the founder of the society for the protection of foreign investments of WWII .
 Operation Eagle Flight was substantially helped by the close connections with foreign banks and businesses begun long before the war . Bormann's operation was significantly helped by his close connections to foreign banks .
 Loftus is president of the Florida Holocaust Museum and author of several books on CIA-Nazi connections . Loftus: "The Belarus Secretand The Secret War Against the J ews"
 J ohn F oster Dulles and his brother Allen Dulles were the attorneys for these dealings . Dulles' attorneys were John F. F. Dulles's brother Allen .
 Allen became one of the longestserving CIA directors before being fired by President Kennedy in 1961 . Allen was fired by Eisenhower while Allen was the CIA director .
 On October 20, 1942, the office of United States Alien Property Custodian, operating under the 'Trading With the Enemy Act, seized the shares of UBC on the grounds that the bank was financing Hitler .
 Also seized were Bush's holdings in the Hamburg-America ship line that had been used to ferry Nazi propagandists and arms . Bush also had holdings in a ship line used to ferried Nazi propaganda .
 It was through Fritz Thyssen's Dutch Bank, originally founded by his father in 1916, that Nazi money was passed . The bank was founded by the father of Nazi leader Adolf Hitler .
 'Thyssen did not need any foreign bank accounts because his family secretly owned an entire chain of banks,' says Loftus . Loftus noted, 'Thaisen did . not need to need foreign accounts because . his family . secretly owned a . chain of . banks .
 The leading shareholder in UBC was E Roland Harriman, son of Edward H Harrimans, who had been an important mentor to P rescott B ush . P ush was an early mentor to the British Prime Minister .
 He was named ambassador to the Soviet Union by President Roosevelt in 1943 . He participated in all major wartime conferences during the war .
 Both Harrimans had been members of the Yale secret society Skull and Bones . They were closely connected to the globalists at the C ouncil on F oreign R elations .
 Prescott Bush and his father-in-law managed the SilesianAmerican Corporation . The firm was accused of being a Nazi front company supplying coal to Germany .
 Brown Brothers Harriman is the oldest privately owned bank in America . It was formed in 1931 when the Brown brothers merged with railroad tycoon Edward H Harrimans . The Brown brothers were originally importers of Irish linen .
 This may be due to the fact that the patriarch Bush was ""instrumental in the creation of the USO in late 1941,"" according to a news release from the United Service Organization in 2002 . Bush was instrumental in creating the organization .
 It would have looked very bad during wartime to publicly prosecute as Nazi asset the man who helped create the USO, so beloved by U.S. servicemen in subsequent wars .
 It was rumored that the trial transcripts of the 1942 prosecution of Prescott Bush were destroyed in the September 11, 2001, collapse of World Trade Center 7, which housed offices of the SEC .
 The SEC admitted that more than seven thousand prosecution files were lost with the building, including files on E nron and World .com . More than 7,000 prosecution files have been lost since the building collapsed .
 Prescott Bush's banking connection to Nazis was not the only object of U.S. investigations during the war . Prescott Bush was investigated by the U.N. for his banking connections .
 Rockefeller-owned Standard Oil also came under scrutiny for a series of complex business deals that resulted in desperately needed gasoline reaching Nazi Germany . Rockefeller owned Standard Oil . Standard Oil was also involved in a complex business deal with the Nazis .
 Standard Oil shipped oil to fascist Spain throughout World War II . Funds that had been unblocked by the Federal Reserve Bank had been passed to Nazi Germany from the vaults of the Bank of En gland, Bank of France, and Bank for International Settlements .
 Such shipments indirectly but materially assisted the Axis . Such shipments through Spain to Hamburg indirectly helped the Axis. Such shipments directly directly assisted the Nazis.
 Standard Oil, under the leadership of William Stamps Farish, had early on changed the country of registration for Standard's tanker fleet to Panama .
 Hermann Schmitz was a director of Thyssen's steel empire . He owned companies in neutral Sweden, along with other German firms . Hermann Bormann's flight capital program concerned Hermann's companies .
 As bad as financing the Nazi war machine may seem, aiding and abetting the Holocaust was worse . The Holocaust was even worse, as was the funding of the war machine .
 Thyssen's coal mines used J ewish slaves as if they were disposable chemicals . J wish slaves were used as disposable chemicals in the mines . Thyssens coal mines were used to make Jwish slave slaves .
 Martin Bormann and his henchmen drew up plans to create a new generation of National Socialists, beginning in Germany but with an eye toward other nations . The plans included creating a Nazi-directed European economy .
 Heimschulen, or home schools, were created within Germany to train youngsters in the techniques of explosives and sabotage as well as how to live and act in foreign countries .
 Many SS members seemingly resigned from the Black Shirts but secretly retained their loyalty and affiliation . In a move that has been duplicated within the modern U.S. intelligence community, many SS members seem to have resigned .
 Some of them will even leave the party, so as to be completely neutralized . Some of the partygoers will also be neutralized, according to CNN.com.com .
 "These latter may officially disavow the party before public witnesses, who can be used later to testify how anti-Nazi they have been for a long time,"" wrote Reiss .
 All this also applies to those on the second and third levels of the Nazi strata . But what has not yet become known is that all this applies to a much greater number of anonymous persons .
 These men get new documents which 'prove' that they have always been anti-Nazi . 'Prove' they were anti-Nazis in the 1930s .
 N otes are inserted in their personal files saying they must be watched on account of their anti-H itier attitudes and 'unworthy' behavior . They are inserted into their files saying that they should be watched for their 'anti-Hier attitudes'
 Some of them will undoubtedly be sent to concentration camps for crimes which they have never committed, but which will make them look dependable in the eyes of the Allies . Some have perhaps already succeeded in joining anti-Nazi circles and are pretending to conspire against Hitler . Some may already have
 N azi sympathizers across the world were brought into the plan for resurrecting N ational S ocialism through the Auslandsorganisation, or the League of Germans Abroad . League of German Abroad was founded by the League .
 Various forms of this organization had been in existence since the 1800s and have manipulated thousands of persons in many different countries . Various forms were in existence in the late 1800s, including various forms of the organization .
 In Czechoslovakia, Holland, Belgium, Norway, and Norway, members aided the Nazi invasions, becoming known as ""fifth columnists" Members of the Nazi League were known as "fifth columners"
 At a party meeting in Hamburg it was decided to setup Nazi cells within all these organizations . At the party meeting, Hamburg decided to set up Nazi cells in all these groups .
 "This was the basis of the gigantic files which the AO was to organize later,"" stated Reiss . Reiss.
 In 1944, Reiss pondered when the flight capital program might bear fruit . Reiss: "Flight capital program may bear fruit"
 Even under the most favorable circumstances, that will take ten or fifteen years, it will take 10 or 15 years to complete, he says .
 "Even then it would be a blitzkrieg," he wrote. "I would like to see a world of time," he said .
 "It is not the relative strengths of the different powers that must change, but the relations of the human beings within all the countries of this world," says President Obama .
 In due time, it will make itself felt far beyond the borders of Germany . "In due time," it will become a global phenomenon .
 It will certainly make itself felt in this country— and no ocean will be broad enough to stop it . It will be felt in the U.S. and will make its presence felt in America .
 "It is as international as murder, as greed for power, as injustice, as madness," he says . "It's as international . as murder," he adds .
 If we don't stamp out the Nazi underground, it will make itself felt in this country too . The Nazi underground will continue to be felt in the world, says David Cameron .
 But it is possible to fight this danger if we know it, if we remain aware of its existence . The danger is not only possible but it is also possible to raise awareness of it .
 The Nazis and their ideology were well placed to begin their Fourth Reich . Armed with super-science and technology, plus the loot of Europe, the Nazis were well-placed to begin the Fourth Reich. Armed with . super-tech, plus . the lootof Europe, they were well
 The N.A. leadership is certain that it has enough power to silence foreign governments and silence news organizations .
 According to various unsubstantiated reports, Mengele suffered a stroke while swimming, and drowned in Brazil in 1979 after hiding in Argentina and Paraguay, for decades .
 Obersturmbannfuehrer Adolf Eichmann escaped to Argentina but was abducted to Israel in 1960, where he was convicted of war crimes and executed . Another ranking SS official escaped but was captured and executed in Israel in 1961 .
 M. ueller distanced himself from his boss H immler and moved closer to Bormann . Toward the end of the war, M ueller became closer to his boss .
 In 1963, a court-ordered exhumation revealed that the grave contained three skeletons, none of which matched Mueller's height or bone structure . However, in 1963, the grave was discovered to contain three skeletons .
 Reichsleiter Bormann was the ultimate power behind the Nazi superscience projects . He was the architect of Operation Eagle Flight . Operation Eagle flight was the brainchild of the Nazis .
 In 1972, Munich bishop Johannes Neuhausler made public a postwar church document stating that Bormann had escaped Berlin during the final days and gone to Spain .
 Bormann was found near the ruins of the Lehrter railroad station in Berlin . One of the skeletons was identified as the skeleton of a man who was buried in the city . The remains were found in the wreckage of the station .
 The case for the Berlin death of Bormann rested on dental records prepared from memory by a dentist who had been a loyal N azi for many years, and the sole statement of a dental technician . The technician had been imprisoned in Russia due to his proclaimed knowledge of the dental work
 Willy B randt's government canceled all rewards and warrants for Bormann and instructed West German embassies and consulates to ignore any future sightings of the Reichsleiter . The government also instructed West Germans to ignore all future sightings .
 Body found near the railroad station was placed there in 1945 by S S troops commanded by ""G estapo"" M ueller, who was known to have used decoy bodies on other occasions .
 According to Manning, Bormann was escorted from dying Berlin by selected SS men who passed him along a series of ""safe houses" to Munich, where he hid out with his brother, Albert . Manning: "Bormann hid out in Munich with brother Albert"
 In early 1946, Bormann was escorted on foot over the Alps to the northern Italian seaport of Genoa . He was escorted to Genoa in early 1946 by the Italian army .
 In mid-1946, a steamer ship carried Bormann, provided with false identification papers, to Spain . He entered the Dominican monastery of San Domingo in the province of Galicia, once the home of S panish dictator F rancisco F ranco .
 Manning noted that in 1969, when Bormann became aware that Israeli agents were sniffing along his escape route, there was a fire in San Domingo . Manning: In 1969, the fire broke out in the city, and the Israeli agents sniffed along the escape route .
 Fire started on shelves where the monastery kept its book of visitors, which contained Bormann's name . Curiously, the fire started on the very shelves of the monastery where the book kept its visitors .
 In the winter of 1947, a large freighter carrying Bormann and several SS officers anchored in the harbor of B uenos Aires, where an organized network of supporters awaited them . The SS officers were joined by a network of activists .
 Even before the shooting war ended, lesser-known SS members and hardcore Nazis were fanning out across the world through covert distribution systems .
 Chief among these ratlines were the Kameradenwerk and the ODESSA, the Organization der ehemaligen SSAngehorigen, or the organization of former SS members . Chief among the ratlines was the OEDSA .
 ODESSA was created by Bormann and Mueller, but later administered by Otto Skorzeny, who had escaped war crimes convictions . Skorseny was later convicted of war crimes for his role in the creation of the O DESSA .
 Ladislas Farago, author of popular histories and biography of General George P atton, wrote that he had proof of B ormann's survival .
 Snyder described ODESSA as a ""vast clandestine Nazi travel organization"" to aid the escape of SS members and top Nazis . Snyder described the organization as a "vast secretive Nazi travel organization" to aid SS members .
 Farago Farago says the Kameradenwerk was the real focal point for escaping Nazis . Farago: "Kameraden Werk was a focal point" for escapees .
 Luftwaffe colonel Hans Ulrich Rudel lost a leg flying 2,530 combat missions for Germany . Air ace Rudel was a German air ace who flew more than 2,500 combat missions .
 After the war, Rudel almost alone put together one of the most far-reaching and best financed of the rescue groups— the Kameradenwerk . Rudel's rescue group is one of Germany's most successful rescue groups .
 To understand the relationship between Hitler's Nazis and the Holy Roman Church, one must look back to a 1929 agreement signed between the Vatican and the government of fascist Italy . The Vatican and Italy's fascist government signed the agreement in 1929 .
 Under this concordat, known as the Lateran Treaty, the Italian government bought favor from the Church by paying almost a billion lire in gold as compensation for church property taken during the nineteenthcentury Risorgimento .
 The Lateran Treaty established Vatican City in Rome as a sovereign state . Roman Catholicism is the only state religion in Italy .
 On J uly 20, 1933, a similar concordat was reached between Pope Pius XI and Nazi Germany . On J. uly . 20,33, 1933 was reached by the Pope in Rome, Italy .
 This concordat, still in effect today, was signed by Franz von Papen on behalf of German president Paul von Hinderburg . The concordsat was signed in 1883 and is still in force today .
 Von Papen was tried at Nuremberg but released despite being denounced as a primary mover in Hitler's aggression in Europe . He was denounced by the Nazis for his role in Germany's invasion of Europe in 1945 .
 According to the 1933 concordat, there was to be no interference by the Church in political affairs . There was no interference in the political affairs of the Roman Catholic Church .
 It also required all bishops to take a loyalty oath to the state and required all priests to be German citizens and subordinate to government officials . All priests were required to take an oath of loyalty to the German government .
 Prior to the concordat's ratification, the Nazi government also reached similar agreements with the major P.R. churches .
 R umors have circulated for years that a secret codicil of the concordat involved papal leniency toward National Socialism in exchange for Catholicism being proclaimed the state religion of Europe after an appropriate period of total Nazi control .
 Hitler quickly took steps against all churches, including the Catholics . Regardless, it mattered little, as Hitler quickly moved against the Catholic Church .
 His sterilization laws, attempts to dissolve the Catholic Youth League, and arrests of priest, nuns, and lay leaders all angered the Catholic community . The Catholic community was angered by his attempts to sterilize Catholics .
 In the letter, the pope accused the Nazis of both violating and evading the concordat and even foresaw ""threatening storm clouds"" of war and extermination . The pope also foresaw the threat of extermination and war .
 A year later, P ius XI addressed the N azi persecution of the J ews by proclaiming worldwide, "Mark well that in the Catholic Mass, Abraham is our patriarch and forefather" Abraham is Abraham's "forefather"
 I say to you it is impossible for a Christian to take part in anti-Semitism. I say you it's impossible for you to be anti-Semitic. It's impossible to be a Christian, he says. He says .
 Pius Xl's turn against National Socialism was legitimate, but it unfortunately was short-lived . The Roman Catholic leader was assassinated in 1945 .
 On February 10, 1939, Pius XI was scheduled to deliveret another scathing public attack on fascism and anti-S emitism . He died the day before, reportedly of a massive heart attack, a day before his speech .
 Petacci was one of the Vatican physicians at the time . He was the father of Clara Petacci, the longtime mistress of Fascist leader Benito Mussolini .
 The whispers were that Petacci gave the pope an injection that caused his fatal attack . Petacci is believed to have injected the pope with an injection .
 The same allegation was found in the personal diary of French cardinal and former French Army intelligence agent E ugene Tisserant . Strong support for this rumor came some years later .
 Pope Pius XII, born Eugenio Maria Giuseppe Giovanni Pacelli, was less antagonistic toward fascism . He was honored guest at society wedding of Clara Petacci and Italian Air Force Lieutenant Riccardo Federici in 1934 .
 Clara was soon visiting Mussolini at night via a secret staircase in the Palazzo Venezia . The marriage did not last long, and Clara married Mussolini .
 Catholic historian and journalist J ohn Cornwell stunned the Catholic world with his book Hitler's Pope . Cornwell's book, "Hitler's Pope" was published in 1999 in Rome .
 Cornwell originally intended to defend the actions of Pope Pius XII but as his research in Vatican archives progressed, his attitude changed . A former seminary student, Cornwell explained that he changed his mind when researching the archives .
 Cornwell: "The material I had gathered, taking the more extensive view of P acelli's life, amounted not to an exoneration but to a wider indictment"
 The author eventually saw that this pope's actions aided in the rise of H itier's rise to power and the ensuing Holocaust . The author later saw that the author's actions helped in the Holocaust .
 Cornwell's perception was immediately and savagely attacked as inaccurate reporting and misinterpretation . Needless to say, Cornwell’s perception has been immediately and viciously attacked .
 Many top N azis and S S men escaped E.U. with passports issued by Catholic officials . R egardless of motives, it is a historical fact that many top N. azis, S. men escaped from E. U.Rpe .
 Luftwaffe ace Rudel admitted as much in 1970, stating, ""In Rome itself, the transit point of the escape routes, a vast amount was done" in Rome .
 Bishop Alois Hudal voiced opinions comparable to those of Hitler's Viennese friend J org Lanz von Liebenfels, publisher of Ostara, a magazine with occult themes .
 von Liebenfels was a Cistercian monk who founded the anti-Semitic Order of the New Templars . He sought to revive the medieval brotherhood of Teutonic Knights, those heroes of Hitler's youth, who had used the swastika as an emblem .
 Bishop Hudal was procurator general of Order of the New Templars . Hudal headed the Order of German Knights . He was named procurators general of the Order .
 On May 1, 1933, in a Nazi-sanctioned celebration of the pagan Walpurgis holiday, Hudal made a particularly impassioned speech in Rome .
 It was a Franciscan friar serving under Bishop Hudal who helped arrange a Red Cross passport and visa to Argentina in 1950 . Obersturmbannfuehrer Adolf Eichmann had managed to slip away from American captors at the end of the war .
 Bishop Hudal, in his later memoirs, thanked God he was able to help so many escape with false identity papers . Hudal: "I am not ashamed of my actions, but I am proud to have done so much to help others escape"
 Many of these ""false identity papers" were documents issued by the Commissione Pontificia d'Assistenza, or the Vatican Refugee Organization . Many of the documents were issued by Vatican Refugee Organisation .
 Vatican identity papers were used to obtain a Displaced Person passport from the International Red Cross, which, in turn, was used to gain a visa . While not full passports themselves, these Vatican identity documents were used by the Vatican to gain access to the Red Cross .
 Supposedly, the Red Cross checked the backgrounds of applicants, but usually it was sufficient to have the word of a priest or a bishop . The Red Cross says it checked the background of applicants .
 Ante P avelic, the pro-N azi fascist dictator of C roatia, escaped to South America after the war with a R ed C ross passport . He was given a private audience with Pope Pius XII shortly after taking power .
 One of the countries in which the Auslandsorganisation worked with particular success was Argentina .
 Many Nazis found safe havens in Brazil, Paraguay, Chile, and Uruguay . No South American nation was more accommodating than Argentina of Dictator J uan Domingo P eron and his lovely second wife, Eva Maria Duarte de Peron .
 Peron was elected president of Argentina in 1946 after participating in a military coup in 1943 . A majority of voters lauded his efforts to eliminate poverty and dignify workers . He was elected by a majority in 1946 .
 He was elected against the intense and overt opposition of the United States. "He was elected ... against ... overt opposition," he says .
 Peron began to nationalize and expropriate British and American businesses soon after he was elected .
 Many Nazi SS and Gestapo fugitives from justice served in the Argentine Army and police forces . Lil<ewise, many Nazi SS fugitives served in Argentina's police force .
 Tank, a fighter plane designer and former director of the F ocke-Wulf aircraft factory, arrived in Buenos Aires with microfilm of aircraft designs hidden in his pants . Tank was armed with false identity papers provided by Peron himself .
 About sixty of his old Nazi comrades joined him, using the same system . Soon, about sixty of them had joined him using the system .
 General Wilhelm von Faupel was most responsible for fostering pro-Nazi feelings in South America . General von Faupel fostered anti-Semitic feelings in the region .
 In 1900, Faupel went to China as a member of the German military legation . In 1900 he visited China as part of a German military mission in China .
 In 1911, he joined the staff of the Argentine War College in Buenos Aires . In 1911 he became a member of staff at the War College .
 Faupel returned to Argentina after serving in Germany in World War I . Served as military counselor to the inspector general of the Argentine Army . He served in Germany during the war .
 Von F aupel imparted military theories to the armies of Argentina, B razil, and P eru . He also instilled in them the political theories of National Socialism . Von F upel instilled National Socialist theories in the armies .
 Faupel most likely was speaking for many globalists who had significant holdings in South America and did not wish to relinquish them to leftists, communists, nationalists, or reformers . F
 Many still view J uan P eron as a champion of the working man . Although he is widely seen as a dictator, many ""P eronists"" still view him as a hero of working people .
 Few realized at the time that he was stashing away an estimated $500 million in Swiss bank accounts . Few realized that he had stashed away $500M in Swiss accounts .
 At least $100 million came from the Bormann organization, Manning says . Manning: "At least $ 100 million came out of the organization's coffers"
 Peron reciprocated for this generosity by allowing many war criminals to immigrate, legally and illegally, to Argentina . War criminals were allowed into Argentina by Peron's government .
 He reportedly provided more than a thousand blank passports for escaping Nazis . He reportedly gave thousands of blank passports to escape Nazis .
 H is private secretary, R udolfo F reude, also was chief of internal security . H is a former private secretary .
 The Argentine dictator was greatly honored to shelter Deputy Fuehrer Bormann . The dictator was greatly honored to have sheltered the deputy .
 Peron saw Bormann's flight capital program as a means of boosting the Argentine economy . After several low-key meetings, Peron met with the German businessman .
 Evita took on the role of liaison between her husband and Nazis seeking asylum . Evita played a liaison between the Nazis and her husband, who were seeking asylum in Nazi Germany .
 As a mistress to other army officers, she caught the eye of handsome military strongman J uan Peron .
 While in Spain, she reportedly met with Otto Skorzeny, who headed a ratline known as die Spinne or the Spider, and arranged the transfer of millions in Nazi loot to Argentina .
 She also met with Argentine shipping fleet owner Alberto Dodero, who within a month was ferrying Nazis to South America . She also traveled to Genoa, where she met with an Argentinian ship owner .
 Evita attended meetings with bankers in Switzerland . But the primary purpose of the trip appeared to be to meet with bankers .
 In 1955, P eron was ousted in a military coup and forced to flee to neighboring P araguay and later to exile in Madrid, Spain . In 1955 he was ousted and forced into exile in neighboring PAraguay .
 Eva died from cancer in 1952, at age thirty-three . He left without the body of Eva, who had died of cancer . Eva died in 1952 .
 Eight persons were trampled to death in the tumultuous crowds who flocked to see her embalmed body lying in state . H er popularity was such that eight persons were killed .
 The impact of transplanted Nazis continues to be felt in South America . The Nazis are still a problem in the region .
 Klaus Barbie worked for the U.S. Army's Counterintelligence Corps after Germany's defeat . Klaus Barbie was the SS Hauptsturmfuehrer of Lyon . He worked in Bolivia under the name Klaus Altmann .
 Using contacts in the Kameradenwerk, he began running guns between Bolivia, Peru, and Chile . Using his contacts, he ran guns from Bolivia to Peru, Chile .
 On J uly 17, 1980, Barbie abetted right-wing officers in the army during a coup over the left-of-center Bolivian government . Barbie was a member of the army in the 1980s .
 With Barbie's aid, Bolivia was soon a primary and secure source of cocaine for the emerging Medellin drug cartel . With the help of Barbie, Bolivia became a primary source for the cartel's cocaine .
 Barbie was captured and extradited to France, where he died in 1991 from cancer . Barbie was serving a life sentence for crimes against humanity . Barbie died from cancer in 1991 while in France .
 ODESSA also turned to gun-running as a means of financing its operations . The group is known for its illegal drug trade and drug trafficking .
 At B ormann's instructions, N azis was set up as a profitable business enterprise as well as escape route .
 The plentiful supply of surplus arms in E. urope turned out to be an immediately profitable commodity . E.U.R. was founded in the 1970s .
 Passau, a picturesque city located ninety miles northeast of Munich at the confluence of the Danube, Inn, and llz Rivers . In late 1945, United States military authorities became aware of a huge black market enterprise being operated out of Passau .
 It was a connecting point between Germany, Austria, and Czechoslovakia . It was also a collection center for Axis arms . The site was a collection point for Axis weapons .
 Hungarian Fifth Army and German Fifth and Twelfth Armies were stockpiled in an American-run depot . It was here that weapons from three complete armies— the Hungarian Fifth, German Fifth, Twelfth and Hungarian Fifth and German Armies .
 Rifles, machine guns, and ammunition were gathered at Passau while millions of dollars worth of vehicles were cached at M attinghoffen, Austria . Millions of dollars were also stored in Austria .
 About $10 million worth of these war materials went missing, sold by black marketers . ODESSA agents, German officials, criminals, and criminals, aided by a few Allied soldiers, went missing .
 In one of the greatest ironies of history, the bulk of this material was being shipped to Palestine for use both byj ews trying to create the state of Israel and by Arabs who opposed such an effort .
 On J anuary 5, 1946, United States military intelligence officers under the command of General Patton's G-2 staff were sent to Passau .
 The agents were murdered and the house in which they were staying was burned . Instead, the house was burned and the agents were killed .
 Spector narrowly missed the massacre at Passau, Germany . Spector was hospitalized with a kidney stone, but missed Passau massacre .
 One of the men involved with the stolen arms as well as the agents' deaths was a Romanian national named Robert Abramovici .
 Abramovici later changed his name to Robert Adam and started an arms company called Intermecco Socomex . The company became closely associated with the CIA's arms company, Interarmco, in the 1960s .
 The arms deals in Palestine were handled byJ oseph Beidas and Eduardo Baroudi and his brothers, who sold weapons to both Arabs and J ews . Beidas sold arms to both Arab and J wews.
 Baroudi later became a vice president of Intrabank, based in B eirut, Lebanon, a major conduit for black market funds . He later became president of the bank, which is a major black market fund conduit .
 Millionaires were made immediately after the war by both war surplus and black market arms deals . M illionaires made immediately following the war . War surplus and  black market arm deals were made in the aftermath .
 Palestine was to be partitioned into a J ewish homeland, and they intended to destroy it at birth . Palestine was intended to be a J wish homeland and was destroyed at birth.
 B ut now, J ewish buyers, funded from America and elsewhere, have entered the marketplace . J wish buyers are funded from U.S. and elsewhere .
 Truman barred from purchasing guns and P-51 Mustang fighter planes by P resident Truman . The only recourse for survival was to trade on the E urope an black market, which, unknown to them, was rapidly coming under the control of ODESSA agents .
 The J ewish agency's buyers might have purchased from the devil himself if it meant survival of the small, defenseless nation, just come into being on May 14, 1947 .
 2nd Baron Rothschild, Lionel Walter Rothschild, received a letter from British foreign secretary Arthur Balfour in 1917 . The letter was replying to his query regarding Balfur's position on Palestine .
 Balfour expressed approval for the establishment of a home for J ews there . Balfur expressed approval .
 In 1922, the League of Nations approved the Balfour mandate in Palestine, thus paving the way for tine later creation of Israel .
 Lord Rothschild was an ardent Zionist, who had served as a member of the British Parliament . Lord Rothschild had served in the House of Lords in London . He died in 1903 .
 The Zionist movement, composed of both J ews and non-J ews, had been working toward the creation of Israel since the late 1800s .
 Lord Rothschild was the eldest son of Nathan Rothschild, who had controlled the Bank of England and funded the Cecil Rhodes diamond empire . He was the son of the banker who controlled the bank and funded Cecil Rhodes .
 It also appears that the Zionists employed blackmail to aid in the formation of Israel . The Zionists also used blackmail to help in the creation of Israel.
 Most famous target was N elson R ockefeller, who in 1940 was named to the intelligence position of coordinator of interAmerican affairs by Secretary of Defense Forrestal .
 Rockefeller was selected to serve as assistant secretary of state for Latin American affairs in 1944 . Rockefeller was chosen to serve in Latin America for Latin America . Rockefeller served as a vice president of the U.S. State Department in 1945 .
 During the war, the Germans in South America got anything they wanted, from refueling stations to espionage bases, while the British had to pay cash . Due to the extensive business dealings between the German Nazis and American globalists, as detailed previously, Loftus and Aarons noted that
 Rockefeller and his cronies would take over B ritain's most valuable Latin American properties . Rockefeller would take control of some of the world's most important properties in Latin America .
 Rockefeller controlled much of S outh America and was able to bring that influence to the newly created United Nations . S oon, R ockefeller controlled the U.S. and brought that influence into the United Nations.
 Rockefeller pushed through UN membership for pro-fascist Argentina over the objections of Truman . Rockefeller lost his government position when he pushed through Argentina's membership to the UN .
 David Ben-Gurion was desperate for votes to ensure the passage of a UN resolution partitioning Palestine and thus creating the state of Israel . In 1947, he turned to Nelson Rockefeller for votes in order to ensure passage of the UN resolution .
 Rockefeller had been able to deflect several investigations into his family's prewar and wartime dealings with the Nazis . 'Then the J ews arrived with their dossier. They arrived with a dossier. Rockefeller had managed to deflect the investigations into the family's wartime dealings .
 The S ecret War Against the J ews probed the role of Western intelligence agencies in the affairs of Israel . Loftus was a United States attorney with unprecedented access to classified CIA and NATO files as well as former intelligence operatives .
 These authors interviewed one of the J ews present at the meeting with Rockefeller . The authors interviewed a man who was present at Rockefeller's meeting .
 In return for the votes of the Latin American bloc, lie wanted guarantees tliat tine J ews would keep their mouths shut about the flow of Nazi money and fugitives to South America .
 There would be no Zionist Nazi-hunting unit, no testimony at Nuremberg about bankers or anyone else . Not a single leak to the press about which Nazis were working for Dulles or which Nazis worked for the Dulles .
 On November 29, 1947, the UN General Assembly approved a resolution recommending the partition of Palestine . The partitioning of Palestine was approved by the UN in 1947 .
 The vote shocked the Arab world, which had not foreseen several Latin American countries switching their vote at the last minute . The Arab world was shocked by the surprise vote .
 The J ews had traded silence for silence for their new country's security, but they didn't take it lying down . The new president is expected to make a speech at the end of the week .
 To this day, Israeli leaders have blackmailed the Western employers of Nazi refugees and war criminals, guaranteeing nearly unconditional support for Israel and its policies . Israel's leaders have also blackmailed Western employers, including Nazi refugees .
 J ohn Pehle worked with Orvis Schmidt in the U.S. Treasury's Foreign Funds Control office . He worked with Schmidt at the time .
 Globalists in both Europe and America were more concerned with gaining a foothold in the oil-rich Middle East than pursuing the Nazis and their treasure .
 SS men and Nazi officials escaped through southern France and across the Pyrenees into Spain . SS men escaped through such organizations, SS officials escaped into southern France .
 These were not forprofit enterprises like ODESSA, but still they received funding and orders from the Bormann group . The group also received orders from O DESSA .
 Die Spinne was a creation of commando commando Otto Skorzeny . It was largely composed of troops from his old wartime commando unit . The group was largely made up of former commando troops .
 After the meeting with Eva Peron in 1947, many Spinne members made their way to Argentina . The number of Germans who went to South America totaled 60,000 .
 Even before the end of the war, the Nazis used concentration camp prisoners and hired specialists to manufacture respectable-looking but phony identification papers .
 World War II ended in chaos in Europe at war's end, resulting in witness protection program . With these and aided by the general chaos, they developed their own effective witness protection .
 Many false identities have withstood the test of time and are still in use . Many of these false identities are still being used today .
 While on the run at the end of the war, B ormann controlled his vast commercial empire through an elaborate communications system .
 A police agent with special knowledge of Bormann spotted the Nazi in the company of two other men in a hotel and trailed them . Then there was a police report from Cordoba Province dated April 22, 1955, in which a police agent tracked them down . The report was dated April
 By 1972, it was apparent to anyone who desired to know that Martin Bormann had been operating in South America for some time . By 1972 it was obvious to anyone . anyone who wished to know about Bormans' activities .
 Ladislas Farago caused a minor sensation in that year with his articles published in En gland's Daily Express, detailing Bormann's activities .
 Argentine secret service sources said today that Martin Bormann was sheltered in the country after World War II, but could not confirm reports that he still lived there .
 Sources in Salta confirmed that the ranch where Bormann was said to have lived was owned by German industrialists . Sources said the ranch owned by the industrialists owned by Germans .
 Of course, only Bormann, Mengele, Eichmann, and a few other leading Nazis garnered occasional news headlines .
 Thousands managed to slip through the hands of authorities unnoticed, thanks to business connections or passports provided by the Vatican . Thousands of people have been caught up in the past few years .
 It seems apparent that it was not only business interests protecting the N azis but individuals within the American government . The U.S. government has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 S. S. archives later took steps to obliterate any record of Kammler or his fate .
 General-major Reinhard Gehlen created a spy network in Germany . The network was created by Gehlen . Gehlen was a German general-major .
 This Nazi network was to become America's eyes and ears in the early days of the Cold War . It was to be America's Eyes and ears during the early Cold War.
 Gehlen was born in 1902 and joined the German Army in 1920 . He was the son of a Catholic bookshop owner . Gehlen joined the army in 1920 and died in 1945 in a German hospital .
 His middleclass family boasted military officers on both sides of the family . His middle class family boasted .
 In the 1930s, Gehlen moved from the German Staff College to the Army General Staff with the rank of captain . Gehlen was a captain at the German General Staff during the early 1930s .
 In 1940, he was promoted to major and served on the staffs of two German generals . He served on two German military staffs during the war .
 Gehlen was the head of Fremde Heere Ost, or Foreign Armies East, in 1942 . Gehlen had a curious title for the section of the German General Staff analyzing all intelligence on the Russian Front . By 1942, Gehlen became a Lieutenant colonel .
 Gehlen created his own network of spies and informers in an attempt to avoid conflicts with the Abwehr, Germany's counterintelligence service . Gehlen's network of informers was created to avoid clashes with the government's counter-intelligence service.
 This system made major contributions to the Nazi war effort by upgrading the level of intelligence on the Soviets . This system soon began making major contributions .
 Gehlen made use of the anti-Soviet spy network of Russian general Andrei Vlasov . Gehlen and the Nazis worked together against the Stalin regime in the fight against the Nazis .
 Gehlen soon put together a network of agents and spies, all sworn to utmost secrecy, even from their own families . Gehlen's network was a remarkable network of spies and agents, all from their families .
 This combined Vlasov/Gehlen operation became known as the Gehlen Organization . U.S. authorities continued to use the network long after the war . This combined spy network was continued by the United States .
 Gehlen's vitriol may have led to Gehlen lending a sympathetic ear to plotters against Hitler . Gehlen may have been sympathetic to the plotters in the 1930s .
 Gehlen managed to survive in the failed 1944 bomb plot against the fuehrer . Gehlen survived the bomb attack .
 By then, he had a new plan, one that was to have lasting effect on the Allied nations and particularly the U.S. and Russia .
 Gehlen offered his spy network in Russia to the British but received no answer . In April 1945, realizing that the war was lost for the Germans, Gehlen realized that the Germans had lost the war . Gehlen died in 1945 at the hands of the British .
 Gehlen also showed no signs of being anything other than an unrepentant National Socialist . Gehlen was a National Socialist who showed no sign of remorse for his actions .
 Gehlen's only objection to Nazi aggression was that Hitler lost, he says . Gehlen: "Hitler lost. Hitler lost"
 Gehlen and his organization stashed their voluminous intelligence files in more than fifty sealed steel containers . One cache was stored near the Wendelstein Mountains, another in tine Algau province of soutliwest Bavaria, and tine tliird in tlie
 Gelilen made liiding out in a mountain lodge for some time . After some time in the lodge, he decided to make a move to the mountain .
 Gehlen arrived in front of Brigadier General Edwin L Sibert, senior intelligence officer of the American occupation zone in Germany . Initially spurned by American officers who failed to recognize his importance, including a member of the Counterintelligence Corps .
 Gehlen detailed the aims of the Soviet Union and its display of military might . Despite United States Army regulations that prohibited personnel from listening to any remarks made by a German against their erstwhile ally .
 Gehlen and some of his staff members were soon flown to Washington in a military plane belonging to Walter Bedell Smith, General Eisenhower's chief of staff . Smith went on to direct the CIA from 1950 to 1953 .
 Smith was to become an early member of the secretive Bilderberg Group . The group was initially headed by former SS officer Prince Bernhard .
 Under the proposal, Gehlen would operate independently and as an equal, offering the Americans only the information they requested or he decided to share, but never in any way conflicting with the interests of his Fatherland . The proposal would allow Gehlen to operate independently .
 Everything the U.S. learned about Soviet aims and capabilities at the end of World War II came from an anticommunist underground filtered through a Nazi organization with connections to the international financial elite . In other words, virtually everything the . United States learned about . Soviet aims at the
 Carl Oglesby, author of The Yankee and Cowboy War, wrote that by 1948, following the formation of the CIA, Gehlen had grown tight with Dulles and his organization and become in effect the CIA's department of Russian and East European affairs .
 Gehlen received an aggregate of $200 million in CIA funds from Allen Dulles . Gehlen's Gehlen organization received the money from Dulles' CIA funds .
 Much of Gehlen's intelligence proved questionable, although this was not known at the time, since the Russians had tight control over information behind the Iron Curtain . Much of the information was questionable, since this was kept out of circulation .
 In 1946, he began forming an intelligence organization that evolved into the Bundesnachrichtendienst, or federal intelligence service, in West Germany . He returned to Germany in 1946 and began forming intelligence organization in 1946 .
 Gehlen became president of the BND from its inception in 1956 until 1968, when he was forced to resign in the wake of a political scandal . Gehlen resigned in 1968 after being forced to step down as president of BND .
 Gehlen, a member of the Knights of Malta, was hailed as the consummate Cold War spymaster . Gehlen died in 1979, but was hailed for his role in the Cold War .
 In 1938, following the Anschluss, or unification, of Germany and Austria, the organization came under Nazi control . It functioned as an intelligence and enforcement arm of the Gestapo until the end of World War II .
 Interpol was headed by some of the most notorious Nazi war criminals . Reinhard Heydrich chaired the infamous Wannsee Conference where the Holocaust was planned . Arthur Nebe commanded Einsatzkommandos, or killer squads, that liquidated ""undesirables"
 Working with Heydrich at Interpol was a young SS officer named Paul Dickopf . The SS officer was working for Interpol at the time . Working with the Nazi leader was working with him at the Interpol .
 After the war, Dickopf served as president of Interpol from 1968 to 1972 . He served as Interpol president between 1968 and 1972 .
 The United States formally joined Interpol just two weeks after the 1938 Nazi Anschluss of Austria . FBI director Hoover recommended the U.S. join Interpol .
 Hoover kept up a friendly correspondence with Nazi Interpol leaders until a few days after Pearl Harbor, when he felt such connections might tarnish his image . Hoover believed such connections would tarnish him image .
 Interpol officials insisted that all its files were destroyed in Allied bombings . After the war, Interpol insisted that the files had been destroyed . Interpol said it was destroyed by Allied bombing .
 An aborted attempt in 1945 to take files out of Germany left them in French hands, a researcher says . However, a Swedish policeman named Harry Soderman argued that an aborted attempt to take them out of the country was made in 1945 . Soderman had worl<ed with Interpol
 The next year, Interpol was reestablished with strong support from the French police and headquartered in Paris . Interpol is now based in Paris, France .
 Hoover sidestepped the U.S. State Department by attending a meeting in Brussels to formally reconstitute Interpol . Hoover was elected vice president of Interpol in 1946 .
 Interpol officials have declined to seek out Nazi war criminals, claiming such action is beyond its jurisdiction . To this day, Interpol has declined to find Nazis war criminals .
 Martin Bormann, then in his eighties, had traveled extensively in South America, often just ahead of Nazi hunters . The Nazi hunter was in his 80s and 80s at the time .
 He lived in a luxurious estate near Buenos Aires, writing his memoirs while still under the protection of ""Gestapo"" Mueller .
 Paul Manning said this aging recluse remained the guardian and silentmanipulator of a gigantic industrial pyramid centered in Germany . Paul Manning: Paul Manning was a recluse who was the guardian of a giant industrial pyramid .
 Bormann also had become mentor to a new generation of lawyers, bankers, and industrialists . Bormans was a mentor to many of the world's top legal and business leaders .
 Nazi in Exile, Manning stated, 'The Bormann organization is not merely a group of ex-Nazis' Manning said, 'Bormann was not merely an ex-Nazi'
 It is estimated that as many as 100,000 ranking N azis remained at large after the war . It is thought to be the largest number of N. azis in existence .
 Colonia Dignidad, or Dignity colony, today is called Villa Baviera, or villa Bavaria . Villa Bavaria is the name of a Bavaria-style villa .
 It was founded by Paul Schaefer, formerly of the Nazi Luftwaffe, in 1961 . It was made up of German immigrants who had been living there since the early 1950s .
 The large compound boasted its own power plant, two runways, and a restaurant . It was surrounded by barbed wire, searchlights, and guard towers . The compound boasts its own runways and restaurant .
 In 1986, an inspection by Amnesty International discovered underground cells where prisoners suffered remotecontrol torture by means of electronic sound systems and electric shock . The cells were used to torture prisoners in the Soviet Union .
 The compound was run by approximately three hundred Nazi exiles, some of whom still live there today . Some of the exiles still live in the compound .
 An estimated three thousand persons died and thirty thousand were tortured during the violent overthrow of Chile's democracy by Pinochet . The overthrow included the still-disputed circumstances of President Salvador Allende's death .
 Schaefer fled Chile in 1997 after being accused of sexually molesting two young boys . Schaefer was accused of molesting boys at a colony in Chile .
 Bormann's surviving Nazi empire still exerts tremendous control over world economies and politics even today, the full extent may never be known . The full extent of the Nazi empire may never know .
 Many of Nazi Germany's most brilliant minds continued their work outside Europe after the war, most notably in the U.S. What is known is that many of their work continued in the United States .
 Herbert Wagner landed in Washington, D.C., in a U.S. military aircraft with blacked-out windows . Wagner created the first Nazi guided missile used in combat .
 Operation Overcast was a program authorized by the J oint Chiefs of Staff to exploit the knowledge of Nazi scientists . It began as a program to exploit Nazi scientists' knowledge . The program began in 1944 and ended in 1945 .
 This operation was renamed P aperclip and formally authorized in August 1945 by P resident H arry Truman . Truman was assured that no one with ""N azi or militaristic records"" would be involved .
 By mid-November, more Nazi scientists, engineers, and technicians were arriving in America . Wernher von B raun and more than seven hundred other N azi rocket scientists were arriving .
 By 1955, nearly a thousand German scientists had been granted citizenship in the United States . They were given prominent positions in the American scientific community . Nearly a thousand scientists were granted citizenship .
 By the 1990s, the infusion of N azis into America's military-industrial complex was complete .
 Dulles brothers were both attorneys for and business partners with Averell Harriman . It should be noted that Dulles were both partners with Harrimans . Dulles was both attorneys and business partner with Hariman .
 Allen Dulles, as OSS station chief in Bern, Switzerland, satatthe nexus of U.S. intelligence as well as Soviet intelligence . Dulles was also the station chief of the Rote Kapelle, or Red Orchestra, spy network .
 Dulles used SS Brigadefuehrer, or brigadier general, Walter Schellenberg to communicate with his immediate superior, Heinrich Himmler . It was during his stint as assistant to the U.S. ambassador to the United States ambassador, Dulles .
 Dulles moved from Bern to become OSS station chief in Berlin atthe end of the war . Dulles became OSS chief at the end of WWII .
 In 1947, when the OSS was rolled into the newly created CIA, Dulles's translator was an army intelligence officer named Henry Kissinger . Kissinger would go on to become secretary of state under President Nixon .
 P roject P aperclip quickly came under the control of an ""old boy"" network encompassing members of the globalists centered in the Council on Foreign Relations . The network was centered around the Council of Foreign Relations, a globalist group .
 Nazi spymaster General Reinhard Gehlen offered to turn over his extensive spy network to the CIA in exchange for non-prosecution of their N azi pasts . Dossiers were rewritten to eliminate incriminating evidence of their work for the Nazis .
 Magnus von Braun's brother, who had been declared a ""dangerous German Nazi"" by counterintelligence officers, was brought to America and his pro-Nazi record expunged . The brother was declared a 'dangerous Nazi' by counter-intelligence officers .
 President Truman had explicitly ordered no committed Nazis to be admitted under P roject P aperclip . Truman was evidently never aware that his directive had been violated .
 "This is evidence of control at a level higher than the president," says White House chief executive .
 Potential intelligence assets were recruited from all across Europe . Many of them were zealous Nazis who could be relied upon to be anticommunists . Intelligence assets recruited from across Europe, many of them Nazis .
 Some Americans just didn't think it proper to bring former N azis to the U nited States and place them in responsible positions . J lOA officers began bringing Nazis from Argentina, that haven for the Bormann organization .
 Recruitment of Nazis included Eastern Europeans thought to be helpful against the communists . Recruiting Nazis now included convicted Nazi war criminals, even convicted war criminals .
 Myth has it that the first group in National Interest, the German scientists, were employed solely because of their scientific expertise, but there were other reasons as well as that .
 Defense contractors and universities could hire German scientists for substantially less money than they could American employees . First, defense contractors could hire them for less than a year .
 Germans signed contracts for approximately $2,000 a year less than their American counterparts . Salary statistics show that the Germans signed . contracts for about $2.000 less than American counterparts received in comparable positions .
 Germans were unaware of the salary discrepancy, since they had earned even less money in West Germany . Of course, the Germans were aware of the discrepancy .
 The J lOA took advantage of the situation by promoting cheap salaries to convince corporations to participate in the project .
 J oint Chiefs of Staff connection with National Interest project . German scientists could obtain security clearances more easily than could American scientists .
 Defense contractors looking for new employees to work on classified projects found this aspect of National Interest to be particularly advantageous . Defense contractors are looking to recruit new employees .
 National Interest placed German scientists at major universities in research or teaching positions, regardless of their Nazi past . National Interest places German scientists in research, teaching positions .
 Even the United States Office of E ducation helped J lOA send fliers to universities all over the country touting the advantages of hiring the Germans on federally financed research projects . Germans could obtain security clearances more easily than Americans .
 Another program, code-named Project 63, was designed specifically to get German scientists out of Europe and away from the Soviets . Project 63 was designed to get the best of the Soviet Union out of the continent .
 In 1952, J 10 A deputy director Air F orce colonel Gerold Crabbe and a gaggle of military officers were involved . The P roject 63 effort to import N azis grew so public that it became public that the effort was made public .
 Conant may not have realized his appeal was aimed atone of the architects of the very program he was trying to end . Conant's appeal may have been aimed at one of the architect of the program he tried to end, he says .
 On October 4, 1957, the Russians launched Sputnik I into orbit around the Earth . The space race was on after the launch of the Soviet Union's first satellite satellite .
 Even as we were bringing foreign defectors into the U.S., we discovered a traitor within our own government . Interestingly, even as we brought foreign defector into the USA, we discovered the traitor within ourselves .
 When arrested in 1962, Whalen was an intelligence adviser, which permitted him access to any information pertaining to the J oint Chiefs of Staff planning and allocation of military forces .
 Though charged with espionage, Whalen made a deal with the J.U.S. Department in 1966 . He pled guilty to a lesser charge in exchange for his cooperation . Whaleen pleaded guilty to the lesser charge .
 Federal judge Oren Lewis, while accusing Whalen of ""selling me and all your fellow Americans down the river,"" nevertheless sentenced the spy to a mere fifteen years in prison .
 Imported Nazis had every opportunity to pass national securitit/ information out of the country . Nazis were able to get national security information from the US .
 Anyone receiving more than 50 percent support from a P aperclip specialist constituted a ""dependent,"" according to their contracts . F urthermore, anyone receiving any more than . 50 per cent support from the specialist constituted . a 'dependent' according to the contracts .
 The rocket scientist had been caught sending a map overseas to General Dornberger and concealing information from U.S. officials .
 F urther investigation revealed that P aperclip specialists were allowed to make unsupervised trips off base and even out of town . The only requirement was that they report when they arrived at their destination .
 H e believed that it was reasonable to assume that friendly contacts between the two groups still existed . H e believes that it is possible to assume friendly contacts still exist between them .
 Apparently, overseas communication between Nazis in America and the Nazis in Russia continued unabated . This has raised the possibility of a parallel space race controlled or manipulated by the very globalists who had created and financed both communism and the Third Reich .
 The Apollo mission landed on the moon on July 20, 1969 . The mission was part of the United States Apollo mission to the moon .
 It is difficult then for them to seriously consider the many contradictions and anomalies of the six moon landings . It is then difficult to consider the complexities of the various landings in the history of the moon .
 The space race was never a true competition between the United States and the former Soviet Union . It was a combined space program run by Nazi scientists and controlled by high-level globalists .
 Top American commanders were given orders to leave all the rockets and their plans at the Nazi facility at Nordhausen for the Russians . As the Allies closed in on Nazi Germany in the spring of 1945, top American commanders ordered to leave .
 Some commanders unofficially absconded with about a hundred V-2s, along with a large collection of plans, manuals, and other documents . However, some commanders also stole about a large number of documents .
 Globalists were already directing activities that would lead to the C. old War . Here was more evidence of the collusion taking place at the level of the globalists .
 After the war, at NASA's George C Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Nazi rocket scientists established nearly a carbon copy of their organization at the facility .
 N azi scientists were circumventing the system to the extent of attempting to build their own Saturn V rocket in-house at the Marshall Center . According to Linda Hunt, J ames Webb, NASA administrator during the Kennedy years, complained .
 "Their positions at Marshall and the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida, were similar to those they had held during the war,"" Hunt wrote .
 Rudolph gained American citizenship after entering the USA with his boss von Braun under the program that was to become P aperclip . Rudolph was credited with helping with helping to place Americans on the moon .
 Rudolph was charged with war crimes but was granted German citizenship . West German investigation found there was no factual basis for charging him with crimes . Rudolph was convicted of war crimes and granted citizenship in Germany .
 Files from behind the Iron Curtain have revealed many of the scientists in P aperclip as well as some on the M anhattan P roject were spying for the S oion .
 Some spied for pay, some for ideology, but all were manipulated by intelligence chiefs far above them . Intelligence chiefs manipulated them into spying for pay or ideology, they say .
 J oseph P Farrell, who holds a doctorate degree in patristics from Oxford, also has researched ancient history and physics, to include the space program .
 This idea is somewhat supported by the fact that the space programs of R. ussia and America moved along different paths . This idea was supported by fact that both countries had different paths to space .
 At the start, the Russians proved more capable of attaining space flight than the Americans . The Russians proved at the start to be more successful in space flight .
 The Russians produced giant heavy-lift rockets while their American counterparts were busy developing the internal technology for guidance and control . Under the leadership of their brilliant engineer Sergei Korolev, the Russian engineers built the giant rockets .
 Both countries used captured Nazi V-2 rockets to begin their space programs . Both nations used captured . Nazi V.2 rockets .
 A common joke in the 1950s involved an argument between a Russian and an American . The joke was a common joke between the two Americans .
 Evidence indicates that the American rocl<et scientists were indeed placed into a holding pattern while their S oviet counterparts caught up with their technology . Yet, the evidence suggests that the U.S. rocl <et scientists are indeed placed in a holding .
 The von B raun team had developed a multistage rocket by adding solid propellant rocket stages to a Redstone rocket as booster . Winterstein S, a retired United States Army lieutenant colonel and one of the rocket engineers on NASA's Apollo team, noted in his 2002 book Gest
 In 1956, such a rocket with two solid stages made successful highspeed rocket reentry tests with model warheads covered with ablative heat protection . The model warheads were covered with a heat-proof coating .
 With three solid stages, such a rocket could have placed a satellite into orbit more than a year before the U.S. was defeated by Sputnik . Such a rocket would have been able to launch a satellite more than one year before its defeat .
 The von Braun team was given direct orders from Washington to stop further development of the project . However, and almost unbelievably, it was almost impossible to stop development .
 It has been argued that a primary incentive of the German scientists was the sheer desire to continue their work .
 The connection between von Braun's work and the Nazis was close and continuous . However, some cases, such as that of von Braun, the connection between the work and Nazi Germany was close .
 Von Braun was the son of a Prussian minister who founded the German Savings Bank . He was brought into Germany's rocket program by Luftwaffe general Walter Dornberger, who, although charged as a war criminal for the rocket attacks on London and Antwerp, was never
 Himmler was accused by survivors of rocket factories at M ittlewerk and P eenemunde of at least once ordering the execution of slave laborers .
 In 1942 Debus turned a colleague over to the Gestapo for making anti-Hitler remarks . According to documents obtained by Hunt, the Nazi leader was turned over to a colleague in 1942 . Debus is believed to be a member of the Nazi Party .
 Soviet experts and Germans worked side-by-side in the same factory, but in separate areas . The Soviet experts worked side by side in the . same factory . The . Soviet experts were able to work together in a separate area .
 Information was passed between the two teams without the Germans ever meeting their Soviet counterparts . Information was exchanged between the Germans and Soviets without meeting each other .
 In 1945, Lieutenant Walter J essel was assigned to investigate how much trust to give the scientists before bringing them to America . In 1945 he was tasked with investigating trust in the government .
 Secret codicils within the 1945 Yalta Agreement between Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin allowed for the partitioning of E urope between the Allied powers . The agreement was reached in 1945 and signed by Stalin and Roosevelt .
 Wilhelm Voss was the former head of the S koda M unitions Works in P ilsen . Voss handled much of the material for Kammler's Special Projects Group . He was also the head of a special projects group in P.I.
 In May 1945, Voss attempted to hand over a truckload of Kammlerstab documents but was told by a U.S. officer that he was under orders to give everything to the Russians . Voss was a member of the American Army in Pilsen, Czechoslov
 Patton's Third Army had reached the outskirts of Berlin before being ordered back a hundred miles to await the arrival of the R ussians . While entire G erman divisions were trying desperately to surrender to the Western Allies, it is well known that .
 The withdrawal is clear evidence of the deals being made at the highest levels . Such a withdrawal would be clear evidence that such deals are being made by the highest level of government .
 There was communication between the two groups of N azi scientists even though they were half a world away from each other .
 This could have been facilitated by the interconnected business and banking interests already described . This could also be facilitated by interconnected business interests .
 As detailed in the section ""Communism versus National Socialism"" the same Western bankers and financiers who funded Hitler's National Socialism also supported Communism in Russia . The same bankers who funded National Socialistism in Russia also supported Communist Communism .
 The United States federal government's leniency toward communism has been well documented . President Franklin D Roosevelt, who began his career as a Wall Street attorney specializing in corporate law .
 Roosevelt echoed his Wall Street cronies' warm regard for both Stalin and communism . Roosevelt echoed Wall Street's warm regard with Stalin and Communism .
 The U.S. government was rife with globalist agents conveying secrets back to Russia . Russia's President Vladimir Putin has been accused of being a globalist . Vladimir Putin is believed to be a Putinist .
 "Donovan's personal assistant, Duncan Chaplin Lee, was a spy,"" Fleming wrote . Donovan's assistant was a "spy"
 Another possible crossing point for aerospace information may have been the British Interplanetary Society . Bennett and Percy say the society may have helped provide information to the public .
 The BIS was reportedly created in September 1945 by combining several existing organizations interested in the future of space exploration . It was not officially inaugurated until December of that year .
 At that time, Wernher von B raun, the man behind the V-2 rockets, was named as an honorary fellow . The V2 rockets were launched by the V.2 rockets in 1945 .
 Arthur C Clarke, an early member of the BIS, claimed the society had been in existence long before the war and was merely in ""suspended animation"" from 1939 to 1945 . Clarke claimed that the society was only in existence from 1939 until 1945 .
 Their insinuation is that valuable rocket technology information was passed along via the BIS, possibly with the approval of von Braun . The BIS may have passed along valuable information with von Braun's approval of the information .
 P. P resident E isenhower ordered a Manhattan Project approach to the space race .
 This mandate resulted in a structure that became compartmentalized and shrouded with secrecy . The mandate was to create a structure of a national government body of power .
 All relevant information was on a strictly ""need-know"" basis, controlled by members of the self-styled globalist elite, the plutocrats who owned the emerging multinational corporations .
 The National Security Act of 1947 gave control over parallel space programs to the U.S. government . The act was passed by the Eisenhower administration .
 President Harry S Truman signed into law the National Security Act of 1947 . Truman signed the act just three months after pilot Kenneth Arnold saw flying discs over Mount Rainier, and two months after something crashed near Roswell, New Mexico .
 The NSC has come to dominate U.S. policy decisions, including the use of armed force . An important example of the tight inner government control by secret society members may be found in the NSC .
 The council principals are the president, vice president, and secretaries of state and defense . The positions were predominantly held throughout the later twentieth century by members of the globalist societies .
 The NSC staff is directed by the president's national security adviser . The staff is responsible for national security decisions .
 To coordinate covert operations, the NSC created the 5412 Committee, also called the Special Group . The committee has changed names several times to avoid public exposure .
 Within tliis organization, wliicli included familiar names as Nelson Rockefeller, Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Gordon Gray, and Allen Dulles . The subcommittee dealt with science and technology .
 It is here that the connection between the corporate and financial world and government-held technological secrets may be found .
 Here is centered control over rocketry, space, alternative energy sources, and even UFOs .
 The film contained eight pages of what appeared to be official U.S. government documents stamped TOP SECRET/MAJ IC EYES ONLY and dated November 18, 1952 .
 Four small human-like beings were found dead about two miles east of the wreckage site . Also, ""four small human like beings had apparently ejected from the craft "" were found .
 The story was changed to a Mogul balloon, used to monitor the upper atmosphere for S.O. A-bomb testing, though why such a monitoring device would be launched from New Mexico was never explained . Later, when the story became discredited, the story was .
 The ""briefing"" papers ended by stating, ""implications for the National Security are of continuing importance in that that the motives and ultimate intentions of these visitors remain completely unknown"
 A significant upsurge in the surveillance activity of these craft beginning in May and continuing through the autumn of has caused considerable concern that new developments may be imminent .
 Debunkers claimed to have found all sorts of discrepancies, from misspellings to identical signatures . Debunksers said they found all kinds of discrepancies in the book .
 No one has been able to definitively disprove all the MJ -12 documents as fakes . However, there is much evidence to indicate their authenticity . The documents have been published in the U.S. since 1998 .
 Typeface and style of the SOM 1-01 manual matched that of U.S. government printing presses in use during the 1950s .
 If the information in the MJ -12 documents is proven correct, it is strong evidence that certain persons within the U nited States had access to remarkable technology, both taken at R oswell and similar to that described as being in N azi hands .
 A cursory look at the men identified as the original MJ -12 group makes clear the potential for high-level control over exotic technology . Technology could upset the monopolies over energy, transportation, and communications held by the wealthy globalists who financed Hitler .
 First Director of the CIA was the third director of Central Intelligence Group . He was the first director of CIA upon its formation in September 1947 . MJ -12 is a topsecret group .
 Vannevar Bush organized the National Defense Research Council and the Office of Scientific Research and Development that led to tine production of the first atomic bomb . Bush was an eminent American scientist .
 Bush was anotlier prime candidate for a high-level group dealing with space . Bush was prime candidate to be part of the group .
 He was close to Averell Harriman, the U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union, who had ownership in Union Banking Corporation along with Prescott Bush . He also was a close friend to Prescott Bush, who owned the bank .
 In 1949, the U.S. Intelligence Board asked Bush to study ways of combining intelligence from all agencies . Bush: "Combination of intelligence from agencies is the answer"
 Bush's plan was initiated by America's first secretary of defense, J ames V Forrestal . Forrestal also is listed as a member of the MJ -12 .
 Bush joined the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as a professor in 1919 . Bush was awarded a major grant by the Rockefeller Foundation in 1936 .
 Bush also served on the board of directors of the Metals and Controls Corporation, which in 1959 merged with Texas Instruments to become the first U.S. governmentapproved fabricator of uranium rods . In 1959, the company was the first United States government approved by the government to fabricate
 Bush was chairman of the board of M erck and C ompany, one of the world's most powerful drug companies . Bush also was a presence in the corporate world of pharmaceuticals, eventually becoming chairman .
 Merck has been among the leaders in researching the human genome, the DNA structure that forms cells into humans . Merck is one of the world's leading geneticists .
 Bush also was president of the Carnegie Institute from 1935 to 1955 . He served as president from 1935 until 1955 .
 After the war, he returned to Read and Company and by 1937 was named president of the firm .
 Dillon and Read were the most profitable of all Wall Street syndicate managers handling German industrial issues in the U.S. capital market in the 1980s . This was at a time when Dillon was most profitable .
 In 1957, Fortune magazine named Clarence Dillon as one of the wealthiest men in America, with a fortune estimated to have been between $150 and $200 million .
 Brigadier General William Draper blocked in his efforts to break up the Nazi syndicates at the end of the war . Draper was an officer of Dillon and Read, who along with Forrestal was a member of Dillon & Read .
 Farben with 91. percent ownership by the brother-in-law of Farben chairman Hermann Schmitz. Farben . Farben is one of the world's largest industrial companies .
 Forrestal reportedly committed suicide at Bethesda Naval Hospital . Forrestal became secretary of defense in 1947, but resigned in March 1949 .
 General Walter Bedell Smith replaced Averell Harriman . General Smith was Eisenhower's chief of staff and former U.S. ambassador to Moscow .
 In 1950, Smith replaced Admiral Hillenkoetter as Director of Central Intelligence . Smith replaced him in 1950 . Smith was the CIA Director of Intelligence from 1950 to 1950 .
 Smith's close relationship with Prince Bern-hard of the Netherlands, the former SS officer who, with Smith's help, founded the secretive Bilderberg Group . Most intriguing was his close relationship as friend and business partner with the Dutch prince .
 This was the day the R oswell Air B ase press release regarding the recovery of a flying saucer was issued . The saucer is believed to have been recovered by the Air Force .
 On September 23, 1945, just as the air force became a separate service, the Air Force became an air force . The U.S. Air Force is the largest air force in the world, with more than 100,000 members .
 General Hoyt S Vandenberg is a West Point graduate and military man . He served as United States Air Force chief of staff and Director of Central Intelligence . He also served as Director of Intelligence .
 As a named MJ -12 member, Vanderberg did not appear to have solid Wall Street connections . Vanderberg is a named member of the MJ-12 .
 He was a close relative to powerful U.S. senator Arthur Vandenberg, who served as president pro tempore of the Senate . He was third in line of succession to the presidency .
 Senator Vandenberg also participated in the creation of the U nited N ations . Vandenberg was a member of the Senate .
 In J anuary 1945 the senator made headlines by announcing his conversion from isolationism to internationalism . He made headlines in 1945 by announcing that he had converted to internationalist .
 As such, he orchestrated bipartisan support for the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan . As such he orchestrated support for both Truman and Eisenhower .
 In the early 1950s, it was General Vandenberg who ordered the destruction of the original Project Sign Air Force report stating UFOs were real .
 Detlev Bronk was a physiologist and biophysicist with international credentials . He chaired tine National Research Council and was a member of the medical advisory board of tine Atomic Energy Commission .
 From 1953 until 1968, he was president of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research . During that time he was given a $600,000 mansion .
 Bronk maintained a long correspondence with Vannevar Bush . Bronk was on the Scientific Advisory Committee of the Brookhaven National Laboratory along with Dr. Dr. Barbara Bronk . She was also on the Advisory Committee at Brookhaven .
 J erome Hunsaker, an aircraft designer, chaired the departments of mechanical and aeronautical engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics .
 It should be noted that less than three months after the 1984 death of Dr. Dr. John Sutter, Dr. George Sutter died, three months later . Dr. Sutter's funeral was held in New York City in 1984 .
 M. any feel H unsacker's death may have signaled to someone in the official world that it was now permissible to leak the MJ -12 Eisenhower briefing document .
 Sidney W Souers was the first Director of Central Intelligence . He was appointed by President Truman in 1946 . Souers is a retired rear admiral who served in the US Navy .
 He was executive secretary to the National Security Council in 1947 . He remained a consultant on security matters for a time after leaving that post .
 Souers held executive positions in the Mortgage and Securities Company of New Orleans, FirstJ oint Stock Land Bank, the Canal Bank and Trust Company, the Aviation Company, and the General American Life Insurance Company .
 President Truman named a special assistant on national security affairs to President Truman . Reynolds was assistant secretary of the army in 1947, became secretary of army in 1949 . Reynolds became special assistant to Truman in 1949, a year later was named national security adviser .
 Gray was named director of the government's Psychological Strategy Board . The board was set up in 1951 to undertake disinformation and psychological warfare against enemies .
 During his stint on the PSB, Gray's chief consultant was Henry Kissinger, who was also a paid consultant to the Rockefellers . Kissinger was also paid consultants to both the Rockefeller and the Rockefeller .
 Gray directed a psychological strategy study of UFOs . Gray was consulted by CIA director Walter B Smith . Gray directed the psychological strategy .
 Gray was also a member of the Council on Foreign Relations from the Truman through the Ford administrations . Gray served as a Cabinet member during the Truman-Ford administrations .
 He also was chairman of the board for the communications companies Piedmont Publishing Company, Triangle Broadcasting Company, and Summit Communications .
 Donald Menzel, a respected astronomer, led a double life . Menzel was a director of the Harvard College Observatory at the time of his death . He was also a prominent astronomer at Harvard College .
 M enzel had been a covert consultant for both the C lA and the N SA with a top-secret security clearance . Stanton Friedman studied Menzel's unpublished biography and interviewed his widow . Friedman discovered that Menzel had a top security clearance with top secret clearance .
 Menzel also worked closely with the State Department, especially on Latin American affairs . Menzel worked with the U.S. State Department on Latin America affairs .
 Menzel unsuccessfully tried to interest the R ockefeller F oundation and H oward H ughes in funding a highaltitude observatory at B oulder, Colorado .
 In Menzel we find a man who, while publicly known simply as a notable astronomer, had intriguing and high-level intelligence connections . Menzel was known as an astronomer and astronomer, but also had connections with intelligence .
 He also served as director of the Antiaircraft and Guided Missile Branch of the army's Artillery School . He was commanding general of the Sandia Atomic Energy Commission facility in Albuquerque, New Mexico, from 1947 to 1951 .
 His responsibilities included security at the White Sands Proving Ground . He was also responsible for security in the area .
 Lloyd V Berkner worked under Vannevar Bush as executive secretary of the J oint Research and Development Board in 1946 . Berkner headed a study that resulted in the creation of the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group .
 Robertson concluded that UFOs did not constitute any direct threat to national security . Robertson concluded they did not pose a direct threat . Robertson: UFOs are not a threat .
 Funding for the AU I came from such luminary institutions as C ornell, H arvard, J ohns H opkins, M IT, and Yale . Funding for this article was provided by Yale .
 Brookhaven National Laboratory is rumored to be involved in defense weaponry and UFOs . Brookhaven has been linked to the AUI for decades . The AUI is believed to have been involved in the creation of defense weaponry .
 These distinguished men appeared to have two things in common— they were all connected to the highest levels of the national security as well as American corporate business .
 The MJ -12 group was also dead at the time the papers surfaced, thus unable to answer any questions about their role in such a group . They were also all dead .
 J. ohnson was the youngest Senate majority leader in U.S. history . He was in a position to serve those in both the military and the corporations .
 President George W Bush echoed J ohnson's remarks by calling for new space missions and the weaponization of space .
 J. OHNSON'S puzzling statement about ""the masters of infinity"" are facts indicating an astounding connection between the welldocumented occultism of the Nazis, the NASA space program, and the Nazis .
 In 1992, H oagland briefed UN officials on the mathematical and geometric linkage connecting the sitting of ""Cydonia""on Mars, the location of the Martian ""Pyramids""and ""Face, "" with the Egyptian locations of the pyramids and sphinx on Earth .
 Hoagland: Public records now provide firm evidence of an astonishing, official link between NASA's supposedly strictly ""scientific"" missions and millennia-old occult beliefs . Hoaglands: These crosscorrelated public records now .
 The original official official official NASA Apollo Lunar Program logo of the 1960s clearly depicted the ""belt"" in the constellation of Orion, long thought to represent Osiris, a central figure in Egyptian celestial mythology . In fact, the original official Apollo Lunar program logo was clearly depicted .
 H e concluded that the entire Apollo Lunar Program was completely controlled by, and designed around, this crucial Orion symbolism . H e concludes that the extraordinarily complex and expensive mission-planning for the Apollo Lunar program, far from being merely ""represented"" by this ""interesting"" Egyptian mythological
 Someone with enough authority to set the launch date and time for an Apollo space mission, as well as many others, was guided by the astrological alignment of the stars and planets rather than an objective scientific basis . In other words, someone with enough power to set a launch date,
 Mary Ann Weaver, a former Boeing engineer and computer professional, was intrigued by the data produced by Hoagland and his associate Michael Bara . Weaver: "I was intrigued"
 As a former researcher with the antenna division of Boeing, she was experienced in 3-D computer modeling, computational analysis and developing equations .
 Weaver concluded that the star alignments for the mission activities and launches did not happen by accident . ""hey must happen by design," she stated. Weaver concluded .
 "It is improbable tliat tine frequency of tliese stellar alignments are tied to weather or lighting conditions,"" she concluded .
 Michael Bara pointed to a disturbing similarity with Russian space flights . Bara said it was similar to a Russian space flight . Michael Barra pointed to the similarities with the Russian mission .
 The launch of the first module for the new International Space Station was launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome located in Kazakhstan, now an independent nation that borders Russia and the Caspian Sea . The launch was apparently designed to coincide with a number of significant celestial alignments already
 This would indicate some connection between the former S oviet space program and NASA, perhaps through the Nazi scientists working in both . The Nazi scientists worked in both NASA and the space program .
 NASA refused the request, citing a number of minor technical considerations . The launch went off as originally scheduled and was witnessed by NASA administrator Dan Goldin .
 The program was already a year behind schedule, NASA says . NASA says the delay would not have led to a significant problem, despite NASA protestations to the contrary .
 The point is that someone high enough in power in the U.S. government is able to order the dates and times of space missions . The point of the question is whether someone high in power believes in such things .
 President Kennedy may have been aware of a parallel space program and decided to make it public policy . President] ohn F Kennedy may be aware of the parallel program .
 On November 12, 1963, ten days before his assassination, he instructed NASA administrator] ames Webb to develop a program of ""joint space and lunar exploration"" with the Soviet Union .
 Sergei Khruschev, the eldest son of the former Russian premier, verified the proposal in 1997 . The proposal, which may startle Americans today, was verified in 1997 by his son, Sergei . The plan was verified by the eldest child of the late Russian premier .
 Strong evidence suggests they may well be the subject of this book— those global National Socialists and their minions, who have a goal of controlling the entire world . Strong . evidence suggests that they may . well be . those global . Socialists .
 In modern warfare, there is also the struggle for control over the hearts and minds of whole populations, whether by psychological or chemical means . Modern warfare is also a struggle to control whole populations by psychological and chemical warfare .
 NAZI INVESTIGATIONS IN TO EXOTIC SCIENCES DID NOT END with flight and weapons technology . NAZI MIND CONTROL DID NOT end with flight, weapons technology.
 Prior to the twentieth century, G ermans had delved into psychology and psychiatry with an eye toward their application to warfare, even to the extent of exploring occult practices .
 As well documented in a number of books, articles, and videos, there was a very definite and underlying occult aspect to National Socialism . The occult aspect of National Socialism is well documented .
 As elucidated in Rule by Secrecy, Unholy Alliance, The Occult and the Third Reich, The Spear of Destiny, and other works .
 World War II was largely the result of infighting between secret occult societies . The secret societies were composed of wealthy businessmen on both sides of the Atlantic . World War I was largely due to infighting .
 The tensions between the groups provoked open warfare that consumed the entire world . Eventually the tensions between these groups provoke open warfare . The tensions eventually led to open warfare which consumed the world .
 Sir Winston Churchill was insistent that the occultism of the N azi P arty should not under any circumstances be revealed to the general public . Trevor Ravenscroft, who wrote that he worked closely with Dr. Winston Churchill, said that he was "insistent" that
 The occult aspect of the Nazis was ruled inadmissible because the tribunal thought such beliefs might allow Nazi leaders to go free by pleading insanity . This remarkable statement was corroborated by Airey Neave, one of the Nuremberg prosecutors, who said such beliefs were so contrary to
 Even Hitler acknowledged that Nazi ideology ventured into a spiritual realm, when he stated, ""Anyone who interprets National Socialism merely as a political movement knows almost nothing about it," Hitler said .
 The Nazis turned to occultists such as Baron Rudolf Freiherr von Sebottendorff, Guido von List and Dietrich Eckart . The Nazis were inspired by the philosophies of the Theosophical Society .
 Theosophy, derived from the G reek theos and sophia, was an attempt to blend Christianity with Cabalistic and Eastern mysticism . It was a blend of Christianity and Cabalism .
 One tenet of theosophy was that ""Great Masters,"" sometimes called the ""Great White Brotherhood,"" are secretly directing humankind's evolution . Theosophy believed that the "Great Masters" are responsible for the evolution of humankind .
 Rudolf Steiner's Anthroposophical Society, and the Order of the Golden Dawn, were among the most prominent members of the Order . Steiner was the founder of the Anthroposophy Society, which he founded .
 Such groups were, ""concerned with raising their consciousness by means of rituals to an awareness of evil and nonhuman Intelligences in the Universe and with achieving a means of communication"
 The Master-Adept of this circle was Dietrich Eckart [the man Hitler called ""spiritual founder of National Socialism"]," noted Ravenscroft .
 As previously mentioned, the deeply occulted Germanenorden contrived the Thule Society as a cover organization . The Thule society was created by the occultists .
 General Karl H aushofer, who used astrology to provoke the strange flight of R udolf H ess to E. nland, was a member of the mysterious Vril, an occult society that practiced telepathy and telekinesis .
 It is surmised that it was perhaps through such occult practices that psychic contact was made with nonhuman intelligences, thus providing the Nazis with the concepts that led to their futuristic technology . The Nazis may have used occult practices to develop their technology .
 Rumors have floated about for years that the Nazis captured a UFO . No credible evidence has ever been produced to support the claims .
 Some of those who have studied this issue have come to suspect that any such knowledge of nonhuman technology may instead have come through Nazi occultists using psychic means similar to remote viewing . Remote viewing was a psychic ability studied, taught, and used operationally by the U.S. Army
 R emote viewing, known in parapsychological terms as clairvoyance, is the ability to discern persons, places, and things at a distance by means other than the normal five senses .
 The N azis formed a unit of psychics and called it Doktor G ruenbaum . According to former U.S. military intelligence agent Lyn Buchanan, who trained the United States Army's remote viewers .
 This name was for the psychic project, not a person, although apparently a G erman psychic who assumed the name G ruenbaum may have lived in the U.S. after the war .
 The name G ruenbaum, or green tree, apparently was a reference to the green-tree symbol in the Cabala, which relates to the ""tree of knowledge"" in the Garden of Eden .
 The Nazi Doktor Gruenbaum unit was connected to a broader program called Majik . Interestingly enough, it was reported that it was connected .
 Majic Twelve has been compared to America's original UFOsecrecy group Majic 12 . This name has prompted comparisons to the original U.S. original UFO . Majic twelve is a group of 12 people who are involved in UFO secrecy .
 German viewers may have perceived the buildup of Soviet forces but been unable to foresee the end result of Barbarossa . Since this ability is intuitive and not always crystal-clear, it may have been difficult to predict the outcome .
 Whether or not the N azis used psychic mental abilities to acquire exotic technology, it is beyond question that the study of the human mind began in earnest in Germany .
 Behind the horrors of the Nazi regime rested a foundation of Europe an study of the human mind . Behind the horrific Nazi regime, Europe was a foundation for the study of human minds .
 J ustification of euthanasia and extermination programs was provided by some of Germany's most learned men . The extermination programs were provided by the Nazis in Germany .
 "It is the overlooked yet utterly central piece of the puzzle,"" wrote Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter: "It's a central piece to the puzzle"
 Thomas Roeder and his coauthors Volker Kubillus and Anthony Bur-well in their 1995 book Psychiatrists— the Men Behind Hitler . Roeder: Psychiatrists were responsible for Hitler's rise to power .
 The result was a strange marriage of Darwin's observations of the animal world with Malthus's emotional assumptions about population growth and social solutions to preserve the British aristocracy .
 Social Darwinism was perhaps the Nazis' most central theoretical foundation, they say . The Nazis' theory of social Darwinism is a key part of their theory .
 F rom the viewpoint that certain people are more evolved and thus more competent to judge others came from the profession of psychiatry . The profession of psychiatrist is thought to be a form of formality .
 The term itself came from the G reek psyche, or soul, and iatros, or doctor . The term is the name of a doctor .
 The doctors of the soul quickly became preoccupied with more material matters . However, they quickly became focused on how to manipulate or destroy the physical brain .
 In 1871, 'The Psychical Degeneration of the F rench P eople'" was published . The paper left the impression that simply being 'F rench' constituted a mental illness .
 At the time of World War I, the attempt to bring respectability to the emerging psychiatric profession resulted in a certain bonding between psychiatry and the aristocratic German government . The attempt to establish respectability for the psychiatric profession led to a bond with the government .
 'Kaufmann therapy' consisted of applied electrical shocks . Based on the idea that antiwar behavior was a chemo-biological dysfunction, the treatment was more of a disciplinary mea sure .
 The army was delighted that recalcitrant troops, following electroshock, quickly agreed to return to service . The army is delighted that the soldiers have returned to service after electroshock .
 Psychiatry continued to grow in power even as its agenda continued to widen . Psychiatry's agenda continues to widen as it continues to expand .
 Such arrogance of belief soon led to the creation of various psychiatric organizations, such as the Gesellschaftfur Rassenhygiene, or Society for Racial Hygiene, which only served to further the ambitions of the profession .
 Since no one has yet found a significant and general ""cure"" for insanity, psychiatrists turned to the dubious concept of prevention . Psychiatrists say prevention is the best way to prevent insanity .
 This came to be known as ""mental hygiene,"" a bland term for the prevention of mental illness, whatever form it might take . Mental hygiene is now known as "mental hygiene" The term was used to refer to mental illness .
 In Germany of the 1930s, the rush to isolate and ""cure" mental defectives quickly was interpreted to include malcontents and dissidents opposed to the Nazi regime . The rush to isolate and "cure mental defectives was interpreted as malcontents
 The N azi Sterilization Act went into effect in J uly 1933, just six months after H itier's ascension to power . This openended concept resulted in the Act, which went to effect in 1933 .
 One of the leading and articulate authorities behind the rationale for this act was Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was one of the key figures in the creation of this law .
 Many Americans, especially among the globalists, embrace the racist and elitist views of the German philosophers . It was well received by those present .
 Nazi interest in science and psychological warfare was paralleled by their concern with eugenics, the scientific study of selective breeding to improve the human population . The Nazi interest was parallel to that of their concern in selective breeding .
 Francis Galton wanted to extend the theory of natural selection into deliberate social engineering . The term ""eugenics"" was coined in the late 1800s by Francis Galon, a half-cousin of Darwin's .
 Rockefeller-funded institutions ensured their early entry into the fields of medicine, pharmaceuticals, and education . R ockefeller funded institutions ensured early entry to the fields .
 The R ockefellers were also interested in the eugenics movement, a program of scientifically applied genetic selection to maintain and improve their ideal for human characteristics, which included birth .
 It seems the wealthy elite of America were as concerned with bloodlines as the Nazis . The wealthy elite were concerned about bloodlines in the US .
 Kraepelin's research institute, rescued from bankruptcy by Loeb's money, had become incorporated into the prestigious Kaiser Wilhelm Institute . Growing Nazi leadership was paying attention to its science .
 Initially, they went for the most defenseless of the German population -- the children . Initially, the children were the victims of the crimes .
 On J uly 14, 1933, only six months after H itier was named chancellor of the R eich, the Law for the P revention of Genetically Diseased Children was passed .
 Ernst Rudin, then director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute, pushed for the legislation . Rudin was a leading proponent of the legislation in the 1930s . He was then a leading advocate of the law .
 The N azi euthanasia program was not carried out in the open but instead by secret decrees . H itIer steadfastly refused to seek a legal ruling, knowing that such a program was illegal under existing laws .
 It is estimated that more than 400,000 people were sterilized as ""life unworthy of life" between 1934 and 1945 .
 One revealing anecdote involving this medical-driven policy was the release of a mental patient who had been imprisoned as a violence-prone hardened criminal, a local official .
 Theodor Eicke was soon named the first commandant of Dachau concentration camp . Werner Heyde, however, pronounced TheodorEicke fit for discharge, and he was soon discharged .
 In 1934, E icker was promoted to inspector general and chief of all concentration camps . He was promoted in 1934, and became the chief of concentration camps in 1944 .
 E icke, whose influence and spirit within the SS was ""second only to that of Himmler,"" died in 1943, when his plane was shot down behind Russian lines .
 H eyde, whose recommendation released E icke from prison, went on to become the medical director of the infamous Nazi T4 euthanasia program begun in 1940 . He was the doctor who released E. icke after his recommendation .
 Hitler acted on the advice of Dr. Dr. Hitler, acting on his father's advice . Hitler ordered the killing of Hitler's son, Adolf Hitler .
 In a prototype of the Nazi death camps, a fake shower room, complete with benches, was constructed and used to gas the first victims . The shower room was constructed in a replica of a Nazi death camp .
 Victims, their families, and even those working within the system did not realize the full extent of the euthanasia program . Great pains were taken to employ what Robert] ay Lifton called ""bureaucratic mystification,""
 In 1941 Hitler ordered the official T4 euthanasia program halted for no recorded reason . Interestingly enough, in 1941 Hitler stopped the program for no known reason .
 Some have argued that Hitler may have developed pangs of conscience . Others believe that as more and more of the German population became aware of the killing, cries of objection could have caused Hitler a political problem .
 Authors Roeder, Kubillus, and Burwell argued that the program was stopped simply because it had achieved its original quota of victims . Authors argued that it was stopped because the program had reached its quota of victim victims .
 "New euthanasia program wasn't waiting to begin,"" they wrote . "But that did not mean that a new euthanasia . program was waiting to start,"" the authors wrote .
 Doctors of T4 began visiting Nazi concentration camps in April 1941 . They soon were practicing their newest euthanasia program in earnest . The Endlosung, or final solution, is the Endloseth, or the final solution .
 Both medical doctors and psychiatrists were quite vulnerable to peer pressure as well as the goodwill of the state . The state provided the credentials and certificates necessary for their practice .
 Mind manipulation through psychiatry and psychology was soon joined by a companion therapy, drugs . The therapy is now being used as a form of therapy .
 German psychiatrists were merely following the lead of medical doctors, who in the twentieth century increasingly moved away from the tradition of homeopathy to allopathy, the straightforward treatment of disease with drugs .
 What therapy could not accomplish through psychological means might be accomplished through drugs . The drugs could be used to help patients cope with depression and anxiety disorders .
 This trend to increase the use of prescription drugs set the stage for the rise of the giant pharmaceutical corporations during the twentieth century . The trend to use prescription drugs was the beginning of the pharmaceutical industry .
 During the Opium Wars of the late 1800s, any type of drug was used for profit . During the time of the war, any kind of drug could be sold for profit in China .
 In 1898, Bayer Company began mass production of heroin and used that name to market the new remedy . Bayer Company used the name of heroin to market its new remedy in 1898 .
 Bayer described heroin as a non-addictive panacea for adult ailments and infant respiratory diseases . Bayer: Heroin is nonaddictive and not addictive . Bayer described it as a 'non-addicted panacea' for adults .
 In the late 1800s, Bayer also promoted cocaine, which until the 1920s was an ingredient in the soft drink Coca-Cola . Bayer's company was also known for its use of cocaine .
 As more easily produced petrochemical drugs made their debut, they prompted the attention of the major global corporations . But as more easily-produced petrochemicals made its debut, the attention was raised .
 According to the center's literature, it has "long been a leader in cancer surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy" The center has been a cancer treatment center for decades .
 Rockefeller represented Rockefeller interests with the firm of Rohm and Haas, still one of the world's largest suppliers of specialty chemicals . Standard Oil, R. Farben and Standard Oil were represented by Rohm & Haas .
 Current company literature states, ""From maintaining the freshness in fruits and vegetables to purifying antibiotics, we help customers create products that enhance the way of life for people around the world"
 The American College of Surgeons maintained a monopolistic control of U.S. hospitals through its Hospital Survey Committee . Members Winthrop Aldrich and David McAlpine Pyle represented the Rockefellers .
 In 1909, J. D Rockefeller Sr. established the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission, dedicated to eradicating hookworm disease . The commission required financial contributions from each of the eleven southern states in which it operated .
 The physician who served as director of the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission during World War I was Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was a physician who worked for the Rockefeller Commission in World War One .
 Olin West was a primary figure in the creation of the Tennessee State Department of Health . West was also a key figure in creating the state's health department . West died at the age of 92 in 1971 .
 West went on to become a top executive for forty years at the American M edical Association . West was an executive at the association for more than 40 years .
 S. S. as well as many small institutions in every state, received aid from the Board .
 When the Rockefeller Syndicate began its takeover of our medical profession in 1910, our citizens went into a sharp decline . The Rockefeller syndicate took over the medical profession, leading to decline in citizens .
 Mullins pointed to Britain's Wellcome Trust as one of the world's largest medical research charities . Mullins said Britain's wellcome Trust is a major medical research charity in the world . He said the Wellcome trust is one of Britain's most successful medical charities .
 Sir Oliver Franks was British ambassador to the U.S. from 1948 to 1952 . He was described as one of the founders of the postwar world .
 H e was a director of the R ockefeller F oundation and its principal representative in E ngland . He was also the principal representative of the Rockefeller Rockefeller Foundation in England . H e e was born in 1926 .
 Nazi medical science employed in America involves the toxic chemical sodium fluoride . The fluoride is a form of form of fluoride used in fluoride treatment .
 Controversy over municipal water supplies has raged since the 1950s and continues today . Water fluoridation has been a source of controversy for decades .
 Through a chemical called cryolite the material is converted into aluminum . Cryolite is used to convert aluminum from aluminum to aluminum .
 A by-product of this process is sodium fluoride, which for many years was used as a rat poison . The process is used to make chemicals that can be used to kill rats .
 Alzheimer disease is the seventh leading cause of death in America today . Alzheimer's is the brain-destroying disease . It is also the seventh highest death toll in America .
 Although aluminum has been associated with Alzheimer's, such claims have been disputed . Aluminium has been linked to Alzheimer's but not Alzheimer's .
 Some have claimed that Alzheimer's disease is more common in areas where the aluminum content in the water supply is highest . However, the method and results of these studies have been questioned .
 In 1986, the EPA raised the level of sodium fluoride in public water supplies from 2 parts per million gallons to 4 parts, even though one part per million has been shown to impair neurological efficiency . B ut it is true that the Reagan administration's Environmental Protection Agency raised the ""safe""
 In October 2007, despite ""heated hearings"" in 2003, the Los Angelesbased Metropolitan Water District began fluoridating drinking water of 18 million Southern Californians in six counties, including San Diego .
 Report: Plan to fluoridate water in Southern California will put 14. percent of children under one year old over recommended fluoride exposure limits . Report says plan will put children under 1 to 2 years over recommended levels of fluoride exposure .
 EWG: Recent studies call into question claims that fluoridation is safe . EWG says fluoridation should be regulated as a precautionary measure .
 A 2006 peer-reviewed study at Harvard strongly supported concerns that fluoridated water is linked to osteo-sarcoma, an often-fatal form of bone cancer, in boys . That finding was echoed by a December 2006 study published in The Lancet, which identified fluoride as
 The H arvard study found a five-fold increase in bone cancer among teenage boys who drank fluoridated water from ages six through eight . The study was published by the Harvard University of Columbia .
 Brain studies show aluminum accumulates in nerve cells that are vulnerable to Alzheimer's disease . Not all persons exposed to aluminum develop Alzheimer's, not all develop the disease .
 The doses of aluminum used were much higher than those occurring naturally in tissues . It is claimed that the doses were higher than that of naturally occurring naturally .
 This obviously raises the question of how much fluoride/aluminum the public is ingesting from nonnatural sources, such as the fluoridation of drinking water . The public should be aware of the fluoride and aluminum levels in their drinking water, the author says .
 By the mid-1990s, studies were indicating a link between Alzheimer's and aluminum . The link is believed to be between aluminum and Alzheimer's .
 The debate over the link between aluminum and sodium fluoride has lasted decades, due to the obstructionist studies funded by the tobacco industry . But just as the debate over link between cigarettes and cancer continues, the controversy over aluminum continues today .
 Sodium fluoride was placed in the drinking water of N azi concentration camps to keep inmates pacified and susceptible to external control .
 A Christian Science Monitor survey in 1954 showed that seventy-nine of the eighty-one Nobel Prize winners in chemistry, medicine and physiology declined to endorse water fluoridation .
 Two-thirds of all municipal water and most bottled water in the U.S. contain sodium fluoride, which has long been used as a rat poison . Yet, today, today's municipal water contains sodium fluoride .
 Fluoride is a key ingredient in Prozac and many other psychotropic drugs . People don't realize that fluoride is a main ingredient in some of the most powerful drugs .
 More than 21 million prescriptions for fluoxetine were filled in the U.S. in 2006 . The drug is one of the most prescribed antidepressants in the world .
 Every U.S. Public Health Service surgeon general from the 1950s to this day has supported the introduction of fluoride into America's water supply . Fluoride, a waste product of aluminum manufacture, accumulates in the human body and has been shown to affect tooth decay only in children
 Prozac, which is 94 percent fluoride and given to hyperactive children, requires a prescription from a licensed physician . The same substance can be placed in our drinking water by dealers who have no medical training, no license to dispense medications, and no idea to whom they are administering this
 In 1946, Oscar Ewing was appointed by President Harry S Truman to head the Federal Security Agency . Ewing headed the U.S. Public Health Service, the S ocial S ecurity Administration and the Office of E ducation .
 Miller, a physician turned Republican politician, said E wing had been placed in his position and highly paid by the Rockefeller syndicate to promote fluoridation . Miller said that E wing was paid to promote fluoride .
 Water fluoridation is the most important aspect of the Cold War that is being waged on us, chemically, from within, by the R ockefeller-S oviet axis . The Cold War has been waged from within by the Rockefeller-S.Ockefeller axis .
 "It serves to blunt the intelligence of a people in a manner that no other dope can," says President Obama . "No dope can. It's a way of blunting people's intelligence," he says .
 This committee did no research or investigation on the poisonous effects of water fluoridation, says committee . Committee did no study or investigation into the dangers of fluoridation .
 Oscar Ewing had been 'rewarded' with $750,000 by fluoride waste producer . P ubIic H ealth Service]. on the order of boss Oscar . Ewing, who had been given the money by fluoride producer .
 He developed the 'public spirit' that impelled him to take a $17,500 job as Federal Security Administrator . He then developed the public spirit that led him to become a federal official .
 West Germany banned the use of fluorides in 1971, a time when it was still heavily occupied by Allied soldiers . It is interesting to note that West Germany used fluorides at the time of the ban .
 Globalist funding encouraged by globalist funding was not content with drugs to merely pacify a population . Globalist minds encouraged by funding were not contented with drugs merely pacifying the population .
 The infusion of N azi mind-control specialists within the fledgling C lA resulted in P roject M KU LTR A . Mind-control research continued until the late 1960s when it was said to have been discontinued .
 Project MKULTR A was created in 1953 by CIA officer Richard Helms . Helms was a good friend to CIA psychiatrist Dr. Dr. Michael Lister . Lister was a CIA officer and a friend of Helms' psychiatrist .
 Dulles reportedly intrigued by reports of mind-control techniques allegedly conducted by Soviet, Chinese, and North Koreans on U.S. prisoners during the Korean War . Dulles was intrigued by the reports .
 Published accounts show this project used drugs to manipulate a person's personality . It also used electronic signals to alter brain functioning, according to reports .
 According to a 1975 internal CIA document, "MKULTR A was a group of projects, most of which dealt with drug or counter-drug research and development . CIA document: Most of the projects dealt with drugs or counter drugs research .
 The Director of C entral Intelligence and the Deputy Director of P lans were kept informed on the program via annual briefings by Chief Technical Services Division or his deputy .
 The objectives were behavioral control, behavior anomaly production, and countermeasures for opposition application of similar substances . The objectives are behavioral control and behavior anomaly .
 Work was performed at United States industrial, academic, and governmental research facilities . The work was done at U.S. industrial and academic facilities .
 CIA has admitted that its drug testing on college campuses resulted in the ""drug revolution"" of the 1960s . The CIA has even admitted that the drug testing led to the 'drug revolution' of the 60s .
 Albert Hofmann accidentally absorbed through his fingertips a chemical derived from cereal fungus ergot . Hofmann was working for Sandoz Laboratories in Basel, Switzerland .
 He proceeded to experience a semiconscious delirium complete with kaleidoscopic colors and visions . He then experienced a semi-consensual delirity .
 Hofmann named itLSD-25 as the twenty-fifth compound of lysergic acid diethylamide . Hofmann was named after the compound .
 P Morgan J operative and head of the Office of Strategic Services conducted irregular and unorthodox warfare . He was searching for a drug that would loosen the tongues of captured spies and enemy soldiers .
 Donovan called together a group of psychiatrists, who tested numerous drugs, including alcohol, barbiturates, and even caffeine . Donovan called on the psychiatrists to come up with the results .
 Plant extracts such as peyote, scopolamine, and even marijuana were tested . Plant extracts were also tested for use of marijuana and other plant extracts .
 In 1947, the old OSS was superseded by the newly created CIA, within which drug experimentation continued, though with mixed results . The CIA was created in 1947, with the CIA taking over the OSS .
 Liaisons were formed between academics, police departments, criminology laboratories, doctors, psychiatrists, and even hypnotists . Liaisons formed between police, academics, criminsists, psychiatrists and hypnotists.
 Secret CIA funding provided and experiments were not limited to laboratory animals . CIA funding was provided .
 Like the Nazis before them, they also used sometimes unsuspecting human guinea pigs . The Nazis used to use guinea-pots to test their theories .
 These experiments were carried out in collaboration with hundreds of known Nazi scientists, who had experimented with the same drugs on prisoners in concentration camps . The experiments were conducted in collaboration .
 These scientists were brought into the United States after the war to continue their work . They were brought in to the U.S. after their work was finished .
 Agency personnel slip LSD into each other's food or drinks without prior notice . Agency personnel tested LSD only on themselves, but later decided to slip it into each others' food or drink .
 Timothy Leary, along with Richard Alpert, later known Ram Dass, conducted a series of experiments with LSD and psilocybin . Leary and Alpert later became known for their LSD experiments .
 Leary had come to Harvard after serving as director of clinical research and psychology at the Kaiser Foundation Hospital in Oakland, California . Leary is credited with saving the lives of people around the world .
 Kaiser was a wealthy industrialist and ship builder who in 1946 began Kaiser Aluminum . Kaiser was the founder of Kaiser Aluminum, a successful aluminum company . Kaiser died in 1946 .
 Current partners in the U.S. include MTV, BET, Univision, Viacom/CBS, and Fox .
 fluoride has received such favorable media attention over the years . It is no wonder that the aluminum waste product fluoride has been given a favorable press coverage .
 Many stories circulated around Harvard concerning LSD parties and undergraduates selling LSDlaced sugar cubes on and off campus . Undergraduates sold sugar cubes with LSD laces in the form of LSD .
 Leary was fired from the university in 1963, officially because he missed a committee meeting . He was fired officially because of missing a meeting . Leary's career spanned four decades .
 Alpert, too, was dismissed, reportedly for violating an agreement not to supply LSD to undergraduates . Alpert was reportedly fired for violating a deal not to give LSD to students .
 This was the first time in the twentieth century that Harvard faculty members had been fired . This was a first time Harvard faculty member fired in the last century .
 Leary and Alpert began writing articles chastising Harvard and extolling the virtues of drugs . Leary began writing about Harvard's use of drugs in the early 1980s .
 As the drug culture grew rapidly in the late 1960s, "it was widely observed that young people paid little or no attention to dire warnings against the hazards of marijuana-smoking, LSD-using, and other forms of drug use"
 After the major media began to report stridently on the campus drug scene, public interest grew, as did demand . The campus drug revolution of the 1960s was off and running .
 The intelligence community of this nation, which requires a shroud of secrecy in order to operate, has a very sacred trust from the American people, the president says . "The intelligence community is very secretive," says President Obama .
 The CIA's program of human experimentation of the fifties and sixties violated that trust . The CIA program was a program of experimentation that violated the trust of the public .
 It was violated again on the day the bulk of the agency's records were destroyed in 1973 . It was also violated on the same day it was destroyed in the 1970s .
 One certain violation involved the death of a scientist working on mind control . The death of the scientist involved in mind control was a violation of the law .
 Dr. Frank Olson was a biological and mind-control scientist working for the U.S. Army at FortDetrick, Maryland . He was surreptitiously given an LSD-laced drink by Dr. Olson . Olson was given the drink by the Army scientist .
 Sidney Gottlieb was killed in a car crash at the Deep Creek Lodge in Maryland . He was shot in the head by a helicopter carrying a gun .
 Olson's close friends and family members believe he was murdered to prevent him from speaking out against the MKULTRA program . However, Olson's family members still believe Olson was murdered because he had come to both regret and despise the program, which he had both regretted and despised .
 Nazi pharmaceutical science even spread to more exotic attempts at mind control . Research based on Nazi pharmaceutical research spread to mind control attempts .
 Carol Rutz spoke at the Eighth Annual Ritual Abuse, Secretive Organizations and Mind Control Conference in 2005 . Rutz is author of A Nation Betrayed .
 R utz claimed to be the victim of government abuse and mind-control experiments . He claimed to have been the subject of government experiments . The government has been accused of experimenting with mind control .
 Rutz: 'This particularly caught my attention, since the change of eye color was a pet project of Auschwitz 'Doctor'] osef Mengele, aka Dr. Dr. Osef . Rutz stated, 'This . particularly caught . my attention since the . change
 George Hunter White, a CIA contract agent, worked under the auspices of Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter experimented on unwitting subjects .
 White would bring unsuspecting men from local bars to a CIA-financed bordello in San Francisco . He would give them LSD-spiked drinks and then watch the men have sex with prostitutes from behind a two-way mirror .
 White would send bills for his ""unorthodox expenses"" to Dr. White . White would then send bills to the doctor for his "unorthodox expenses" Dr. S. S . taxpayers paid for it all .
 White said he was a "minor missionary, actually a heretic, but I toiled wholeheartedly in the vineyards because it was fun" White once said of this work, "I was a very minor missionary, Actually a Heretic" White said of his work: "
 Edgewood Arsenal is located on Chesapeake Bay northeast of Baltimore . Much of the drug experimentation was centered at secret facilities at the Arsenal . The Arsenal was located in secret facilities .
 In 1955, thanks to the influx of Nazi chemists, a new drug-testing program was instituted at Edgewood . The program began in 1955 thanks to an influx of chemists .
 "They were told they would only suffer temporary discomfort,"" wrote mind-control researcher and author Walter H Bowart .
 I am one of the 6,720 enlisted soldiers used at E dgewood in 1955-1975 . I am also a member of the Army National Guard who served in the U.S. Army during that time .
 I am glad C ongress investigated it in '75 and the army shut the program down— at least they won't do it openly anymore. I'm glad C. ongress looked into it and shut it down . I'm not sure if the program will continue to be used in
 "I am now forty-nine and totally disabled, I have the body of a seventy-year-old, and the VA says the army didn't do anything to me. I am now 40, and I am totally disabled," he says .
 Despite a congressional investigation in the 1970s and a lawsuit by one of the soldier victims, M. ames Stanley went to the United States Supreme Court in 1986, the work at Edgewood never reached the public .
 The fact that P aperclip scientists worked at Edgewood between 1947 and 1966 has been kept a closely guarded secret .
 Rahr deported back to G ermany in 1948 after another scientist, H ans Trurnit, accused him of being a communist . Rahr was deported after being accused of being communist .
 Edgewood scientists included TheodorWagner-J auregg and Friedrich Hoffman . Theodor Wagner-Juregg also worked at the Edgywood facility . The Edgywald site was founded in 1903 .
 These men initially studied the Nazi poison gasses, tabun and sarin, the most deadly agents the U.S. military had ever encountered . The men studied the deadly agents .
 United States soldiers exposed to tabun and mustard gas in an E dgewood gas chamber . The chamber was reminiscent of those in the Nazi death camps . The gas chamber was used to expose the U.S. soldiers to the deadly gas chambers .
 F riedrich H offmann, another P aperclip chemist, traveled the world in search of exotic and new psychochemicals . He traveled around the world looking for exotic and . new psychochemistryicals .
 H e used the U niversity of Delaware's chemistry department as a cover to prevent anyone from connecting him to Edgewood Arsenal . H ee used the university of Delaware to avoid being connected to the club .
 Both Mosher and Moore were heavily involved in the MKULTRA program . This subterfuge was easy enough to maintain, because both the department chairman and Professor ames Moore were involved .
 SS Brigadefuehrer, or brigadier general, Walter Paul Emil Schreiber, worked for more than a decade for the chemical division of the United States Europe an Command . One U.S. Army officer described him as ""the prototype of an ardent and convinced N a
 The Untold Story Behind CIA Experiments with MKULTRA & Germ Warfare . Walter S. S. chreiber had been the paymaster for all the doctors working the N azi biochemical warfare programs .
 A year later, Schreiber, fearing that the media might discover his background, obtained a visa and found a job in Argentina . The actor's daughter was living in Argentina, where his daughter was also living .
 Hunt may not have noticed the interconnectedness of the personalities and business interests in both Germany and America before, during, and just after, the war .
 J ohn K Vance, a graduate of C olumbia U niversity, had served as a military translator at the N uremberg trials . Vance was one of those who noticed the funny business was taking place .
 Vance stumbled upon MKULTRA in the spring of 1963 while working on an inspector general's survey of the CIA's technical services division . Vance was working on a survey of CIA technical services .
 Vance's discovery and inspector general's report led to scaling back the project . The project was eventually said to have ended in the late 1960s . The agency began scaling back after Vance discovered the discovery .
 MKULTRA used patients in psychiatric hospitals, and other unwitting subjects, to develop mindcontrol techniques . The program became public knowledge in 1977 during hearings conducted by a Senate committee on intelligence chaired by Senator Frank Church .
 Some of the most distinguished figures in psychiatry participated in MKULTRA, including Dr. Dr. Paul Allen . Dr. Allen was a member of the CIA .
 Ewen Cameron was sent by Allen Dulles to study Rudolf Hess . Cameron later served as president of both the American and Canadian Psychiatric Associations . Cameron was also president of the World Psychiatric Association .
 M KU LTR A shows that the CIA, in addition to seeking the truth serum, also was highly interested in the ability to program individuals to act in accordance with the will .
 The 1962 Frank Sinatra film The Manchurian Candidate portrayed a programmed assassin ordered to kill a ranking political figure . The film was released in 1964 and has been widely viewed since then .
 This movie came out at the same time the C lA was actively working on just such a program, thanks to the groundwork laid down years earlier by N azi mindcontrol experts .
 It was run by the CIA and designed to control a subject's mind and will to the point where he or she would become an assassin . It was designed to be controlled by a subject and to control his will to become a killer .
 'To achieve this I was forced to undergo extensive drugging, electroshock, sensory deprivation, hypnosis, partake in pornographic films, act as a prostitute, and much else' 'I have been forced to participate in porn films, experience experimentation and much
 I finally have realized I cannot keep hiding tliat it lias left me only a shell of life to live . I finally realized I couldn't keep hiding .
 In 1973, on orders of Helms, Gottlieb destroyed all MKULTRA files before leaving the agency . A full accounting of the Nazi-inspired mind-control experiments will never be known, because in 1973, Helms destroyed all files .
 Businesses in the United States continue to be dominated by the Nazis and their ideology . U.S. businesses continue to thrive in spite of the Nazis .
 In the war's aftermath, some of the same personalities who helped place Hitler in power came back into play . In the aftermath of the war, Hitler's warlord came back to play .
 Dr. McCloy, wartime assistant secretary of war, close friend to Deutsche Bank chairman Dr. Dr. John Defterios, is a close friend of the bank's chairman .
 He pardoned more than seventy thousand Nazis accused of war crimes . As such, he pardoned over 70,000 people accused of Nazi crimes . He also pardoned thousands of others .
 Thirty-three S S officers, including their leader, were condemned to death in 1946 for the massacre of more than a one hundred American prisoners near Malmedy, Belgium, during the Battle of the Bulge . ObersturmbannfuehrerJ oachim Pe
 McCloy commuted all the remaining death sentences to life imprisonment . McCloy, the American high commissioner of the U.S. high commissioner, commuted the sentences .
 High U.S. officials had moved to free convicted Nazis . Once again, hidden from public scrutiny, they had moved from prison .
 About three hundred ranking N azi sympathizers from the Belarus region of the Soviet Union were brought to the United States after the war in hopes they could provide intelligence on the motives and abilities of the Soviets .
 Loftus found that the OPC had recruited Nazi collaborators to fight against communism . Loftus said that OPC recruited Nazis to fight communism in the 1930s .
 When it was discovered that their work was ineffectual, these Nazis were allowed to immigrate to the United States, their former activities concealed . The Nazis were discovered to be working in the U.S. when it was found to be ineffective .
 Former Belarusian president Radislaw Ostrowsky offered immunity from prosecution for war crimes . Franz Kushel, an SS general who commanded the Belarus Brigade, was responsible for the execution of more than forty thousand J ews . Stanislaw Stankievich, who organized the execution
 Belarusians are buried in a cemetery near a monument to Belarusian war veterans, which is topped by the image of an Iron Cross .
 Allen Dulles authorized to use false paperwork to maintain the Vatican ""ratlines"" for escaping Nazis . In 1948, soon-to-be CIA director Dulles, who had been on hand in 1921 for the creation of the Council on Foreign Relations, used false paperwork .
 Wisner's Nazis were working for CIA propaganda fronts such as Radio Liberty and the Voice of America . Within a year, the Nazis had been working for the CIA propaganda front .
 Dulles had encouraged the choice of Wisner as head of the OPC . The OPC undertook active operations against the Soviet Union as the Cold War developed . Wisner was the leader of the anti-Soviet Union operations .
 EVERY U.S. administration since the CFR's inception has been packed with council members . The CFR's council members have been in every administration since its inception .
 This trend continued through both Bill Clinton and George W Bush administrations . This trend continues through both Clinton and Bush administrations.
 Terrorist groups may be traced back to the Nazis, which prompts speculation on who is truly behind them .
 Otto Skorzeny, the Nazi commando who may have found Solomon's treasure, made his way to postwar Egypt, where he created an Egyptian ""Gestapo"" staffed almost completely with former SS officers . According to Peter Levenda's Unholy Alliance, the Egyptian Gestapo
 This operation encompassed the Muslim Brotherhood, a progenitor of today's al Qaeda terrorist organization . Operation encompassed Nazi-linked Muslim Brotherhood . Operation included the Nazi associated Muslim Brotherhood.
 The connection began with Muslim Brotherhood founder Hassan al-Banna, who formed a group of Egyptian youth dedicated to social reform and Islamic morals .
 Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab founded the Wahhabi sect that teaches that any additions or interpretations of Islam after the tenth century are false and should be eradicated, even by violence . He was a devotee of the eighteenth-century Muslim who founded the group . Muhammad Abd al
 AlBanna formed this nationalist group called the Muslim Brotherhood . He formed the nationalist group . The Muslim Brotherhood was formed by alBanna .
 Al-Banna was a devout admirer of Adolf Hitler and wrote to him frequently . He wrote to Hitler frequently .
 They hated J ews; they hated democracy; and they hated Western culture . They hated democracy and Western culture. They hated the Western culture, they hated the West .
 It became the official policy of the Third R eich to secretly develop the Muslim Brotherhood as the fifth Parliament, an army inside Egypt . The Muslim Brotherhood became an army in Egypt .
 Arab raiders caused continual problems for Allied forces in the years leading up to the fall of the Arab Spring .
 After World War II, the Muslim Brotherhood and its German intelligence handlers were sought for war crimes, as they were not considered regular military units . The Muslim Brotherhood was not considered a regular military unit during the war .
 British Secret Service hired Brotherhood members to fight against Israel in 1948 . Brotherhood members were turned over to the Secret Service after arrests in Cairo .
 Many of the members of the Arab Armies and terrorist groups that tried to strangle the infant State of Israel were the Arab Nazis of the Muslim Brotherhood . Only a few people in the Mossad know this, but many of the . members of . the Arab . Armies tried to
 The idea was that we were going to use the Arab N azis in the M iddle E ast as a counterweight to the Arab communists . It was intended to counterbalance the Arab communist movement in the Middle East .
 Nasser ordered all of the Muslim Brotherhood out of Egypt or be imprisoned, and we would execute them all, he said . "We would execute all of them all," he said. Nasser said .
 Student was named Osama bin Laden. Now when they arrived in Saudi Arabia ... student was named bin Laden . Student was killed in 1998 in a car bombing in Afghanistan .
 Osama bin Laden was taught by the Nazis of the jviuslim Brotherhood who had emigrated to Saudi Arabia . Bin Laden taught by a group of Nazis who emigrated from the country .
 In 1979 the CIA drew fanatics from these Saudi Brotherhood members and sent them to Afghanistan to fight the Soviet Russians . The CIA sent fanatics to Afghanistan in 1979 to fight Soviet Russia .
 Once out of Afghanistan, the mujahideen became known as al-Oaeda, or the Base . The Base is the name of the Taliban, which is based in Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 Following the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, the Saudis didn't want the fanatics to return, so they bribed Osama bin Laden and his al-Oaeda followers to stay out of Saudi Arabia .
 Loftus: "Current generation CIA are good and decent Americans and I like them a lot. So the Muslim Brotherhood became this poison that spread throughout the Middle East, and on 9/11, it began to spread around the world"
 Part of their problem is their files have been shredded, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "They're trying to do a good job, but part of the problem is that they have not been shredded," he says .
 While Dulles headed the CIA, his brother, J ohn Foster Dulles, was President Eisenhower's secretary of state . Dulles' brother was Eisenhower's Secretary of State .
 German banking industry profited from connections with Dulles brothers and McCloy . McCloy was a key figure in the American banking industry .
 Allied authorities ordered the breakup of Germany's largest bank, Deutsche Bank . Allied authorities also ordered the break-up of Deutsche Bank, Germany's biggest bank .
 By the turn of the current century, Deutsche Bank was reunited and had become a world banking leader . The bank was reunited in 2007 and has since become the world's leading bank .
 Deputy Fuelirer IMartin Bormann's fliglit capital plan was recognized by authorities in Britain and the U.S. The plan was approved by British and American authorities .
 The U.S. was dissuaded from action by the general euphoria at the war's end . The chaotic conditions in Europe and the chaos in Europe, the idea that growth would restore the wrecked Europe an economy, were dissuaded .
 There was also the behind-the-scenes power of men in banking and commerce who had been in league with the N azis . They still carried sympathy for their cause .
 Investigators were reassigned by their superiors, some of whom had been business partners with the Nazis for years . Some of the investigators had been working with Nazis for decades .
 Russell A Nixon was a member of the U.S. Military Government Cartel Unit . He found himself working directly under Brigadier General William H Draper, advocate of eugenics .
 N ixon was blocked at every turn in his attempt to break up the F arben cartel .
 Eisenhower was told Draper had canceled orders to dismantle or destroy F arben facilities, lied about bomb damage to plants, and deliberately violated General Eisenhower's orders to break up the Farben cartel . Draper was told by the general that he had cancelled orders to destroy or destroy facilities .
 N azi industrialist Richard F reudenberg arrested in Germany . U.S. ambassador to Germany Robert Murphy ordered him released .
 Department of J ustice attorney] ames Stewart Martin, was sent to United States Military Command in London to investigate collaboration between the Nazis and American businessmen . Martin was investigating collaboration between Nazis and businessmen .
 Martin bristled when he found his commanding officer was a Colonel Graeme K Howard, an official with General Motors . Howard was a General Motors official . Martin bristles when he was led by Howard, a Colonel from the company .
 H oward was quietly reassigned back to the States . After M artin pointed out the cozy relationship G eneral M otors had with the N azis .
 Martin later investigated tine fate of ITT's German cliairman Gerliardt Westricl<, wlio, after tine war ended, after hiding out in a castle in southern Germany . Martin investigated the fate of the ITT man who fled Berlin .
 After presenting a report on the status of ITT firms to U.S. military authorities, Westrick was given a light prison sentence and released . Westrick presented a report to the United States military authorities .
 "We had been stopped in Germany by American business,"" Martin wrote in the 1950 book All Honorable Men .
 Whatever it was that had stopped us was not 'the government' But it clearly had command of channels through which the government normally operates . It was not the government, but it was 'commanding' channels .
 One of those insiders who helped protect Nazi interests in the wake of World War II was William H Draper]. Draper was a business partner with Prescott Bush . Draper was appointed head of the economic division of the U.S. Control Commission .
 M artin also may have stumbled across the answer to why the international business community turned against Hitler .
 The leading bankers and industrialists were looking forward to a postwar world composed of intertwining corporate business connections among the nations of the world— a N ew World Order . The world was looking for a post-war era of a new world of corporate connections .
 Hitler was planning to attack the U.S. just as soon as he had effective rocket and long-range bomber delivery systems in place . Hitler, on the other hand, was planning an attack on the United States soon after he had the delivery systems ready .
 Globalists did not want a continuous war, nor did they want H itier to control a world N ational S ocialist government . The globalists wanted to control the world, not to control itier .
 Manning revealed that, ""there are U.S. Treasury old-timers of World War II still not aware of the magnitude of the Bormann operation and of its success"
 No one in a position of power within the financial centers of Washington, Wall Street, or the City of London, or Paris desired a real search for the scattered German assets .
 Without the German industrial base that had been its foundation for years, the Europe an economy was suffering . Without that, the European economy would be suffering, the EU was suffering, says the German government .
 U.S.J oint Chiefs of Staff directives ordered that nothing be done to rebuild Germany's industries . Germany's economy was hit hard by the fall of communism in the 1990s .
 President Roosevelt's friend and chief of staff General George Catlett Marshall had become secretary of state under President Truman in 1947 . General Marshall had been Roosevelt's chief of Staff . President Truman's friend was Marshall's Secretary of State .
 Truman convinced Truman that it was in the best interests of E urope an prosperity that Germany be allowed to rehabilitate its economy . The son of a prosperous coal producer and a participant in every high-level policy conference .
 Millions of dollars of aid began pouring into war-devastated Europe . The Marshall Plan was born, and millions of dollars began pouring in .
 Many Americans attacked the M arshall P Ian scheme as merely another R ockefeller scheme to bilk American taxpayers . Many Americans, including Colonel Robert McCormick, editor of the Chicago Tribune, attacked the scheme .
 Foster Dulles and Allen Dulles of Sullivan and Cromwell. Attorneys for the firm were attorneys for Foster and Dulles . The firm was founded by the late Dulles in 1945 .
 Future CIA director and Warren Commission member Allen Dulles sat on the board of Schroeder . Future CIA chief and future CIA director sat on board .
 Throughout the war, C base maintained its financial connections with the Nazis through its Paris bank . It is interesting to note that throughout the war the bank maintained its . connections .
 Farben chief Hermann Schmitz served as Chase president for seven years prior to the war . He was Chase's first president .
 Farben executives stood trial at Nuremberg for crimes against humanity . The building and maintenance of concentration camps and the use of slave labor were among the crimes committed .
 Schmitz was convicted of war crimes in 1948 at Nuremberg, but served a mere two years in prison . Zyklon-B gas was used for human extermination in Nazi concentration camps .
 Reichsleiter Martin Bormann forged a formidable Nazicontrolled organization for postwar activities . Schmitz business connections with the banking and business network helped forge a formidable organization for the war effort .
 The Nazis' attempt at central control through the economic sector produced the early stages of a united E urope so sought by H itier . Interestingly enough, the Nazis tried to central control of the economy .
 After the war, a devastated Europe looked to Germany for economic leadership . After the World War II, Germany became a major economic hub in Europe .
 The economic steps taken that became the C ommon M arket took the shape of prewar N azi plans . The Germans had the answer originally in 1942 when they were melding economic institutions of the C ontinent into their own design .
 It is interesting to note that the present E uropean U nion began as merely economic measures . The present E.U.N.Nion began to be just economic measures.
 The C ommon M arket evolved into the E urope an U nion, a supranational and intergovernmental body with tendrils into all aspects of E.U. life . F rom this reasonable beginning as a trade organization, the E. nion evolved
 In 1950, French foreign minister Robert Schuman proposed the joint management of the French and West German coal and steel industries . The French and German industries were managed by France and West Germany .
 1951 treaty provided for the shared production of coal and steel . 1951 treaty between Belgium, France, Italy, Italy and the Netherlands, Luxembourg, and West Germany .
 It was thought that this mutual endeavor would ensure against another war between these nations . The two nations were thought to be at risk of another war .
 It could be seen as a means of consolidating the Nazi business holdings of the Bormann organization . It also could be used to consolidate the Nazi organization .
 The E urope E conomic C ommunity was established in 1957 by the Treaty of Rome, signed by the same nations as in 1951 . It was established by the treaty of Rome .
 The Common |Viarl<et was styled as merely a step toward equalizing trade balances and tariffs . Again, the Common |Varl <etwas styled as an attempt to equalize trade balances .
 The word ""Economic"" was deleted from both the treaty and the community . The Maastricht Treaty was signed in 1992 . The treaty was popularly known as the European Economic Community .
 By 2000, the Europe an Union was composed of various economic, political, and judicial institutions including the E urope an C entral B ank . The Euro was a unified Europe an currency, the Euro .
 Nazi vision of a united Europe appeared to signal success for the emerging Fourth Reich . But nothing showed more success than the seeds that had been sown in the postwar U.S.
 FDR Democrats looked favorably on federal social and economic controls . FDR Democrats were firmly in the pocket of the global corporate elite . Harry S Truman was never fully under their command .
 The real problem lay with the R epublicans, longtime supporters of less government and more economic freedom, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 One willing accomplice of the globalist/Nazi nexus was an obscure Republican politician from California. One of the world's most prominent anti-globalist politicians is a Republican from California .
 When Truman was reelected in 1948, N. Nixon became Allen Dulles's mouthpiece in Congress . According to authors J ohn Loftus and Mark Aarons, .
 Nixon joined the Council on Foreign Relations in 1961 but resigned in 1965 after his membership became a campaign issue . He got an initial boost to his political career by befriending a Nazi named Nicolae Malaxa . Nixon was elected president in 1964 .
 Malaxa belonged to Baron Otto von Bolschwing's Gestapo network . His business partner was a former business partner of Nazi Luftwaffe chief Hermann Goering .
 Both were members of the Nazi Iron Guard in Romania and had fled prosecution for their role in the deaths of manyj ews . Both fled prosecution in Romania for their roles in the Holocaust .
 Their common interest was in Richard Nixon, who was elected vice president in 1952 . The two men had a common interest in Nixon's work in Washington .
 In late 1946, Nixon's influence, along with that of the Dulles brothers, freed Malaxa's money frozen in Chase National Bank during the war . The money was freed in late 1946 .
 Treasury Department official won Malaxa's case to release the money was the same man who froze these assets in the first place . Treasury Department's official won the case to free the money from the company's assets .
 Malaxa had escaped from Europe with more than $200 million in U.S. dollars . The escapee had escaped with over $200million from Europe .
 In America, following the retrieval of his frozen assets, Malaxa gained another $200 million from Chase Manhattan Bank . The bank also recovered $200million from the bank .
 The legalities were handled by the Dulles brothers' law firm, Sullivan and Cromwell . The Dulles' legal team handled the legalities .
 A company called Western Tube was another effort to further help Malaxa . Western Tube is also a company that has been trying to help the company . The company is now working with the government to find a solution to the problem .
 In 1951, Nixon introduced a private bill in Congress that would have allowed Malaxa to remain in the U.S. despite provisions of the Displaced Persons Act, which prohibited persons with Fascist backgrounds . The bill was introduced by Nixon in 1951 .
 Malaxa pretended to create Western Tube, a seamless tube that he claimed was vital to the Korean War effort . When this effort failed, he pretended to have created Western Tube . He claimed to have made the seamless tube for the Korean war effort .
 Nixon set up his company in his hometown of Whittier, California, and registered it in the same building as the law firm of Bewley, Kroop & Nixon . Loftus and Aarons reported, ""H e set up . company in N ixon's hometown
 $2 million fee Nixon received from Malaxa that funded his successful election campaign for Congress . Nixon received the fee from the firm that helped fund his successful congressional campaign .
 In 1952, Malaxa moved from Whittier to Argentina, where he joined Argentine dictator Peron and Hitler's chief commando Otto Skorzeny in profitable business dealings with the network .
 Elmer Holmes Bobst of WarnerLambert P harmaceutical, described as ""a mentor and father figure"" to N ixon, was a power behind Nixon's 1960 presidential campaign . Bobst was described as a mentor, father figure to Nixon .
 Bobst was a close associate of Otto von Bolschwing, head of the Gestapo network that included Malaxa and Trifia . Bobst worked for Otto von Bolschwwing, who was head of Gestapo . He was close associates of Bols
 To mask the wave of Nazis flooding into the U.S. and to gain tighter federal control over Americans, the prewar specter of the Communist Menace was resurrected . The prewar . Menace . was resurrected to mask the invasion of Nazi Germany .
 In 1953, half a million citizens of the German Democratic Republic staged a revolt against the E ast G erman regime . It was violently suppressed by troops and tanks .
 N o further large-scale demonstrations were to take place in East Germany until 1989, the year before the GDR ceased to exist .
 Three years later, P olish workers attempted their own rebellion against the C ommunist regime . Three years after the uprising, workers attempted a revolt against the government .
 Widespread violence only averted after China's MaoTse-tung convinced Russian Premier Nikita Khrushchev to allow Polish Communist Wladyslaw Gomulka to assume authority and institute reforms in Poland .
 In late October 1956, the people of Hungary spontaneously rose up against their Soviet occupiers . Many in response to broadcasts of support by the BBC, Radio Free Europe, and Voice of America .
 Hungarians unprepared for fullscale military assault on Budapest on November 4 . Put offguard by initial offers of compromise by the Russians, the Hungarians were unprepared for the assault .
 Thousands were killed and an estimated two hundred thousand fled the country . Thousands of people were killed in the fighting . Thousands fled the violence .
 This S oviet show of force maintained their control over central Europe . It also perpetuated the idea that Communism was monolithic and irresistible .
 KENNEDY and the NAZIS MOST AMERICAN LEADERS THROUGHOUT the COLD WAR COULD only see the danger of international communism .
 President Kennedy warned of the dangers of unnecessary secrecy and secret societies such as Skull and Bones and the Council on Foreign Relations .
 Kennedy was the first American president born in the twentieth century . He graduated from Harvard cum laude . He was one of the best educated Americans .
 The book that first made him a public figure was the bestseller Why E ngland S lept, a treatise on prewar British-German diplomacy .
 Kennedy had a keen understanding of geopolitics and behind-the-scenes machinations of the globalists . This work showed clearly that Kennedy had an interest in geopolitics . Kennedy's work shows clearly that he had an understanding of globalists' machinations behind the scenes .
 His political career may have come about because of his relationship with an alleged Nazi spy .
 Inga Arvad attended the wedding of Germany's Field Marshal Hermann Goering and met with Adolf Hitler . The former Danish Miss Denmark was suspected of being a Nazi spy . She met with Hitler at the wedding .
 Naval Ensign J ohn F Kennedy was one of her visitors . Ensign Kennedy was then a Naval Intelligence officer in Washington, D.C.
 In 1960, Richard Nixon was expected to be the next president of the United States . In 1960 he was seen as a rising star in Washington, DC .
 Kennedy was guided by his father, J oseph P Kennedy, a pro-Nazi sympathizer . Corporate heads and their Nazi backers must have been mollified to know that Kennedy was being guided by .
 In December 1961, J oseph Kennedy suffered a stroke that left him totally incapacitated . Kennedy suffered from a stroke in December 1961 . Kennedy died at the age of 65 .
 H is son now held the nation's highest office with no real control over him . He is now the president of the country .
 By mid-1963, Kennedy was beginning to exert his autonomous influence over the most powerful and violent groups in U.S. society .
 "Obviously, persons affected by these moves felt that something had to be done. Obviously, somebody had to . Something had to do," the mayor says .
 Today, most people agree that the assassination of P.A. Kennedy was the result of a conspiracy . The full details of the assassination are still not known due to a cover-up at the highest levels of government .
 It is fascinating to note that the connections between Kennedy's death and N aziconnected persons, groups, and firms are many .
 The CIA had passed hundreds of millions of dollars to the Nazi Gehlen Organization . The CIA has long been fingered as a major player in the assassination .
 Operatives such as future Watergate burglars E Howard Hunt and Frank Sturgis were involved . CIA officer Desmond FitzGerald was a CIA officer . Mobster J. ohnny Roselli was a Cuban minister .
 Rolando Cubela, David Ferrie, Carlos Bringuier, Orlando Bosch and Carlos Prio Soccaras all played roles in the CIA/intelligence mix surrounding the assassination of Fidel Castro .
 George DeMohrenschildt was the last known close friend to accused assassin Lee Harvey Oswald . But more pointedly, he began his intelligence career as a Nazi agent . He was a Dallas oil geologist who was also a Nazi .
 CIA document: DeMohrenschildt applied to work for U.S. intelligence as far back as 1942 . He was turned down because he was a Nazi espionage agent, CIA document says .
 Baron C onstantine M aydell was one of the top N azi intelligence agents in N orth America . He was later directed into the Gehlen Organization to direct the CIA's Russian emigre programs . Baron M onstantin was a cousin of Baron C ayd
 Oswald's other close associates in Dallas just prior to the assassination were Ruth and Michael Paine . Oswald was also close friends with Paine and Ruth . Paine was one of Oswald's closest associates .
 Dallas police found incriminating photos Oswald claimed they were fabricated of Oswald in Mrs. Oswald's home . Oswald claimed the photos were fabricated, but they were found in the home of his wife . Oswald's wife was also found to have incriminating photographs of Oswald .
 Payne's garage holds a rifle authorities identified as the assassination weapon . Payne held the rifle in his garage, authorities identified it as the rifle used in the assassination . Payne was shot in the head with a rifle believed to be the murder weapon .
 Her husband worked for Bell Aerospace Corporation in Hurst, Texas, later Bell Helicopter . P aperclip N azi Walter Dornberger was a vice president of P aPerclip .
 This document first appeared under the pen name of William Torbitt but was actually written by a Texas attorney named David Copeland . Copeland wrote the document under his pen name, but it was written by an attorney from Texas . The document was first published by Copeland under the pseudonym
 Copeland told this author he had received the information from friends in both the FBI and the Secret Service . Copeland said he received the news from friends of both FBI and Secret Service members .
 Torbitt/Copeland spent considerable effort searching for evidence to support the paper's thesis . Based on this information, the pair spent considerable time looking for evidence .
 Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation was in charge of NASA's Security Division and the Defense Industrial Security Command in his position as head of counterespionage activities in the U.S. Torbitt explained, 'The director of the FBI was in . charge of . NASA's
 His agents investigated every employee of the space agency as well as the employees of the pertinent contractors doing business with NASA . They also probed prospective employees of every arms and munitions manufacturer . His agents also investigated all of NASA's business partners .
 Bloomfield in directing activities of the munition-makers' police agency, the Defense Industrial Security Command . Bloomfield is the director of the agency, which oversees the defense industrial security command .
 North American won the NASA contract despite the fact that its own source evaluation board had recommended another company . The company won the contract despite being recommended by a NASA evaluation board .
 "It was not official, and it was not an American operation, but was simply the independent action taken by these men,"" he wrote .
 Torbitt's tale of a NASA conspiracy was supported by New Orleans District Attorney im Garrison, who was investigating the Kennedy assassination . Torbits' tale of NASA conspiracy supported by Garrison .
 Garrison telephoned magazine editor Warren H inkle to say, ""Important new evidence has surfaced. important new evidence" Garrison called the editor to say that new evidence had surfaced . Garrison was editor of the magazine in 1968 . Garrison died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound .
 P.A. resident Kennedy's murder appears to have been an oilman, not a Texas oilman . Kennedy was found dead in the early hours of his murder . The case is believed to be the first of many to be solved in Texas .
 As far as we can tell, the conspiracy was limited to the aerospace wing . It was the military-industrial complex that put up the money for the assassination, but as far as possible .
 Garrison attempted to subpoena the testimony of their employees . NASA refused to provide the testimony citing national security reasons of national security .
 Oswald had tried to defect to R. ussia and voiced hostility toward the U.S. A and its policies . Why Oswald thought he could go on to work for the nation's leading aerospace agency was never explained .
 According to the Torbitt document, this complex matrix of government agents, NASA employees, and Nazis was managed by Louis Mor-timer Bloomfield of Montreal, Canada . Bloomfield managed the complex matrix .
 Clay Shaw was a former OSS officer and founder of the city's International Trade Mart . He was charged with conspiracy to assassinate the president in 1967 . Shaw is a former member of the OSS, who was arrested in 1968 .
 The Trade Mart was connected with CMC through yet another shadowy firm named Permindex . PermIndex is also in the business of international expositions .
 Bloomfield held half of the shares of Permindex and was in total command of its operation in Europe and Africa as well as the North and South American continents . Torbitt: Bloomfield was in control of the company's European operation .
 The prince was a wealthy aristocrat who had been undersecretary of agriculture under Benito Mussolini . His daughter-in-law was related to Nazi minister of finance Hjalmar Schacht . Ferenc Nagy, former premier of Hungary and leading anticommunist
 The Italian media reported that Nagy was president of Permindex, and the board chairman and major stockholder was Louis Mortimer Bloomfield, a powerful Montreal lawyer . Bloomfield represented the Bronfman family as well as serving United States intelligence services .
 C entro M ondiale C ommerciale and its companion company P ermindex were expelled in 1962 for subversive activities . Both firms were found guilty of similar activities to those in the P ropaganda-2 M asonic Lodge scandal of the Reagan years .
 Today it is clear that C lay S haw was tightly connected to the C lA and intelligence work . Despite denials at the time of the G arrison investigation, he denials that he was involved .
 Shaw worked for the U.S. Army during World War II . Shaw worked as aidedecamp to General Charles 0.0. Shaw . Shaw also worked as an aide to General 0.1 .
 Thrasher was a liaison officer to the headquarters of Winston Churchill . He served as a liaison to Churchill's headquarters .
 At the time of his arrest in New Orleans by Garrison, Shaw's personal address book was taken . Garrison took Shaw's address book and took it to New Orleans .
 It revealed the names and contact information of important Europeans, many of them pro-Nazi royalty or Bilderberg members . It also revealed the contact information .
 SS Obergruppenfuehrer Karl Wolff had headed the Gestapo in Italy . Wolff was also a member of the SS . He had been a Nazi collaborator in Italy and was linked to Hitler .
 Wolff was sentenced to four years' imprisonment after the war but served only a week . As part of Allen Dulles's hidetheNazi program, Wolff served as part of a week in prison . Wolff is believed to have been a Nazi collaborator .
 The boat then belonged to Goering's widow, Emmy, whose estate attorney was the celebrated Melvin Belli . Emmy's estate attorney, the celebrated Belli, was the son of Goering, who died in 1966 .
 Belli represented the Naziconnected actor Errol Flynn, as well as J ack Ruby, the man who shot Lee Harvey Oswald . Belli also represented the man behind the shooting of Oswald .
 A letter smuggled out of Dallas CountyJ ail and later bought by earlyj FK assassination researcher Penn J ones . Even odder is a letter smuggled from the Dallas County Jail .
 Ruby pointed to Lyndon J ohnson as one of those behind Kennedy's death . Ruby said Lyndon Johnson was one of the those behind JFK's death. Ruby said Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 "They will know that only one kind of people that would do such a thing, that would have to be Nazis," he said .
 Perhaps Ruby was not as unhinged as he was portrayed in the media at the time . Considering J ohnson's close connections to the Nazi-riddled NASA .
 Streikher was quoted as saying, "One of the worst-kept secrets in the . history is the truth about the president's murder" Streikhers was on assignment in Africa in late 1963 .
 CNN's John Sutter says the CIA was complicit in the killing of Osama bin Laden . He says the intelligence apparatus that controls the way the world operates is complicit in that murder .
 No serious assassination researcher truly believes that Kennedy was killed solely by German Nazis . Kennedy was not killed by Nazis, but by Nazis .
 Men with Nazi connections were most opposed to Kennedy's policies . But, as previously reported, they were also members of secret societies . Kennedy was opposed to his policies by those who had Nazi connections .
 They also had the power and influence to affect such an assassination and certainly were capable of blocking any meaningful investigation . Right up to today, they still have the power to affect the assassination of President Obama .
 McCloy served as a high commissioner in Germany or as president of the World Bank . He did so as a servant of the ruling elite, McCloy says . McCloy was a member of the so-called Warren Commission .
 H is most extensive ties to that elite were to various R ockefeller family interests . He is most likely to have ties to the elite in his life .
 The Kennedy Presidency was at loggerheads with the Wall Street E stablishment, those same globalist financiers who first promoted communism and then N. ational Socialism . Gibson made a cogent argument that the primary factor behind the FK assassination was that he was . at logger
 Citicorp was directly tied to 49 top companies . Chase Manhattan, Chemical Bank, and Metropolitan Life each had 24 other top companies represented on their boards .
 Rostow discussed this with at least one unidentified person in the minutes immediately following Oswald's death . Rostow and Alsop applied pressure to LBJ less than 24 hours later. Rostow talked about the situation with an unidentified person .
 Gibson concluded the Warren Commission was an operation of private power based in the East Coast Establishment . Gibson concluded that the cover-up was essentially an operation based on private power .
 The inner-core U.S. establishment was filled with supporters of N. ational Socialism, just as they had supported communism before that . And, as has been seen, the inner-Core United States establishment was full of supporters of socialism .
 World socialism broken into three economic blocs to be played against each other for profit and control . This global elite was working to lay the groundwork for their New World Order .
 With the assassination of 1963 and its subsequent cover-up, the globalists had finally gained a new empire, a Fourth Reich . The globalists, who first created communism and then National Socialism, first created Communism and then N.S. Germany, have finally gained control of the world
 The Nazlflcatlon of the U.S. moved ahead largely unhindered . The White House was built on the strength of the Reich, American-American style .
 During the J ohnson years, the president was surrounded by a coterie of advisers, collectively known as his ""wise men" The president is surrounded by his 'wise men'
 McCloy, Averell Harriman, Dean Rusk, William Bundy, Dean Acheson, George F Kennan, and Robert A. Lovett .
 Few people were aware of the growing power and influence of the military and the immense war machine assembled behind it . The war machine was assembled behind the Vietnam War .
 It was designed to suck tax dollars from the public treasury, centralize power in the government and its corporate sponsors, and spread the new Reich's influence across the globe . "The Reich" was built on the idea of centralizing power in government and corporate sponsors .
 Under the banner of freedom and democracy, the U.S. pursued the agenda of the globalists who supported the Nazis . The United States slowly turned from one of the most admired nations in the world to one of its most despised .
 The result of America's empire-building national policy has been dismal at best and catastrophic at worst . The result is a failure at best at worst, and the result is catastrophic .
 This brought the shah to power, with the monarchy assuming complete control in 1963, and turning Iran into a client state of the U.S. The shah turned Iran into an ally of the United States .
 Thousands of Iranians, perhaps millions, died during tine repressive rule of the shah and his brutal SAVAK secret police . The shah ruled Iran during the 1970s and 1980s .
 The shah was forced out in 1979 by the Ayatollah Khomeini, who quickly became tine United States' latest foreign enemy . Despite the fact that he had been on tine CIA payroll while in Paris, the shah had been forced out of the U.S
 The shah was granted asylum in the United States . A medieval version of Islam took control of Iran in 2007 . Iran was again a targeted enemy .
 Prominent American government officials such as former CIA director Walter Bedell Smitli, then CIA director Allen Dulles, Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs] ohn Moors Cabot, and secretary of State J ohn Foster Dulles were all closely connected to United Fruit
 Guatemalan peasants died in the resulting military dictatorships . An estimated 120,000 peasants died during the military dictatorship .
 CIA organized anti-Castro Cubans, which resulted in numerous attacks on Cuba and failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in 1961 . Castro was labeled a communist by the CIA, and the CIA organized numerous attacks against Cuba .
 The island nation has been the object of United States economic sanctions since tliat time . The U.S. has imposed sanctions on the island nation .
 The troops were ostensibly sent to prevent a communist takeover . But later it was admitted that tliere had been no proof of such an attempt .
 Two years later, U.S. troop strength in Vietnam had grown to 380,000, and soon after climbed to more than 500,000 . Two years after the war, the number of American troops in Vietnam was more than half a million .
 U.S. dead by the end of that Asian wartotaled some 58,000, with casualties to the Vietnamese, both North and South, running into the millions . United States dead by end of Vietnam War, Vietnam war .
 Allende was killed, and some 30,000 persons died in subsequent violence and repression, including some Americans . Allende's death was the result of subsequent violence, repression and repression .
 Chile was brought back into the sphere of influence of the United States . Chile remained a military dictatorship for the next two decades . Chile was re-exposed to the U.S.
 CIA-backed Contra insurgents operating from Honduras fought a protracted war to oust the Ortega government . An estimated 30,000 people died in the long-running war to overthrow the government .
 IranContra involved persons connected to the National Security Council selling arms to Iran, then using the profits to buy drugs in support of the C ontras . The ensuing struggle came to include such shady dealing in arms and drugs that it created a scandal .
 M arines landed in Lebanon in an attempt to prevent further bloodshed between occupying Israeli troops and the Palestine Liberation Organization . The landings were part of a peace deal between Israel and the Palestinians .
 Thousands died in the resulting civil war, including hundreds of Palestinians massacred in refugee camps by rightwing Christian forces . Ariel Sharon, then Israeli general, looked on with apparent approval .
 Despite the destruction of Beirut, American forces were withdrawn in 1984 after a series of bloody attacks on them . Despite the battleship shelling of Beirut and the destruction, the U.S. withdrew in 1984 .
 More than two decades later, the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians remains as intractable and deadly as ever . In large part due to the virtually unconditional support of Israel by the United States, which has been sustained by the Israel lobby .
 The official explanation was to rescue a handful of American students who initially said they did not need rescuing . Officials say they rescued the students after they said they didn't want to be rescued .
 The only real damage inflicted in this tiny war was to a mental-health hospital partly owned by a White House physician . The hospital is widely reported to be a CIA facility, possibly used for mindcontrol experiments .
 In 1981, it was claimed that Qaddafi had sent hit teams to the United States to assassinate President Reagan . In 1986, following the withdrawal of U.S. oil companies from Libya, an air attack was launched, which missed Qaddafi but killed several people .
 Bush sent United States troops to invade that C entral American nation to arrest onetime ally, M anuel N oriega . Bush sent U.S. troops to arrest that C.E. A.N.G. American nation .
 The excuse was that the P anamanian dictator was involved in the importation of drugs to the U.S. The excuse is that he was trying to stop the drug importation .
 U.S. News & World Report noted that a year later, the amount of drugs moving through Panama had doubled . The amount of drug traffic through Panama has doubled .
 More than a million Iraqis, including women and children, have died as a result of the continued missile and air attacks not including those killed since 2003 .
 The U.S. fomented and backed the toppling of the democratically elected president in 2004 . Once again in 2004, the United States backed a coup and replaced him with an unelected gang of militarists .
 Other nations that have felt the brunt of C lA and/or U.S. military activity as a result of globalist foreign policy include Somalia, Afghanistan, Serbia, Kosovo, Bosnia, Brazil, Chad, Sudan and many others .
 Liddy had named the Watergate ""plumbers"" afl:er that vast secretive organization that helped N azis escape both E urope and justice . Liddy called the Watergate "plumbers" Liddy said the Watergate 'plumbers' were the group that helped the N
 Nixon officials included] ohn Ehrlichman, Egil Krogh, Donald Santarelli, and Robert Mardian . The Nixon administration was in charge of Nixon administration .
 With Nixon's resignation in August 1974, the U.S. entered a period of further turmoil . The United States entered a turbulent period of turmoil .
 The Church Committee uncovered conspiracies, including assassination plots within the CIA . Recriminations started following the loss in Vietnam, following the defeat .
 Gerald Ford, a Republican insider, had been appointed vice president with the resignation of Spiro Agnew, who was under indictment for tax evasion . Gerald Ford had been chosen to replace Agnew . Ford was named vice president in 1973 .
 At the time, most people could not understand B ush's appointment, having forgotten that his N aziconnected grandfather had been a politician .
 They created an outgrowth of the old Council on Foreign Relations called the Trilateral Commission . The Commission was created by the old council on foreign relations . They created a new body of international relations .
 The Trilateral Commission was brought to David Rockefeller in the early 1970s by Zbigniew B rzezinski, then head of the R ussian studies department at C olumbia U niversity . The concept was first conceived by David Rockefeller, then David Rockefeller .
 While at the Brookings Institution, B rzezinski had been researching the need for closer cooperation between the trilateral nations of E urope, N orth America, and Asia .
 H e saw this larger community being funded by ""a global taxation system,"" similar to one that is now being proposed in the U.N. He said he saw a global tax system similar to that proposed by the United Nations .
 Brzezinski's plan for a commission of trilateral nations was first presented during a meeting of ultrasecret B ilderberg G roup in April 1972, in the small B elgian town of Knokke . The plan was presented at the meeting of the ultr
 The Trilateral Commission was officially founded on J uly 1, 1973, with David Rockefeller as chairman . David Rockefeller was chairman of the Commission . The Commission was founded in 1973 .
 North American members included Georgia governor immy Carter, United States Congressman J ohn B Anderson . Time Inc. editor in chief Hedley Donovan was also a member .
 Foreign founding members included Reginald Maudling, Lord Eric Roll, Alistair Burnet, FIAT president Giovanni Agnelli, and French vice president of Commission of Europe an Communities Raymond Barre .
 Even the establishmentoriented media expressed uneasiness over the preponderance ofTrilaterals in government in early 1977 .
 Cyrus R Vance, Harold Brown and W Michael Blumenthal are the new secretaries of state, defense and treasury . They will be the new treasury secretaries, defense, treasury and treasury secretaries .
 Carter, Mondale, and Brzezinski captured the three most powerful positions in the land . The odds of capturing the presidency were not calculated .
 The Rockefeller-dominated Trilateral Commission failed to satisfy the globalists . Despite being a creation of the Rockefeller-backed Trilateral commission, it failed to meet their aims .
 The mass media were already focusing on conservative C alifornia government R onald R eagan as the man of the hour .
 Reagan's nomination as GOP presidential candidate for the 1980 election seemed assured . Reagan was nominated for the White House in 1980s . Reagan ran for the presidency in the 1980s.
 C arter asked for and was granted a national television spot during prime time . Many media pundits predicted that he was about to announce changes in government as well as initiatives .
 Carter traveled to California to address a Hispanic crowd celebrating C inco de M ayo, the day the M exicans defeated the French Army in 1862 . Carter was to speak at the Los Angeles C ivic C enter M enter M all celebrating .
 A few days later, a handful of newspapers carried a small story stating that a ""grubby transient"" had been arrested there and was being held on suspicion of the attempted assassination of the president . The story was carried out by a few days after .
 The suspect is being held in lieu of $50,000 on charges of conspiring to kill the president . However, a few days later, another news item appeared, which reported that the suspect was being held . The suspect was arrested on suspicion of conspiracy to kill president .
 Newsweek revealed more details of the incident in a one-time story in May 1979 .
 A .22, eight-shot revolver was found on the man along with seventy rounds of blank ammunition . The man was also found with a .22 revolver and a revolver .
 A short time later, the suspect implicated a second man, a twenty-one-year-old Hispanic, who also was taken into custody . The suspect is being held in lieu of $100,000 bail .
 The second suspect at first denied knowing the other man, but finally admitted that the pair had test-fired the blank starter pistol from a nearby hotel roof the night before Carter's appearance . Carter was arrested on suspicion of attempted murder .
 Both men said they were simply local street people hired by two hit men who had come up from Mexico . Both men say they were hired by hit men from Mexico who came up from the country .
 Both suspects led authorities to a shabby Alan H otel located near the civic center . They were to create a diversion with the blank pistol, and the two hit men were to assassinate President Carter with high-powered rifles .
 Investigators found an empty rifle case and three rounds of live ammunition in a room rented under the name U mberto C. C amacho . Investigators found the room had been rented under a name Umberto C . amacho.
 The Anglo suspect's name was Raymond Lee Harvey and his Hispanic companion was Osvaldo Ortiz . The suspect's identity was Raymond Harvey and the Hispanic companion, Osvald Ortiz .
 The disposition of the case against Lee Harvey and Osvaldo apparently has never been made public . No further news stories appeared, and the case was never revealed .
 A recent search of the federal prisoner database indicated no such persons are currently incarcerated . No such persons were currently incarcerated, a recent search indicated .
 He canceled national TV speech and went into seclusion at C amp David . He canceled his national TV appearance and went to seclusion .
 By midNovember the United States took a conservative turn and elected Republican Ronald Reagan . Reagan was elected president of the U.S. in November 1981 .
 Reagan's victory was due, in large part, to a failed military attempt to rescue U.S. hostages held by Iranian radicals . The failure of negotiations regarding their release in mid-October 1980 led to the collapse of negotiations .
 President Reagan stocked his administrations with current and former members of globalist groups, the very people he had criticized while campaigning . Former General Electric spokesman for General Electric Company .
 During the 1980 presidential campaigns, Reagan verbally attacked the nineteen Trilateralals in the C.A. administration . Reagan vowed to investigate the group if elected . The group was the subject of numerous investigations .
 Reagan lambasted Bush's membership in both the Trilateral Commission and the CFR . Reagan pledged not to give Bush a position in a Reagan government . Bush was nominated for the nomination by President Bush .
 The Republican National Convention is held in New York City, New York, on Tuesday night . The convention is scheduled to take place in the U.S. state of New York .
 With Reagan secured as the presidential candidate, there was a contentious fight to see who would be vice president . Reagan was defeated by Reagan in the 1980s .
 President Reagan and Vice President Gerald F. F. Ordered to be a 'dream ticket' to be composed of Reagan and F. Ford Ford . Reagan and Ford were elected to the White House in 1964 .
 It was even suggested that since F ord had been president, he should choose half of the R eagan cabinet .
 F or one brief moment, the power of those who control the corporate mass media was revealed . The power of the corporate media has been revealed in this moment .
 Reagan never again uttered a word against the globalist groups such as the Trilateral Commission and the Council on Foreign Relations . Reagan was never more critical of the groups .
 Reagan's transition team was composed of twenty-eight Council on Foreign Relations members, ten members of the elite Bilderberg Group, and at least ten of the Trilateral C ommission members . Reagan's election team was made up of at least fifty-nine members of his transition
 H e appointed prominent C F R members to three of the nation's most sensitive offices Secretary of State Alexander Haig, Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger, and Secretary of the Treasury Donald Regan . H e even appointed prominent members of the party to key positions .
 Bush named Bush's campaign manager ames A Baker III, who then served as a chairman of the R eagan-B ush campaign committee, as his chief of staff . Baker was Bush's former campaign manager .
 B aker is a fourthgeneration member of a family long connected to Rockefeller oil interests . He is the fourth generation of a fourth generation member of the Rockefeller oil family .
 After Reagan won in November, it was alleged that Bush, along with CIA Director William Casey, had privately cut a deal with Iranian leaders to hold American hostages until after the election, thus assuring a Reagan victory .
 Later testimony confirming this ""October surprise"" came from several people involved, including R ichard B renneke and H einrich R upp, who claimed to have flown C asey to a meeting with the Iranians .
 Brenneke was tried for perjury but found not guilty of perjury . Because of his damaging testimony, he testified against the government . He was convicted of perjury, but not perjury, in 2010 .
 Despite this verdict, no action was taken by the Reagan-Bush administration, thanks primarily to debunking by a House Task Force led by Congressman Lee Hamilton . Hamilton, the same man Bush's son would name to cochair his 9/11 Commission in late 2002 .
 Claims of this ""October surprise"" conspiracy were further supported by the fact that just minutes after Reagan was sworn into office, American hostages were released . Within weeks, military supplies that Carter had withheld from Iran began moving to that nation .
 President Reagan was shot by would-be assassin Hinckley just two months after taking office in 1981 . His brother had scheduled dinner with Neil Bush the very day he was shot . Hinckly exhibited the symptoms of brainwashing .
 For many weeks, while many Americans prayed for Reagan's recovery, the son of Prescott Bush ran the nation . Reagan's son ran the country for many weeks .
 Bush had exerted his influence to have Alexander Haig appointed secretary of state . Only days before the attempted assassination of Reagan had named Haig to head a special emergency preparedness committee .
 Haig, a ranking globalist member of the Council on Foreign Relations, was N ixon's chief of staff from 1973 to 1974 . Haig was a ranking member of a globalist globalist .
 Bush's name and phone number were found in the personal notebook of oil geologist George De-Mohrenschildt, the last known close friend of Lee H arvey Oswald . It should also be noted that Bush including his then littlepublicized nickname ""Poppy"
 Some saw Hinckley's action as an attempt to bring Bush to power eight years before he was elected president . Some thought it was a bid to bring the Bush presidency to power .
 "Constitution stuff is pushed aside once they declare national emergencies," says Obama . "What they don't understand is all that constitution stuff ... pushed aside," Obama says .
 Constitutionally, the next in line in the order of succession is the vice president, the speaker of the House, the Senate president pro tempore, then the secretary of state . The next in order is the speaker, the House speaker, and then the Secretary of State .
 He was eventually brought to court and declared not guilty by reason of insanity for the assassination attempt . He was later brought back to court .
 Bush was virtually unassailable, due to his hidden but powerful support base . Bush's hidden support base was key to his success in the Bush administration .
 Bush's network of friends in high places helped him defend his actions . Bush's defense was an impressive network of high places, including his friends .
 Reagan laid a wreath at a cemetery in Bittburg, Germany, where many Nazi SS officers were buried . Reagan administration may have been under influence of fascists .
 Reagan followed through with his plan to honor war dead . Veterans organizations and J.Ewish groups raised concerns about the visit .
 In his remarks, he placed the blame for Nazi atrocities on ""the awful evil of one man,"" an obvious reference to Hitler .
 This effort to foist off all the blame for N azism onto one person was perhaps an indication of the influence of pro-N azi elements within his party . This is perhaps a sign that pro-nazi elements within the party are in power, he said .
 Weyrich garnered large support by appealing to Christian fundamentalists and anticommunists . He appealed to Christians, anti-communists and anti-Russian .
 Pasztor built up the GOP emigre network and was founding chairman of the Republican Heritage Groups Council . Paszor built up a GOP network of emigres in America .
 Pasztor reportedly belonged to the Hungarian Arrow Cross, a group that helped liquidate J ews there during the war . Paszter reportedly served as a member of the Arrow Cross .
 The authors quote Nixon as telling J ohn Ehrlichman, "Eliminate everyone except George Bush" Nixon told Ehrichman to eliminate everyone except Bush . The authors say Nixon told John E. ohn .
 Bush fulfilled Nixon's pledge to make emigres with Nazi backgrounds a permanent part of Republican politics . Indeed, it was the elder Bush .
 Galdau was a supporter of Valerian Trifa, convicted of war crimes when he headed the Romanian Iron Guard in Bucharest . He supported the convicted war crimes of Trifa during his time in the Iron Guard .
 As a ranking member of the Ukrainian Congress Committee of America, Fedorak lobbied Congress trying to stop J.U.S. prosecutions of pro-Nazi Ukrainian war criminals . He lobbied Congress .
 Nazis and J ewish-haters were involved in the coalition supporting Bush's Republican campaign in 1988 .
 At least four of those mentioned by name were forced to resign from their posts .
 Online J ournal reporter Caria Binion wondered aloud if Reagan, Bush, or Reagan's CIA director William Casey realized they were being aided and supported by Nazis and Nazi collaborators .
 Nearly two thousand Nazi and Fascist Individuals entered the United States under Official Auspices recently released by the National Archives after being locked away for years .
 Peter Levenda also has studied the connection between old Nazis and ranking Republicans . Levenda: The connection between Nazis and Republicans is important to the GOP .
 He wrote that we cannot, of course, hold former President Bush responsible for the sins of his father; nor can we hold his son responsible .
 We can expect a higher degree of moral responsibility in their actions as men and as political leaders . Yet, we can expect them to be responsible for their actions, he says .
 Levenda wrote about a streak of anti-S emitism in the globalist individuals and companies that supported H itIer and continued to support N azism even after the war . Levenda stated that the entire racial theory of Nazism was a comfortable environment for these men .
 The minions of the fascist globalists took steps to change the power structure of America . Americans were lulled into a false sense of security during the Reagan years .
 Bush was in virtual command of the White House during Reagan's hospitalization and recuperation . Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld were conspicuously absent at least once a year in the 1980s .
 C heney and Rummfeld traveled to Andrews Air Force Base, usually in the middle of the night . From there, they would proceed to a remote location in the United States, such as a decommissioned military base or underground bunker .
 "Cheney was working diligently on Capitol Hill as a congressman rising through the ranks of the Republican leadership," according to Mann . Mann reported that, ""Cheney worked diligently" in Washington, DC .
 He dedicated time to the success of such commercial products as NutraSweet, Equal, and Metamucil . Searle and Company, he dedicated .
 No one in C ongress knew where C heney was, nor could anyone at Searle locate Rumsfeld . Yet for periods of three or four days at a time no one knew where he was at the time .
 C heney and R umsfeld were involved in one of the most highly classified programs of the R eagan administration . The program called for setting aside legal rules for presidential succession .
 This ""continuity of government"" program was created by a secret executive order from Reagan . Reagan created the program with a secret order .
 Mann: "One of the awkward questions we faced was whether to reconstitute Congress after a nuclear attack" Mann: One of the program's participants told him that one of the questions was whether Congress should be reconstituted after a nuke attack .
 It had its own building in the Washington area, run by a two-star general, and a secret budget adding up to hundreds of millions of dollars a year . The secret budget was added to a secret building in Washington area .
 Members of the Reagan program rejoiced when George W. Bush was elected president in 1988 .
 Bush wouldn't need to be initiated into its intricacies and probably wouldn't reevaluate it . Bush would probably not reevaluate the issue .
 The elder Bush gained his own time in the White House in 1988, but it was limited to one term due to the controversies and conspiracies swirling about him . His father's pro-N azi background was behind the pro-democracy movement .
 In 1949, Gorge moved from his ancestral home in Connecticut to the more receptive envirirals of Texas . It was to escape this heritage that, in 1949, young Gorge had moved from Connecticut to Texas .
 During the C linton administration, those who knew about the ""continuity of government"" plan considered it an outdated relic . The plan was considered outdated by some .
 Cheney told President Bush to delay his planned flight back from Florida, Mann reported . Rumsfeld instructed Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz to leave Washington for the safety of one of the underground bunkers .
 Of course, there was no mention of the Naziconnected globalists who had inspired it . Of course there were no mention .
 They stayed in touch with defense, military, and intelligence officials, who regularly called upon them . They stayed with defense and military officials .
 Former navy pilot during World War II and failed artist like his hero, Adolf Hitler, saw the telltale signs of conspiracy abroad in America . Rockwell attributed it to ""international communism"" coupled with the anti-S emitic view of a worldwide] ewish conspiracy .
 He formed various National Socialist political organizations and made headlines trying to conduct public rallies in various places . Made headlines in the 1930s and '60s .
 R ockwell, as well as the more recent N azi skinheads, merely served to focus public attention on fringe elements of society and away from the military-industrial empire being created .
 The U.S. has long been governed by men connected to secret societies such as the Council on F oreign R elations and the Trilateral C ommission . The Bavarian llluminati and Freemasonry have long been involved in secret societies like Freemasonry .
 These groups can, in turn, be traced back to even earlier societies, such as the Knights Templar and Rosicrucians . These groups all had a particular interest in alchemy and the occult .
 Whether or not the infamous llluminati still exists, its credo ""the end justifies the means"" lives on in the hearts of the corporate owners of today globalists who value the blending of state and corporate power .
 Bilderberg is a secret group of powerful men and women, many of Europe an royalty, who meet in secret each year to discuss the issues of the day .
 The Bilderberg Group is composed of the inner-core elite of the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission . Founded by Prince Bernhard, the group was formed by the Prince of the Netherlands . The group was founded by Prince of Germany .
 Dutch prince Bernhard full name Bernhard J ulius Coert Karel Karel God-fried Pieter, prince of the Netherlands and of Lippe-Biesterfeld was the primary impetus for the Bilderberg meetings .
 In 1937, he married Princess uliana of the Netherlands and became a major shareholder and officer in Dutch Shell Oil, along with Britain's Lord Victor Rothschild . Lord Rothschild was also major shareholder of Dutch Shell oil .
 Bilderberg began as unofficial meetings between members of Europe's wealthy elite . J oseph Hieronim Retinger encouraged Prince Bernhard to create the group . Retinger created the group after he was forced to give up his job as a top Nazi .
 The official creation of this highly secret organization came about in the early 1950s, following discussions between Prince Bernhard and Dr. Dr. Martin Bernhard . Dr. Bernhard created the organization after discussions between the Prince and Prince .
 R etinger was brought to America by Averell H arriman just after the war, when he was U.S. ambassador to England . He brought him to America just after war .
 In America, Retinger visited prominent citizens, such as David and Nelson R ockefeller, and J ohn F oster Dulles, and then C lA director Walter B edell S mith, all men with close connections to the Nazis . Retinger also visited prominent
 P reviously, R etinger had formed the American C ommittee on the U nited E urope, working alongside future C lA director and C F R member Allen Dulles, then C F  R director Gorge F ranklin, and former O
 "Anglophile" was a supporter of close BritishAmerican relations . He was known as an "anglophile,"" supporter of British American relations .
 Retinger continued his participation in Bilderberg meetings until his death in 1960 . Retinger died in 1960 at the age of 65 . He continued to attend meetings until he died .
 In 1991, then Arkansas governor Bill Clinton was honored as a Bilderberg guest . The next year he ran for and won the presidency of the U.S.
 After his election, Clinton made no mention of the Bilderberg meetings . After his presidency, Clinton said he would not attend the meetings .
 Hillary Clinton attended a meeting in 1997, becoming the first American first lady to attend such a meeting . Hillary Clinton was the first first lady in the U.S. to attend a meeting with other first ladies in 1997 .
 By 2008 she was a leading Democratic presidential candidate . Thereafter, talk grew about her future role in politics .
 President Clinton's treasury secretary Robert E Rubin was named to head Clinton's National Economic Council . Rubin was a former cochairman of Goldman Sachs, a former Goldman Sachs co-founder .
 Goldman Sachs and other investment banks were paid many millions of dollars to arrange these deals . Goldman Sachs was paid millions to arrange deals .
 Goldman Sachs earned $10 million arranging U.S. Steel's 1982 buyout of Marathon Oil . For example, Goldman Sachs arranged United States Steel's 1981 buyout .
 In 2007, Rubin was vice chairman of the board of directors of the Council on Foreign Relations . Rubin is a former vice-chair of the council on foreign relations .
 Conspiracy theorists have spoken out about hidden control in the world . NOT J UST FRINGE conspiracy theorists speak out against hidden world control .
 President Woodrow Wilson, who was intimately connected with conspiratorial power, once wrote, "Some of the biggest men in the United States, in the field of commerce and manufacture, are afraid of somebody" Wilson .
 P routy was a liaison officer between the P entagon and the C lA in the 1960s . He was able to witness the control mechanisms over intelligence and military .
 P routy said the U.S. is run by a ""secret team, ""answerable only to themselves" The United States has a "secret team," he said .
 Their power is derived from their vast covert intragovernmental infrastructure and connections with private industries, mutual funds, investment houses, universities, and the news media, including foreign and domestic publishing houses . The U.S. government has a vast covert infrastructure and its direct connections to private industries
 P routy would have been horrified to learn that this ""secret team"" might include N azis brought into the military-industrial complex after the war . P routs would have be horrified to hear that this 'secret team' might include .
 President Truman's choice for America's first secretary of defense, J ames V Forrestal, was intimately connected with the globalists . Forrestal was the man President Truman picked to be the first secretary-of-defense . President Truman also picked Forrestal for the job .
 They do not make mistakes that favor the best interests of the U.S. people, they say . President Obama has been accused of making a mistake that favors the interests of his country .
 George W Bush administration took a tougher stance toward Russia . The Bush administration has taken a tough stance on the Russian Federation .
 Following the collapse of Communism, there was a splendid opportunity to create new friendship and working arrangements with the eighty-six political entities that comprise the new Russian Federation .
 Russia has been presented as a potential enemy following the arrival of the Bush administration and the attacks of 9/11 . The U.S. has provoked hostility there by aggressive diplomatic and military maneuvers .
 NATO "planted NATO right on Mother Russia's front porch," says President Obama . "Not only did we bring Poland into NATO, we brought in Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia," he says .
 Others saw America's reaction to Russia's peace overtures as nothing less than aggression . Others saw it as a continuation of the National Socialist agenda of destroying the old Soviet Union .
 It was Bush's America, not Russia, that withdrew from the antiballistic missile treaty . The move reminded some of the USSR's Cold War-era public pledge never to be the first to use nuclear weapons .
 In mid-2007, Vladimir Putin chastised the United States in a major press conference . Putin said the U.S. actions prompted federation president Vladimir Putin to chastise Russia in a press conference.
 Putin's reasoned remarks were little reported in the corporate-controlled U.S. mass media . Putin's remarks are little reported by the mass media in the United States .
 Bush's announced advocacy of an American first-strike nuclear capability . Bush's proposed ""missile defense"" system will be placed in Europe, despite defending as a deterrent to rogue nations such as North Korea .
 Thomas C Schelling of Harvard shifted rhetoric from ""deterrence" to ""compellence,"" a newspeak term for blackmailing nations into submission through the threat of nuclear weapons . Schelling was an advocate of the United States Mutual Assured Destruction C old War strategy .
 Republicans set out on a new ""neoconservative"" path for the party . Following the tempestuous Clinton administration, Republicans took power .
 The grandson of financier Prescott Bush, Nixon cronies, or the neoconservatives have shown sympathy for National Socialist ideals . NOT ONLY the grandson of Prescott Bush or the son-of-the-grandson of Nixon and Bush cronies .
 Austrian-born former bodybuilder turned actor turned governor of California . Arnold Schwarzenegger has a background of pro-Nazi statements and friends .
 "I admire him for being such a good public speaker and for what he did with it," she says of Obama . She says she admires him for his public speaking skills .
 H is admiration for H itier may have come from sitting at his father's knee . H is an admirer of his father, who died in 2011 .
 In 1938, H itier's N azis took control of Austria in an Anschluss, unifying that country with Germany . Austria was taken over by the Hier's government in 1938 .
 Arnold's father, Gustav, one year later joined Hitler's infamous Sturmabteilung storm troopers known as the Brown Shirts . Gustav's father was a member of Hitler's notorious Brown Shirt storm troopers .
 Schwarzenegger also caught flak because of his friendship with Kurt Waldheim, former secretary general of the United Nations . Waldheim lost the presidency of Austria in 1992 after his Nazi past was revealed .
 Schwarzenegger toasted Waldheim at his 1986 wedding to Maria Shriver by proclaiming, ""My friends don't want me to mention Kurt's name, because of all the recent Nazi stuff and the United Nations controversy," Schwarzenegger said . Schwarzenegger: "My friends [don't] want to mention
 Schwarzenegger has renounced Hitler and made hefty contributions to the Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles, named for the Nazi hunter . Schwarzenegger has since renounced his Nazi background and made contributions to a center named for Simon Wieselenthal .
 Americans have tried to distance themselves from their Nazi pasts . But the same concern did not apply to Nazi-developed ideals and substances . The substance was found in the United States .
 Nazi restrictions on scientific liberty were attendant to World War II restrictions . Guns, drugs, and other items were brought to America after WWII . Nazi science was brought back to the U.S. after the war .
 Since 1940, America's scientists have become faceless members of teams working under the auspices of the military-industrial complex or the corporate world . America's scientific community has been at risk since 1940 .
 Such tight inner control over scientific advances was reminiscent of the late-war Nazi SS control over technology in the Third Reich . Such tight control of scientific advances is reminiscent of Nazi control of technology .
 Hitler's Germany was not only the first nation to use or advance television, rocketry, and computers but also the first to build a national freeway system . It was also first to address occupational health issues, restrict the use of firearms, restrict firearms, attack use of alcohol and tobacco,
 Hier realized that he needed the support of his wealthy conservative followers, so he directed much of his public statements to them, particularly in the areas of rearmament and foreign policy .
 President Obama's social programs in many cases were a liberal's dream come true . B ut his social programs were in line with many of his liberal counterparts .
 Gun control was already widespread in pre-Nazi Europe unaccustomed to the freedom to bear arms . For example, gun control was widespread in a pre-Nigerian Europe .
 Anti-gun control advocates have long pointed out that it was an unarmed population that allowed the Nazis to both gain and maintain power .
 The Nazis used Weimar Republic's gun-control laws to restrict private armies such as Hitler's SA to keep the population disarmed . Ironically, the Nazis used the laws to disarm the population .
 Hitler was against keeping arms in the hands of citizens, especially conquered peoples . Hitler and his ilk were against keeping weapons in the people’s hands, especially those of conquered nations .
 History shows that all conquerors who have allowed their subject races to carry arms have prepared their own downfall by so doing . History shows how conquerors have prepared themselves by allowing their subjects to use arms .
 The Nazis were not content with the stringent gun laws already on the books . Still, the Nazis still wanted to keep guns in the hands of the Nazis .
 In 1938, they strengthened these laws by asserting that only loyal Nazis could own weapons . Only loyal Nazis were allowed to own weapons in 1938 .
 A group opposed to gun control says U.S. gun-control legislation is based on this Nazi law . A well-supported argument has been made by the group called .
 The 1928 law was enacted by a center-right, freely elected German government that wanted to curb 'gang activity,' violent street fights between Nazi party and Communist party thugs . The law was passed by the government in 1928 .
 The assassination of President J ohn F Kennedy precipitated a cry for gun control in the U.S. The corporate media went into high gear promoting this agenda .
 The idea languished until after the 1968 murders of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Yet, resistance was strong and the idea was never considered .
 Following these shocking deaths, the Gun Control Act of 1968 was passed in October of that year, after strenuous debate and compromise . The act was passed after a series of debates and compromises .
 Some conspiracy researcliers see tliis as a classic example of creating a problem, offering a draconian solution, and settling for a compromise that fulfills the original agenda .
 The gun legislation of 1968 stated only licensed dealers could send and receive firearms across state lines, thus ending mail-order sales . Only licensed dealers were allowed to send firearms across states lines .
 It also allowed bureaucrats in Washington to decide what types of firearms Americans could own . The decision was also decided by bureaucrats in the White House .
 The term ""sporting"" guns was not clearly defined, allowing whole classes of firearms to be banned . The term 'sporting' guns was also not defined .
 Dodd was a Democrat who lost to Republican Prescott Bush in a 1956 Senate election . Dodd gained the state's other Senate seat two years later . Dodd lost to Bush in the 1956 election but gained his seat in two years . Dodd was elected to the Senate in 1964 .
 Dodd served as a special agent for the FBI in the 1930s . Dodd had served as executive trial counsel for the Office of the U nited States C hief of C ounsel for the P rosecution of Axis C riminality at the war crimes trials at the end of
 It may have been during his time in N. uremberg that he became familiar with the Nazi gun laws .
 A letter from the Library of Congress to Dodd in 1968 showed that four months prior to his guncontrol legislation being passed, he received an English translation of the Nazi Weapons Law based on the original German law .
 Dodd won his father's seat in the Senate . Dodd is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations . Dodd, a Democrat, won his dad's Senate seat .
 The younger Dodd, a liberal, nevertheless took money from and lent considerable support to corporate miscreants like E nron and Arthur Andersen . Dodd's willingness to support the globalists indicates his willingness to back globalists, he says .
 Control of weapons was not the only item on the fascist globalist agenda . But control of weapons wasn't the only agenda on the agenda .
 Most do not know the extent of Rockefeller wealth and influence over modern medicine and drugs . Rockefeller control of oil, influence on modern medicine, drugs .
 Drug industry is controlled by a Rockefeller ""medical monopoly,"" largely through directors of pharmaceutical boards representing Chase Bank, Standard Oil, and other Rockefeller entities . The Story of the Medical Conspiracy Against America is published by David Frum .
 Dr. Winthrop Aldrich also served on the Committee on the Cost of Medical Care . Dr. Aldrich was a member of the Committee, which was originated by Dr. Richard Aldrich . Aldrich served as a physician .
 Other notable choices were Winthrop Aldrich, president of Chase National Bank; J ohn Frey, secretary-treasurer, AFL; William T Foster, director of Pollack Foundation in Economic Research; Olin West, M.D., executive secretary, AMA; and fifteen physicians
 F ive physicians from P ubiic H ealtli were cliosen, and tlie director of researcli for tine M ilbanl< IMemorial Fund .
 Representatives from insurance, liospital, nursing, nursing and pliarmacy sources were appointed . Six members from positions were appointed and six from positions .
 The full-time staff was headed by Harry H Moore of Washington . He published 'American Medicine and the People's Health' while a member of the Public Health Service .
 A minority of the committee recommended that government competition in the practice of medicine be discontinued . Smith noted that corporate medicine financed through intermediary agencies such as Health Maintenance Organizations should be opposed .
 Rockefeller control over the medical establishment also was exercised through the R ockefeller Sanitary Commission and the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research . Dr. Rockefeller control was also exercised .
 Mullins also pointed to the Nazi connections of GlaxoSmithKline . Mullins says the company is second-largest pharmaceutical company in the world after Pfizer .
 The history of the Big Pharm giant can also serve as an example of the consolidation of drug companies in recent years . The pharma giant is one of the biggest drug companies to have merged .
 Burroughs Wellcome & Company was founded in 1880 by two American pharmacists, Henry Wellcome and Silas Burrough's . The company was founded by Wellcome in 1880 .
 Glaxo, a New Zealand firm that originally manufactured baby food, went multinational in 935.935. The New Zealand company was founded in 1903 .
 Glaxo moved its facilities to the U.S. after the acquisition of other companies, including Meyer Laboratories, in the 1950s . After the acquisition, the company moved its operations to the United States .
 Smith, Kline and Company merged with the French, Richard and Company in 1929 . Smith Kline changed its name to Smith, French and French Laboratories in 1929. The company went on to be Smith, France and Kline .
 By 1969, the firm had spread its business worldwide and purchased seven additional laboratories in Canada and the U.S. by purchasing seven additional labs in Canada .
 Smith-Kline Beckman merged with Beckman Incorporate in 1982 . In 1982, it merged with the Beckman-affiliated company to become Smith-kline . In 1983, Smith-line merged into Smith-Smithman, which merged into the company .
 International Clinical Laboratories, SmithKline Beckman grew by 50 percent . International Clinical Labs grew by more than 50 percent in 2013 . SmithKlines Beckman is a clinical laboratory that tests patients' blood samples .
 The latest merger took place with GlaxoWellcome in 2000, and the firm became Glax SmithKline . GlaxSmithKline was founded in 1996 and merged with Wellcome in 1998 .
 Burroughs Wellcome drug firm was wholly owned by Wellcome Trust, whose director was the British lord Oliver Franks . Eustace Mullins says Wellcome was founded by the British director of the drug company .
 William Rockefeller's father tried to sell unrefined petroleum as a cancer cure . M ullins spent more than thirty years researching the ""R ockefeller medical monopoly,"" commented .
 R. Farben and the drug companies it controlled in the U.S. were responsible for the suppression of effective drugs until a monopoly could be established .
 From 1908 to 1936, Farben withheld its discovery of sulfanilamide, an early sulfa drug, until the firm had signed working agreements with the important drug firms of Switzerland, Sandoz and Ciba-Geigy .
 Novartis is one of the largest corporate mergers in history . The two firms joined in 1996 to form Novarti, one of world's largest pharmaceutical companies .
 Support of globalists and transplanted fascists helped put the Reagan-Bush team into power in 1980 .
 Aspartame is an additive sugar substitute found in most diet soft drinks and more than five thousand foods, drugs, and medicines . It is instructive to look at the many controversial drugs now being used by millions of Americans .
 Aspartame is found in most sugar substitutes . NutraSweet, Equal, Metamucil, and Canderel are among them .
 Aspartame releases free methanol that breaks down into formic acid and formaldehyde in the body . When heated to more than 86 degrees F ahrenheit keep in mind that the human body temperature is 98 degrees .
 One quart of an aspartame-added beverage is estimated to contain about 56 milligrams of methanol . The amount of water used to add the ingredient to the beverage is thought to be about half an ounce .
 Lab tests have shown little harm from small amounts of aspartame, say experts . Countering claims that laboratory tests indicated little harm . Aspartame is a popular form of form of artificial form of sugar .
 Before 1980, the Federal Drug Administration had refused to approve the use of aspartame .
 Adrian Gross testified to Congress that aspartame caused tumors and brain cancer in lab animals . Gross said it violated the Delaney Amendment that forbids putting anything in food that is known to cause cancer . Gross: Aspartame is a violation of a law that prohibits putting food that causes cancer
 Aspartame also is blamed for the increase in diabetes as it stimulates and aggravates diabetic retinopathy and neuropathy . When interacting with insulin, aspartame can cause diabetics to go into convulsions .
 She was the founder of Mission Possible International, working with doctors around the world in an effort to remove aspartame from food, drinks, and medicine .
 For 16 years the F DA refused to approve it, not only because it's not safe but because they wanted the company indicted for fraud . The DA wanted to indict the company for fraud, but wanted it to be safe and not safe .
 Both United States prosecutors hired on with the defense team and the statute of limitations expired . Both U.S. prosecutors were hired on defense team . The statute of limitation expired .
 Skinner went on to become secretary of transportation . Skinner squelched tine cries of tine pilots wlio . Skinner was Secretary of Transportation under Busli's fatlier .
 Thompson from King and Spalding Attorneys became deputy under Ashcroft . Thompson was deputy to Ashcroft when he became attorney general . Thompson is a former attorney general for the federal government .
 It interacts with all antidepressants, L-dopa, Coumadin, hormones, insulin, all cardiac medication, and many others . It also interacts with hormones, hormones and insulin .
 It also is a chemical hypersensitization drug, so it interacts with vaccines, other toxins . Splenda that has a chlorinated base like DDT and can cause autoimmune disease .
 People were found using aspartame as the placebo for MSG studies even before it was approved . Both excitotoxins, the aspartic acid in aspartim and MSG, the glutamate, are excitotsins .
 The FDA has known this for a quarter of a century and done nothing even though it's against the law . The FDA hasn't done anything since it's illegal to sell marijuana in the U.S. Even though it is illegal, the FDA has done nothing for decades .
 Searle went on to build a Nutra-Sweet factory and had $9 million worth of inventory . Searle built the factory and now has an inventory of more than $10,000 worth of sweet products .
 Arthur H ull H ayes, the new FDA commissioner, overruled that board of inquiry . He then went to work for the P R agency of the manufacturer, Burson-Marstellar, rumored at $1,000 a day . He has refused to talk to the press
 There were three congressional hearings because of the outcry of the people being poisoned . Three congressional hearings were held after people were poisoned .
 The first hearing was in 1985, and Senator Hatch and others were paid by Monsanto . Senator Hatch was paid by the company to conduct the hearings .
 This bill would have put a moratorium on aspartame, and had the NIH do independent studies on the problems being seen in the population, interaction with drugs, seizures, what it does to the fetus, and even behavioral problems .
 Reagan's FDA commissioner Hayes initially approved aspartame only as a powdered additive . Hayes was Reagan's first FDA commissioner . Aspartame was initially approved only as powdered additive only as partame .
 In 1983, just before he left his position, he approved the additive for all carbonated beverages . The additive was approved in 1983, when he left the post .
 Attempting to study or report on aspartame is a thankless task for mainstream academics . Aspartame has been banned in the US for more than a decade .
 J anet Starr Hull, an OSHA-certified environmental hazardous-waste emergency-response specialist and toxicologist, in 1991 was diagnosed with incurable Graves' disease . Hull learned through her own research that she had been poisoned by aspartame . Hull is a OSHA
 Some will say aspartame research isn't worth the effort because they cannot get published in American scientific journals . Some say it's because they can't be published in U.S. journals .
 Illustrating the battle between experts in regard to aspartame was the 2005 research by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter's research was published in 2005 .
 Morando Soffritti is the scientific director of the European Ramazzini Foundation of Oncology and Environmental Sciences in Bologna, Italy . He says the study was published in the European Journal of Cancer and Environmental Studies .
 Soffritti conducted a three-year study on 1,800 rats . He concluded that aspartame is a multipotential carcinogen .
 His work was peer-reviewed by seven world experts, and in April 2007, Dr. John Defterios was awarded a Nobel Prize for his work .
 Only a small amount of aspartame can trigger cancer . Babies of mothers of mothers who ingested it could grow up to contract cancer .
 Aspartame is carcinogenicity in laboratory rats, according to studies . The studies were largely unreported in the U.S. media .
 In 2006 media reports spoke of a ""new study"" that countered Soffritti's research . In 2006, media reports said of a "new study" that countered the research .
 Lim and colleagues worked with 473,984 men and women between the ages of fifty and seventy-one to study diet-and-health study .
 In 1995 and 1996, participants were asked how much they drank of soda, fruit drinks, and iced tea . Participants were asked if they drank three popular diet drinks, soda and fruit drinks . The study was published in 1996 and 1997 .
 C ritics noted that this study was subject to ""recall bias,"" since those in the study were being asked to remember what and how much they drank . C ritsics said this study is subject to "recall biases"
 There also were no consideration of the many other foods and additives that contained aspartame, which added to the daily intake . There also was no consideration .
 In the past seven years the pharmaceutical and health-products industry spent in excess of $800 million to lobby legislators and government officials at both the federal and state levels . According to the Center for Public Integrity, the pharmaceutical industry spent $800million lobbying in the last seven years .
 Manufacturers spent nearly $182 million on federal lobbying from 2005 through 2006 . Manufacturers of pharmaceuticals, medical devices, and other health products spent $180 million on lobbying . Pharmaceutical companies spent $181 million lobbying on federal issues .
 Large pharmaceutical corporations annually spend nearly twice as much money on marketing as they do on research and development . It should also be noted that the large pharmaceutical companies annually spend more on marketing .
 Pharmaceutical direct-toconsumer advertising has grown from $791 million in 1996 to more than $3. billion in 2004 . In 2004, the C PI reported that pharmaceutical direct-tobroner advertising had grown to $3 billion . The C PI also reported that direct-
 Cross-corporate ownership of both pharmaceutical houses, medical institutions, and the mass media might explain the media's hesitation in reporting the deleterious effects of drugs .
 M arcia Angell, former editor in chief of the N ew E ngland J ournal of M edicine, says profit is the driving force behind medicine today .
 The current power of the pharmaceutical industry can be traced to its phenomenal growth during the Reagan years . How They Deceive Us and What to Do About It brings focus to the argument that the current power .
 Angell and a number of others took note of a strong pro-business attitude shift during the ReaganBush years . Angell: The ReaganBush era was marked by a pro-Business attitude shift .
 There was a time in the not-so-distant past when educated persons of class looked upon commercial businessmen only slightly more kindly than they had once looked upon theater folk . There was also a time when educated people of class .
 Scientists, teachers, public servants such as firemen and policemen chose their careers for service and community betterment rather than for lavish salaries and retirement benefits .
 Media portrays the race for wealth as practically virtuous . Today, the corporate mass media portrays it as practically virtueless .
 Before 1980, pharmaceuticals was a good business, but afterward, it was a stupendous one, she said . She went on to say that before 1980, before that, it had been a great business .
 The success of Big Pharma has more to do with marketing than with the efficiency of its drugs, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . Big Pharma's success is more than just marketing, he says, than efficiency .
 This term is applied to large drug corporations' attempts to convince healthy people they are sick and need drugs . Large drug corporations are often trying to convince people they need drugs to take them .
 R eferring to the colossus that the pharmaceutical industry has become. The pharmaceutical industry is now a colossus .
 Beginning in the 1980s, important new laws were passed relaxing restrictions on pharmaceutical corporations . Starting in the 1990s, the laws relaxed restrictions on drug companies .
 These included the Bayh-Dole Act, after its chief sponsors, Indiana Democratic senator Birch Bayh and Kansas Republican senator Robert Dole . Other bills were named after their chief sponsors .
 The Bayh-Dole Act allowed universities and small businesses to patent discoveries from research underwritten by the National Institutes of Health . The act is the major distributor of tax dollars for medical research .
 It also allowed taxpayer-financed discoveries formerly in public domain to be granted to drug corporations through exclusive licenses . Drug companies were granted exclusive licenses to develop new drugs .
 Angell said universities, where mostNIH-sponsored work is carried out, can patent and license their discoveries and charge royalties .
 Legislation allows NIH to directly transfer NIH discoveries to industry . Subsequent but similar legislation allows the NIH itself to directly . NIH discoveries can be transferred to industry by NIH .
 Today, ""all parties cash in on the public investment in research,"" she noted . Today, "all parties" cash in, she said .
 Research paid for by public money becomes a commodity to be sold for profit by private concerns . U nder this system, research paid for . public money is a commodity .
 Angell provides examples of the large consulting fees paid by pharmaceutical corporations to individual faculty members and to NIH scientists and directors .
 R ecall that it was an N IH study that refuted peerreviewed research linking cancer to the sweetener aspartame .
 Approximately half of the largest pharmaceutical corporations are not American . Half of the world's largest pharmaceutical companies are based in the United States .
 All price their drugs much higher here than in other markets,"" said Dr. Dr. John Defterios of the U.S.
 The lucrative connection between Big Pharma and medical schools and hospitals has brought about a definite corporate-friendly atmosphere . Big Pharma has a lucrative relationship with medical schools, hospitals .
 She blasted pharmaceutical corporations for their claims that high drug prices are necessary to fund research and development . She also blasted pharmaceutical companies for their claim that high costs are necessary for research .
 F or the top ten companies, they amounted to only 11 percent of sales in 1990 . That figure rose slightly to 14 percent in 2000, rising slightly to 11 percent in the 1990s .
 The biggest single item in the budget is neither R&D nor even profits but something called 'marketing and administration' A name that varies slightly from company to company .
 In 1990, 36 percent of sales revenues went into this category, and that proportion remained about the same for over a decade .
 Angell noted what many people see as excessive salaries of pharmaceutical executives such as Charles A Heimbold J, the former chairman and CEO of Bristol-Myers Squibb, who made $74,890,918 in 2001 . Angell further noted that Charles A.
 This does not count his $76,095,611 worth of unexercised stock options . This doesn't count $76.095 million worth of options .
 Stafford, chairman of Wyeth, made $40,521,011, not counting his stock options . Wyeth chairman also got $40.629,459 in stock options in the company .
 C ongress expressly prohibited M edicare from negotiating lower drug prices through its bulk purchasing power . In 1997, the FDA permitted the drug industry to do direct advertising to the public, previously restricted to physicians .
 The excesses of the globalists' pharmaceutical corporations have prompted many Americans to seek price relief by traveling to C anada or M exico to purchase drugs .
 Angell concluded that only an aroused American public can rein in the power of the pharmaceutical monopoly . Angell: Only an aroused public can re-energize the pharmaceutical industry .
 Noting that drug companies have the largest lobby in Washington, drug companies give copiously to political campaigns . Drug companies have given copious amounts of support to politicians .
 Angell says it will be exceedingly difficult to break the pharmaceutical industry's power . Mass media corporations are dependent on pharmaceutical industry for campaign contributions and advertising .
 "There will be no real reform without an aroused and determined public to make it happen,"" she said. "That is why citizens should know what is really going on"
 This report intensified the controversy over chemical food and drink additives that have been linked to hyperactivity in children . This report has intensified the debate over additives to children .
 Coca-Cola, Pepsi Max, Diet Pepsi and Diet Pepsi all contain sodium benzoate . Makers say they entrusted safety of additives to the government .
 Many government agencies are under the control of the giant pharmaceutical corporations . U nfortunately, many government agencies have been taken over by the pharmaceutical companies .
 With the exception of Republican jviitt Romney, both Clinton and Obama were the largest recipients of Big Pharma largess .
 Insurance industry contributed $226,245 to Sen. C linton's campaign to pass laws to prevent insurers from charging higher rates to people in poor health . The insurance industry contributed more than $200,000 to her campaign .
 Fascists neglected a little-known and little-publicized aspect of the Third R eich the fight against cancer, tobacco, alcohol abuse, and occupational hazards . Fascists took swift charge of Nazi drug technology after the war .
 The National Socialists' predilection for health foods and preventative medicine may have been yet another reason the globalists turned against H itier and his regime .
 Most food additives, colorings, and preservatives are petrochemicals . Any decrease in human consumption would spell loss of profits to the globalists' corporations' corporations .
 The N azi regime instituted policies designed to create healthier environments within the workplace . E arly on, the N Azi regime has instituted policies .
 Production lost priority as the imperatives of wartime production grew . However, the measures were lost priority to production .
 One example of globalist neglect of Nazi science can be seen in the issue of asbestos .
 By the late 1930s, Nazi Germany had firmly documented the link between asbestos and lung cancer . The link was firmly documented by Nazi Germany .
 By 1943, the N azi government had recognized asbestos-induced cancer as a compensable occupational disease . This connection was flatly stated in a 1939 textbook .
 N azi research would be used in later years to counter asbestos producers' claims that they were unaware of the danger of asbestos until modern studies . The research was used to counter claims that asbestos producers were unaware .
 The owners of the United States tobacco industry fought a successful, decades-long rearguard action against the claims that cigarettes are a leading cause of cancer .
 They bought time while they diversified their ownership away from tobacco . Utilizing one hired expert after another, they bought time . The tobacco company is now a multi-billion dollar company .
 The link between smoking and cancer was demonstrated in postwar Britain and America, according to Proctor . Proctor. C ontrary to the popular belief that the link between . smoking and . cancer was proved in the late 1930s that we first find a broad medical recognition of both the
 The Nazis were among the first to ban smoking in public places such as Nazi party offices, post offices, hospitals, resthomes, and waiting rooms . A restriction today becoming prevalent across America becoming prevalent .
 Much of the attack on alcohol and tobacco stemmed from the Nazi ideals of racial hygiene and Aryan purity .
 As in America from the 1960s to the 1980s, German tobacco interests formed organizations and hired various experts to counter the claims of antitobacco activists . As in U.S. from the 60s to 80s, as in America, the groups formed organizations .
 As in America, they claimed that the medical evidence against tobacco was ""unscientific"" and the propaganda of health fanatics . As in the U.S. they said that the evidence was ""uncientific" and "unscientific"
 Hier disdained tobacco and alcohol . But it was an uphill fight, considering the amount of scientific data then available .
 National Socialist effort to stamp out both smoking and drinking was constantly pointed out . Hitler neither smoked nor drank, it was said .
 Hitler would not permit his lover, Eva Braun, or his deputy, Martin Bormann, to smoke in his presence . Hitler's lover Eva Braun would not be allowed to smoke at his home .
 Hitler, Mussolini, and Franco were nonsmokers . Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin all smoked cigarettes, cigars, or a pipe .
 The Nazis came to realize that tobacco-related illnesses could impact the hospital industry as well as the insurance industry . The Nazis, like modern American corporations, realized that tobacco related illnesses could affect the hospital and insurance industries .
 This concern, coupled with the increasing demands for healthy wartime workers, undoubtedly was an added stimulus for the antitobacco campaign . This concern was the increasing demand for healthy workers .
 This is a fascinating example of how social idealism can be subverted for tyrannical purposes . This is the first time social idealists have been subverted by tyrannical powers .
 NAZIS' CONCERN over rising cancer rates also resulted in a bizarre confrontation over the use of X-rays .
 Otto Warburg is a relative of the banking family and director of B eriin's Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Cell Physiology . Warburg died at the age of 92 in August .
 Warburg's institute was founded in 1931 following a substantial donation by the Rockefeller Foundation to the Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft, today known as the Max Planck Institute . The Rockefeller Foundation donated a substantial amount of money to the institute .
 All normal body cells meet their energy needs by respiration of oxygen . Cancer cells meet energy needs in great part by fermentation, cancer cells do so much by fermentation .
 Cancer cells can do well without oxygen, drawing energy from fermentation of sugars . Most living cells require oxygen to live, but cancer cells can thrive without oxygen .
 To maintain normal health, humans require a minimum of 22 percent oxygen in the air they breathe . Humans need 22 percent of oxygen in their air to maintain healthy health .
 Most American cities regularly fall below ozone-alert days . On so-called ozone alert days, oxygen level often drops to 18 percent or lower .
 The less said about the amount of sugar in the American diet the better . And the less said .
 Nothing has been done to cure cancer in the intervening four decades . Warburg is correct, and he stated that, ""on the basis of anaerobiosis there is now a real chance to get rid of this terrible disease," Warburg said .
 M eanwhile in America, R ockefeller executive F rank H oward, after convincing Alfred S loan and Charles Kettering of General Motors to fund a cancer institute, was named chairman of the new Sloan-Kettering Institute .
 Howard chose Cornelius ""Dusty"" Rhoads, former chief of research for the medical division of the U.S. Chemical Warfare Service, to direct the institute's experimentation with chemotherapy . Howard chose Cornell Rhoads to direct the experimentation with chemo .
 Howard represented Rockefeller interests in the drug company Rohm and Haas . He represented Rockefeller interest in Rohm, Haas . Later, Howard represented the Rockefeller interests .
 In modern health-conscious America, little has been done to educate citizens about the dangers of overly prescribed drugs, including the depressant alcohol .
 During the Third R eich, there was even a substantial anti-alcohol movement in beer-loving G ermany, including a sizeable German Anti-alcoholism Association with a membership numbering in the thousands .
 The Nazis outlawed alcohol advertising aimed at youth, as well as any that suggested alcohol was healthful . The Nazis banned alcohol advertising for youth advertising .
 Alcohol-related hazards such as cirrhosis of the liver, cardiomyopathy, fetal abnormalities, and esophageal cancer were well known even prior to the rise of National Socialism but mostly ignored in modern America's popular media .
 Like Prohibition in America, the Nazi anti-alcohol effort largely failed, due to the pressure for consumption from a thirsty population . Yet, like Prohibition in the U.S., the Nazi effort failed .
 Like Americans today, the Nazis introduced a variety of nonalcoholic beers and even produced some made from liquefied vegetables . The Nazis produced some of the beers, including ones made from vegetables .
 In 1936, a certification system was instituted, designed to protect children from ""unsuitable" drinks . The certification was designed to prevent children from drinking unsafe drinks .
 Coca-Cola was declared one such beverage due to its sugar and additives . Coca-Colon was declared a beverage that was deemed a sugary beverage by the World Health Organization .
 Today's ""New Age" issues echo aspects of National Socialism in the Third Reich . In fact, today's issues echo parts of National Socialist in the 1930s .
 Organic foods, herbs, and healing plants were all encouraged in Nazi Germany . Nazis' fascination with the occult, organic foods and herbs were also encouraged . Back to nature idealism and respect for the rural life was encouraged .
 About 83,000 voluntarily participated in his vegetarian-lifestyle program . The program is a vegetarian lifestyle .
 Although he disdained both hunting and eating meat, he did not attempt to force his ideals on his followers, for purely pragmatic reasons . He did not try to force the ideals of his followers .
 The Nazi campaign against tobacco and the 'wholegrain-bread operation' are, in some sense, as fascist as the yellow stars ews] and the death camps . Robert N Proctor correctly concluded, 'The Nazi campaign ... is as fascist . as the 'Wholegrain
 The Fascist Globalists may be promoting a program of population reduction . Aspartame, tobacco and dangerous drugs such as aspartame could help reduce population .
 Third Reich Nazis were greatly interested in the field of eugenics, the study of genetic selection to maintain and improve ideal human characteristics, which grew to include birth and population control .
 The concept grew from the writings of the Victorian scientist S ir F rancis G alton, who after study reached the conclusion that prominent members of B ritish society were such because they had ""eminent"" parents .
 Of course, to determine who was dirtying the gene pool required extensive population statistics . The results of the study were based on a study of the population .
 The wife of railroad magnate Edward Harriman was the mother of diplomat Averell Harrimans . She was the wife of railroads magnate and mother of a diplomat . Her name is the name of her husband, railroad magnates and diplomat . She is also the wife
 The first International Congress of Eugenics was convened in London in 1912, with Winston Churchill as a director . Winston Churchill was a director of the first Congress in 1912 . The first conference was held in London, London, in 1912.
 The concept of "bloodlines" was significant to these people . Obviously, the concept of ""bloodlines"" was significant .
 Ernst Rudin of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Genealogy and Demography in Berlin . Rudin is a former member of the German National Socialist Party .
 Rudin founded the Deutschen Gesellschaftfur Rassenhygiene, a forerunner of Hitler's racial institutions . Rudin was unanimously elected president of the International Federation of Eugenics Societies for his work .
 Rudin was honored personally by Hitler in 1939 and 1944 . Rudin continued to be acknowledged as a leader in psychiatry .
 Despite renunciation of eugenics following the revelations of the Nazi racial extermination programs at the N. uremberg trials, work continues right up to today, under more politically correct names . Despite much public renunciation, the work continues under politically correct name .
 General William Draper was a member of the International Eugenics Congress in 1932 . He was named head of the economic division of the United States Control Commission in Germany at the end of hostilities .
 He and his son were in charge of Bush's campaign fund-raising in 1980 . Bush's father and son were also involved in 1980s campaign fund raising .
 Draper went on to work with populationcontrol activities of the U.N. Draper worked with the United Nations during his time in the United States . Draper is now a successful businessman .
 Early efforts at reducing the birth rate by sterilization met with resistance in the U.S. The rhetoric was softened and other means pursued in the United States . Early efforts to reduce birth rates by sterilizing were met with opposition .
 The abortion controversy stems from the eugenics views of the globalist families . Globalist families believe that some form of population control must be allowed in a well-run society . The globalist family believes population control is necessary .
 The Human Genome Project has only elevated fears that human DNA can be manipulated and controlled . The HumanGenome Project is only one of the world's most ambitious genome projects .
 In 2006, more than a third of the group's contributions came from corporate and foundation grants . More than a quarter of those grants came from corporations and foundations .
 Rudin's eugenics work was, in a large part, funded by Rockefeller money . Rudin was a pioneer in the field of eugenetics in Chicago .
 General Maxwell Taylor, a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam, reflected his fellow globalists' viewpoint in a 1981 interview with Executive Intelligence Review .
 Taylor stated that the underlying cause of world problems was overpopulation . Taylor said that overpopulation was the root cause of the world's problems . Taylor: Overpopulation is the only solution to world problems .
 He said it would be necessary by the beginning of the twenty-first century to reduce the human population by disease, starvation, and regional conflicts . He said the population would be reduced by the end of the century .
 The population crisis and the food-supply question dictate that we should not even try . The world's food supply is not enough to feed all of the world's population .
 When one considers the starvation that wracks so many poor countries, the AIDS epidemic sweeping Africa, and the ongoing strife in Afghanistan and Iraq, plus dozens of smaller conflicts all over the world, it would seem that Taylor's vision of the future has come to pass .
 The real fear is to be found in the desire to control others, not in voluntary population control or human genes, says MIT cognitive scientist Steven P inker .
 R eferring to the wrongness of N azi genetics beliefs, P inker observed, 'The other one, Marxism, had no use for race, didn't believe in genes, and denied that human nature was a meaningful concept'
 Before anyone looks for relief from social manipulation from heaven, it is instructive to see the parallels in the use of religion both in the Third Reich and in modern America .
 George W. BUSH has been only the most recent world leader who has used religious factions to gain support for his policies and objectives . George W Bush has been the most successful world leader to use religious groups to gain political support .
 Goebbels consciously used religious terminology in many of his speeches . It has been shown that Goeb beseigbels quite consciously .
 Nazism was a total worldview which by the very nature excluded all others . Nazism's worldview was 'a total worldview' that excluded all other people, he says .
 From this it followed that traditional Christianity was a rival, not a friend, he said . From this he followed that Christianity was not a rival to traditional Christianity .
 In Mein Kampf, Hitler spoke condescendingly of religion, offering this rationalization for organized religion . Hitler offered the rationalization of organized religion in Meinkampf .
 He saw in Christian fundamentalism a reflection of his own National Socialist zeal and ambition . He also saw in Christianity as reflection of National Socialist ambition .
 "An educated man retains the sense of the mysteries of nature and bows before the unknowable," says the author . An educated man "bows before the unknownable"
 An uneducated man runs the risk of going over to atheism (which is a return to the state of the animal) as soon as he perceives that the state, in sheer opportunism, is making use of false ideas in the matter of religion, while in other fields it bases
 I've thus prevented Catholic and Protestant supporters from forming groups against one another, and inadvertently knocking each other out with the B ibie and sprinkler . I've also prevented Catholics and Protestants from form groups against each other .
 The dogma of C hristianity gets worn away before the advances of science, says author . "Cristianism" is worn away by advances in science .
 All that's left is to prove that in nature there is no frontier between the organic and the inorganic . "In nature, in nature, there are no frontier in nature between organic and inorganic," says the author .
 When understanding of the universe has become widespread, when the majority of men know that the stars are not sources of light but worlds, perhaps inhabited worlds like ours, then Christian doctrine will be convicted of absurdity .
 It's only gradually that it became transformed in this direction, with the object of maintaining the rule of the priests, who can live only to the detriment of society collectively . The priests' rule is only to be maintained by society collectively, he says .
 Hitler quickly took steps to subdue the church in Germany . Because of his private opposition to true Christianity, Hitler quickly subverted the church . Hitler quickly became a dictator .
 Ludwig Mueller, a former German Army chaplain and virulent anti-Semite, was named Reich bishop in 1933 . Six months after he came to power, a Nazi-dominated National Synod in Wittenberg named him as Reich bishop .
 Mueller issued a decree designed to bring control over the German Evangelical Church . Six months later, Mueller issued what came to be known as the ""Muzzling Order,""
 Ministers were forbidden to speak about controversial or political matters; hence there could be no opposition to the Nazi regime . Ministers were also forbidden from speaking about controversial matters .
 This same no-involvement-with-politics message can be heard in many churches in America today . The message is heard in churches across the country today .
 Despite Nazi hostility to Christianity, many Germans believed that Hitler was heaven-sent . Goebbels's propaganda helped many Germans believe Hitler was a good man .
 German congregations all fell into lockstep with the Nazi government . Some anti-N azi clerics such as P astors M artin N iemoeller and the martyred Dietrich Bonhoeffer were among those who supported the Nazis .
 Many churchgoers were zealous Nazis, but many were simply hesitant or afraid to speak up against their noisy fellow members . Many were afraid of speaking out against noisy members of their congregation .
 Germany in the 1930s was a predominantly religious nation with the majority divided between Catholics and Lutherans . The majority of Germany was Catholic and Lutheran .
 The fascist globalists realized that the multisectarian U.S. could not be brought under one religious control system . They realized that a multissectarian United States could not have one religious system .
 Through their corporate control over the large media outlets, these would-be global rulers have instituted a decades-long campaign to undermine and discredit organized religion, regardless of denomination . Through their control of the media, they have instituted an unprecedented effort to undermine organized religion .
 Some wayward TV evangelists and Catholic priests have only exacerbated this campaign . The Catholic Church has a history of evangelising in the U.S.
 There also appears to be a movement to control the church's message in the campaign for the 2008 election .
 Democratic presidential candidates Sen. Ted Cruz, Hillary Clinton and Sen. Tammy Duckworth have been invited to meet with Sen. Hillary Clinton . Hillary Clinton has been accused of being racist, sexist and homophobic .
 Soledad O'Brien, a CNN anchor and CNN correspondent, will moderate the forum . CNN's John Defterios is a CNN correspondent and CNN anchor .
 Detractors accuse Wallis of attempting to divide evangelical Cristians to the benefit of secular liberals . Wallis is accused of trying to divide evangelicals to benefit secular liberals.
 Traditional Values Coalition claims to be the largest nondenominational, grassroots church lobby in America . Wallis has taken a 'consistently left-wing and anti-American stance'
 The report goes on to accuse Wallis of supporting socialist programs, noting that while Wallis was in seminary, he founded a magazine he named PostAmerican . Wallis is accused of supporting socialism .
 Wallis was an example of the plutocracy's propensity for supporting and thus controlling both sides of an issue, critics say . Other critics say Wallis is a model for the rich and powerful to control both sides .
 Hillary's ties to the secretive Bilderbergs, her husband's membership in the Council on F oreign R elations and the Trilateral C ommission, as well as her work with the N azi-connected group called The Family . Hillary provides a connective tissue
 Pastor Lutzer described what he saw as attempts to suppress and denigrate Christianity in presentday America . He said the attempt to suppress Christianity in America was an attempt to denigrate it .
 Interpreted in oneway, it can mean that the church should be free to exercise its influence and practice religion without interference from the state . It can be interpreted as allowing the state to exercise influence in religion .
 That kind of separation is exactly what the church in G ermany so desperately needed . The church in the U.S. desperately needed separation from the church .
 To them, it means that religious people should not be allowed to practice their religion in the realm that belongs to the state . To them they say it means religious people shouldn't be allowed .
 Religion, we are told, should be practiced privately; the state must be 'cleansed' from every vestige of religious influence . The state must also be cleansed from religious influence, the government is told .
 Some churches in America are already feeling the eyes of the government on them . Some churches are already being watched by the government .
 Pastor Mark Holick of the Spirit One Christian Center in Wichita, Kansas, urged the IRS to brush up on the constitutional freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution .
 IRS officials warned church against 'political activity' and demanded answers to questions about beliefs . This came after his church received a letter from the IRS warning it against political activity .
 Holick notified the IRS that, ""the church cannot agree to not engage in any activity that may favor or oppose a candidate" Holick told the IRS the church could not agree not to engage in such activity . Holick said the church was not allowed to participate in any political activity
 Simply preaching the word of God on a moral issue to which a candidate is opposed, may be deemed to oppose a candidate . Simply preach the word, God may be considered an opposition to a candidate's views .
 Evangelist Bill Keller, founder of the 15-year-old Bill Keller Ministries, publicly complained that he too faced problems with his right to free speech . He created the Liveprayer with Bill Keller television program and Liveprayers.com .
 In 76 previous attempts yet to be successful in getting anyone's tax exemption pulled . Of course, this is designed to intimidate people into silence .
 Keller complained his freedom of speech was being curtailed by Internet corporations . Keller also complained that Internet corporations are curbing his free speech . Keller says he has been threatened by the Internet .
 These new filters are 'content filters' and work off of a dictionary that can have any words added the operator wants . These filters work off a dictionary and can be added to the operator's search engine .
 For six months, we have been getting our Daily Devotional blocked sporadically by Microsoft's servers based on the 'content' of my message . Microsoft has been blocking our daily devotional for six months .
 This is also happening to other Christian organizations as well as conservative political groups . Conservative political groups rely heavily on e-mail .
 The issue is not abortion or content, but the right of free speech, whether it is a church or an individual, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The issue here is the right to free speech .
 Large mainstream monied churches have long been used as platforms for politicians, both local and national . Large monied monies are used to support politicians, such as politicians .
 The fringe churches seem to fare well but it is the fringe churches and religions where we find longestablished freedoms being chipped away . The fringe religions are the ones we find chipping away at freedom of religion .
 It must seem strange that churches can be intimidated by the government much like in Nazi Germany, even with a professed Christian in the White House .
 Some Christians have been less restrained in their comparison between professed fundamental C hristianity on today's political scene and the use of religion in N azi G ermany . Some Christians are not restrained in comparison .
 Bush-Cheney 'compassionate Conservatism' and Fascism are one and the same . An Online] ournal contributing writer, Schwarz stated, "In fact, if you look real close at Bush-cheney and understand the fundamental dynamics of what brought H itier
 Most people appeared not to notice the parallels between the fascism of Nazi Germany and the conservative Christian movement in America today . Both with deep roots in the conservative faction of the population . But most people appear not to have noticed the parallels .
 In America, this faction tends to be pro-business, which makes it a prime target of the fascist globalists . The globalists largely control the corporate life of the nation, which means that the U.S. is a target of them .
 This faith-based political movement began in the late 1970s with the formation of the Moral Majority . The Moral Majority was a coalition of conservative groups seeking to defeat P resident J immy C arter in the 1980 election .
 One of its founders was Southern Baptist preacher Pat Robertson . Robertson severed all connections with the church in 1988 to run for president . Robertson ran for president on the R epublican ticket in 1988 .
 Robertson went on to become an influential TV evangelist . Robertson founded the Christian Broadcasting Network in 1961 . He founded the network in the 1960s .
 In 2005, he was forced to apologize for comments interpreted by many as advocating the assassination of Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez .
 Robertson: "It's a whole lot cheaper than starting a war, and I don't think any oil shipments will stop" Robertson told his audience . Robertson: It's cheaper than a war .
 Another M oral M ajority founder was J erry F alwell, a televangelist who became a firm supporter of George W Bush's Faith-based Initiative .
 Erik Prince, a former Navy SEAL, is the founder of Blackwater USA, a private security contracting firm that has grown into one of the largest private armies in the world . Erik Prince is a former SEAL and founder of the private security firm Blackwater .
 In 2007, Blackwater came under criticism and congressional scrutiny following more than two hundred shooting reports in Iraq . One in September of that year, one in September, that year left 17 Iraqis dead and over two dozen wounded . Blackwater was responsible for more than 2,000 shootings in Iraq
 Prince's father supported the Family Research Council, a right-wing fundamentalist Christian group close to the Bush administration . Edgar, Edgar, a self-made millionaire from selling auto parts, supported the group .
 Both men were significant contributions to the elections campaigns of George W Bush . Both men contributed to the election campaigns of Bush .
 Edgar's widow served on the boards of FRC and another heavyweight Christian right organization, Focus on the Family . Edgar Edgar served on FRC boards .
 She runs the Edgar and Elsa Prince Foundation, of which Erik is a vice president . Erik is also vice president of the foundation .
 The foundation gave more than $1 million to the Christian right from 2003 to 2006 . The foundation has given more than a million dollars to Christian right since 2003 .
 Author] eremy Scahill compared Prince's private army to Hitler's ""Brownshirt"" storm troopers . Prince's army was compared to Hitler’s ‘Brownshirt’ storm troopers.
 It has been noted that prewar G ermany and the U nited States both had Cristian roots, a widespread acceptance of biblical social values and a commitment to private virtue .
 Lutzer: America has benefited from a constitutional guarantee of separation of church and state . Germany has a history of democracy, as well as its history of separation, he said . America has different from Germany in that it has a constitution, he added .
 Most Germans of the 1930s offered no resistance to the everencroaching fascism of National Socialism . Like so many in modern America, most Germans of today's 1930s offer no resistance against fascism .
 N. no one in the area of religion seems able to get a clear picture of what is happening in modern America .
 The push-pull between liberty and security, scripture and social consciousness appears to have created a stultifying tension . The tension appears to be the result of a tension between freedom and security .
 Globalists have found that ongoing controversies coming from many different directions is an effective mechanism to keep Americans arguing with each other, off balance, and ineffective in uniting to learn the truth behind their New World Order agenda . The globalists found that such ongoing controversies keep Americans off balance .
 Matthew 12:3131, M ark 3:2829, and Luke 12:10 J esus specifically stated that all sins can be forgiven, even from those who choose not to believe in him or have blasphemed against him .
 One sin that can never be forgiven is to speak against the holy spirit, he said . But he stated the one sin that never can be forgiven can be to speak out against the spirit .
 If an ideology can be institutionalized through the education establishment, it has won a major battle, Professor George MOSSE said in his book Nazi Culture .
 U.S. education establishment has been created and guided for many years by the progenitors of the globalists who created both communism and National Socialism . It will be found that the American education establishment .
 Rockefeller created the General Education Board in 1903 to dispense Rockefeller donations to education . The oil magnate created the board in 1903 . The board was set up in 1903 by Rockefeller .
 By 1960, it had ceased operating as a separate entity and its programs were rolled into the Rockefeller Foundation . The Rockefeller Foundation was rolled out of the organization .
 According to current school literature, the facility engages in, ""enrolling students from kindergarten through grade 12," according to the current literature . According to the facility, it is intended to enroll kindergarten through to grade 12 .
 Lincoln School was described frankly as a revolutionary school for the primary and secondary schools of the entire U.S. From its outset, the school was described as a 'revolutionary school'
 Rocl<efeller , tlirougli tlie society, lianded out close to a million dollars to many different schools . Between 1890 and 1914, Rocl <efeller donated close to one million dollars .
 The lynchpin of his attempt to guide American education was his formation of the National Education Board . He also formed the National University of Chicago and continued to support the U niversity of Chicago .
 The mammoth university now encompasses an undergraduate college, four graduate divisions, six professional schools as well as libraries, laboratories, museums, clinics, clinics and other institutions .
 In 2003, a university center opened in Paris to accommodate the school's program of Europe an studies . The university center was opened in 2003 .
 C losely connected to R ockefeller 's U niversity of C hicago is the E nglish world's most accepted authority on everything . U n university of Chicago is connected to Rockefeller University of Chicago .
 Encyclopaedia Britannica, headquartered in Chicago, also owns Merriam-Webster Incorporation, one of the world's leading publishers of dictionaries and thesauri .
 During World War II, he served as assistantsecretary of state in Washington, D.C., until 1947 . During that time he was active in organizing the U nited N. ations .
 H e served as a member of and delegate to numerous United Nations and international conferences and commissions . H e has served in the U.N. for more than 30 years .
 A declared Democrat, he was United States senator from 1949 until 1953 . He was a declared Democrat and declared Democrat .
 From 1943 until his death in 1973, Benton was chairman of the board and publisher of Encyclopaedia Britannica . He died in 1973 .
 BankJ acob Safra Switzerland is part of the Safra Group, a far-flung chain of financial institutions . The Swiss bank is one of the largest in the world .
 Paolo Lionni traced the deleterious effects of experimental psychology on the education system back to German professor of philosophy Wilhelm Max Wundt . Lionni: "The only difficulty was that education, on the whole, wasn't in bad shape"
 J efferson had maintained that in order to preserve liberty in the new nation, it was essential that its citizenry be educated, what ever their income .
 Free school systems established by Quakers in Pennsylvania and the Midwest . Free school movement in N ew York, and a large number of ""normal schools" so named for helping to set the norms for education .
 By the start of the twentieth century, the U.N. States was home to many major universities, which turned out thousands of well-trained teachers each year . The U.S. has been home to more than 100,000 teachers since 1900 .
 Students learned how to read not comic books but essays of Burke, Webster, Lincoln, Horace, Cicero . Students also learned to read the essays of the likes of Cicero, Burke, Lincoln .
 A review of a typical elementary school arithmetic textbook printed before 1910 shows dramatically that students were learning mathematical skills that few of our current high school graduates know anything about .
 The agenda behind Rockefeller's creation of the GEB may have been revealed in correspondence from Frederick T Gates, Rockefeller's choice to head the board . Rockefeller chose Gates as the head of GEB . The GEB was founded by Rockefeller in 1903 .
 Gates wrote, "In our dreams, we have limitless resources and the people yield themselves with perfect docility to our molding hands" Gates wrote that in his dream, the people would yield "perfect docility" to his hands .
 The present education conventions fade from their minds, and unhampered by tradition, we work our own good will upon a grateful and responsive rural folk . We work ourselves good will on behalf of the rural folk, says the author .
 "We shall not try to make these people or any of their children into philosophers or men of learning," says the PM . We shall not make them into philosophers, scientists or philosophers, says the Prime Minister .
 We have not raised up from among them authors, editors, poets or men of letters . We have to raise up from . among them . authors, editor, poets and men of . letters .
 We shall not search for embryo great artists, painters, musicians nor lawyers, doctors, preachers, politicians, statesmen, of whom we have an ample supply . We will not look for great artists nor lawyers nor lawyers .
 The views in most of those areas are fundamentally flawed and don't lead to the best solutions in 'mental health,' education, medicine, sanity, and happiness . Well, the views in many areas are 'fundamental flawed' and 'don't lead the best solution'
 With the collapse of communism, the advent of the U.N. and NATO, along with various economic treaties now in place, it would appear that this globalist goal is close to becoming realized . The end of communism would appear to be the end of the Soviet era .
 He added that these entities had been subverted from the original goals of their creators by subsequent directors . This is another example of wealth taking control of existing organizations .
 G ibbs, associate professor of political science at the U niversity of Arizona, noted that the intelligence community has long taken advantage of academia to propagate their views and philosophies as always .
 Ernst Mueller, head of the German-American Settlement League, acquired lakeside property in Yaphank, Long Island, in 1935 . Mueller invited Americans of German descent to visit and relax .
 The youth in Yaphank constructed tents on platforms, called Camp Siegfried . The youth built the camp on a platform called a platform .
 N euss's father initially was friendly with the G erman organization but soon turned against them because of their anti-Semitism and un-American speeches . He turned against the organization because they were anti-Semitic and anti-American .
 Although many German-American organizations existed in the prewar United States, the Bund was among the only ones to express support for Nazi ideals . The Bund was one of the only organizations that supported Nazi ideals in the U.S.
 In February 1939, Fritz Kuhn addressed a crowd of about twenty thousand in Madison Square Garden . He railed against President ""Frank D Rosenfeld"" and the ""Bolshevik-J ewish conspiracy"" threatening America .
 Some Bund members fled the country while others were placed in internment camps . Once the nation entered the war, some members of the Bund fled the nation .
 Although the American Nazi Bund never developed into a serious threateven Hitler tried to distance himself from it . The subversion of the educational process under which it prospered continued .
 The National Education Association was founded in 1850 as a professional teacher organization . Today it is the largest labor union in the United States, representing almost 3 million educators .
 In 1966, the NEA merged with the American Teachers Association, an organization primarily concerned with education in the black community . The R ockefellers funneled money into black education programs and organizations, who funneled it to black organizations .
 By 1964, Rockefeller's General Education Board had spent more than $3.5 million in support for black education . Some critics say it was merely a means to instill white values and worldviews in black students .
 J ohn D Rockefeller Sr. was more concerned with shaping a new industrial social order than providing a useful education . Rockefeller was more interested in shaping an industrial order than creating a useful educational program .
 Conservative Republican Pat Buchanan decried the efforts of the NEA as a negative influence on American education . Buchanan decries the efforts to promote American education as a result of the organization .
 Opposing the Ex-Gay Educators Caucus at the 2004 NEA National Convention was KevinJ ennings, a former private-school teacher in Massachusetts . He has partnered with the NEA in promoting acceptance of homosexuality using curriculum materials in the nation's schools .
 At the convention, J ennings was presented the NEA's human rights ""creative leadership"" award .
 In years past, if a child was acting up or caught staring out the window, he or she received a rap on the knuckles with a ruler and was told to stay with the rest of the class . Now, the school says it is no longer dealing with such incidents .
 Today, the child is sent to the school nurse, who oftentimes tells the parents the student has attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder . The school nurse often recommends the administration of Prozac or Ritalin, psychotropic drugs that have been shown to produce psychosis in rats .
 Number of children taking R italin nationally jumped from 500,000 in 1987 to more than 6 million by 2001 . Republican State Representative Lenny Winkler, one of the bill's primary sponsors, quoted studies showing the number of children .
 The bill also prohibits the state's Department of C hildren and F amilies from taking children away from parents who decline to put their children on moodaltering drugs .
 A 1999 study at the H uman Development C enter at the U niversity of Wisconsin in E au C laire found that 13 ""ADHD"" children on medication, over four years, performed progressively worse on standardized tests than a group of 13 normal children .
 Tliat wliile cliildren in lier community used Ritalin two to three times more than the national rate . Their academic performance in relation to their peers showed no improvement .
 For her persistence in questioning the rising incidence of drug use in schoolchildren, she was awarded the award for her work . For her work, she has written a book about how to deal with the problem .
 The difficult-to-control male child is certainly not a new phenomenon, but attempts to give him a medical diagnosis are the product of modern psychology and psychiatry . The difficult to control male children is a modern phenomenon .
 N ow it's just assumed to be a real disease, regardless of the failure to prove it so, it's not just assumed it's real . It's assumed that it will be a disease .
 The center of psychoanalysis shifted from Germany to the U.S. after the war, author says .
 Psychiatrists Thomas Roeder, Volker Kubillus, and Anthony Burwell in their book Psychiatrists the Men Behind Hitler . Roeder and Kubillus are psychiatrists .
 The influx of Nazi-trained psychiatrists after World War II has produced a blossoming of psychological disorders . The influx in the military and intelligence fields has led to a rise in psychological disorders.
 Helmut Remschmidt was a leader in research into hyperactivity in children . He directed the Society for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry until 1984 . He was one of the world's leading experts in childhood behavior .
 Hermann Stutte was associated with Nazi psychiatrists involved in the German euthanasia program . He received his doctorate from Robert Sommer, director of the Deutscher Verband fur psychische Hygiene, or the German Association for Mental Hygiene . Hermann had received his
 Remschmidt, long after the war, still pointed to ""a genetic answer"" to hyperactivity . He was a leading proponent of the use of drugs such as Ritalin . He still believed that there was a genetic answer to the problem .
 The racist and elitist theories of the original child psychiatrists as documented in 1940 at the F irst C ongress have not only survived but flourished . What is equally frightening and obvious is that the theories of child psychiatrists have not survived .
 It has been a natural passage of poison from teacher to student, from the N azis to subsequent generations of child and adolescent psychiatrists . It is a natural progression of poison to teacher to pupil, from Nazaz to psychiatrist .
 R italin is more potent than cocaine in its effect on the dopamine system, an area of the brain many doctors believe is most affected by these drugs . O'Meara pointed to a 2001 study at the Brookhaven National Laboratory .
 Drugs such as Ritalin are now used to treat questionable mental afflictions . Tens of millions of U.S. youngsters are taken by tens of millions .
 Americans wonder why there has been a rash of school shootings and teen suicides in recent years . Yet virtually all of these killings have involved a student on moodaltering drugs or just coming off them .
 In five cases of school shootings between March 1998 and May 1999 including the tragedy at Columbine High School at least seven of the students involved were being medicated . At least seven students were medicated in five school shootings .
 Seung-Hui Cho, the gunman in the 2007 Virginia Tech shootings, had been undergoing psychological counseling . Cho had prescription psychoactive drugs in his possession, according to reports .
 Peter Breggin analyzed the clinical and scientific reasons for asserting that E ric H arris's violence at C olumbine was caused by the prescription drug Luvox . He also argued that the drug was responsible for the violence .
 A Web site called TeenScreenTruth is dedicated to gathering information off the Internet to help teens "connect the dots" between moodaltering drugs and teen violence . The site is based on information gathered from the Internet .
 This assessment was echoed in a 1999 article in Health and Healing by Dr. Dr. David Perry . Dr. Perry: "I'm not a believer in religion. I'm a Christian."
 In 1998, GlaxoSmithKline, maker of Paxil, was ordered to pay $6. million to surviving family members after Donald Schnell, sixty, flew into a rage and killed his wife, daughter, and granddaughter just forty-eight hours after taking Paxil .
 Steven W Brownlee, an Atlanta postal worker on psychotropic drugs, killed two coworkers in 1985 . Brownlee was a postal worker in Atlanta, Georgia, who was addicted to drugs .
 He was given a drug after a fiveminute phone consultation with a psychiatrist . He had been given the drug after five minutes of a phone consultation .
 Solomon, flfl:een, opened flre at Heritage High School in Conyers, Georgia, while on a mix of antidepressants . Solomon, who was on a mixture of antidepressants, opened the school flre .
 She shot and wounded another student at Bishop Neumann High in Williamsport, Pennsylvania . Another student was wounded in the shooting .
 Eli Lilly, which makes Prozac, later seti:led a lawsuit brought by survivors . Eli Lilly's Prozac was later sued by survivors of the drug addiction .
 Debora Green set her Prairie Village, Missouri, home on fire, killing her children, ages six and 13 . Debora set the house on fire with the help of a neighbor . The children were killed in the blaze .
 G erman drug science and psychiatry have provided the foundation for action toward today's schoolchildren who are being steered to drugs for any complaint .
 Direct-to-consumer pharmaceutical advertising grew from $791 million in 1996 to more than $3. billion by 2004 . Direct to-consumer advertising grew to $3 billion in 2004 .
 Media executives fear the loss of advertising revenues from the giant pharmaceutical corporations, some of the largest advertisers in the nation . Those familiar with this subject claim media executives fear .
 M any have, but they don't receive significant coverage in the corporate mass media . Many more fear reprisals from both the drug corporations and the federal government .
 "That effort dwarfs the [pharmaceutical corporations'] advertising expenditures,"" explained Alan Mathios, a dean at the College of Human E cology at C ornell U niversity .
 Signed into law by President George W Bush on j anuary 8, 2002, the act brought immediate criticism from educators, state authorities, and libertarians alike .
 They questioned the act's sweeping proposals, which range from forcing teachers to conform to federally mandated curricula to inflicting monetary punishments on school districts that do not live up to federal expectation .
 $410 million apportioned for the education of migratory children . Most of the children come from the families of illegal aliens .
 Standardized testing has proven a handicap to children who speak English as a second language . Standardized tests have proven to be difficult for children with English as second language children .
 The act was a thinly disguised attempt to force conformity on students and standardize the minds of American youth . While no caring person would want to be caught leaving some poor child ""behind"
 It smacks of the same uniformity of education sought by the N. ational S ocialists under H itier . The government is seeking uniformity, uniformity and uniformity .
 Conservatives and libertarians even claim that the act is an usurpation of state authority by the federal government .
 Utah passed a state law allowing school districts to ignore portions of NCLB . The Department of Education threatened to withhold federal education funds in 2005 .
 The backbone of NCLB is federally mandated standardized testing, which long has been accused of cultural bias . The testing system has been criticized for being biased toward cultural bias by students .
 The practice of testing as a determinant of educational quality has been called into question . The emphasis on tests forces teachers to teach only material that will get students to pass the tests, leaving a deficiency in grasping greater understanding and thinking critically .
 It should also be realized that both textbook publishers and standardized testing firms are, for the most part, controlled by the same globalist corporations under discussion .
 The act rewards districts with better test scores, so critics claim that schools lower their standards to show improvement on test scores . Critics say schools lower standards in order to show that they are improving on test results .
 A 2007 report from the C enter on E ducation P olicy indicated increased test scores in reading and math . It was unclear if this reflected enhanced learning or lower standards on student tests .
 S ection 9528 requires schools to give military recruiters the name, home phone number, and address of every enrolled student . Another portion of the NCLB Act that rankled libertarians was S ections 9528, which required schools to tell recruiters of every student .
 Schools are not required to tell students or parents that their information has been passed on . Students can ask to not have their contact information shared .
 Student information withheld from universities and job recruiters as well as the military . Filing the form often means student information is withheld from recruiters and universities . Fearing filing the required form means students' information is often withheld from employers .
 There are claims that other areas of schooling have been neglected, especially physical education . There are also claims that physical education has been neglected in schools .
 Some nine million kids between the ages of six and 19 suffer from obesity . The Centers for Disease Control says nine million youngsters are obese .
 Garrett Lydic was Delaware's 2006 Teacher of the Year . "I don't get it. I don't understand what's going on," he said .
 NCLB's merciless testing, absurd timetables and reliance on threats,"" says USA Today education writer Alfie Kohn . Kohn: "NCLB has merciless testing and absurd timetabilities"
 He echoed the statement of J ohn D Rockefeller, founder of the National Education Board, who said, "I don't want a nation of thinkers" Rockefeller said, ""I don’t want a country of thinkers."
 H itier felt intellectuals might present a rival to N azi ideology . intellectuals might form a group separate from the common man through a feeling of superiority due to their knowledge and education .
 Biden recalls Bush looking unflappably sure that the U.S. is on the right course and that all was well . Bush, Biden recalled, just looked at him and said he was sure . Biden: "All was well"
 Biden said that Bush stood up and put his hand on the senator's shoulder . Biden said Bush stood down and put a hand on Biden's shoulder.
 The Fourth Reich in America, it seems, is guided by ""instincts, ""just as during Hitler's Reich," says Obama . "The Fourth Reich" in America seems to be guided by instinct, says Obama.
 One difference between the Third Reich and the Fourth is the lack of emphasis on flag ceremonies and repetitious pledges . One of the differences is the absence of flag ceremonies .
 In Nazi Germany, a school day did not pass without these ceremonies of the state . The ceremonies were carried out in Nazi Germany .
 Schoolchildren still recite the Pledge of Allegiance and raise the U.S. flag . But in multicultural America, any formal ceremony has dropped away .
 Today, hardly any American child or adult knows or observes proper flag protocols . Today's flag etiquette is a little more common than today's American flag etiquette .
 If the Pledge of Allegiance is used in schools, it is generally spoken over the loudspeaker . It is generally used in classrooms .
 If they can obtain a note from their parents, they are not even required to stand . If you can get the note from your parents, you can't even stand in the crowd .
 P. atriotic allegiance to one's nation is not conducive to the globalists' agenda of borderless countries under the control of multinational corporations . The globalists want to create borderless nations under control of corporations .
 Today, such nationalistic trappings have been replaced by ubiquitous corporate logos and slogans . Today's nationalistic tributes are replaced with ubiquitous corporate slogans and slogans.
 More and more educational programs are being underwritten and guided by corporate officials . The programs are underwritten by corporations and underdeveloped by students .
 President Bush's secretary of education Margaret Spellings hosted the 2006-07 Siemens Competition in Math, Science, and Technology . Spellings was Spellings' Secretary of Education during the competition .
 Business leaders began to realize that education had failed to keep up with the corporatism of America . Business leaders realized that education was failing to keep pace with corporatism .
 Prudential CEO Art Ryan complained that hiring high school graduates today is a high risk . Ryan: Hiring high school grads is a "high risk" for the company .
 Another rising concern in education tliat can be traced bacl< to corporate intrusion is tine rise of advertising in scliools .
 Teacliers liave complained that getting kids to buy products, feel good about a corporation, or adopt the viewpoints of an industry on an important issue is not the purpose of education . promotional sponsored education materials blur the line between education and propaganda .
 Advertisers would dictate the placement of billboards, banners, and lightboxes, according to a teacher at a school in Oakland, California .
 The highly visible areas normally reserved for students' artwork, bulletin boards, and school/community message centers would be taken over . Areas would include bulletin boards and school message centers .
 Retired Georgia teacher Elizabeth Gould wrote, " "" gives students a warped sense of the world" Retired teacher wrote, ' ''
 A fourth-grade teacher at Alice Costello School in Brooklawn, New J ersey, said, "In an ideal world, schools would have all the money they need to fund programs and buy equipment, but we're not living in Utopia."
 Advertisers urged to exercise self-restraint or face future legal restrictions . Gary Ruskin, writing in Advertising Age magazine, urged advertisers to exercise restraint .
 Channel One, the in-school advertising service, was removed last school year from Nashville, and will soon be kicked out of Seattle . Channel One was removed from Nashville last year, and is now in Seattle .
 A group of Chicago businessmen became concerned that education in Germany and Austria was moving ahead of American education in the 1800s .
 Even in the 1800s, thoughtful persons questioned the propriety of business guiding education . But even in the 18th century, thoughtful people questioned the idea .
 In mid-2007, billionaires Bill Gates and Eli Broad announced they had pooled $60 million to finance a campaign to emphasize education in the 2008 elections . Gates and Broad announced the campaign would focus on education education .
 Nationalism in Germany of the 1930s made a strong appeal to its youth . Nationalism was made to Germany's youth by the Nazis .
 The N azis fully realized that if the younger generations could be brought to their worldview, the future of National Socialism would be assured . The future of the N.S. was assured, according to the Nazis .
 Modern America also has witnessed conflict between the younger and older generations . Modern America has also seen conflict between generations of Americans .
 The genesis of this generational conflict began with rockand-roll music of the 1950s . It grew full-blown with the Vietnam War, when families were split along lines of age . The Vietnam War was the first time families were divided .
 The young embraced the antiwar movement while the older generations supported the war policies of Lyndon J ohnson and Richard Nixon . The older generations, tempered by the propaganda of World War II, supported the policies of the war .
 Hitler's promises of a more prosperous future held considerable sway with the younger generations . Here again was a reflection of Nazi Germany, where Hitler's promise of a better future held much sway .
 This generational conflict was caused by control over popular culture such as music, films, art, etc. It was merely another use of the divideand-conquer tactic . This is merely another attempt to divide and conquer .
 Milton Mayer was both J ewish and of German ancestry . Mayer was an American journalist and educator . He was of German descent .
 He traveled in E. urope before the war and tried unsuccessfully to gain an audience with H itier in 1935 . He traveled to E. orope in 1935 and visited the city in 1935.
 Seven years after the war ended, Mayer traveled in Germany, searching to understand what had made the average German blindly follow National Socialism . Mayer traveled to Germany in search of what made Germans follow National Socialist ideology .
 Ten Germans were sufficiently different from one another in background, character, intellect, and temperament to represent, among them, some millions or tens of millions of Germans . But they were sufficiently like unto one another to have been Nazis .
 "I was overcome by the same sensation that had got in the way of my newspaper reporting in Chicago years before," he says . "It was the same feeling that had gotten in the . way of reporting in the Chicago years ago," he writes .
 Mayer recounted the story of one unnamed German academic, a language teacher, and his experience as Hitler's Third Reich grew in prominence . Mayer recounted his experience in Germany in the 1930s and 1940s . Mayer: "The story of a German academic's experience in the Third Reich is a
 After 1933 no one seemed to notice the ever-widening gap between the government and the people . This teacher said that after 1933 the gap between government and people was growing .
 It was all rigmarole, of course, but it consumed all one's energies, coming on top of the work one really wanted to do . "It consumed all of the energy, but ... it consumed ... all of it," she says of her work .
 You can see how easy it was, then, not to think about fundamental things. You can't think about basic things, and it's easy to do so easily .
 The dictatorship, and the whole process of its coming into being, was above all diverting . The dictatorship is above all the time diverting. The whole process was diverting, says the former president .
 It provided an excuse not to think for people who did not want to think anyway . It provided a way to avoid thinking, but it did not stop people thinking anyway .
 "I was neither, so I did not speak out. Then they came for the S ocialists and the Trade U nionists, but I was neither," he says .
 'I was not a J ew so I did not speak out. Then they came for the J ews, but I was not the J w ews so I didn't speak out,' she says .
 A great part of this hesitancy to resist encroaching fascism was not due to fear, according to the academic Milton Mayer, but to genuine uncertainty that anyone else was seeing the things as he did, he says .
 In Nazi Germany, people who questioned the motives behind government policies were deemed alarmists . Those who questioned government policies in Nazi Germany were deemed to be 'alarmists'
 In America today, they are called conspiracy theorists . "In small gatherings of your oldest friends, you feel that you are talking to yourselves," says author. "You are isolated from the reality of things"
 It is clearer all the time that, if you are going to do anything, you must make an occasion to do it, and then you are obviously a troublemaker . It is clear all the . time that if you . going to . do something, you have to make it an
 "So you wait, and you wait,"" explained an unnamed teacher quoted by Mayer .
 The person who is aware suddenly sees the world in a new way . He said that the person . who is . aware suddenly suddenly sees . the world .
 The forms are all there, all untouched, all reassuring, the houses, the shops, the jobs, the mealtimes, the visits, the concerts, the cinema, the holidays, the family .
 B ut the spirit, which you never noticed because you made the lifelong mistake of identifying it with the forms, is changed . The spirit is changed, and the spirit of the spirit will be changed .
 N ow you live in a world of hate and fear, and the people who hate, fear do not even know it themselves; when everyone is transformed, no one is transformed . When people are transformed, they will not be transformed .
 The people in Germany who still thought of complaining, protesting, resisting, were betting on Germany's losing the war . And the people who, once the war had begun, still thought . Germany's war had already begun, and people who thought of protesting were betting against Germany losing it .
 N azi-occupied E. urope, and even many G ermans toward the end of the war, looked to the Allied nations for their liberation .
 In Nazi Germany, while labor was extolled and glamorized, the power of labor unions was all but abolished . It should also be noted that in Nazi Germany it was not only that labor unions were abolished .
 All labor matters were combined into the Deutsche Arbeitsfront, or German Labor Front, a monolithic N azi organization created by H itier to replace the old labor union system .
 The agenda of the corporate globalists was at work to curtail any meaningful power within the working class . Again, the agenda of global globalists is at work, says CNN.com .
 The promised labor-professional equality was a myth, and labor problems continued to plague the N azi government right through the end of the war . However, despite early labor support based on pro-labor Nazi slogans and propaganda, the workers soon realized that the promised labor professional equality was
 Globalists declined to create a laborcontrolling mechanism with modern America . In light of the continuing problems in Nazi Germany, the globalists chose not to create such a system .
 The White House bought corrupt labor leaders, made deals with crime syndicates that controlled certain unions, and crippling labor through federal legislation pushed through Congress with corporate money . Instead, they began a successful program of buying corrupt labor .
 Reagan administration crushed collective bargaining by air traffic controllers in the 1980s . Air traffic controllers desired increased air safety through better working conditions rather than just higher wages .
 A labor dispute between the International Longshore and Warehouse Union and the Pacific Maritime Association caused a stack-up of cargo ships along the West Coast from San Diego to Seattle . The dispute threatened to cut deeply into the 200203 holiday season profits . Another example came in mid-2002, when
 President Bush invoked the TaftHartley Act, a controversial 1947 union-busting law . The act was passed over President Truman's veto . The strike was broken in October, when Bush invoked a controversial law .
 U.S. government and corporate policies have been instituted by firms created and controlled by America's wealthy elite globalists . It has already been demonstrated how many United States government and . corporate policies were instituted by . firms and organizations created by . America's rich and powerful globalists.
 Globalists created the myth that the Rockefellers represent the apex of America's wealthy elite . The globalists also created a myth that they represent the . apex of the wealthy elite, a description the Roc .
 The long-standing idea that American oil magnate J. ohn D Rockefeller was driven solely by greed obscured the fact that he was financed by outside sources . Rockefeller's wealth was not only driven by greed, but by the outside sources, it was also funded by outside interests . Rockefeller
 According to Eustace Mullins, the Rockefeller combine has never been an independent power . Mullins: Rockefeller combines have never been independent power. Mullins says Rockefeller is not independent .
 It was this myth of a homegrown elite that distracted attention from the international globalists and allowed the American public to accept the family as the nation's preeminent power .
 Mullins: 'This is tine final control, which ensures that no one can quit the organization. According to Mullins, 'This . ensures that . no one . can quits the organization . Mullins says .
 He would be stripped of all assets, under contract for assassination . Not only would he be stripped, but he would be under contract to kill himself .
 Mullins was fully aware of the lack of detection or prosecution of N azi war criminals who came to America, or of any serious prosecution of prominent corporate miscreants . Mullins, like authors J ohn Loftus, Gary Allen, M ark Aarons, and
 Examples of the machinations of foreign financial powers in the U.S. may be found in my book Rule by Secrecy .
 The Rockefellers, the M organs, the S chiffs, and the Warburgs have in recent years lost much of their previous influence . But their giant global enterprises today remain as powerful as ever, maintaining all the functions they were first organized .
 This mechanism today has been brought under the control of the fascist globalists, who created both communism and National Socialism using the wealth brought from Europe by the Nazi ratlines . The globalists today have brought this mechanism under control of this mechanism today .
 In January 1945, German war production was actually higher than in 1940, the year of spectacular military successes . In 1945, the German cities were in ruins from round-the-clock Allied bombings .
 Germans were still heading off to work each day each day, and production facilities, many moved underground, were producing at record capacity . Germany was still heading for work, with production facilities moving underground .
 Historians have faithfully recorded the reasons for this propaganda and hidden terror . Historians will continue to record the reasons behind this propaganda .
 The official, controlled government news bombarded the public with assurances that there was light at the end of the tunnel . The official government news has assured the public that there will be light at end of tunnel .
 N ew secret weapons were coming on line, they were told, and this, as has been noted, was not a total lie . They were told they had secret weapons being made available .
 According to the media, God was on their side and all would end well . According to their media, the media was on the side and said all would be well .
 There also was the knowledge, only heard in whispered rumors, that anyone who spoke out about the true state of Nazi Germany would disappear into the offices of the Gestapo, likely never to be seen again .
 Globalists have learned from the N azis of the Third R eich how to employ these methods to ensure obedience from an intimidated public . The globalists have used these methods in order to get the public to obey them, says Julian Zelizer .
 Americans have learned to live with fear since September 11, 2001 . From constantly changing terrorist alerts and color codes in public places, since 9/11, Americans have lived with fear .
 Unspoken fear is rampant in many levels of U.S. society, and it's not all caused by unknown foreign terrorists . The fear of terrorism is not only caused by foreign terrorists, it's also caused by American society's fears .
 President Kennedy, Robert F Kennedy, and Dr. Kennedy, were assassinated in 1968 . President Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 . The Kennedy family is proud of their legacy .
 The trail of dead dissidents, witnesses, accusers, and whistleblowers has grown longer with each passing year . Martin Luther King J, on through the 2002 fatal plane crash of Minnesota Democratic senator P aul Wellstone eleven days before an election whose seat was then taken by a R epublic
 If any individual threatens to become too popular or brings too much attention to the fascist activities, they seem to disappear from the scene quickly . J ust as in the days of the Third R eich, if any individual . threatens to . become . popular or bring too much . attention
 Texas senator ohn Tower was critical of the Reagan-Bush handling of the Iran-contra scandal . Tower had confided to friends that he planned to write a tell-all book .
 Tower was killed in a plane crash at Brunswick, Georgia, on April 5, 1991 . Tower had chaired the powerful Senate Armed Services Committee and the Republican Policy Committee . Tower died in the plane crash .
 Clinton White House counsel Vince Foster's 1993 death was ruled a suicide . J ames McDougal, a convicted partner of Bill Clinton in the Whitewater scandal, was a source of insider information to prosecutor Kenneth Starr .
 M cDougal died of an apparent sudden heart attack while being held in solitary confinement in a Fort Worth federal institution . He was being held at a federal institution in Texas .
 Others, while not actually killed, have been shot or intimidated from running for office, such as former Alabama governor George Wallace and 1992 presidential candidate Ross Perot . Perot publicly stated his reason for dropping out was his safety for his family .
 Many members of C ongress find themselves susceptible to blackmail by damaging information from government and corporate databases . Thanks to the modern surveillance state, many members of the public find themselves vulnerable to blackmail .
 J. Edgar Hoover blackmailed government employees and congressmen into supporting his agendas . Hoover perhaps with files from Interpol, as previously discussed blackmailing government employees into supporting him .
 All too often, this type of coercion is more effective than campaign contributions . All too oft en, this kind of coercion can be more effective, says CNN.com .
 It is not only Congress members who find themselves at the mercy of increasing surveillance and control . But it is also not only members of Congress .
 Beginning in December 2009, Americans will face the prospect of carrying their ""papers"" to conduct daily life, similar to the identity papers demanded by the Nazi Gestapo . Americans will be required to carry their "papers"
 Under provisions of the Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act for Defense, the Global War on Terror, and Tsunami Relief, popularly known as the Real ID Act, a national identity card will be required of every citizen .
 Today it has become unlawful not to provide identification documents to a police officer upon demand . It has also become unlawful to provide ID documents to police officers upon demand.
 The sheer act of failing to properly identify oneself can today result in arrest and jail . Failure to identify oneself today could result in jail and jail, says police .
 The law requires national standards for state-issued driver's licenses as well as non-driver identification cards . Under the pretext of combating terrorism, this law is needed to combat terrorism .
 No federal agency can accept any state ID card or license unless it meets the requirements as stated in the Real ID Act . It specifically states that no federal agencies can accept state ID cards or licenses unless they meet requirements .
 Anyone without identification compliant with Real ID Act may be unable to fly on commercial aircraft . The Transportation Security Administration provides security at airports . Anyone without a Real ID must have a passport compliant with the law .
 Employers would no longer be able to hire anyone without a Real ID Act-compliant document . The federal Social Security Administration requires states to maintain a new-hire directory . The law would require states to keep a new hire directory .
 Financial institutions would be required to accept only Act-compliant IDs . Of particular concern to libertarians is the requirement that all financial institutions would have to accept Act-compliance IDs .
 Customers without federally approved documentation could be denied financial and banking services . Customers without such documentation could have been denied services .
 The law was attached as a rider to a military spending bill and signed into law on May 11, 2005 . This thinly disguised nationwide citizen-registration law languished in a hesitant Congress .
 In 2007, it was announced that enforcement of the law would be delayed until December 2009 . Several states have passed legislation opposing the Real ID Act . The law was announced in 2007 .
 In 2007, states that opted out of the Real ID Act were told their citizens might not be able to travel freely around the country . The act was passed by Congress in 2007, but some states opted out .
 Steven Yates is a teaching fellow at the Ludwig von Mises Institute in Auburn, Alabama . He is a research and education center of classical liberalism, libertarian political theory and economics .
 Institute supports publications, programs, and fellowships . Follows the intellectual tradition of Ludwig von Mises, a renowned economist who has been called the ""uncontested dean of the Austrian school of economics,""
 He and others see the slow encirclement of law-abiding U.S. citizens with national ID technology advancing a globalist agenda . National ID technology does little to safeguard us against terrorism, they say .
 Many legislators, such as J ane H arman of C alifornia, seemed agreeable to citizen registration .
 Asked if she thought the public was ready for such measures, Harman replied, ""I think most people are really there. Most people really there"
 A vision of the near future in which the feds could freeze dissident's assets could be done by reprogramming his database information . What disturbs many thinking people is a vision of a near future when the feds decide to stifle dissent, they could "freeze" dissident
 Scanners would not recognize him and he would become invisible, unable to drive or work legally, have a bank account, buy anything on credit, or even see a doctor . He would be unable to work or drive, work legally or have bank accounts .
 Applied Digital Solutions, Inc., a high-tech development company headquartered in Palm Beach, Florida, announced the launching of a national promotion for its new subdermal personal verification microchip in October 2002 .
 The ""Get Chipped"" promotion was describing a device that can be implanted under a person's skin to transmit data to various locations .
 The 'VeriChip' is an implantable, 12mm by 2.1mm radio frequency device . The device is about the size of a typical ballpoint pen .
 Radio frequency energy passes through the skin, energizing the dormant VeriChip . The dormant chip then emits a radio frequency signal containing the verification number .
 The firm also fields the ""ChipMobile,"" a motorized marketing and ""chipping"" vehicle .
 The chip chip is not a regulated medical device, the FDA has ruled . The new campaign was launched just days after the FDA ruled that the chip was safe .
 Chip implants have been linked to malignant tumors in some lab mice and rats . Manufacturers and FDA did not mention studies in the 1990s .
 Cancer experts say animal tests don't necessarily apply to humans . They are 'troubled' by the findings and urged further study .
 Some say they would not allow their family members to receive implants . Others would not be allowed to have implants implanted into their bodies .
 Tommy Thompson was the head of the federal Department of H ealth and H uman S ervices when the VeriC hip was approved . Tommy Thompson has since left his government post as a director of the government .
 H e resigned from the company in early 2007 to run an unsuccessful campaign as a Republican presidential candidate . H e resigns from the firm to run a failed presidential bid in 2007 .
 Uses for the chip include controlling access to nonpublic facilities such as government buildings and installations, nuclear power plants, national research laboratories, correctional institutions, and correctional institutions .
 C ompany officials envision chip will come to be used in a wide range of consumer products . P C and laptop computers, personal vehicles, cell phones, homes, and apartments, officials say .
 They said the implanted chip will help stop identity theft and aid the war against terrorists . The chip will be implanted in a secure location in the UK .
 C ityWatcher.com began to place the VeriC hip in the arms of some of its employees who worked in sensitive areas .
 Firm did not require employees to receive the chip to keep their jobs . Some saw the company as establishing an unsettling precedent .
 Authorities are availing themselves of technologies the Nazis of the Third Reich could only have dreamed about . Today, authorities are using technology the Nazis could only dream about .
 Satellite surveillance and the increasingly ubiquitous cameras in public places have curtailed privacy to a large extent in the industrialized world . Satellite surveillance also curtails privacy in industrialized countries .
 Sophisticated miniature cameras now can read license plates and track vehicles even traveling at speeds of more than sixty miles per hour .
 The United States federal government utilizes an electronic eavesdropping satellite and computer system called Echelon . The U.S. federal government uses the system to spy on satellites .
 System tracks international telephone calls, faxes, and e-mail messages all around the world . This system tracks international phone calls and faxes from around the globe .
 The government would neither confirm nor deny its existence until 2001 . It was so secret that the government would not confirm nor confirm its existence .
 Echelon accumulates electronic transmissions like a vacuum cleaner . Study by the Europe an Union says it accumulates transmissions using keyword-search software and massive data banks .
 The Echelon system, housed within the National Security Agency at Fort Meade, Maryland, has caused protests in several nations excluding the United States . The U.S. rarely sees any news concerning this powerful global wiretapping system .
 As technology continues to advance, so does the means of manipulating, even controlling, whole groups of individuals . The means of controlling, controlling, individuals can be manipulated by technology .
 The means to control the human mind has come a long way since the days of Nazi concentration camps and the subsequent CIA drug experimentation . The means of controlling the mind is still a mystery .
 electromagnetic frequencies can alter perceptions, instill emotions, and even cloud normal reasoning . Beamed electromagnetic frequencies have been used in the U.S. for decades .
 All organic life consists of living cells controlled by the DNA within them . The DNA of all organic life is controlled by DNA within the living cells .
 The chemical action within the cells is driven by electromagnetic frequencies that pulse, oscillate, and vibrate . The cells are driven by an electromagnetic frequency that pulse and oscillate .
 The energy within a living organism creates a weak, albeit weak, electromagnetic field . Collectively, the energy within an organism creates an electromagnetic field, which can be seen in the light of light .
 Royal Raymond Rife demonstrated the ability of precise electrical frequencies to disrupt viral and bacteria cells . He demonstrated how precise electrical frequency can disrupt viral cells .
 Thomas Rivers of the Rockefeller Institute had not even seen Rife's equipment in operation . Thomas Rivers said he was surprised to discover that Rife had never even seen the equipment before .
 By 1934, R ife had isolated a virus that bred cancer and stopped it by bombarding it with electromagnetic frequencies . By 1934 it had isolated the virus which bred cancer .
 He was successful in killing both carcinoma and sarcoma cancers in more than four hundred tests on animals . He was able to kill both cancers in over four hundred animals .
 F oord, succeeded in using his frequencies to cure 16 cancer patients diagnosed as terminal by conventional medicine . He used his frequency to cure sixteen cancer patients who had been diagnosed terminal .
 The body then recovers itself naturally from the toxic effect of the virus or bacteria . The body is destroyed and the body recovers itself from the toxins .
 A general analogy to this effect is glass shattering when a singer's high note is sounded . The effect is similar to glass shattering in glass when a high note sounds .
 It did not take long for the medical establishment to realize that such a device not only would wreck the pharmaceutical industry but damage medicine in general, since cures meant fewer visits to the doctor . The medical establishment realized that such an invention would wreck medicine .
 False claims were made against him against him, test procedures were altered, causing his demonstrations to fail, and impossible and diverting demands were made on Rife's research . False claims made against Rife, and test procedures altered, caused his demonstrations .
 Rife's troubles turned more serious after he declined an offer to partner with M orris F ishbein, then head of the American M edical Association . Rife is facing lawsuits and health authorities coming at him from all sides .
 Rife was marginalized, and his device today is available only as a costly research instrument employed by a few doctors and private citizens . Rife is marginalized, but his device is now only available as a cheap research instrument .
 electromagnetic energy manipulation was seeking to make humans healthier . But such technology also brought horrific possibilities for mind control .
 By the early 1970s, within certain military and academic circles, it became clear that human behavior could be modified by the use of subtle energetic manipulations . By the 1970s it was clear that humans could manipulate their behavior .
 It is destructive to living organisms; can cause behavior modification by transmitting frequencies through normal telephone, TV, and radio networks . It can produce frequencies to paralyze the central nervous system . It is also known to be dangerous to humans .
 Several methods have been found to allow persons to hear sounds and speech without the use of the ears or normal auditory pathways such as the Neurophone . The Neurophone was developed in the 1980s .
 This device uses a vibrational technology developed by Patrick Flanagan in 1958 . The technology allows the transmission of sound vibrations through the skin, much like the vibration of a speaker .
 Bypassing the ear, a completely different part of the brain processes the sound, creating new neural pathways . Bypasses the ear and creates neural pathways in the brain, the sound creates a new neural pathway .
 S uch technology is used to increase concentration while studying or learning languages . It also helps with meditation, relaxation, and healing .
 Amplified brainwave frequencies can be imposed on others . Unfortunately, it was also found that amplified brainwaves can also be imposed by others .
 S . patent describes how very low or very high audio frequencies can be used to transmit subliminal messages to the human brain . Patent describes how subliminals can be transmitted to the brain .
 The reason that the Soviets set safety standards as low as they did was because they detected biological effects at levels ignored by the West,"" he explained .
 Microwaves may be affecting large segments of the population in the U.S. But this issue pales when one considers the possibility of a program to consciously target whole populations .
 Vast array of powerful transmitting dishes located near Gakona, Alaska . Such a program exists in the High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program .
 Scientists claim this powerful array can be used as a weapon . They claim it can deliver energy blasts equal to an atomic bomb, destroy communications across the planet, and even influence human behavior .
 C ritics argue that H AAR P has the capability of stimulating the ionosphere to return a pulsed electromagnetic signal, which, at the proper frequency, can override normal brain functions .
 A complaint letter from the Russian State Duma to President Vladimir Putin stated that HAARP was influencing near-Earth atmosphere with high-frequency radio waves . The letter was sent to the Russian state Duma .
 This new type of weapon differs from previous types in that the near-E arth medium becomes at once an object of direct influence,"" stated the letter .
 Despite this objection, no discernible action has been taken by the United States, and the HAARP system continues to operate . The U.S. has not taken any action .
 COMPUTER systems are under development today to anticipate criminal or antisocial behavior . Computers can anticipate criminal behavior .
 They are designed to read human body language that might indicate potential criminal activity and summon authorities . They are reminiscent of prewar Nazi plans to preempt crime and dissent .
 First Conference of the German Society for Child Psychiatry and Therapeutic Education was held in Vienna, Austria, in September 1940 . The society later changed to the German society for Child and Adolescent P sychiatry .
 The trend to identify and detain potential troublemakers before they have actually committed a crime is being perpetuated today . The trend has been perpetuated by police officers in recent years .
 The British government, in May 2007, acknowledged it had secretly established a new national antiterrorist unitto protect VIP s by first profiling, then arresting persons considered potentially dangerous .
 The power to detain suspects even before they actually committed a crime was based on mental health laws . Amazingly, this power to . detain suspects was based upon mental health . laws .
 It was hailed as the first joint mental health police unit in the United Kingdom . The unit is hailed as a 'prototype for future joint services' in other areas .
 British government introduces legislation to broaden definition of mental disorders . It would give doctors and police more power to detain people .
 If you are going to allow doctors to take people's liberty away, they have to be independent . If you're going to let doctors take people’s liberty away from you, they must be independent, she says . She says .
 Doctors' credibility undermined when doctors are part of the same team as the police, police say . That credibility is undermined when the police are involved in the investigation, they say .
 A unit that allows police investigation to lead directly to people being sectioned without any kind of criminal proceedings . F irst, that you have a unit that . allows police . investigation to . lead directly into people being . sectioned . Police investigation leads to people sectioning without criminal proceedings
 Libertarians fear that such measures might be slipped into legislation such as funding for the military or H omeland S ecurity . They fear that they might be slipping into legislation .
 Once offenders are picked up, today they face new types of unconstitutional trials . Once offenders were picked up they face a new type of unconstitutional trial . The trials are often unconstitutional .
 Another eerie parallel between the Bush administration and the Third Reich involved the Fuehrerprinzip, or leader principle, which was outlined in Hitler's book Mein Kampf . The leader principle was outlined by Hitler's famous book, which he wrote about .
 This principle stated the leader embodied National Socialism and therefore the people . This principle was stated the . leader embodied . National Socialism . Therefore the people, therefore the . people, were the people of Germany .
 National Socialism, like our democracy, was supposedly a movement of the masses . National Socialism was supposedly supposed to be a movement for the masses. National Socialism is supposedly a democracy .
 "Ideology denounced civilian methods of elections, negotiation, and compromise as horse trading,"" noted P rofessor Louis L Snyder in his Encyclopedia .
 This top-down leadership principle sounds eerily similar to calls by President George W Bush for a ""unified presidency" as well as his comment to reporters in April 2006, ""I hear the voices, and I read the frontpage and I know the speculation. And I know
 Brookings Institution senior fellow with Brookings Institution: Reagan, Bush and Reagan were both presidents . Reagan and Bush were both known for their work in the 1980s .
 Civil libertarians historically have heeded the statement of patriot Thomas Paine, who wrote in Common Sense, "In America, the law is king"
 Bush has argued that actions allowing him to ride roughshod over the Congress, the courts, and the Constitution were necessary to preserve the presidency . Yet, Bush has said those actions were somehow necessary to protect the president .
 In launching the invasion of Iraq in 2003, Bush preempted the power of Congress, as the U.S. C onstitution under S ection 8 clearly states that only C ongress has the power to declare war .
 President Obama and his appointees rammed the USA PATRIOT Act through a cowed Congress, with little or no input . He likewise took powers from the representatives of the people, he says .
 It was hurriedly and enthusiastically signed into law by President Bush on October 26, 2001 . President Bush signed it into law in 2001 .
 The speed with which this legislation was presented to Congress left little doubt in many minds that it had long been prepared . It simply needed some provocation as an impetus for action, the author says .
 According to some congressmen, many lawmakers had not even read the entire document when it was passed . Some congressmen say they didn't even read it when passed .
 ACLU: Some members of Congress had less than one hour to read the changes of law contained within the act . The ACLU also reported that some members of the Congress were given less than two hours to read changes to the law .
 "The great fear began when we had to evacuate the Capitol on September 11," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I'm not going to be able to live in the U.S. forever. The great fear is that we will be forced to evacuate."
 A bomb scare occurred as members were pressing the CIA during a secret briefing . It continued when we had to leave the Capitol again when a bomb scare was reported .
 It is present in the camouflaged armed national guardsmen who greet members of C ongress each day . The camouflaged guardsmen greet each day each day we enter the C apitol campus .
 Texas congressman Ron Paul was one of only three Republicans to vote against the House bill . Paul said he objected to how opponents were stigmatized by the name .
 I thought it was undermining the C onstitution, so I didn't vote for it therefore I'm somehow not a patriot, I thought I'm not a patriotic . I thought that undermining the constitution was undermining it, I said. I thought ... therefore I was a patriot. I
 Paul confirmed rumors that the bill was not read by most members of the H ouse prior to their vote . Paul confirms rumors that most of the members of Congress did not read the bill .
 Paul's view of the PATRIOT Bill was echoed by the only independent in the House, Congressman Bernie Sanders of Vermont, who said, "I took an oath to support and defend the Constitution of the United States"
 Since March 9, 1933, the United States has been in a state of declared national emergency . The U.S. has been declared a national emergency since that date, March 9 .
 In fact, until 1976, the USA operated under four presidentially proclaimed states of national emergency . The one declared by R oosevelt in 1933 was declared by P resident Truman on December 16, 1950, during the Korean conflict .
 Years of debate over the need for emergency powers resulted in the creation of the United States Senate's Special Committee on the Termination of the National Emergency in 1973 .
 By 1976, the committee had consolidated emergency declarations and produced the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601-1651), which limits such emergencies to two years .
 Hundreds of statutes delegate to the president extraordinary powers . They affect the lives of American citizens in a host of all-encompassing manners . The president is entitled to extraordinary powers, ordinarily exercised by the Congress, he says .
 This vast range of powers, taken together, confer enough authority to rule the country without reference to normal constitutional processes . This vast number of powers confer enough power to rule freely . The country is ruled by the British government without regard to constitutional process .
 People in the U nited S tates today have been informed that they have been living under a state of emergency since September 11, 2001 .
 The implication was that he would lead the entire government, not just the executive branch . President Barack Obama has said he would be a better leader than the president .
 Bush's contention that he must defend his office from the loss of power is also troubling . Bush: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not sure what I think about it"
 Vice President Cheney: 'For thirty-five years that I've been in, there's been a constant, steady erosion of the prerogatives and the powers of the president of the United States. InJ anuary 2006, Cheney stated on NBC, 'For 30-35 years
 The American president today carries far more power than ever imagined by our F ounding F athers or even more modern chief executives . Richard Loss's 1990 book The M odern Theory of P residential P ower .
 J ohn W Dean, the White House counsel to Nixon, who served jail time after Watergate, said, ""the institutional powers of the presidency all but overwhelm those of Congress" Dean, a former White House lawyer, served time for Watergate .
 Dean added: 'To claim a need for secrecy to restore presidential power is disingenuous at best, and a deliberate falsehood at worst' Dean added that claims need to be shrouded in secrecy are 'dishonest'
 A J une 29, 2006, Supreme Court ruling bolstered efforts of those in Congress who had been trying to curtail overreaching overreaching presidential power . The ruling says the president has unilateral authority to determine how terrorism suspects are tried .
 The Bush administration drew up the M ilitary C ommissions Act of 2006 . The act required the Bush administration to draw up the act .
 The White House has a penchant for secrecy, including secrecy surrounding its secrecy . It has a history of secrecy surrounding the White House .
 Bush's secretive manner of drawing ever more power unto liimself came in tine form of ""signing statements" written responses by tine president issued upon tine signing of a bill into law .
 Such statements have drawn severe criticism from credible legal sources, including credible legal experts . The statements have been taken to task by the government .
 From 1817 until the end of the Carter administration in 1981, only 75 ""signing statements"" were issued .
 From the Reagan administration until the end of the Clinton administration, this number had grown to 322 . The number of people killed in the military has grown to more than 1,000 .
 Such signing statements convey a president's view toward the law and his own power . The signing statement is a statement of support for the president . Such statements convey the president's views on the law .
 Bush is the first president in modern history who has never vetoed a bill . Congress has no chance to override his judgments, columnist says .
 Bush often invites sponsors to signing ceremonies, at which he lavishes praise upon their work . The bills' sponsors often receive praise from the president .
 Van Bergen took particular note of Bush's signing statement while he was signing into law curtailing torture on prisoners . The statement was part of the signing of a bill curbing torture in prisoners .
 Cooper: "This is really big, very expansive, and very significant" Cooper said. "This was really big and very expansive"
 The Bush White House is more closed-mouthed than any previous administration . Little is said of such things, because the Bush administration is more secretive .
 In the Nixon, Reagan, Clinton, and both Bush administrations, loyalty has been seen as a requisite for those serving the White House . Loyalty is seen as an important part of loyalty in the Nixon and Reagan administrations . loyalty is a key component in loyalty to the president .
 Many people working with the highest levels of power in the U.S. see their superiors as public servants . They are only looking after the best interests of America, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Such unquestioning loyalty and allegiance was a hallmark of the Third Reich . Such unquestionable loyalty and loyalty was the hallmark of Hitler's regime .
 M any loyalists around N ixon, R eagan, C linton, and the two B ushes truly saw their leader as a paragon . M ixon was a 'paragon' of the people he was around .
 They appeared blinded to their leader's actions, as happened to so many in the Third Reich . They were blinded to his actions as well as so many who died in the Holocaust .
 She was twenty-two years old when she was selected to become a secretary to Hitler . She was chosen to be Hitler's secretary at the age of 22 .
 Germans could see parallels between their Nazi era and modern America . Soon after the War on Terror got underway, the Germans, who should know, could see the parallels .
 Herta Daeubler-Gmelin brought criticism from President George W Bush in September of 2002, in criticizing Bush's policy in Iraq . Herta said Bush wants to distract attention from his domestic problems . She also said Bush wanted to distract from Iraq .
 Daeubler-Gmelin was asked to resign by German chancellor Gerhard Schroeder . For her remark, the German chancellor asked her to resign . She was a guest at Bilderberg meetings .
 It is not just politicians who must be careful of voicing their opinions in the new American empire . And it is not only politicians but also people who have to be careful to speak out .
 Demonstrators are routinely herded into fenced "free speech zones" or arrested for speaking out . Demonstrations are routinely held in fenced zones or herded in "speech-free speech" zones .
 Andrew Meyer was asked why he had not challenged the 2006 presidential election . He was tasered by campus police on September 17, 2007 . Meyer was a student at Florida University .
 On top of the ubiquitous nature of surveillance technology and the intimidation of dissenters, there is very real control through the print and electronic matrix we know as the mass media . Mass media is very powerful in the way it controls the media .
 The Nazis of the Third R eich were well-known for their use of propaganda as a tool of public control . The Nazis used propaganda to control public opinion in Nazi Germany .
 The 1952 edition of The New Webster Encyclopedic Dictionary of the English Language defined propaganda as propaganda . Propaganda was defined as propaganda by the New Webster dictionary .
 Where the definition of propaganda once included allegations and false information, today it is just ""organized"" and ""selected"" information, of the type seen daily in the mass media .
 A noteworthy component of propaganda is not just false or spun information, but the omission of critical material that is essential to enable the reader or viewer to place the presented information in a meaningful context . Propaganda is not only false, spun information but also important information .
 C ritics see the single greatest failing of the modern corporate mass media as that while it bombards its audience with facts, figures, and statistics, it rarely attempts to bring coherence to this data .
 M any people complain that the major media are superficial, conformist, and subjective in their selection of news. M any . people complain about the major . media . The major media is superficial and conformist .
 A Pew Research Center poll showed respondents who thought news reporting unfair and inaccurate ranged into the 60 percentiles . A Pew poll showed people who thought the news was unfair or inaccurate thought it was unfair .
 A survey by the news industry publication Editor & Publisher showed that journalists themselves do not disagree with the idea .
 N early half of its participants indicated their belief that news coverage is shallow and inadequate . The survey was conducted by CNN iReport.com with a panel of experts .
 H itier was stating that most people are honest and would never tell a great lie . Therefore, it is hard for them to believe that anyone especially an admired leader would tell one .
 During the Nuremberg trials, Hermann Goering explained how to persuade the public to go to war . For example, Goering said how to convince the public of war .
 Voice or no voice, tine people can always be brought to the bidding of the leaders . Voice of the people is always always a factor in the outcome of a vote .
 Ubiquitous propaganda remains a prime method for controlling public thought and worldviews . The U.S. government is using propaganda to control public thought, the author says .
 The use of the public media to frame the issues of the day and bolster support for the government was quickly understood by Hitler and his top lieutenants . Hitler used the media to bolster his government's support for his regime .
 In America today, there are thousands of persons working in the advertising agencies, public relations firms, and programming departments of the TV networks and cable/satellite channels . They are toiling unceasingly to present the corporate worldview to their viewers .
 "They weave an electromagnetic ""matrix"" around our society, which is difficult to break with even for the most sophisticated and educated," says the author of the book . The electromagnetic "matrix" is woven around society, says author .
 Six multinational corporations controlled almost everything the average American reads, sees, or hears . By 2008, SIX multinational corporations had control of almost everything .
 The Internet has done a marvelous job of bringing alternative news and information but only to those who own and can use a computer . The Internet is a wonderful place to find alternative news, but only if you have a computer or computer .
 Time magazine, one of the corporation's media assets, noted that the combination will be, for better or worse, the world's biggest media conglomerate . Time magazine said it will be 'for better . or worse'
 Ifs is a vast empire of broadcasting, music, movies and publishing assets . Time Warner's cable network feeds to consumers, ultimately fed to consumers .
 Time Warner is in the traditional media business; AOL is an Internet company . Time Warner and AOL are both in the Internet business . AOL is a traditional media company .
 Because the two didn't overlap, antitrust lawyers saw no need for concern . Antivivial lawyers say there was no need to worry about overlap between the two .
 The more people looked, the more they thought this was not just a marriage of two companies in different arenas . But the more people . looked at the more . people looked at it more than a marriage, they thought it was not .
 The AOL-Time Warner conglomerate involved twelve film companies, including, Warner Bros. and AOL, involved 12 film companies . The AOL/Time Warner deal was announced in October .
 AOL-Time Warner president and CEO, Richard Dean Parsons, and at least one other director are members of the Council on Foreign Relations . AOL's CEO and one of its directors is a former member of the council on foreign relations .
 Disney has grown into one of the largest media and entertainment corporations in the world . The Walt Disney Company is now a multi-billion dollar entertainment giant .
 Bogart is a Media Studies Center fellow and former general manager of the Newspaper Advertising Bureau . Bogart: "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to do it"
 Viacom is a media conglomerate created from the remerging of CBS Corporation in 1999 . It is the largest media conglomerate in the world . It was created from a merger between CBS Corporation and Viacome .
 The corporation includes CBS with its two hundred affiliates . The corporation's properties include CBS with two hundred affiliate stations .
 Blockbuster, Paramount Pictures, MTV Films, MTV and Nickelodeon cable networks, TV Land, CMT, Spike TV, VHl, BET, Comedy Central, book publishers, almost two hundred radio stations . Infinity Outdoor is the largest advertising company in the world .
 Vivendi Universal Entertainment was created by the 2000 merger of Vivendi media with Canal-i-television and the purchase of Universal Studios from the Seagram Company of Canada . Universal Studios was purchased by Vivendi in 2000 from Seagram .
 By 2006, with the sale of Vivendi Universal Entertainment to General Electric, it was reformed as NBC Universal . NBC Universal was formed in 2006 .
 News Corporation, a creation of Australian news magnate Rupert Murdoch, originally was incorporated in Australia . In late 2004, it was reincorporated in the U.S. under the laws of the State of Delaware . News Corporation was created in Australia by Murdoch .
 Murdoch's media conglomerate reaches tens of millions each day . Murdoch remarked in an older News Corporation annual report, ""Our reach is unmatched around the world. Our reach is unparalleled," Murdoch said .
 Bertelsmann AG, the world's largest publisher in the English language, is a multinational media corporation based in Gutersloh, Germany . The company employs more than 88,000 employees in sixty-three countries . It is the largest publisher of English in the world .
 It also owns YES Solutions, a large provider of creative, media, and operational services . The company also owns a large number of creative and media services .
 Bertelsmann Foundation is 76. percent owned by the Bertelsman and Mohn families . Founded by the two families, Bertelsmann is sometimes called Bertertie .
 During wartime, Bertelsmann had close ties to Goebbels's Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda . During wartime it published 19 million books, which made it the largest publisher for the German Army .
 Bertelsmann made indirect use of "slave labor" in some occupied countries . Bertelsman also made use of 'slave labor' in occupied countries, according to group .
 Bertelsmann's history came under scrutiny in 1998, when the company took over Random House, the largest book publisher in the U.S. The company's history was scrutinized in 1998 when it bought Random House .
 In public announcements, the firm said it was closed down by the Nazis . In public . announcements, it said it had been closed .
 IHC, however, reported that this story was a ""legend"" and that the firm's closure in 1944 was more likely due to shortages of material than any subversive activities . The IHC reported that the company's closure was probably due to shortage of material .
 The values of Bertelsmann then were 'irreconcilable' with the company today, a spokesman said . But a spokesman for the company said the values were 'incompatible' with those of today's company .
 The company is now a global player in the media industry,""Many Americans, especially World War II veterans, might wonder about the propriety of a German corporation once tied to the Nazis controlling so much of their media .
 As has been noted here previously, many of today's wealthiest multinational corporations might deserve scrutiny . Bertelsmann might deserve the same scrutiny as today's richest corporations .
 Freedom of the press belongs to whomever owns the press, it has been said . When it comes to media ownership, the name of the game is money, it is money .
 Communications industry has spent $486 million since 1997 to affect election outcomes, influence legislation before Congress and the White House . Center for Public Integrity investigation of campaign contributions through November 2006 .
 Lewis explains how media companies win influence with lawmakers and regulators . Lewis also explained how media firms can influence lawmakers .
 Not only does the media lobby and contribute to the two political parties and politicians at the federal level, they also decide whose face and voice make it onto the airwaves .
 P resident C linton requested that the F ederal C ommunications provide free or reduced-cost television time to candidates . Within days, within days, the powerful broadcast corporations and their Capitol Hill allies managed to halt this historic initiative . Lewis illustrated this power by noting that when
 In the Senate, incoming Commerce Committee chairman J ohn McCain, the Arizona Republican, and Conrad Burns, a Republican from Montana and the chairman of that panel's communications subcommittee, announced that they would legislatively block the FCC initiative .
 A regulated industry has a stranglehold over the regulator and its congressional overseers . The industry has been in the spotlight for more than a decade . It's a big problem for the federal government .
 Studies by nonpartisan Project for Excellence in J.Nalism show that the country's leaders are not anti-gay .
 ""hard"" news stories, which constituted more than half of all news reports thirty years ago, today have fallen to less than one-third . They found that ""hard" news stories are now less than a third of news stories .
 Story content has moved away from discussions of the political process, war and peace, and policy, to people, human interest, and news you need . F urthermore, story content today has moved from political process to people and human interest to people's human interest .
 There is also increasing emphasis on scandal, the bizarre, and fear of the future . There are also increasing calls for scandal and the bizarre to be investigated .
 Declining viewership and readership has become commonplace in the mass media . It does not seem to overly concern corporate managers . Declining viewers and viewers are commonplace in mass media, but corporate managers are not concerned .
 Increasingly the attempt to present news objectively has given way to advocacy, which borders on sheer propaganda . Increasingly, the attempts to present the news objectively have given way . The attempt to report the news has become more like propaganda .
 Distraction and ignorance are integral parts of the fascist globalists' plan for a new American empire . Distraction, ignorance, and fear are part of the plan for the new U.S. empire .
 President George W Bush has used nationalism and middleclass moral values to gain the unquestioning allegiance of a large swath of the public .
 Georges Eugene Sorel, a French conservative Socialist whose philosophical work provided a foundation for fascism, noted at the start of the twentieth century that all great political movements are generated by ""myths,"" defined as the belief held by a group who believe themselves to be an army of
 The N azis used the myth of Aryan brotherhood and superiority to create their N ational S ocialist empire . The myth was used to create the N. ational empire .
 In the U.S. it has become the myth of America's God-ordained right to create an empire which has launched a worldwide war . In the United States, it has . become a myth of . America's ‘God’ordained . right’ to
 Today, numerous books and articles have been written about a new American empire or Reich, in German . The Reich was created by the Nazis in the early 1900s .
 The creation of this empire has been facilitated by the power of the corporate mass media, increasingly falling into fewer and fewer hands . The media empire has also been enabled by the strength of the media, the author says .
 The ownership of the corporations that today control the information available to the broadest portion of the public can be traced back to the same families and companies who backed Hitler .
 Globalists who control America's mass media have attempted to bring citizens into one common worldview by the unremitting dissemination of homogeneous news and information . Like Hitler, who sought to bring individuals alienated by the Industrial Revolution and Depression into a hive-like German Volk, or united people,
 Networks and cable channels routinely accept reports from ""pool"" reporters . Many channels present the same version of the news as a result .
 Only those who consciously tune in to alternative media or surf the Internet gain access to information differing from the party line . Alternative media or the Internet is the only way to learn about alternative media .
 H itier achieved this conformity of thought among his followers through the use of radio, mass rallies, and meetings .
 Today, it is the corporatecontrolled mass media that determines the worldview of most Americans . Today, the corporate controlled mass media is responsible for most Americans' views .
 The corporate media owners, many of them members or close associates of the fascist globalists' secret societies, have learned the lessons of Nazi media manipulation well - i.e., simplistic catchwords repeated constantly with no real opposing viewpoints allowed . iReport: Corporate media owners have learned lessons of
 The corporate media called the enemy "insurgents,"" defined as anyone who opposed the established authority . For example, at the time of the Iraqi invasion, the media used to call the enemy 'insurgent'
 The term "Iraqis" did not fit well with government pronouncements about U.S. troops being well received by that nation's population . The term 'Iraqis' was used in reference to the occupation of Iraq .
 By 2007, the term "insurgent" was being superseded by the term ""al-Qaeda"" in an effort to connect fighting in Iraq to the attacks of September 11, 2001 .
 President Bush admitted that neither Saddam Hussein nor Iraq played any role in the attacks . This attempt came in the wake of President Bush's admission that neither Iraq nor Saddam Hussein played a role .
 Even seven years after 9/11, no serious attempt has been made to secure the nation's borders . The mass media long and loudly has trumpeted the term ""War on Terror,"" with its attendant warnings to be watchful for terrorists .
 Official government pronouncements are merely broadcast uncritically, with very little effort to check their reliability, with little effort being made to check them .
 The directors of modern American viewpoints speak of a brighter and better tomorrow, yet constantly regale the public with images and evocations of great moments in history . Also, like Hitler, they also speak of the future, but also of the past and present .
 The attacks of 9/11 initially were compared to P earl H arbor, and P resident B ush early on garnered criticism for calling his War on Terror a ""crusade,"" a term with ugly historical connotations . The attacks were initially compared to the attacks of
 The sacrifices of wartime America during World War II were pointed to as models for the war against terrorism . America's sacrifices of war during WWII have been compared to those of today's .
 Such ""us against them"" mentality has been used by despots for centuries to rally populations behind them . Such a 'us vs. them' mentality is used to rally people behind despots . Such mentality was used by dictators for centuries .
 The arrogance of the N azi mindset and their accepted method for hoodwinking the public was voiced by an unnamed aide to President George W Bush in 2002 .
 As you study reality judiciously, as you will we'll act again, creating other new realities, which you can study too, and that's how things will sort out . And while you are studying that reality, as well, as we will, we'll create new realities .
 This echoes Hitler's stated belief that big lies repeated loudly and often will sway the masses of people more effectively than well-articulated arguments based on reason and facts . Hitler's belief is echoed by his stated belief of big lies .
 It also reflects the arrogance of the fascist globalists, those who feel they are somehow superior to others and that they alone are fit to rule . The fascist globalist's arrogance reflects his arrogance, he said .
 Nazi mentality cannot be separated from its cultural context, for a nation's culture clarifies its worldview and sensibilities . This reach for empire the ""Future Belongs to Us"" Nazi mentality is not separated from cultural context .
 In describing Nazi culture under Hitler, Professor George L Mosse might well have been describing popular tastes and prejudices reflected in America today . Professor Mosse may well have described popular tastes of American today .
 Do not care for the distorted pictures of expressionists; they do not understand the searchings of such art, says the artist .
 People like their pictures simple and easily understandable and their novels should have gripping plots and large amounts of sentiment . People like to read pictures simple, easily understandable, and novels should be gripping plots .
 Americans have drawn parallels between the attacks of September 11, 2001, and the R eichstag fire that launched H itier's Third R Eich . The attacks were the destruction of a prominent national structure with the immediate affixing of blame on terrorists .
 Many citizens still have not been exposed to the controversies, contradictions, and unexplained events of 9/11 . But because of the tight corporate control over news and information in America, many citizens still haven't seen the controversies .
 A growing number of Americans have declined to fully accept the official explanation of the attacks, which, when carefully examined, is nothing more than a conspiracy theory . Despite attempts by both government and corporate leaders to deny that the attacks were anything but what was claimed, separate polls show a growing number
 Osama bin Laden's Most Wanted poster did not include any mention of the 9/11 attacks . In mid-J une 2006, when questioned as . questioned as to why bin Laden . had no mention of 9.11 attacks, he said .
 Conspiracy theory accepted by Bush administration and corporate mass media contends that nineteen fanatical M usiims somehow overcame the $40 billion U.S. defense system . The fourth plane crashed in western Pennsylvania as the result of a revolt by the passengers .
 Zogby International poll results showed that 90 percent of persons on the East Coast and 75 percent of those in the western U.S. believe the attacks of 9/11 have been the most significant historical event of their lifetime .
 65 percent of those polled gave President Bush's attempts to combat terrorism negative marks . That's a dramatic drop from those who supported Bush's efforts just after 9/11 .
 National polls have shown more than half the country has failed to buy into the official story of the attacks . And despite the globalist control over the mass media, national polls show that many people have not bought into the story .
 Zogby poll was conducted between August 24 and 26, 2004, on the eve of the Republican National Convention . Only slight mass media coverage was given to the poll .
 Nearly 30 percent of registered Republicans and more than 38 percent of those who described themselves as ""very conservative"" supported this proposition . Despite the political implications of such an accusation, nearly 30 percent supported this claim .
 68 percent were open to the suggestion that 9/11 was contrived within the U.S. government . This means a whopping 68 percent of Americans are open to a theory that the September 11 attacks were contrived by the government, according to poll .
 Various exercises with names like Vigilant Warrior, Vigilant Guardian, Nortliern Vigilance, and Tripod II were being conducted by the North American Aerospace Defense Command .
 The exercises included a scenario of hijacked airliners being used to crash into prominent U.S. buildings, specifically naming World Trade Center towers . According to Sergeant Lauro Chavez of the United States Central Command .
 False images called ""inputs"" representing hijacked planes were placed on military radar screens, causing much initial confusion . Chavez, who worked with the command center's computers, also noted tliat false images called "inputs"
 Vice President Cheney assumed command over NORAD shortly before 9/11, Chavez said . Chavez said, much to the surprise of the military, it was announced shortly before that .
 Although it was not hit by airplanes, it fell neatly between the Verizon Building and the United States Post Office . Neither of the buildings suffered critical damage .
 These are only a short list of the more pertinent questions that have not been addressed or adequately explained . These comprise only a small list of questions that need to be addressed .
 Evidently, the ""watchdog"" mass media has been cowed by its corporate masters . Evidently the mass media is cowed into silence .
 P resident B ush's handpicked panel, the 9/11 Commission, has not answered questions . Nor have these and many other questions been answered by any of the official government investigations, including Bhuhu .
 Bush initially tried to appoint Henry Kissinger to head his commission but was thwarted by public outcry . Kissinger was a globalist globalist who opposed the idea of globalizing .
 The LIHOP argument is that certain individuals within the federal government had foreknowledge of the attacks . Israel, Cuba, and even the Taliban in Afghanistan attempted to warn Washington of the coming attacks yet did nothing to prevent them . MIHOP supporters took notice of the close relationships between the
 They argue that the attacks were actually precipitated by elements within the U.S. government . They say that elements in the United States government were responsible for the attacks .
 The controversy over the truth of the 9/11 attacks undoubtedly will continue for many years . How long it will take before the corporate mass media are allowed to objectively investigate and report on this festering scandal is anybody's guess .
 The major corporations that control the mass media, like the other corporations previously discussed, are for the most part filled with honest and honorable people . The media is filled with people who are honest and honest .
 Most of their superiors are men and women with credible backgrounds . They, like most of their corporate superiors, have credible backgrounds, they say . But they are not all of the same .
 We are constantly bom barded with ""official"" pronouncem ents and advertising. We are also constantly bombarded with "official" pronouncements and advertising, we are constantly .
 Television is everywhere ■ in bars, waiting room s, airports, and usually constantly on in our very living room . In our fastpaced society, no one has tim e to thinl<, much less read deeply, especially corporate business is king .
 F reedom to F a seism , there is no law requiring Am erica ns to pay an incom e tax . No law requiring the U.S. to pay such a tax .
 "ascism's principles are wafting in the air today, surreptitiously masquerading as something else, challenging everything we stand for," says the IR S . The IR S can drag into court and even jail those who fail to fulfill ""voluntary compliance"
 The cliche that people and nations learn from history is not only overused, but also overestimated . Often we fail to learn, or draw the wrong conclusions, in the world's history .
 Laurence W Britt, in an article for Free Inquiry, a long-standing publication of the Council for Secular Humanism, which promotes secular humanist principles .
 Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, Franco's Spain, Salazar's Portugal, Papadopoulos's Greece, Pinochet's Chile, and Suharto's Indonesia . Britt concluded that these fascist governments had observable similarities .
 The fervor to show patriotic nationalism, both on the part of the regime and of citizens caught up in its frenzy, was always obvious . Powerful and continuing expressions of nationalism F rom the prominent displays of flags and bunting to the ubiquitous .
 Catchy slogans, pride in the military, and demands for unity were common themes in expressing this nationalism .
 It was usually coupled with a suspicion of things foreign that often bordered on xenophobia . It was often coupled with suspicion that things foreign were foreign .
 Examples of patriotic zeal may be found in the ever-present yellow ribbons showing support for United States troops . American flags and bunting at large public events such as the Super Bowl are seen everywhere .
 Tine regimes tliemselves viewed liuman riglits as of little value and a hindrance to realizing the objectives of the ruling elite . Disdain for tine importance of tined importance of liumlits has been noted .
 Through clever use of propaganda, the population was brought to accept these human rights abuses by marginalizing, even demonizing, those being targeted . The country was brought into accepting the abuses by using clever propaganda .
 When abuse was egregious, the tactic was to use secrecy, denial, and disinformation . The tactic was often used to cover up the abuse of the U.S. government .
 Michael B Mukasey was sworn in as attorney general of the U.S. in November 2007 . He faced contentious confirmation hearings on the issue of torturing prisoners . The former federal judge was confirmed to be the attorney general .
 G onzales was criticized for his part in crafting the B ush administration's secretive legal arguments permitting the torture of suspects . He is one of the top legal experts in the U.S. government .
 The most significant common thread among these regimes was the use of scapegoating as a means to divert the people's attention from other problems, to shift blame for failures, and to channel frustration in controlled directions . Identification of enemies/scapegoats as a unifying cause .
 The methods of choice relentless propaganda and disinformation were usually effective . The methods were used in the U.S. government's efforts to discredit the opposition .
 Active opponents of these regimes were inevitably labeled as terrorists and dealt with accordingly . Active opponents were inevitably labelled as terrorists by the regime .
 Examples of such tactics can be heard from the mouths of those who constantly use racial slurs, such as those using racial slurs . Examples of racial slurs are heard from those who use such slurs .
 Afghanistan's former ""freedom fighters"" have semantically changed into ""insurgents"" then into ""al-Oaeda terrorists"" in the news . Such epitaphs as ""rag head"" and ""sand nigger"" are commonly used in the general population .
 Ruling elites always identified closely with the military and the industrial infrastructure that supported it . The supremacy of the military was the subject of military supremacy and avid militarism .
 A disproportionate share of national resources was allocated to the military, even when domestic needs were acute . The country's resources were allocated to military rather than domestic needs, officials say .
 The military was used whenever possible to assert national goals, intimidate other nations, and increase the power and prestige of the ruling elite . Military was seen as an expression of nationalism, and was used when possible .
 The United States military budget for many years has consumed the bulk of the national spending . The U.S. military budget is considered the nation's largest .
 President Bush's 2008 budget provides $439. billion for the Department of Defense's base budget . The budget is a 7 percent increase over 2006 and a whopping 48 percent rise over 2001 .
 This figure does not include military-related expenditure such as nuclear weapons research or the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq . This figure is based on the fact that the UK has not spent much on military research .
 Neither does it count trust funds, anticipated costs of Social Security, and Veterans Administration costs of services to veterans .
 By totaling all government figures relating to the military, the WRL estimated that more than half (51 percent) of all federal spending goes to military . The WRL estimates that 51 percent of the federal budget is spent on the military .
 The political elite and the national culture were maledominated, and women were viewed as second-class citizens . Beyond the simple fact, these regimes viewed women as second class citizens . Rampant sexism was rampant in the Middle Eastern countries .
 These attitudes were usually codified in draconian laws that enjoyed strong support by the orthodox religion of the country, thus lending the regime cover for its abuses . The laws were often codified by the country's orthodox religion .
 Many women still find it difficult to break through what has been termed the ""glass ceiling,"" in which they can see higher positions in the workplace but never seem to get there . This practice is less prevalent in the U.S. today, although many women find it hard to break
 Modern America differs from Nazi Germany and other cultures in that women are beginning to fill the corporate chairs formerly held by men . Modern America also differs from other cultures like Nazi Germany .
 Under some of the regimes, mass media were under strict direct control . Mass media could be relied upon never to stray from the party line . Under some regimes, the mass media was under strict control .
 Methods included control of licensing and access to resources, economic pressure, appeals to patriotism, and implied threats . Methods used include economic pressure and economic pressure . Methods included the control of license and access, access, resources, and threats .
 The leaders of the mass media were oft en politically compatible with the power elite . The leaders were often politically aligned with the political elite .
 The result was usually successful in keeping the general public unaware of the regimes' excesses . The result of the regime's excesses was to keep the public unaware .
 As previously detailed, the American corporate mass media today is essentially in the hands of six giant multinational communications corporations . The American mass media is now largely controlled by six giant communications corporations.
 The owners of these corporations are proponents of ""free trade"" in business policies . Yet coverage of alternative news and views is mostly ignored .
 A few giant conglomerates are determining what we see, hear, and read . Whether it is television, radio, newspapers, magazines, books, or the Internet, a few giant companies are determining our view .
 Inevitably, a national security apparatus was under direct control of the ruling elite . Obsession with national security meant that national security was under the control of government .
 It was usually an instrument of oppression, operating in secret and beyond any constraints . It was used to be used as a weapon of oppression against people in secret .
 Its actions were justified under the rubric of protecting ""national security,"" and questioning its activities was labeled unpatriotic or even treasonous . Questioning the government's actions was labeled 'treasonous' or 'patriotious'
 While all Americans should be concerned about national security, many see it as a pretext to strip away constitutional rights . National security is a pretext for stripping down constitutional rights, many say .
 Thoughtful persons also worry about a man like Michael Chertoff, son of a J ewish rabbi, who has been accused of having dual citizenship . Michael was major architect of Bush administration policies, named secretary of Homeland Security .
 Unlike communist regimes, the fascist and protofascist regimes were never proclaimed godless by their opponents . Fascism and fascism was never proclaimed Godless by its opponents .
 In fact, most of the regimes attached themselves to the predominant religion of the country . The regimes chose to portray themselves as militant defenders of that religion .
 The fact that the ruling elite's behavior was incompatible with the precepts of the religion was generally swept under the rug . The ruling elite was often criticized for their behavior, but their behavior was generally covered up .
 A perception was manufactured that opposing the power elite was tantamount to an attack on religion. Opposing religious beliefs was a perception that opposing a power elite is tantamount . Opposing a political party is not a religion, it is a form of protest against the establishment .
 The obvious parallels have been drawn between the use of religion in Nazi Germany and modern America to support government policies . Earlier in this work, the obvious parallels were also drawn .
 The personal life of ordinary citizens was under strict control . However, the ability of large corporations to operate was not compromised .
 The ruling elite saw the corporate structure as a way to not only ensure military production but also as an additional means of social control . Corporations were used as a means of military production and social control, the ruling elite said .
 Members of the economic elite were often pampered by the political elite to ensure a continued mutuality of interests, especially in the repression of ""have-not"" citizens . The economic elite was often in charge of repression of citizens .
 Federalism Project of the American Enterprise Institute says preemption claims often by federal regulatory agencies interfere with the states' historic role in protecting citizens against corporate misconduct .
 Organized labor was seen as the one power center that could challenge the political hegemony of the ruling elite and its corporate allies . It was inevitably crushed or made powerless . The power of organized labor was suppressed or eliminated .
 The poor formed an underclass that was viewed with suspicion or outright contempt . The poor were seen as a class that was seen with suspicion, contempt or contempt .
 Labor news has largely dropped from the mainstream media's radar screen . Those with long memories know that labor news has been largely dropped off the radar screen.
 Intellectuals, and the inherent freedom of ideas and expression associated with them, were anathema to these regimes . Disdain and suppression of intellectuals and the arts was a key feature of the Soviet-Russian regime . The Soviet-U.S. state of the Cold War was founded
 Intellectual and academic freedom was considered subversive to national security and the patriotic ideal . Academic freedom was seen as counter to the national security of the U.S.
 Universities were tightly controlled, politically unreliable faculty harassed or eliminated . Politically unreliable faculty were harassed, eliminated or eliminated from universities .
 Unorthodox ideas or expressions of dissent were strongly attacked, silenced, or crushed . The U.S. government has been trying to silence dissenters in the past . The country has been in a state of war with the U.N. for decades .
 To these regimes, art and literature had to serve the national interest or they had no right to exist . Art and literature must serve national interests or they were not allowed to exist, they were said . Art, literature and art had to be served by national interests, they said .
 In the wake of 9/11 attacks, many conservative groups on college campuses denounced academic freedom . Conservative groups on campuses denounce academic freedom, report says .
 Other academics have been fired or reprimanded for merely speaking out on the issues of war or questioning the official story of 9/11 .
 Most of these regimes maintained draconian systems of criminal justice, with huge prison populations . Obsession with crime and punishment was an obsession with punishment .
 Police were oft en glorified and had almost unchecked power, leading to rampant abuse . The police were often over-rewarded and often abused by the public . Police were often under-represented in the United States .
 Fear and hatred of criminals or 'traitors' was often promoted among the population as an excuse for more police power . Fear was often used as a justification for police powers in the country .
 The U nited States today has a higher incarcerated population than all E urope an jails combined . In certain areas, such as Washington, D.C., police presence is at an all-time high .
 One visitor to Washington in the summer of 2007 asked a police officer why there were so many cops around .
 Those in business circles and close to the power elite often used their position to enrich themselves . Rampant cronyism and corruption is rampant in the country's business circles .
 Corruption was largely unconstrained and not well understood by the general population . With the national security apparatus under control and the media muzzled, this corruption was under-control . This corruption was largely unexplained by the public .
 The cronyism and outright nepotism of the Bush administration has been well documented . The Bush administration is known for its cronies and nepotists .
 Elizabeth Cheney was named as a deputy secretary of state in February 2002 . Her husband, Philip Perry, became chief counsel for the Office of Management and Budget .
 F ormer secretary of state C olin L P owell is the father of M ichael P o well, who chaired the F ederal Communications Commission . He is also father of F edal Communications Commission chairman Michael P orwell .
 Elections in the form of plebiscites or public opinion polls were usually bogus . Fraudulent elections were usually followed by bogus elections .
 When actual elections with candidates were held, they would, as a rule, be perverted by the power elite to get the desired result . The power elite would try to pervert the outcome of the election, writes Julian Zelizer .
 Common methods include intimidating and disenfranchising opposition voters, destroying or disallowing legal votes, and destroying legal votes . Common methods included maintaining control of the election machinery and intimidating opposition voters . As a last resort, turning to a judiciary beholden to the power elite, they turn to a
 Americans are aware of the controversies concerning the presidential elections of 2000 and 2004 . Americans are well aware of . the controversies surrounding the . presidential elections .
 George W Bush's first term was decided by the Supreme Court, not the voters . George W. Bush was elected to a second term in 2006 .
 In 2008 charges of vote fraud were already being voiced in the state primary elections, primarily over computer voting machines . Controversy over both elections continues today .
 Many Americans noticed the similarities between George W Bush's unprovoked attacks on Afghanistan and Iraq and Hitler's attacks on Poland, the Low Countries, and France . Many Americans have noticed similarities between the attacks on Iraq and Poland .
 America is officially a democracy with the rule of law, a constitution, a free press, honest elections, and honest elections . After all, this is America, constantly being put on guard against evils .
 Historical comparisons like these are just exercises in verbal gymnastics, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Globalist fascists are turning the once free and independent United States into a not-so-profitable subsidiary of their global corporate structure their empire of the rich . It seems that by comparing Britt's characteristics of fascism to current events, the argument can definitely be made .
 When secular humanists, conservative Christians, J ews, liberal Democrats, Republicans, and moderates, all start issuing the same warning against fascism, perhaps it is time we start paying serious attention .
 Commentators like Noam Chomsky and Gore Vidal have spoken out against the ""national security state"" from the left . Noam Chomsky and Gore Vidal have been critical of the government .
 Late S enator B arry G oldwater and evangelist P at R obertson speak out from the right .
 When historical figures and concerned citizens from opposite ends of the political spectrum all say the true state of the American union, it is time to consider the truth of the U.S. union .
 Time to stand up and be counted for true freedom freedom from the corporate state . And perhaps it's time to stand . Stand up .
 Every nation has the right to defend itself, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Every nation should expect the government to do what is best for its citizens, he says .
 Media critic Michael Parenti observes: 'To oppose the policies of a government does not mean you are against the country or the people that the government supposedly represents' Parenti says: To oppose a government's policies, opposing them doesn't mean opposing them .
 Either we have the right to democratic dissent and criticism of these policies or we all lie down and let the leader, the fuehrer, do what is best, while we follow uncritically, and obey whatever he commands .
 There are those who would argue that it is perhaps unpatriotic or not politically correct to speak out on issues involving taxation, immigration, political beliefs, race, eugenics, or criticism of the militaryindustrial complex .
 Many believe that the perceived need to conform to restrictions on speech and behavior set by politicians, corporate leaders, and other self-appointed authorities . Today many believe that . definition has grown to include . people who believe they must conform to . restrictions set by . politicians .
 This is the same self-imposed restriction that was adopted by too many G ermans during the Third Reich . This is a similar restriction to that of too many Germans during the Second World War .
 The man on the street was afraid to speak out against the Nazi regime . Free speech was denied to the intelligentsia . The Nazi regime was denied free speech .
 Germans in the Third Reich did not l<now the term ""political correctness,"" but they well understood the penalties for freely voicing their opinions . Germans in Germany did not call it political correctness .
 Recent legislation targeting socalled hate speech can easily slip into official punitive action against any speech that arouses the ire of politicians, police, or judges . Politicians, police and judges should not be able to take action against hate speech .
 Rauch quoted author Salman Rushdie, who was sentenced to death in absentia by Muslim ayatollahs . Rushdie wrote a book they claimed slandered the beliefs of millions of M. usiims .
 Rauch wrote that the public should learn a lesson from Rushdie's experience .
 The Nazis preached the unity of the Volk and spoke out against the old divisions of class and education . The leaders operated in an entirely different manner .
 Globalist rulers of America pit bureaucrats, politicians, academics, . academics, corporate leaders, and the public against one another in an agenda of divide and conquer . Likewise, the globalists pit bureaucrats and politicians against each other .
 They maintain control in a society fragmented by combative ideologies and philosophies as well as competing corporate interests . The government maintains control in the society fragmented .
 In today's America it seems the only common common denominator is consumerism and debt . In the U.S. it seems consumerism is consumerist and debt-obsessed .
 Globalists learned well the dangers of allowing any one individual to gain the power over masses of people . Because of their loss of control over Hitler, the globalists lost control of the world .
 There has not been one prominent figure in recent American history who has commanded the popular respect and esteem of a majority of the population . Consequently, there has been no one prominent American leader in recent U.S. history who commanded the public respect .
 Even the assassinated PresidentJ ohn F Kennedy, beloved by so many, never held popular goodwill to the extent of Franklin D Roosevelt . Roosevelt never held the same level of goodwill as Kennedy .
 Since World War II, no national leader has gained the stature of Roosevelt, Churchill, or Hitler . No national leader since WWII has gained stature of FDR, Churchill or Hitler, says historian .
 Many of the basic attitudes and prejudices which went into his worldview are still with us, waiting to be actualized, to be directed into a new mass consciousness,"" prophesied P rofessor M osse .
 Martin Bormann and the Fourth Reich, wrote: 'The despicable forces loosed by the Third R eich are not expunged, although, like some virulent virus, they may have changed to other forms'
 These sentiments came from writers unaware of the fascist globalists' plan being woven around them . The fascist globalist globalists are weaving their plan around them.
 Americans could easily fall sway to the pernicious ideology of National Socialism, they say . Yet, they could sense that Americans are not likely to be swayed by the ideology of the Nazis .
 The U.S. has a tradition of individual freedom, its Constitution that guarantees that freedom, and the fact that so many Americans own firearms to protect their freedoms .
 National politicians no longer refer to the ""republic,"" because modern America has ceased to be one . Modern America no longer refers to the "republic" because of modern America .
 Obviously, there are dissimilarities between Hitler's Third Reich and the new American Reich . The new U.S. President Barack Obama was elected to the White House .
 The United States today is a very different time and culture. After all, the U.S. today is very different times and culture, says CNN.com's Mark Twain .
 The same philosophies and methodologies employed by the same families, corporations, and organizations that at one time supported H itier's Third R eich, have now found roots in modern America .
 It has been necessary for these fascist globalists to break up the U.S. into divisions of race, sex, age, generation and culture . It's necessary for them to break-up the United States into divisions, race and age divisions, she says .
 This has been accomplished through a degrading of popular culture, downgrading the education process, permitting a steady flow of illegal immigrants, and the fragmentation of the population over issues such as abortion, immigration, and foreign policy .
 Control over a diminished national economy and corporate downsizing has brought undue stress on workers . The gradual destruction of the nuclear family has led to the demise of the family, author says .
 N. one of this construction of the new American empire has come about suddenly, he says . "It's not surprising that this is coming about suddenly," he says of the U.S. empire .
 The owners of the multinational corporations, with their membership in secret societies, know their goals will not be achieved overnight . Since 9/11 they seem to have redoubled their efforts .
 While businessmen deal with yearly quarters, and the average worker lives for his weekly paycheck, these people look ahead fifty years or a hundred, if that's what it takes . The average worker looks for a weekly paycheck .
 They realize that their program of a global fascist socialism is the only means of maintaining their power and control . The only way in their view to maintain the purity of their race and class is to maintain their purity .
 They laugh at the concepts of true individual freedom and multiculturalism, they say . They have no faith in the innate goodness of humankind or its ability for self-government .
 "They have no real faith in G od and use religious ideals and concepts merely as another tool for social control," says the author . "They use religion as a tool to control their lives," she says .
 The struggle against such steadfast will to power and its attendant control will not be easy . The struggle for the future is not easy .
 The U.S. can be done before it falls into depression, anarchy, and then a police state . But it can't be done hopefully before the United States falls into an anarchy .
 Technological breakthroughs await only the change of attitude on the part of conventional politics, commerce, and finance . The breakthroughs are possible, but only if they are willing to change attitudes .
 A sea change in the public consciousness is well under way, although it is not reflected in the corporate-controlled mass media . The sea change is under way in the US, but it's not reflected by mass media, it says .
 Informed consumers are beginning to realize they can vote with their spending, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Consumers are starting to realize that they can influence their spending .
 If enough people refuse to buy a certain product, it can force a change of direction in the controllers . It can also force the government to change its direction .
 In a 1940 address, he stated, 'The shootings and the chains and the concentration camps are not simply the transient tools but the very altars of modern dictatorships'
 They may talk of a 'new order' in the world, but what they have in mind is only a revival of the oldest and the worst tyranny . The world's 'newest tyranny' is the old tyranny, says David Cameron .
 The proposed 'new order' is the very opposite of a United States of Europe or a U.S. of Asia or a United. of Europe . The proposed new order would be the opposite of the United States .
 It is not a union of ordinary, self-respecting men and women to protect themselves and their freedom and their dignity from oppression . It's not an ordinary union, it's a union for ordinary people to protect their freedom . The union is not an alliance of ordinary people, it
 It appears that the ""New World Order" is really just the ""Old World Order"" packaged with modern advertising slickness new names, logos, and slogans .
 What once was traditional American conservatism has been molded into fascist forms, beginning with the infusion of N ational S ocialism ideals into the military-industrial complex . Then spread into science, corporate life, the mass media, and even political parties .
 This change has been engineered by the globalist elite who hold monopolies over basic resources, energy, pharmaceuticals, transportation, and telecommunications, including the news media . This change was engineered by globalist elites, including news media, the author says .
 As detailed throughout this work, the same men, families, and companies that first supported communism in Russia funded and supported National Socialism in pre-war Germany .
 With the defeat of the Germans, they simply shifted their attention to the U.S. The United States. With the loss of the United States, they .
 Nazis financed by the stolen wealth of E urope perhaps including S olomon's treasure . Nazis funded by a vast network of worldwide corporations . They were abetted by the Nazis .
 Thousands of Nazis escaped to both North and South America, their way facilitated by supporters in Wall Street, the Bank of En gland, and the Vatican . The Vatican, Wall Street and Vatican helped facilitate the escape .
 Self-styled globalists are now attempting to subdue the American population through a maze of government policies, drugs, a dumbed-down education system, and a controlled corporate mass media . Using German advances in the study of the human mind, behavior, and propaganda, these self
 Political and corporate leadership continually swap roles, creating a merger of the state and industry the very definition of fascism . The merger is the result of a merger between the state, industry and the corporate world .
 Mergers and leveraged takeovers have concentrated corporate power into fewer and fewer hands . Many of those directly connected through banking and corporate ties to prewar support for the N azis .
 Law enforcement personnel increasingly no longer wear the blue uniforms of police sworn ""to serve and protect,"" but black body armor with the German-style military helmets, initially dubbed the ""Fritz" by the soldiers .
 Even the fields of religion, education, and entertainment are being used to transform whole generations of formerly free Americans into cowed and subservient members of an increasingly National Socialist system . Even the field of religion and education is being used as a tool to transform entire generations of Americans .
 An account of the fall of the Fourth Reich has not yet been written, for it has yet to happen . The collapse of the Nazi regime is not yet being written, but it will happen .