 The authors of this artic about the crisis into question, highlighting very different future policy . Drawing on evidence made available o of conferences involving both scholars of and participants newly accessible archive material, they say .
 They challenge the possibility of a definitive version of the events of the crisis period . They further challenge the very possibility of an authoritative version of events of that period .
 The Cuban missile crisis of October I962 has been the most studied crisis of the nuclear age . The crisis was the first time the U.S. launched a nuclear missile attack on the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 The received wisdom in respect of the crisis has been called into question by two sets of developments . In the last few years, however, the received wisdom has been questioned by some .
 A series of conferences have taken place aimed at producing a 'critical oral history' of the events of October I962 . The events took place in the wake of the Second World War .
 Previously closed archives have been opened up, both as a result of the use of the Freedom of Information Act in the United States and, more widely, as a consequence of the ending of the Cold War .
 Our aim in this paper is to see if the 'facts, 'models' and 'lessons' of the cn'sis are indeed well founded . Our aim is to find out if 'facts' and "lessons" of the 'cnn'sis' are indeed
 Our central claim is that for all three interested groups (historians, political scientists and policy-makers) the commonly accepted analysis of thc crisis is in fact wrong in several crucial respects . We claim that for historical and political scientists, the current analysis of the crisis is incorrect .
 For historians the main concern has been to write an accurate account of the crisis . The limitations of established views have led to a number of issues in the world's history .
 The dominant assumption was that the more evidence became available, the more complete an account of events would be produced . This was always problematic given the limited availability of Soviet, Cuban and European archives, but the more .
 The assumption is that it is possible to arrive at answers, and that, the more evidence becomes available, the closer one gets to those answers . "The assumption is ... that it's possible to find out answers," the author says .
 We believe that in a number of key areas recent disclosures actually make the task of providing answers much more difficult . We believe in a few of the key areas of the U.S. government's ability to provide answers is difficult to do .
 These disclosures challenge the very idea of historical truths, not in the straightforward sense of complex historiographical debates about 'what happened' But in the far more unsettling sense of calling into question the possibility of writing a history of the crisis .
 The more we find out about the crisis, and the more we think we know, the less, not the more, clear our analysis becomes over major issues of histonrcal interpretation . The most important question is how much of the crisis is still to be debated .
 Allison's study looked at the various models to determine what counts as evidence . Allison's work was left to make what resembled an ideological choice of which model was accepted .
 Allison's book has led to a major research effort at examining the utility of his models in the Cuban missile crisis . Allison's work is aimed at seeing how they can be applied in a wide variety of other case-studies .
 Policy-makers claim that they have learnt a lot from the Cuban missile crisis . The U.S. government says it has learnt from the crisis .
 It has to be said that several of the lessons are clearly incompatible with each other . However, it has been said that some of these lessons are not compatible .
 In the U.S. there was a tendency to see nuclear superiority as vital in ensuring success in any future US-Soviet crisis . In the United States, there was also a tendency .
 The missile crisis was a perfect example of how to stand tall, be firm and achieve goals . The crisis was an example of standing tall and standing firm, says David Cameron .
 A parallel desire for superiority or parity was said to have influenced Soviet decision-makers for the 25 years after the crisis . The desire for parity or superiority or at least parity in the Soviet Union's decision-maker's policy .
 October I962 was seen as the closest the world had come to nuclear war . For critics of nuclear weapons, the crisis was a timely illustration of the dangers of a nuclear world . The crisis has been seen as a timely reminder of its dangers .
 For many practitioners, the episode, far from exhibiting any tendencies to drift into war, showed the importance of the way in which the Kennedy administration controlled developments through calculated and rational crisis management .
 A major study of foreign policy fiascos used the missile crisis as an exemplar of how to manage crises . The missile crisis was a model for how to deal with crises, the author says .
 Many practitioners saw an obvious linkage between American military superiority and the political advantage the United States enjoyed . Without mnilitary superiority, the U.S. might have had to trade the Soviet missiles on Cuba for its own missiles in Turkey .
 For many, U.S. nuclear superiority was the key factor in the outcome . For others, vulnerability to even the most limited Soviet attack was what mattered most .
 Some saw the effect of the crisis as being to spur on the Soviet Union to ensure that it was never in such a position of inferiority again . Others concluded that the crisis marked the beginning of detente since it showed how useless nuclear superiority was .
 Those on the right saw a completely different set of lessons from those on the left . Thus, incompatible lessons were drawn from the crisis, and it is especially notable that those on both sides saw the same .
 The crisis became a central historical source for those who saw it as proof that superiority was of critical importance as well as those who argued that it was irrelevant to the outcome of the election .
 This in itself shows how difficult it is to point to any one set of 'facts' concerning the crisis . While this is problematic for historians and political scientists, it is of major concern for policy-makers . Policy-makers proceed to base current policy on the perceived lessons of the c
 The editors of the book arising from the third conference discussed below feel that there was not one crisis in October I962, but three, and accordingly offer three different accounts of events . Indeed, they feel there were three crises in the month of October I952 .
 The first recent development is the series of conferences held to discuss the events surrounding the crisis . The conferences are being held to talk about the crisis in Iraq .
 There have been five major meetings, as well as others run by groups such as the Nuclear History Program . The meetings have been held in the past year .
 The five conferences were important in that they brought together academics and practitioners from the three principal participant countries . The meetings were important to bring together academics from three principal participants countries .
 Two Soviet delegates joined the United States academics and policy-makers . The second was in October that year, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, with three Soviet delegates .
 I989 was the subject of a book, published in I989, which included transcripts of the meetings and interviews with key actors .
 A third conference was held in Moscow in January I989, with twenty Soviet, twelve United States and six Cuban participants . Many of whom had been personally involved in the crisis were personally involved .
 Two further conferences were held, in Antigua in I99I and Havana in I992, during which much more Cuban information was presented . Fidel Castro himself attended the Havana conference, with Fidel Castro attending .
 Group working within the multinational Nuclear History Program held a conference on the European dimensions of the crisis in Paris in October 1992 . These conferences have represented exercises in oral history, with all the concomitant methodological problems .
 The conference was organized by the Groupe d'Etudes Francais d'Histoire de l'Armement Nucleaire .
 The end result has been a fascinating set of discussions which have produced important historical revelations . Scholars have also been able to question participants in the crisis over their interpretations of each other's motives and interpretations .
 Mark Kramer has consistently argued with specific reference to the Cuban missile crisis . Nonetheless, there remain methodological problems with oral history, as Kramer argues .
 In our analysis of the principal changes in the interpretation of the missile crisis that follows, we refer several times to evidence gleaned through oral history . We have sought to draw also upon corroborating evidence from other sources, rather than basing our arguments exclusively on individual memory .
 Critical oral history opens up potentially fruitful avenues of enquiry for historians . However, we do not wish to underestimate the problems of relying on oral history, especially since on several occasions faulty memories have sent scholars off on wild goose chases .
 Robert Kennedy raised the issue of trade between Soviet missiles on Cuba and U.S. missiles in Turkey on Friday 26 October . Khrushchev replied to the proposal in his 'second' letter of Saturday .
 The conventional wisdom has always been that there was no such deal and that the issue was raised by the Soviets, not the Americans, on the 27th (after the letter demanding the deal), not the 26th .
 If Dobrynin were correct then the crisis would have to be radically rewritten . If there was a deal, who proposed it, when, and to whom, would have enormous implications for the lessons .
 This does not affect the significance of the revelation that there was a secret trade between the U.S. and the Soviet Union on the issue of the missiles in Turkey and those on Cuba, but it closes off a remarkably confusing line of enquiry .
 General Gribkov claimed the Soviets had secretly delivered the nuclear warheads for six FROG-7 short-range tactical nuclear launchers . General Pliyev had pre-delegated authority to fire the missiles to the local Soviet commander, General Pliyev . A second example concerns
 Soviet commanders in Cuba had decided to shoot down an American U-2 spy plane on Saturday 27 October . The most tense period of the crisis was when the U.S. ExComm debated how to respond to the incident .
 His claim has been attacked by many Soviet military officials and also by those who have worked on the crisis in Soviet archives .
 The fact that the claims of Dobrynin and Gribkov have been dismissed as a result of detailed investigation by historians indicates that there are powerful checks against the weaknesses of the methodology . The claims were dismissed by historians after a thorough investigation .
 The oral history approach has enabled scholars to begin to write histories of the crisis from Soviet and Cuban perspectives, by actively engaging in lengthy discussions .
 Only by exploring the motivations and perceptions of policy-makers from other countries can a less American-based history emerge . Only by examining the motivations of policy makers from those other countries, the history of the crisis will emerge .
 The very definition of the crisis has been dictated by an American version of what happened . After all, it is not simply that the U.S. perspective has been written about from a United States perspective, but that the very definition is dictated by the American version .
 Critical oral history has opened up lines of enquiry which documentary sources would never suggest, simply because they can never easily indicate the nindset or beliefsystem within which they have been written, debated and evaluated . Critical oral oral history opens up new lines of inquiry into the beliefs of the
 The effect of this flood of material has been to call into question accepted views of the crisis . It has also been to raise questions about the extent of the damage caused by the crisis in Iraq .
 The conventional wisdom on the crisis has been almost exclusively US-based, and centred on only the open political record . Thus the conventional wisdom is almost exclusively U.S.-based .
 To put it mildly, this is a very limited view of the events of October I962 . The events took place in the early hours of October 1, 2012 .
 The opening up of the archives of the Cuban missile crisis is only possible to write an international history of the crisis, one that reflects the intentions, motivations, perceptions, values and politics of all the main participating countries .
 For too long the historiography of the crisis has been an American history . For too many Americans, it has been the American history of the Iraq crisis . The U.S. government has been in the midst of a crisis crisis .
 "The implications of this point are absolutely profound for our understanding of what we call the Cold War," says author . The implications of the point are "absolutely profound"
 Flood of new evidence will not make it easier to write a definitive account of the events of October I962 . More problematic still is the thought that the flood of new . evidence won't make it easy to write an accurate account .
 The first is that the documents that survive may be incomplete records . The second is that they may have been incomplete records. The documents that survived may also be incomplete .
 Just as the memories of policy-makers may be faulty, so archives may tell a very selective version of events . Just as policy-maker's memories are faulty, the memories may also be faulty . Archives may tell very selective versions of events in the past .
 Mark Kramer's attack on the oral history of the crisis on the grounds of the lack of documents to back up the claims made reveals a touching faith in the reliability of documentary evidence . Kramer: 'Mark Kramer has a touch on documentary evidence'
 There is now strong evidence that Kennedy did not take the committee fully into his confidence . For example, the transcripts of the ExComm meetings are very detailed, but there is now .
 Some of his statements during ExConmm meetings can be read as political manoeuvres rather than as statements about his intentions . Thus some of his . statements can be . read as . read out as a political manoeuvre .
 As we note below, he never told ExConum about the secret trade with the Soviets over the Turkish missiles . As we point below, we also note that he never said about the trade .
 Documents can be just as problematic a source as oral histories, historian says . Documentary documents can be problematic sources for oral histories .
 Soviet and Cuban views as well as the American . British, Italian and Turkish stories, to name only those countries most directly involved in crisis .
 Even were all these available, it would remain a sheer act of faith to believe that there is only one story to be told .
 This applies not only to so-called factual interpretation but also to how each set of decision-makers read the intentions and motivations of the other sets of decision makers . This applies to the crucially important issue of how each decision-maker reads the intentions of others . This is important to
 Historians often become engaged in a complex exercise in double or triple hermeneutic circles . They attempt to understand how one set of actors read the intentions of others, or how the Soviets thought the Americans saw Soviet perceptions of the crisis .
 Documentary evidence does reveal that it is very difficult to maintain that there was any such thing as a unified national position on unfolding events .
 The level of decentralization and a lack of coordination result in a number of actors making policy-and, critically, implementing it-in each of the main participant states . On the contrary, the decentralization of the government is not a problem, but a problem .
 Resolving these dilemmas requires an a priori judgement as to who was the U.S., Cuba or the Soviet Union .
 Documents alone do not get us very far in answering the central puzzles of the episode . At one level, the archives suggest a multitude of Cuban missile crises .
 The existence of open archives and critical oral history together put us in a very strong position when it comes to evaluating the received wisdom on the crisis . Having said this, the existence of the open archives puts us into a strong position, says the author .
 We are now able to subject these claims to a wide set of documentary and oral evidence, with the result of the . result that the historiography of the crisis has a much broader range of sources to use . The . Historians of the Spanish crisis have a much wider range of
 Our main claim is that the reading of the crisis which has prevailed has been a very particular and a very political one . We are concerned that the crisis has been very political and very particular, we say .
 Recent historiography tells us about what has been accepted as the history of the crisis . We now turn to look at some of the main elements in the accepted received wisdom on the crisis.
 In each case we sunumarize what became the conventional wisdom before showing how understanding has changed . We also show how understanding of the world has changed.
 General Gribkov's revelations concerning pre-delegated authority for the use of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons during the crisis, revealed in 1992, are now understood to be erroneous and misleading . For example, the revelations were revealed in . 1992 .
 The list of changing perceptions is not exhaustive, nor are our judgements in any sense final . We are happy to clarify that the list of changes in perceptions are not exhaustive .
 Historians of the crisis have until recently been based on incomplete and political readings of the events of October I962 . We nevertheless contend that they demonstrate that they . demonstrate that the historiography of the . crisis has until . recently been . based on very incomplete and . political readings
 The issue of why Khrushchev deployed the missiles in Cuba has preoccupied American scholars . American scholars have been trying to find out why the missiles were deployed there .
 There is still disagreement about Khrushchev's decision and the relative importance of the different factors in Soviet policy-making .
 The 'quarantine' line around Cuba was drawn closer to Cuba to give Khrushchev more time to consider his response . 'Quarantine' was moved closer to the Cuban border to give him time to respond to the threat .
 This was suggested by the British ambassador and Kennedy family friend, David Ormsby-Gore, and agreed immediately by Kennedy . This was the suggestion by British ambassador . Kennedy was the first president to be elected to the White House .
 McNamara implemented the quarantine change in the face of strong opposition from the U.S. navy . The quarantine change was made in response to strong opposition by the United States .
 Graham Allison suggests that the quarantine line was never moved, indicating that presidential orders were not implemented and thus supporting his organizational process model . Allison: "Presidential orders were never implemented" Allison: Quarantine line never moved .
 President said he 'was against a strict application of the five hundred mile rule' though he recognized it might be better to intercept the specific ship that was being monitored outside the 5oo-mile radius .
 Previously the U.S. navy had been authorized to intercept outside the soo-mile quarantine line . Allison appears to have confused intercepting a ship and boarding it with boarding it .
 ABC News reporter known to have highlevel access to State Dept. John Scali approached by Soviet diplomat Aleksandr Fomin . Fomin approached Scali, a reporter with access to the State Department . Scali says he was approached by a Soviet diplomat .
 Fomin outlined a possible deal to resolve the crisis involving the withdrawal of Soviet missiles under UN supervision in return for an American pledge not to invade . The deal would involve withdrawal of the Soviet missiles from the Soviet Union under supervision .
 The Soviet official was known to be the KGB chief or Resident in Washington . Dean Rusk and John Kennedy considered his approach to the Soviet official's approach .
 Later that afternoon a letter from Premier Khrushchev arrived which inter alia appeared to make a similar proposal . The proposal was rejected by the Soviet Union . Later that day a letter of support for the proposal was also sent .
 Fomin's approach, assumed to have originated in Moscow, apparently influenced the way Kennedy and Rusk read Khrushchev's letter of 26 October . Fomin was assumed to be the author of the letter .
 Robert Kennedy presented Dobrynin with the American response to Khrushchev's letters . Kennedy presented the Soviet ambassador with the U.S. response .
 According to Kennedy's posthumously published account, the Soviet official raised the issue of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The Soviet official said the issue was raised by Kennedy .
 "We had only a few more hours-we needed an answer immediately from the Soviet Union," says President Nixon . "We needed only a little more hours," says Nixon .
 The President is depicted as displaying flexibility but nevertheless standing firm . The President was depicted as standing firm in the face of the situation .
 In i987 Anatoly Dobrynin began to provide his recollections and claimed that the initiative for the Turkish trade came from Robert Kennedy . He claimed that Robert Kennedy came up with the initiative . In i9 i987, Dobrynins claimed that Robert Kennedy was responsible for the
 Dobrynin challenged the idea that Kennedy had presented any kind of ultimatum . He said Kennedy did not present an ultimaatum, but that he did not .
 Khrushchev stated that the offer regarding the Turkish missiles was put to him on Friday 26 October, giving rise to speculation about the impact this may have had on his public demand for the withdrawal of the missiles .
 Dobrynin has now admitted that his recollection of the date was in error, and that the meeting did indeed take place on the evening of 27 October .
 Lebow and Stein have reproduced Dobrynin's telegram of 27 October, which clarifies several important issues . The telegram has been published by Lebow, Stein and Stein in their book .
 Kennedy's account of the 27 October meeting could be interpreted as implying some kind of deal over the Turkish Jupiters . It should be noted that, even with Sorenson's creative editing, Kennedy's accounts could be misinterpreted .
 Officials in Moscow grasped that a response within 24 hours was essential . The Attorney-General stressed that the request for a reply the next day 'is just that-a request, and not an ultimatum'
 During I962 there was a concerted programme of American actions directed against Cuba . Large-scale military manoeuvres and covert operations were carried out during the period of the Cold War .
 McNamara authorized active preparations for an invasion of Cuba in late September and early October . Considerable evidence has emerged concerning U.S. military contingency planning for a Cuban invasion . I96I and I962 were planning to invade Cuba .
 Details of American covert warfare against Cuba have also become known . Details of U.S. covert warfare on Cuba also known .
 More recently evidence has emerged to challenge the denials of Kennedy administration officials that the U.S. did not intend to invade Cuba .
 At the beginning of October, and before the discovery of the medium-range ballistic missiles , McNamara himself ordered the intensification of planning and preparations for action to 'the highest state of readiness' so that an .s.I.E.N.Namara ordered the . intens
 The new evidence vindicates Soviet and Cuban perceptions that an American attack was imminent . Whether or not the Kennedy administration intended to invade, the new evidence increasingly vindicates .
 President Kennedy ordered the removal of American Jupiter missiles from Turkey on several occasions . Kennedy was angry when he discovered that his order had not been obeyed .
 The failure to remove missiles could be seen as both provocative and vulnerable . New interpretation: The failure was the responsibility of the President's subordinates, rather than the State Department .
 President Kennedy ordered his officials to explore the possible removal of the missiles on several occasions in I96I and I962 . President Kennedy was made aware of Turkish opposition to the idea, and did not issue any order to have the missiles removed .
 President accepted that it would be bad for Turkish morale if the missiles were withdrawn before Polaris submarines were deployed in the Mediterranean . According to Dean Rusk the President accepted the decision .
 The decision to proceed with the deployment in I96I reflected concern that after Khrushchev's attitude at the Vienna summit, cancellation would show weakness . The decision was also thought to reflect concern that canceling the deployment would show weak .
 The order to withdraw the missile was not given until after the crisis . The order was given to withdraw missile after it was withdrawn .
 President should bear responsibility for the failure to remove the Jupiters from Turkey before the crisis, he says . Turkey's organizational process model does not provide an explanation for what happened .
 Soviet strategic nuclear weapons were not placed on alert during the crisis . The Soviet Union did not deploy any nuclear weapons during the Cold War .
 Former Soviet officers with responsibilities for strategic nuclear forces have stated that the alert status of intercontinental-ballistic missiles and long-range nuclear bombers was increased from peacetime status to the intermediate level . The alert status was increased to the state of combat readiness during the crisis .
 It is not yet clear what specific event caused the Soviet leadership to respond in this way . It is unclear what caused the response .
 Russia's strategic inferiority did not prevent the Soviets from making preparations for nuclear war . This factor could not have caused the political leadership to pursue a political solution that it would not otherwise have sought .
 Had the U.S. launched an invasion, and had the missiles and their crews survived, subordinate military officials could have initiated nuclear hostilities . The missiles and crews survived .
 American conventional attacks could have precipitated regional nuclear war . U.S. conventional attacks were likely to precipitate nuclear war in Asia .
 American decision-makers might well have assumed that the decision to use nuclear weapons had been taken in Moscow . Additionally, U.S. decision makers may have assumed the decision was made in Russia .
 There would have been very considerable pressure for an American nuclear response against Cuba . How the U.S. government would have responded is a matter for speculation .
 The prospect of escalation to at least a regional nuclear exchange appears to have been much higher than was understood at the time, or subsequently, or later .
 At the Havana conference in January I992, General Anatoly Gribkov (administrative head of the Soviet General Staffs main operations directorate in I962) stated that pre-delegated authority had been given to the Soviet commander in Cuba .
 Gribkov retracted this statement about pre-delegated authority, which had been questioned by other senior Soviet officers involved in the operation . General Garbuz's deputy, General Pliyev, also questioned this statement .
 None of these accounts has yet been confirmed by Soviet documentation, though Sagan quotes declassified American documents to provide some corroboration .
 Soviet command and control arrangements may have been effective in preventing the risk of 'inadvertent' escalation .
 Gribkov's revelation that the Soviets had deployed tactical nuclear missiles in Cuba has not been challenged . Nevertheless, the revelation of the Soviets' deployment of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba is not challenged .
 This was a significant intelligence failure on the part of the U.S. Americans, says CNN's John Sutter . This is a "significant intelligence failure"
 Khrushchev would have possessed options for escalation that fell short of attacks on U.S. or NATO territory . It meant that had Kennedy decided to invade, he would have had options to escalate . It would have included options that would have fallen short of attacking the United States .
 The Commander in Chief of the Strategic Air Command gave orders that a message be broadcast en clair to ensure that the Soviet authorities were fully aware of SAC's alert posture and strength . General Thomas S Power, at some point in the crisis, gave orders .
 The move was designed to intimidate the Soviets by demonstrating U.S. will in mobilizing its massive nuclear superiority . This move was intended to demonstrate U.K. will .
 President Kennedy was unaware of this unauthorized action, which could have undermined his attempts to manage and control the crisis . The unauthorized action was highly provocative, and could've undermined Kennedy's attempts to control the situation .
 Increases in the Defense Condition alert posture of American nuclear forces were routinely transmitted in unclassified messages . Increased alert posture was routinely transmitted by unclassified statements .
 General Power did transmit a message to his bomber wings on 24 October, but sought to emphasize the need for 'calm judgement' on the part of his crews . He stressed that wherever possible they should seek clarification of any orders departing from the normal .
 The previous understanding distorts General Power's intentions, and exaggerates the extent to which the move would have been provocative . Thus the previous understanding of the move distorts the intention of General Power .
 We still have no indication from Soviet sources about its effect on Soviet military perceptions and calculations . However, it is still not clear if the Soviet military calculations are accurate .
 The U.S. government did not identify any Soviet nuclear warheads in Cuba, though there was evidence that some were in transit when the American blockade/quarantine was imposed .
 Without the warheads, the U.S. was not under nuclear threat from Cuba . The blockade remained effective, so long as the United States remained effective .
 The U.S. felt that it had to assume that the warheads had arrived, and that the missiles would be operational . The American government felt that the U.N. had assumed that they had arrived and that they would have warheads .
 Russian officer later revised this latter figure to 12 warheads for the 6 FROG-7s . Lt-Col. Col. Vladimir Kuzn-Kuzn: "It's a war of revenge for what happened"
 If any of these accounts is true, then there was a real Soviet threat and Khrushchev would have been able to retaliate against US territory . The US would have had to defend itself against the Soviet threat .
 The significance of the Soviet accounts for U.S. decisionmaking is limited because the Kennedy administration acted on the assumption that the MRBM warheads had arrived and could be used . The significance was limited because of the fact that the warheads were available .
 Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 was shot down on 27 October . There has been long been speculation concerning the shooting down of the U.2 .
 It has been variously suggested that the decision to fire the surface-to-air missile was taken by subordinate Soviet military commanders or even the Cuban Prime Minister, Fidel Castro .
 Each of these explanations suggests that Moscow was not in control of its own forces . Each explanation suggests that Soviet-or, more significantly, Cuban-actors took important decisions to escalate the crisis .
 Soviet sources have made clear that the decision was taken and authorized by subordinate Soviet commanders in Cuba . The decision was made by Soviet sources in Cuba, sources say .
 According to General Volkogonov, authorization was provided by General Stepan Grechko from General Pliyev's headquarters . General Volkovogonova: authorization provided by general Stepan Grechko, as General Pliyev himself could not be contacted in
 The decision was not authonrzed by Moscow, and resulted in a mild reprimand from the Soviet Defence Minister, Marshal Malinovsky . It resulted in the Soviet defence minister reprimand .
 The decision was made by subordinate officials, though these were Soviet and not Cuban officers . Thus a crucial decision was taken by subordinates, not officers .
 This is the first account to claim that there were nuclear bombs in Cuba which could be carried by the Ilyushin-28 jet bombers . The first account of this claim was published in the New York Times .
 This significant intelligence failure can be explained by use of use of the bureaucratic politics model of decision-making, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: 'This is a failure to be able to predict the outcome of the intelligence failure'
 There was disagreement on whether it was prudent to risk the U-2s in direct overflights of Cuba . The administration was guided by the views of Dean Rusk and McGeorge Bundy .
 John McCone returned from his honeymoon to discover that the western part of the island had not been photographed for a month . McCone challenged this approach .
 On 9 October it was decided to send a U-2 on a direct overflight, but on io, II, I2 and I3 October meteorological conditions prevented the mission . The mission was cancelled .
 It was agreed on 9 October that the SAC would assume responsibility for the U-2 missions, which it did on I2 October . The SAC was also agreed that the U.2 missions would continue to be carried out . The U.S. Air Force will continue to
 No evidence has emerged to support the contention that rivalry between the CIA and SAC delayed the mission . No evidence of rivalry between SAC and CIA has emerged .
 The U.S. navy succeeded in surfacing five or six Soviet diesel-attack submarines in or near the 'quarantine zone'
 One of the submarines was damaged during this action and, unable to submerge, had to return to the Soviet Union . The action took place in the early 1950s .
 There is also evidence that practice depth charges were used by one of the Anti-Submarine Warfare ships involved . Practice depth charges may have been used by an anti-submarine vessel .
 American political authorities were unaware of these activities during the crisis, which could have led to subordinate officers provoking a military confrontation . Political authorities were seeking to prevent escalation while they were trying to prevent it .
 Five Soviet submarines were positively identified and trailed in the Caribbean and the Atlantic during the crisis . Five Soviet submarine submarines were tracked down in the Atlantic and the Caribbean .
 Specific 'Submarine Surfacing and Identification Procedures' were devised, including the use of practice depth charges and grenades . Practice depth charges, grenades and grenades were also used .
 It is possible that one of the submarines was damaged by a practice depth charge, though there is no firm evidence of this . The Soviets did not issue any formal complaint concerning American ASW operations .
 Secretary McNamara specifically approved the special submarine surfacing procedures on 23 October . The submarine is believed to have been launched by the U.S. Navy's first sub .
 Defense Secretary was made aware of ASW operations throughout the crisis . He and the President were concerned about Soviet submarine movements at the outset .
 All major U.S. military commands were placed on DEFCON-3 on 22 October . SAC moved to DEFCon-2 on 24 October . All major United States mi]itary commands placed on DeFCON 3 on October 22 .
 The United States did not seek to raise the alert status of the Thor and Jupiter Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles deployed under dual-key arrangements in Britain, Italy and Turkey . The U.S. did not want to raise alert status .
 General Truman Landon ordered increased number of nucleararmed aircraft on Quick Reaction Alert . IRBMs in Britain and Italy were at fifteen minutes readiness . The British V-bomber force was brought to a high state of ground alert .
 American policy-makers were unaware that a squadron of F-ioo nuclear bombers were on QRA at Incirlik in Turkey . Despite extensive discussion of 'defusing' the Turkish Jupiters as the crisis reached its climax on 27 October, U.S. policy-
 Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey were liquidfuelled missiles which took hours to prepare for firing . They were therefore vulnerable to pre-emption and could only be considered as first-strike weapons . The Jupiter missiles were launched in Turkey and Italy and Italy .
 Both the Jupiter and the Thor IRBMs could be held at some fifteen minutes' readiness indefinitely indefinitely .
 Under this procedure the warheads were mated to the rissiles, and the arming and firing sequences were partially completed . The warheads were then mated and fired to each other in a firing sequence .
 Jupiter missiles in Italy and the Thor missiles in Britain were at this state of readiness during the crisis . It is known that the Jupiter missiles were ready to be launched in Italy .
 How far the Soviets, and their military authorities, perceived these weapons systems as particularly 'provocative' is not yet clear .
 Before his arrest he was able to transmit a prearranged coded message warning that war was imminent . He had been able to send a coded message to warn of war being imminent .
 Fearing that this was motivated by a desire to 'play Samson and bring down the temple on everyone else' his handlers withheld the information and the President and his advisers were not informed of what had happened .
 Subordinate actors prevented American decision-makers from believing that the Soviets were about to attack, which could have provoked pre-emptive American action and escalation in the crisis .
 The pre-arranged telephonic warning of 'a sudden development of a dangerous situation' was transmitted, but this was not until 2 November . The code was sent to a secure location in the UK .
 U.S. strategic forces remained on higher alert postures until 20 November . By then, the immediate crisis had abated, but the situation had improved .
 When the coded warning was sent, news was immediately passed to the Director of the CIA, who in turn, briefed the President on 3 November . The President was briefed on the threat by the CIA on November 3, 2014 .
 "Subordinate actors did not prevent what could have been a major escalation," says CNN.com .
 Findings show how difficult it is for historians to reach the 'truth' about the crisis . Implications for historians are difficult for them to find out the truth .
 We want to stress that this difficulty does not arise from a lack of evidence, for that implies that if we had all the evidence we would be able to approximate towards the truth, it would be easier to find out .
 This is a historical epistemology which we reject, since it implies a correspondence theory of truth . We reject it, since we reject it . This is the theory of historical truth, but it is a theory of history .
 In our view the lack of a truth reflects far more fundamental epistemological and methodological difficulties, we say . The lack of truth reflects more fundamental problems, we argue, such as epistememological difficulties .
 We believe that even if we knew every detail about the crisis that would not mean that we could write a definitive history, even if that history were to be written from the perspectives of each participant in turn . We are not sure if we know every detail of the crisis .
 The reason for this is that motivations and intentions are rarely revealed and are usually inconsistent across time if not at each specific moment . The motivation and intentions of a person is rarely revealed in this case .
 Policy-makers in the crisis acted for a variety of reasons, and spoke and wrote for different purposes and audiences at different times . Policy makers acted for various reasons and audiences, including for different audiences .
 In short, more and more evidence may simply make things less and less clear . More evidence may make it less and more clear .
 Examples I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 above illustrate clearly just how difficult it is to ascertain 'what happened' even as more and more information is obtained . Examples of 'difficult to ascertain' what happened, such as how difficult to find out 'what
 Getting at 'the truth' of the crisis may simply be impossible, not because we know too little but because there is no single truth to be ascertained . Thus, getting at the truth is simply not possible, but it is impossible, says David Cameron .
 Historical truth is, in this sense, always contextual and always partial, always partial . Historical truth, however, is always contextual, and partial .
 We hope to have shown that the prevailing view of the crisis is in reality an American view . Crucially, it is one that needs to be re-read against other versions of events, and other definitions of 'the' crisis .
 In this light it is possible to see that the debates about the crisis have been conducted within parameters set by the U.S. definition of what happened . The debate has been conducted in this light of the United States definition of the crisis .
 Historians have focused on the gaps and puzzles highlighted by one reading of events rather than subjecting this reading to critical analysis . Yet, precisely because that definition reflects a specific political reading, it is not subjecting that reading to analysis .
 There has been little concern with the critically important issue of why it was a crisis . Above all, there has been a lack of concern about the crisis itself, says David Cameron .
 The conventional accounts of events tend to start their analysis from exacdy the place that seems least secure and certain, such as the place where it seems most secure .
 Historians have ignored the silences of the crisis, focusing rather on open differences between participants . Historians ignore silences and focus on the open differences of participants .
 They have taken the agenda of participants as given and have not looked closely at the shared beliefs held by participants . They have also not looked at the beliefs of participants in the debate .
 The new evidence may not make the crisis any more susceptible to one explanation, but it does offer the possibility of a genuinely international history of the crisis .
 New evidence builds on the point that beliefsystems were of considerable importance in the crisis . There are many implications for political scientists .
 Most of this work has centred on Allison Allison's analysis of events . Allison is the author of Allison's book, "Allison's Analysis of the World War II"
 Our examples allow us to re-evaluate Allison's account in order to see whether or not his alternative models are supported . Our examples are examples of Allison's examples .
 The result is rather mixed, with three examples supporting his claims about the importance of bureaucratic and organizational factors, three disproving his claims .
 New evidence confirms Allison's claims for the importance of organizational and bureaucratic factors during the crisis . We think that the new evidence tends to confirm rather than undermine Allison .
 Our findings indicate that these bureaucratic foul-ups cannot simply be explained away as a result of slippage due to a lack of presidential attention . Our findings show that these problems are not simply explained away, but they are serious .
 The President is far more than just another player in the bureaucratic game as the bureaucratic politics model implies . However, the importance of the events surrounding the trade between U.S. missiles in Turkey and Soviet missiles on Cuba also indicates the critical role of the President's perception of the situation .
 Allison says the case-study shows how important the President's choices were for the outcome of the crisis . Allison: The President's decision to take the lead in the crisis was crucial to the outcome .
 At first sight this may be seen as supporting the claims of the rational actor model, but this is not so . This is not the case for the first time in the history of the world's most powerful institutions .
 The rational actor model is very weak in accounting for the values and priorities of a President, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "Rational actor model" is not strong enough to account for President's priorities .
 New evidence refocuses our attention on the President and on his choices . However, it does not mean that a rational actor account, which treats values and beliefs as exogenous, is vindicated .
 An account that explains individual choices does not have to be a rational actor account, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Rational actor account doesn't need to be that of rational actor accounts"
 The overwhelming implication of the evidence is to support the influence of organizational factors in foreign and defence policy behaviour . This conclusion will receive further support when we look at the risk of inadvertent nuclear war during the crisis .
 Evidence tends to support the view that Allison's alternatives need to be augmented by models that take cognitive factors into account . Having said this, we believe that the evidence also tends to . support the views of David Welch in his review of Essence of decision 20 years on .
 None of Allison's models can really deal with several central questions of the crisis, he says . Instead, it would require examination of the ways in which beliefs and cognitive maps are linked to bureaucratic positions and institutional power .
 Such a project lies outside all three models as currently constituted, although it is most easily compatible with the bureaucratic politics framework . The project is not compatible with any of the three models, but with bureaucratic politics, such as bureaucratic politics .
 Archives and oral history evidence show the centrality of organizational and bureaucratic factors for any explanation of the crisis . Political scientists need to develop models stressing the linkage between cognitive factors and bureaucratic position, authors say .
 There are three main implications of the new findings for policy-makers . Implications for policy makers include the impact of the findings .
 The first is that the conventional wisdom of how the crisis ended is very misleading, says David Frum . He says that conventional wisdom is misleading about how it ended is misleading .
 U.S. stood firm and won clear and unambiguous victory in the Cold War . Cold War crisis resulted in much more of a draw than a United States victory, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The existence of an explicit trade between the U.S. missiles in Turkey and the Soviet missiles on Cuba significantly alters the usually accepted view of the crisis .
 President Kennedy had made arrangements for a trade to be proposed publicly by the Secretary General of the UN if the proposed secret deal between his brother and Dobrynin failed . The so-called Cordier ploy was revealed only in I987 .
 The conventional account of the crisis also requires major revision in respect of the notion that the U.S. 'stood firm' and exercised brinkmanship to force a Soviet climbdown .
 Such an account tends to lead to conclusions about the possibility of nuclear diplomacy and of the use of nuclear superiority to obtain political advantages, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Sources seem to show that U.S. decision-makers were extremely worried about the prospect of any Soviet nuclear response . The result was to nullify the enormous nuclear superiority that the United States enjoyed at the time .
 McGeorge Bundy, Special Assistant for National Security Affairs during the crisis, has argued very strongly that nuclear superiority was not important in settling the crisis . Bundy argued that mutual vulnerability was more important than nuclear superiority . Bundy: Mutual vulnerability was a key factor .
 Psychologist James Blight has examined the relationship between fear and the peaceful resolution of the crisis . Psychologist Blight says fear can lead to a peaceful resolution .
 This interpretation has been supported strongly by the opening up of the new archives, especially the transcripts of the ExCornm meetings, and by the opportunity to discuss the events with the participants through critical oral history .
 There is a real problem in relying on what Ernest May has termed the 'lessons of the past'86 By this May means that policy-makers use historical analogies, but do so badly . Policy-makers should not rely too much on the lessons of past, says Ernest May
 The missile crisis, itself seen by May as an example of the good use of history by decisionmakers, has been viewed by policy-makers in a very partial way, one which new evidence calls severely into doubt .
 Policy-makers often fall back on half-remembered analogies from previous crises . Our worry is that lessons learnt from the Cuban missile crisis may be dangerously misleading .
 In our view, the lessons of the crisis are very different indeed from those so often quoted by policy-makers . The lessons of this crisis are different indeed, we say, from those that often quoted .
 These claims were expressed particularly strongly during the Reagan and Thatcher periods, and we see them as fundamentally undermined by the evidence unearthed in more recent years .
 We feel that the prospect of the wrong lessons being learnt from the Cuban missile crisis is a particularly worrying one . Our reading of the evidence calls for a far more circumspect interpretation of the supposed benefits of nuclear superiority, and a more serious appreciation of the implications of mutual vulnerability .
 The third and most important implication for policy-makers is paradoxical, it's paradoxical . Policy-makers should be aware of the implications of this, especially in the future .
 The most commonly held view of the crisis is that it was the nearest that the superpowers came to nuclear war, is in one sense accurate and in another sense very misleading . New evidence shows that the view is misleading and accurate .
 The crisis has been seen as a period when Soviet and U.S. policy-makers were engaged in nuclear brinkmanship . The crisis occurred during the Cold War .
 The danger of nuclear war resulting from the policy choices of the two sets of leaders was indeed enormously high . But we believe that the new evidence reveals a far more disturbing picture .
 The good news is that it is now clear that neither leadership was willing to go to war over Cuba, much less run the risk of nuclear war . Neither leadership would have been willing to risk nuclear war, even if it were possible .
 In this sense the dangers of war by design have been exaggerated by historians, political scientists and policy-makers . War by design has been much exaggerated by history and policy makers, he says .
 Kennedy had the Cordier manoeuvre up his sleeve if the Kennedy-Dobrynin talks failed . New evidence shows just how firmly Soviet forces were under control .
 In this sense, the conventional wisdom of nuclear bargaining and crisis management is seriously misleading, says David Cameron . "In this sense of nuclear negotiations and crisis managers are seriously misleading"
 Each side was anxious to avoid war at all costs, despite the public rhetoric and the subsequent politicization of events . In reality, each side wanted to avoid conflict, despite rhetoric and politics .
 The danger of nuclear confrontation by accident was far higher during the missile crisis than was previously thought . However, new sources have made abundantly clear that the danger of a nuclear confrontation is far higher than previously thought.
 Recent books by Bruce Blair and Scott Sagan show in graphic detail how technical systems of the two superpowers were operating in ways contrary to the intentions of policy-makers .
 Blair's book looks at the entire Cold War period, but draws on important new information on the Cuban missile crisis . Blair's new book is a look at the Cold War era, but focuses on the missile crisis in Cuba . The book is available now on Amazon.com .
 The risks of accidental nuclear war have been seriously underestimated in the literature and, hence, by policy-makers . But the overwhelming implication of the new evidence is that the risks are seriously underestimated . The overwhelming implication is that nuclear war risk is seriously underestimated by policy makers .
 Scott Sagan's book gives a long and more detailed list of 'close calls' during the crisis, such as launch of an Atlas test missile from Vandenberg air base on 26 October .
 We have chosen only examples where the new evidence alters our understanding of the crisis . We have not mentioned some of the well-established incidents which risked accidental nuclear war-cases .
 There is now ample evidence that the fact that the crisis did not lead to nuclear war was due, in large part, to good luck . In short, there is no doubt that good luck played a role in avoiding nuclear war .
 'Most important finding' undermines claims that nuclear crises can be safely managed, scientists say . 'This undermines the claims that command and control systems will work,' they say .
 Far from the crisis being a controlled exercise in brinkmanship, we see it as extremely disorganized and as disorganized . The crisis offers policy-makers considerable pause for thought, the authors say .
 Historians, political scientists and policy-makers need to re-examine their assumptions about the missile crisis . The aim of this paper has been to present an overview of recent evidence .
 Only then will historians be able to write a genuinely international history of the crisis, they say . Crucially, only then can write a genuine international history .
 History will not be able to provide one single, definitive account of events . But even that history will not provide a definitive account, it will be impossible .
 The most important impact of the new evidence is that for policy-makers, since so much of the material we have reviewed in this short paper requires a fundamental rethinking of what went on in October .
 The findings should be taken very seriously indeed, the authors say . The crisis led to such important political lessons about the need for nuclear superiority and the success of policy-makers' control over nuclear operations during the crisis .
 This was not a crisis in which the U.S. was able to force the Soviet Union into a humiliating submission . Above all, the United States, through rational use of escalation dominance and nuclear crisis diplomacy, won't have to be humiliated, he says . The United States won't
 It was a crisis which illustrated the importance of mutual vulnerability and of the desire by both sets of decision-makers to avoid war at all costs . Rather than war, it was the need for the two sides to avoid it at all times .
 The possibility of inadvertent nuclear war was considerable . Yet, at the very same time as Kennedy was involved in a secret trade, the possibility of accidental nuclear war .
 Of all the things we all thought we knew about the crisis, this misconception is most salient as we drift into a far more complex nuclear world . This misconception is particularly salient in the world of nuclear power .
 Policy-makers in future nuclear crises will be as frightened by nuclear vulnerability as were the participants in the Cuban missile crisis . Optimistically, we hope that policy-makers will be able to control their nuclear arsenals less effectively .
 Either way, we believe that the story of the crisis is very different from that told in the American version of events that has hitherto prevailed, says CNN.com.com . We believe that . either way, the story will be very different .