 Merriweather: "I'm a good guy, I'm a great guy. I love you"
 a {font-weight:600.a.33 Work Sans,sans-serif}.promotion-shopping-description-info a . .tp-container-inner {clear:both}.tag__newsletter-headline {color:d8361e;
 Work Sans,sans-serif;height:112px;opacity:0;padding:12px;position:absolute;text-align:left;top:45px;-webkit-transition:opacity .3s;-o-transitions:
 It will be 50 years since the start of the Cuban missile crisis . The U.S. and the Soviets were on the brink of nuclear annihilation for 13 days .
 The standoff ended when the two countries agreed that the Soviets would not i nstall missile bases and the United States would not invade Cuba . The U.S. and the Soviet Union avoided a catastrophe .
 "The path we have chosen for the present is full of hazards, as all paths are," he says . The path they have chosen is "full of hazards," he adds . "All paths are."
 It would have been the easiest thing in the world for us to build those emplacements under the guise of something totally different and they would have never been discovered . It would be the easy thing for them to build them in the same way as the others, he says .
 The Soviets and Cuba had been better at camouflaging the bases . One wonders what would have happened if they'd been better camouflaging .
 President Kennedy didn't negotiate out of the Cuban missile crisis simply because he and Khrushchev got along well . Kennedy had to make a deal to end the crisis in order to avoid further escalation .
 Pulitzer Center for Crisis Reporting has supported my reporting from Asia, which looks at sustainable fashion, global health, and technology for development for development .
 In a past life, I worked as a travel and food writer . I got the assignment to cover the grand opening of the Trump International Hotel in D.C. just a couple miles from my home .
 When Trump won the election and refused to divest his business, I stayed on the story, starting a newsletter called 1100 Pennsylvania . I've contributed to Vanity Fair, Politico, NBC News and Vanity Fair .
 Forbes searches premium retailers to find the latest products and the latest deals .
 Featured products are independently selected and linked to for your convenience . Use these photos to help us understand today's featured news stories .
 My areas of specialty are wearable tech, cameras, home entertainment and mobile technology . I'm an expert in wearable tech and cameras .
 I also work as an actor, enjoying equally the first Mission Impossible movie, a season at Shakespeare’s Globe and a part in the latest series of The Crown . I’ve written for the Daily Telegraph, the Sunday Times, the Daily Mail, the Sun, Metro,
 Most of my work away from Forbes appears in the Independent, the Evening Standard and Monocle Magazine . Right now most of his work is for Forbes .
 Verdict.co.uk is the founding editor of Verdict . Follow us on Twitter and Facebook .
 I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 . I have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen . Bitcoin and cryptocurrency is the most important new technology since the internet itself .
 I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others . I have also written for the New York Times, CityAM and The Guardian .