 Most likely cause of this is a content blocker on your computer or network . The most likely cause is a lack of internet connectivity .
 Visit c950.chronicle.com and chronicle.blueconic.net . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Back to the page you came from .
 Once you have access to these URLs, please use the use of the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Visit CNN.com for more information .
 CNN.com will feature a shortlist of the top 10 most recent news stories . Click here to see who is on the list at the bottom of the list .
 Blight and Lang, a research professor of international affairs at Waterloo, have spent almost 30 years investigating how events almost brought the world to nuclear war . They have spent that time investigating how those events almost ended up in nuclear war.
 Blight and Lang have created a companion “transmedia, multiplatform” Web site at armageddonletters.com.com .
 The imagined conversations are in screenplay and graphic-novel form, with illustrations by Andrew Whyte, a Vancouver artist . Koji Masutani also designed the project’s Web site .
 On the Armageddon Letters Web site, Blight, Lang, and Masutani plan to post 20 short films, narrated by a cartoon stylization of Blight himself .
 To students he might come off as either very much not hip or, because of his enthusiasm and intense gaze, square jaw, and crew cut, ultra-hip or even post-hip .
 Blight and Lang trade overlapping comments about the Web site’s components, including podcasts and blogs with what they imagine Castro, Kennedy, and Khrushchev might have posted at the time . As they recount their project and its purpose, Blight & Lang talk about what they think
 The authors’ primary target audience is undergraduate and high-school students . It’s no surprise, then, that they’re targeting undergraduates .
 50 years ago, Kennedy stated that the U.S. would not tolerate the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . The tension began ratcheting up on September 4, 1962, when Kennedy said that the United States wouldn't tolerate them . Kennedy: "The United States would not
 Soviet leaders countered that America had missiles in Britain, Italy, Turkey, and Turkey . Soviet leaders said America had missile bases in Britain and Italy .
 Blight and Lang were moved to tell the story by Robert S McNamara, the U.S. secretary of defense during the crisis .
 Blight says he and Castro got on like old pals because both had been pitchers, Blight in the Detroit Tigers farm system . Blight: Castro and Blight met in Havana, Cuba, where they got on as old pals .
 The gatherings were Blight’s first forays into what he now calls “critical oral history” in which decision makers from key historical episodes relate their experiences while scholars armed with declassified documents .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots to CNN iReport.com/Travel next Friday .
 McNamara “all but ordered us,” write Blight and Lang, “to learn more about the actual experience of the Cuban missile crisis” from its participants, they say .
 Both trained in psychology, they came to differ with the standard account of the crisis, which attributes its resolution to rational decision-making by the leaders . Instead, they see the whole period from the Bay of Pigs invasion to the missile crisis in psychological terms .
 Blight hung an effigy of McNamara while an anti-Vietnam War activist in a chapter of Students for a Democratic Society . Blight wrote two books with former secretary of defense .
 Blight and Lang’s work around the Cuban missile crisis, often with a colleague, David Welch, has produced several other books, dozens of journal articles .
 Eleven Lessons From the Life of Robert S McNamara and Virtual JFK: Vietnam if Kennedy Had Lived . The animator on their current project, Koji Masutani, animates .
 Peter Monaghan is a correspondent for The Chronicle . He is also a writer for The Washington Post . Monaghan: "It's time for the country to get back on the track"