 Joseph P Kennedy served as U.S. ambassador to Britain at the time of the 1938 Munich conference, where the British and French agreed to let Nazi Germany take land from Czechoslovakia in exchange for a short-lived promise of peace . Kennedy's father served as United States ambassador to
 The elder Kennedy's support of appeasement later was strongly criticized and may have cost him any hope of running for national office . He was criticized for his decision to support the West in the Cold War .
 LeMay, like other military leaders, advocated immediate military intervention to destroy Soviet missiles and unfinished silos that had been detected by aerial reconnaissance in Cuba .
 He said blockade ships bound for Cuba, as other advisers urged, would lead to war anyway . President Obama said blockade of Cuba ships would not have led to war .
 President Kennedy privately called LeMay ""field marshal,"" did not respond to the remark . President Kennedy did not comment on LeMay's remark .
 The National Archives released 15 hours of tapes from the Kennedy White House . The tapes cover meetings that took place during the decision-making phase of the crisis 34 years ago this week .
 Authorities deleted 27 minutes they said covered intelligence sources or methods still in use . Authorities deleted the video . Authorities said it covered sources and methods still being used .
 Much of the material has already been recounted in the writings of participants . summaries of the meetings were released in 1992 .
 Several of Kennedy's advisers, foremost among them Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, urged an attack . Defense Secretary McNamara was among those who urged the attack .
 The tapes indicate that Kennedy initially appeared to agree that he would be forced to resort to military action . The tapes show Kennedy initially agreed to go to war with the U.S.
 U.S. intelligence had vastly underestimated what is now known to have been the strength of Soviet forces in Cuba . But they also show that United States intelligence had underestimated what now known as Soviet forces .
 The Americans believed there were no more than 1,500 to 3,000 Soviet troops . Documents released after the fall of the Soviet Union showed there actually were 42,000 .
 Kennedy felt painted into a corner by Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev's offer to remove Cuban missiles if the U.S. removed its Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey . Kennedy felt it was a mistake to ask the United States to remove the missiles .
 The president said Khrushchev's offer was so reasonable that it would turn world public opinion to the Soviet side . The president accepted the offer, which he ultimately accepted .
 LeMay's comment ''was an amazing thing to say to any president, but it was a particularly amazing thing'' said Sheldon Stern, historian at the John F Kennedy Library in Boston, where the tapes were released .
 Joseph P Kennedy was ambassador to Britain at the time of the 1938 Munich conference . The British and French agreed to let Nazi Germany take land from Czechoslovakia in exchange for a short-lived promise of peace .
 LeMay, like other military leaders, advocated immediate military intervention to destroy Soviet missiles and unfinished silos that had been detected by aerial reconnaissance . LeMay called for the destruction of the Soviet missiles .
 He said blockading ships bound for Cuba, as other advisers urged, would lead to war anyway . President Obama's administration has been criticized by some of his advisers for their advice .
 Kennedy privately called LeMay ''field marshal'' did not respond to the remark . Kennedy did not comment on the remark and the meeting went on to cover other military and diplomatic issues .
 The National Archives released 15 hours of tapes from the Kennedy White House . The tapes cover meetings during the decision-making phase of the crisis 34 years ago this week .
 Authorities deleted 27 minutes they said covered intelligence sources or methods still being used . Authorities deleted the video . Authorities said it was deleted because it contained intelligence sources and methods .
 Much of the material has already been recounted in writings of participants . Much of this is already known in writings from participants .
 The president said Khruschev's offer was so reasonable that it would turn world public opinion to the Soviet side . The president accepted the offer, which he ultimately accepted .
 They were visiting the grave of Mr Khrushchev's father Nikita, the Soviet leader of the time, during a conference of Soviet, Cuban and United States officials .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union were ready to go to war, the author says . The United States and the USSR was ready to exchange nuclear weapons and destroy the entire planet, he says .
 JFK was intent on ensuring that a war that no one wanted would not happen again . JFK was trying to ensure that that the war that he wanted would never happen again. JFK was determined to prevent it from happening again .
 JFK refrained from attending Ex-Com deliberations so as to allow them to conduct a free-for-all debate . Four-star generals joined by graduates of Harvard and other Ivy League institutions, who formed the Executive Committee .
 An enlightened president and his intelligent advisers, the embodiment of the Rational Men, are in charge . Which is what happens when an enlightened president is in charge.
 Prof Allison raised questions about the viability of what he labelled as the Rational Actor Model . But after studying the 1962 crisis, Prof Allison has raised questions .
 According to this model, the government acts as a unitary rational actor to make decisions . This model is based on the model of the government acting as a rational actor in making decisions .
 Prof Allison suggested that in reality what happens has very little to do with rationality . Instead, Prof Allison said that what happens is very much more important than rationality .
 Things tend to be more messy, reflecting the personal, political and bureaucratic interests of the main players, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 His foreign policy aides were smart, but he didn't pay too much attention to their advice, especially by those who encouraged him to risk a war with the Soviet Union . "He didn't listen to them, but they were smart," he says .
 JFK who wanted to avoid a nuclear war at almost any price relied on a relative, his brother Robert Kennedy, the attorney-general, as well as other outside players to communicate with the Soviet leaders and help fashion up a secret compromise deal .
 Some of the 'adults in the room' in the JFK administration had advocated military escalation . The inexperienced JFK resisted their pressure and pursued a more cautious approach .
 Richard Nixon proposed that U.S. presidents need to embrace what he called the Madman Theory . Richard Nixon called it the "Madman Theory"
 Much of Mr Trump's modus operandi as a businessman and now as a politician has involved bluffing . But we are aware that Mr Trump is bluffing. But we also know that he has bluffing, says Mr Trump .
 Trump renounced some of his main campaign pledges he had renounced after being elected as president . These include getting Mexico to pay for the wall on the southern border and labelling China as a currency manipulator .
 Concealing one's intentions and misleading the other side about them, or bluffing, can prove to be a very effective tool in politics, including foreign policy .
 President Eisenhower's Secret Battle to Save the World, historian Evan Thomas noted that the much-admired president was a specialist in bridge .
 Mr Eisenhower radiated warm sincerity and his emotions were easy to read . Mr Eisenhower was known for his warmth and sincerity . He died at the age of 92 .
 Being a bluffer is a perfect personal trait if you are in the business of nuclear strategy, Mr Thomas contended . Being a 'bluffer' is a good personal trait, he said .
 Mr Eisenhower's basic policy throughout his presidency was known as Massive Retaliation . He threatened to use nuclear weapons against aggression wherever and whenever it might occur .
 Eisenhower's closest adviser, General Andrew Goodpaster, guessed that 'Ike' would never use nuclear weapons . Others weren't so sure, and Mr Eisenhower wasn't going to tell them .
 Mr Eisenhower managed, ""by cleverness, indirection, subtlety, and downright deviousness, and by embracing the very weapon he could never use, to safeguard his country and possibly the rest of mankind from annihilation"
 President Barack Obama has been in office since 2001 . Obama's administration has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the past . The White House has been accused of being too secretive about his administration .
 One cache of important records was found in a shopping cart in the basement of the State Department . Other significant papers from national security agencies were scattered throughout the executive branch .
 In the past five years, many of these ""hidden" documents have come to light -largely through the persistent effort of the Washington-based National Security Archive .
 Among the documents from 1962-63 were CIA papers on Operation Mongoose, the covert operation to destabilize the Castro government . The documents include an exchange of letters between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev .
 With the list in hand, the archive began filing a series of Freedom of Information Act requests for the files .
 The government had declassified 2,000 documents in full or in part by mid-1989 . The documents were declassified by the end of that year .
 Hundreds of other classified records have been released after archive analysts and other scholars filed FOIA requests . In the early 1970s many important internal papers were made public at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library .
 Its publication last week by The New Press was timed to coincide with the missile crisis anniversary .
 The court battle for the rest of the documents and portions of papers that have been excised continues . Meanwhile, the court battle continues to continue .
 The reasons the government gives for holding them back -even after 30 years -are intriguing . The reasons are intriguing .
 A secret discussion paper on actions to increase pressure on Cuba (short of the use of force) was denied because disclosure would harm U.S. security interests . A section of the State Department prepared for the National Security Council was denied .
 It filed a request for a summary judgment for release of the remaining documents last week . It filed for the summary judgment last week for the release of remaining documents .
 National Security Council briefed President John F Kennedy on that ominous development . President Kennedy was briefed on the threat of nuclear weapons .
 The organization, the predecessor of today's AF Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Agency, had an important role before and during the crisis when the U.S. and Soviet Union came to the brink of war . The organization had a key role in the Cold War .
 USAFSS became involved in airborne operations against Cuba in early 1962 . By mid-October, the command was firmly entrenched in the mission .
 The U.S. began building up its land forces and readied a strict naval quarantine . Airborne Communications Reconnaissance Program operations increased in Oct. 1962 .
 A second Europe-based C-130 and USAFSS crew arrived in Florida on the eve of President Kennedy's famous speech to the country . The plane was the first to arrive in Florida since the Kennedy era .
 This arrival increased the number of C-130s used in the operation to three . The operation is the first of its kind to take place in the U.S.
 The next day the third C-130 and its crew stood ready to fly ACRP missions against Cuba . It was the first time the plane had been deployed to Cuba .
 27 people and an intercept van sent to Key West, Fla., to augment Naval Security Group operations at the site . Alerted on Oct. 31, command sent its first contingent of 27 people .
 USAFSS personnel left Key West and opened operations at Cudjoe Key, about 15 miles east of Key West Naval Air Station . Air Force One was stationed in Key West, Florida, during the 1960s .
 The command dealt with many challenges in preparing and deploying its people to Key West . The deployment order deadline still met the deadline .
 Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Richard P Klocko received a telephone call from the Air Force chief of Staff, Gen. Gen. Robert P. R. Klocka . Gen. Riffel received a phone call from Air Force Secretary of State Gen. Michael E.
 That day, a Soviet SA-2 surface-to-air missile destroyed an Air Force U-2 above the island, killing the pilot, Maj. Maj. Gen. Robert Schurman . The pilot was killed by the missile, which was fired from a Soviet rocket launcher .
 It appeared the U.S. would launch air strikes against the already launch-capable MRBM sites and execute a massive amphibious assault against Cuba .
 USAFSS put its forces in place, flying invaluable ACRP missions and conducting an intercept operation on the ground . USAFSS also conducted an intercept mission on ground .
 The United States and the Soviet Union reached an agreement to avert a conflict . By Oct. 1962, the U.S. and Soviet Union had reached a deal to avoid a war . The Soviet Union and the United States avoided a war in October .
 USAFSS had established itself as a primary provider of invaluable intelligence to U.S. forces . Based on America's reaction, it become clear USAFSS .
 I remember I couldn't find any kids to play with on the street, and I heard about people building bomb shelters in their backyards . I remember . I heard people building bombs shelters in backyards in my backyards. I remember when I was a little girl, I had no
 "I kind of liked the idea of canned foods and candles, but I knew something was wrong," she says . She says she knew something had to be done with canned food and candles .
 Costner would grasp the gravity of the October 1962 crisis in which the U.S. and the Soviet Union stood eyeball to eyeball in a dispute over the Soviet buildup of nuclear missiles in Cuba . It wasn't until years later, of course, that Costner .
 The actor now stars in ""Thirteen Days,"" an epic suspense thriller that dramatizes the events that nearly caused an apocalyptic nuclear war .
 The film chronicles the crisis from Day 1, when a U.S. spy plane detected the Soviet missile buildup in Cuba, through Day 13, when the Communist superpower eventually agreed to discontinue its installation of nuclear missiles on the island nation .
 The $80 million thriller focuses on the bitter debates within President John F Kennedy's White House . Cabinet members, diplomats and top military brass offered ideas on how to resolve the crisis .
 Kennedy resisted armed confrontation for as long as possible even when an American fighter pilot was either intentionally or inadvertently shot down . Ultimately, it came down to Kennedy, who, as the film reveals, resist armed confrontation .
 Costner plays trusted presidential aide Kenneth O'Donnell, who actually served in the Kennedy administration . Costner stars in the film as a conduit to the dramatization .
 David Self has woven a tale about the crisis as seen through the eyes of a little-known White House aide . Drawing on historical material, including White House tapes, memoirs, oral histories, declassified CIA documents and personal interviews .
 The popular actor and director says it wasn't important to him to star in the picture . He says he wasn't interested in the role in the movie .
 Costner's job is to provide the star power to get audiences into movie theaters, he says . Costner says audiences might be reluctant to sit down and absorb a historical drama over 2 hours long whose outcome may already know .
 He knows the difficulty of producing big budget pictures that may fail to draw the large audiences needed to support them . He knows firsthand that he knows firsthand .
 Costner was key to getting ""Thirteen Days"" produced . Costner starred in such blockbusters as ""Bull Durham,""The Bodyguard,"" ""Field of Dreams"" and ""Dances With Wolves"
 His O'Donnell character is the everyman who bears witness to the power and peril during an unraveling crisis in the White House . His character is an everyman .
 Costner starred in another movie dealing with the Kennedy years, Olver Stone's 1991 ""JFK,"" a controversial drama about the Kennedy assassination . Costner played New Orleans prosecutor Jim Garrison in the controversial drama .
 He insists that the important factor he considers when choosing a film role is the story and the writing . The actor insists that he considers a film's story and writing as important as a role .
 Casting the Kennedy brothers was more difficult, Donaldson says . Most people have an image in their minds of what John and Robert Kennedy looked and sounded like, he says . Casting the brothers was difficult, as most people have a picture in mind of what they think of .
 Greenwood and Culp have been working together to create the film . The film is based on Greenwood's work on the subject of a series of historical events .
 Greenwood: "There were differences in the way talked, and we worked on giving our characters a unique voice" Greenwood says. "There was a lot of similarities between the characters, but there were differences between them"
 Costner admits that doing the Boston accent in "Thirteen Days" was challenging . Costner has a Boston accent that he says was challenging for him .
 On the positive side of the ledger, the attacks sent a message to Osama bin Laden and his cohorts that the U.S. is prepared to abandon a number of legal and political constraints in the fight against terrorism .
 The U.S. will no longer hold itself to a rigorous legal standard of establishing their guilt before striking back . Their bases in foreign countries will not be treated as sanctuaries, and the United States won't treat them as sanctaries .
 In addition, these attacks may have meaningfully set back the bin Laden network's attempts to obtain chemical weapons . In addition to the attacks, these may have set back attempts to get chemical weapons, the attacks may also set back efforts to obtain them .
 Bin Laden group was planning additional attacks before this U.S. strike, so vengeance motive may not matter much in this case . But bin Laden group already was planning more attacks before the United States strike .
 A second concern is damage to the U.S. relations with Pakistan, which appears to have had its airspace traversed without permission . Pakistan appears to be the brunt of the wayward cruise missile .
 The United States is taking off its gloves in the battle against terrorists . The U.S. willingness to violate Pakistani airspace is not something to be done lightly . But it does reinforce the message that the United States has taken off gloves .
 These hits against the bin Laden infrastructure probably will have limited military impact . Unfortunately, these hits probably won't have a big military impact on the ground .
 Terrorist organizations like Hamas and Hezbollah in the Middle East have already shown that things like large training bases and central arms caches are not essential to their operations . Terrorists in the region have shown that such bases are not necessary to their military operations .
 The cruise-missile strike put no U.S. troops at risk and put him at only modest risk . He also may view the strike as an indication of what we are not prepared to do than what we're not prepared for .
 A commando raid against bin Laden's headquarters south of the site we bombed. Admittedly a very risky one_a very risky raid .
 There is some chance that our target would have eluded our grasp, and a very good chance we would have lost soldiers . Mohamed Farah Aidid in Somalia in 1993 was killed by a bomb in 1993 .
 Unlike the Aidid case, bin Laden represents a direct threat to core U.S. interests . Unlike Aidid's case, the case is not a secret threat to the United States' interests .
 President George Bush sent thousands of troops to capture Noriega in 1989 . President Bush sent troops to Panama to capture him in 1989, but he was not captured that time .
 In this case, thousands of United States troops would not have been needed . Thousands of U.S. troops would have not been needed in Iraq .
 Several hundred could have flown into Afghanistan on perhaps two dozen helicopters predeployed to an aircraft carrier in the Indian Ocean, could have done the job .
 A commando operation would have shared many of the military and political risks that confronted Desert One, the attempted rescue of U.S. hostages in Tehran, Iran, in 1980 . Desert One was an attempt to rescue United States hostages in Iran .
 Eight U.S. servicemen were killed when a helicopter and airplane collided at an improvised staging base in the Iranian desert . Carter's presidency was effectively sealed when the crash killed eight Americans .
 They are run by a unified command that provides them with high-quality equipment and rigorous, realistic training . They are also run by the unified command .
 Marine Corps pilots had to fly unfamiliar Navy helicopters, and coordinate operations with Air Force planes they had not properly trained with before, would not recur . Situations such as those confronted in 1980, when . pilots had had to . fly unfamiliar . Navy helicopters .
 Pakistan might have firmly resisted any use of its airspace or territory to stage the operation, even if we had offered to lift sanctions imposed on it after its nuclear weapons tests .
 Bin Laden may pose the most serious direct risk to U.S. territory since Cuban missile crisis . But bin Laden may well pose the greatest risk to United States territory .
 Next time, assuming we can again find him, we should consider going in and getting him . "Next time" will be when we find him again, he says .
 Michael O'Hanlon is a fellow in foreign policy studies at the Brookings Institution in Washington . He says the U.S. has a long history of foreign policy in the Middle East .
 It may not be an exaggeration to say the world was on the verge of ending, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 As he received updates on the situation, he took some notes on a yellow legal pad . The notes were preserved for posterity .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were at the center of the missile crisis . Historians think it was the closest the world has come to nuclear war . Their fathers, President Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita .
 The crisis began when President Kennedy learned Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the U.S. President Kennedy knew Cuba had nuclear missiles that could reach the United States . The Cuban crisis began in 1961 when President Eisenhower learned Cuba could have nuclear missiles .
 The crisis ended two weeks later, when the Soviet leader promised to remove the nuclear missiles in exchange for a promise by Kennedy not to invade Cuba . Kennedy was the president of the Soviet Union when the crisis began .
 McNamara made the statement after returning to Washington from a four-day closed-door meeting in Havana of former U.S., Soviet and Cuban officials investigating circumstances of the historic showdown .
 Anatoly Gribkov said nine short-range rockets with nuclear warheads had been placed in Cuba . Gribakov said nine rockets had been put in Cuba by the Russian government .
 Gribkov told the Havana meeting he had visited the island with orders that, in case of a U.S. invasion of Cuba, the senior Soviet troop commander was authorized to use short-range nuclear weapons without further approval from Moscow .
 The intermediate-range Soviet weapons that were the focus of the missile crisis could have wreaked devastation on much of the U.S. mainland, Gribkov told the Havana meeting . They could have been fired only with explicit authorization of Nikita Khrushchev, he said .
 McNamara and other U.S. experts on the missile crisis said they had not known of the short-range atomic weapons until the recent Soviet statement . McNamara: "I had no idea of the weapons"
 Cuban President Fidel Castro says he would have approved use of the short-range nuclear weapons if the U.S. had attacked the island . Fidel Castro said he would approve use if the United States had attacked Cuba .
 The Havana meeting was probably the last in a series of historical reconsiderations by participants in the missile crisis . The Cuban city was the site of the Cuban missile crisis.
 Bill Jackson, now retired after 22 years of teaching history and art in the Del Norte School District, had a front-row seat to the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 . Jackson was a 20-year-old seaman assigned to a top-secret command post aboard the Navy's
 Russian Prime Minister Nikita Khrushchev ""was banging his shoe at the U.N. and Castro was setting up his regime"" in Cuba . Khrushchevski was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The Northampton, nicknamed ""The Gray Ghost of the Virginia Coast,"" was President John F Kennedy's floating command center in case of nuclear war . President Kennedy called the Northampton a "Gray Ghost of Virginia Coast"
 Castro imported Russian-made jets that could carry nuclear bombs and ballistic missiles that could reach the U.S. Emboldered by his Bay of Pigs victory, Castro imported jets with nuclear bombs, missiles .
 In August 1962, high-flying American U2 spy planes photographed them being unloaded from Russian ships . U2 planes photographed the unloading of the ships .
 A naval blockade of Cuba was ordered, and American children soon were practicing ""run, duck and cover" drills at their schools . The blockade was ordered .
 The general public didn't know what was going on then, but we were that close to World War III,"" he said . "We were close to ... World War II," he said, holding his fingers an inch apart .
 The Northampton and dozens of destroyers, cruisers and the aircraft carrier USS Forrestal surrounded Cuba . Cuba was the first Cuban island nation to be attacked by the U.S. Navy .
 "Of course, there was concern for the folks at home if there was a nuclear war or if we had to invade Cuba," he says . "There were concerns for the people at home," he adds .
 Kennedy accepted Khrushchev's promise to remove the missiles under U.N. inspection if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba . Kennedy accepted the promise in 1962 .
 Castro refused to allow U.N. officials to verify withdrawal . U-2 photos showed missiles being loaded on Russian ships . Castro refuses to allow United Nations to verify the withdrawal .
 In 1974, they moved to Del Norte, California, where they taught school for 22 years . In 1974 they taught at Del Nortes, they taught in Del Norten, California .