 This favourable result was not merely due to U.S. military threats or even Soviet leader’s common sense . But this favourable result is due to the Soviet leader's common sense, he says .
 There is another story hidden behind the nuclear showdown that transcends the contest of wills and that remains relevant today . There is also a story hidden in the showdown, and that is relevant today, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A quiet unassuming UN Secretary-General, U Thant, actively mediated and helped resolve this nuclear confrontation . U. Thant helped resolve the nuclear confrontation with North Korea .
 At the request of much of the UN member states he was able to push the leaders to step back from the brink to give diplomacy a change . The UN has been forced to back down from brink of war in Syria .
 Historians glossed over Thant’s part in the drama, depicting the conflict as a unilateral U.S. victory achieved by Kennedy's resolve and military show of force . The United States was willing to risk nuclear war, in which the United States risked nuclear war .
 Thant took his first initiative after a naval conflict and escalation to general war seemed likely . Shortly after the blockade took effect October 24, he took action .
 He appealed to Kennedy and Khrushchev to allow time to resolve the crisis peacefully . He successfully appealed for time to allow a peaceful resolution .
 This breathing space proved critical in allowing both leaders to face down their hardliners . The breathing space allowed both parties to take on each other .
 Khrushchev turned back many of his ships, but kept others steaming to Cuba so as not to appear to back down entirely . The war broke out between the Soviet Union and Cuba .
 Kennedy asked Thant to follow up with a more detailed appeal to Khrushchev to keep his ships away ‘for a limited time” so an agreement could be worked out . Thant’s initiative then prompted Kennedy to follow-up with a detailed appeal .
 Thant sent this second appeal as his own proposal so it would not appear as an American initiative . Thant said he wanted the appeal not to appear as a U.S. initiative so it wouldn't appear as American .
 Khrushchev readily accepted the proposal and used it to save face while keeping his remaining ships away . The proposal came as a request for moderation from the UN Secretary-General .
 Thant's went on to assist the parties deal with the two main issues of the conflict, namely the missiles in Cuba and Cuba’s security concerns . Thant helped with the Cuban government in the aftermath of the war .
 Kennedy feared short-range missiles in Cuba were about to become operational . He was under enormous pressure to attack Cuba . Kennedy was under pressure to strike Cuba .
 The most peaceful solution he could foresee involved a freeze on all missile activity, he said . He said it would be best for negotiations to end missile activity .
 Members of his advisory council pushed for military solutions, including a first-strike against Cuba . Members of the Executive Committee pushed for a first strike .
 President Obama suggested that the Russians dismantle their missiles in exchange for a U.S. guarantee that the United States would not invade Cuba . He suggested that Russia dismantle its missiles in return for an American guarantee . The United States wouldn't invade Cuba, Obama said .
 Thant advocated this solution publicly in televised Security Council debates, then privately to ambassador Stevenson . Thant said this solution would be a better solution to the crisis in Syria .
 The superpower agreement became the basis for the superpower agreement . It was accompanied by a secret commitment made by Attorney-General Robert Kennedy to remove United States missiles from Turkey .
 Thant’s initiatives exerted a powerful pacifying influence, especially on John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, and Dean Rusk . During the hottest phase of the crisis, after a United States U-2 spy plane was shot down, Thant's initiatives exerted powerful influence .
 All three argued with their colleagues in favour of restraint rather than escalatory actions against Cuba .
 Thant shuttled to Cuba at the end of October and convinced Castro to tone down his rhetoric . When agreement was finally reached and Castro threatened to upset it, Thant traveled to Cuba and convinced him to calm down . Thant: "It's a good sign that you're
 In support of Thant’s mission, Kennedy lifted the United States blockade and aerial overflights for two days . The United States lifted the U.S. blockade on Thant and lifted the blockade .
 Castro refused a UN supervisory force, which Kennedy and Khrushchev had agreed upon . Thant helped find a way to verify the missile removal .
 He facilitated high-level Soviet and American negotiations at the UN to work out a plan for the return missiles on Soviet ships could be viewed by U.S. planes and ships .
 Kennedy understood the need to give his opponent an honorable way out and how to use an internationally prominent and skilled mediator to do so . Kennedy’s resolve played a role in this conflict, no doubt, but he also understood how to help his opponent out .
 Kennedy made large concessions, including withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey . Kennedy exercised enormous restraint, even to the point of refusing to give orders to attack the gunners that shot down the U-2 .
 U Thant's role in the Cuban missile crisis was one of the UN's finest moments . The U.N. ambassador was a key member of the United Nations during the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 It was the week that a UN Secretary-General helped the superpowers pull back from nuclear annihilation .
 As America considers its options with regard to nuclearizing Iran and other dangerous confrontations, it would do well to consider and recognize the helpful role that the UN and its Secretary-General can and did play forty-five years ago .
 Walter Dorn is a professor at the Royal Military College of Canada . He is Chair of the Canadian Pugwash Group . Dorn has published a book, "Pugwash Canada", on the subject of the Pugwash Canada .
 Robert Pauk is a research associate and a former Canadian military officer and UN peacekeeper . Pauk was a UN peacekeeping officer and a Canadian peacekeeper. Pauk says he has been in contact with the U.N. since 2007 .