 Americans bought sugar, Cuba’s main crop; they also controlled much of the economy . Cuba's economy was controlled by the U.S. government .
 President Kennedy tried to overthrow Castro in April 1961 . The Bay of Pigs was the site of the Bay of PIGs .
 The attack was a disaster and failed dismally, the rebels were met by 20,000 Cuban troops . The attack failed and failed, and was met by Cuban troops.
 The fiasco convinced Castro that the USA was enemy; he now turned to the USSR for protection . Castro turned to Russia for protection; he turned to them for protection.
 Kennedy looked weak and was criticised for the failed attempt to defeat Communism in their own back yard . Kennedy was seen as a weak leader and looked weak .
 By September 1962 it had thousands of Soviet missiles, patrol boats, tanks, radar vans and jet fighters, plus 5,000 Soviet technicians to help maintain the weapons . The U.S. became one of the world's most powerful statesmen .
 The U.S. became concerned over events in Cuba between 1959 and 1961 . Explain why the USA became concerned about the situation in Cuba .
 If he had missiles in Cuba he could agree to remove them if the USA removed their missiles from, Turkey . Turkey is where the U.S. could remove missiles from .
 It was the only Communist state in the Western hemisphere, and had willingly become Communist . It was also the first Communist state to become Communist in Western hemisphere .
 It was ideal to try to encourage Communist development in South America, it was said . It was 'ideal' to try and encourage communist development .
 By putting medium range missiles in Cuba it would begin to even the gap between them . The U.S. would be able to reach out to Cuba by sending medium-range missiles .
 Kennedy had already been seen to win the arms race and this damaged Khrushchev’s credibility . Kennedy was seen to have already won the arms war and damaged his credibility . The arms race was the first arms race to be seen in the world .
 Just by existing Cuba was good for the USSR, it made the USA look bad having Communist state right under their nose . The USSR made the U.S. look bad by having a Communist state under its nose .
 Some sites were finished and others were still being built, but could be ready in 7 days . Some sites had been finished and some were still to be built, say officials .
 Twenty Soviet ships are currently on the way to Cuba carrying missiles, according to reports . They also reported that twenty Soviet ships were being sent to Cuba with missiles .
 He did not let himself be overinfluenced by his advisers or by Khrushchev, he said . He said: "I'm not going to let myself be overindindindicated by his advisors or by his own government"
 He made clear to Khrushchev what would happen in his response to the first letter . He said he would respond to his first letter to the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy had stood up to Khrushchev and made him back down . Kennedy had to accept that Castro and Cuba would remain Communist and this was seen as a defeat .
 Khrushchev was able to highlight his role as a peacemaker . Cuba remained Communist and a valuable ally . USA were withdrawing missiles from turkeya major threat so close to the USSR .
 Castro was upset by the deal the USSR made with the USA . He had to put up with it because he needed the USSR as an ally . Cuba stayed Communist and was highly armed . Cuba became an important base for Communists .