 Ocala's Joyce and Mike Perdue were living in Norfolk, Va., at the time, and had just recently heard the good news . Joyce Perdue's husband and wife were in Norfolk when they heard the news .
 It was a quiet day for the Perdues -Joyce was watching TV and Mike had just gotten out of the shower when the phone rang . Mike and Joyce Perdue were watching TV when the call rang .
 In early October 1962, life was good in the United States . Life was good at the time .
 Mike couldn't tell me where he was going, what they would be doing or when he would be back . Mike was unable to tell me what they were doing or where they would go .
 "They checked out the car thoroughly, checked our IDs and let us through. They checked out our car thoroughly," says CNN.com's Rob Greene .
 When we got close to the ship, there was black smoke coming out of the stack, and he said, 'Someone isn't doing their job right' The ship's captain said: 'Someone is not doing their . job right. When we . got close, there were black smoke
 DuPont had a close encounter with a Russian submarine, playing a dangerous ""cat and mouse"" game for three days . The DuPont played a dangerous game of cat and mouse with the Russian submarine . DuPont spent three days with the submarine .
 The Cuban Revolution had scattered the family of Ocala's Iris Diaz all over Miami . At school in Key West, Diaz was a student at a Key West school . Diaz's family now lives in Miami, Florida .
 My cousin got a job with Associated Press in Key West monitoring Cuban radio and one TV station in Havana . His cousin was working for Associated Press .
 Eventually, she went to a boarding school in Key West -Mary Immaculate High School . She was eventually sent to Key West boarding school . She graduated from high school .
 The director of Civil Defense at the time told the mother superior of the convent to take us to the beach and get in the water waist high . "The director of civil defense at the . time told us to . take the . beach to get in waist high water," she says .
 We had 46 students, many from South America, who came here to learn English . Many of them came from South American .
 Craig Baggs, of Ocala, says he lived in Miami in 1962 . Baggs: "In October 1962, I lived here in Miami"
 He worked with people such as McGeorge Bundy and Robert McNamara . He worked closely with people like McGeorge McNamara and Robert Bundy .
 His knowledge of Latin American affairs and his geographical location were key factors in his success . His knowledge in Latin America affairs was key factors, he said .
 "It was a realization that we were only 90 miles or so from what could of been the brink of nuclear war between two superpowers. It was a . realization that . we were just 90 miles from . what could . of been a . nuclear war .
 Baggs: "My father had just returned from Washington and immediately went into his study" Baggs recalled . Baggs' father was in his study when the incident occurred .
 President Kennedy said the Russians had backed down and the crisis was resolved . Kennedy: "It was President Kennedy saying the Russians backed down" President Kennedy was president of the United States .
 "My father looked up with open eyes and a sense of great relief and said, 'We did it. We did it," she said .
 Hendrix won the international reporting prize for "persistent reporting which revealed, at an early stage, that the Soviet Union was installing missile launching pads in Cuba and sending in large numbers of MIG-21 aircraft"
 'In early October 1962, life was good. Co pyrig ht 20 0 2, 20 0 4 O cala cala .
 American U-2 spyplane cameras caught the Soviets sneaking long-range nuclear missiles into Cuba . U.2 spy planes caught the U.S. trying to sneak into Cuba in the early 1950s .
 Curtis LeMay urged President John Kennedy to bomb and invade the communist island of Cuba . LeMay called for invasion of communist island to be bombed by the U.S. President Kennedy .
 Duck-and-cover bomb drills for U.S. schoolkids no longer seem abstract . Duck and cover drills for American schoolchildren no longer seemed abstract .
 On Day 10 of the 12-day standoff, a U-2 pilot is seen at the edge of his 70,000-foot ceiling . Capt. John Sutter says he is still at the top of the U.S. Capitol Hill in Washington, DC .
 McIlmoyle was targeted by two Soviet-made SA-2 missiles, which billowed behind him in silent vapor trails . The missiles were fired from the Soviet-built SA2 missiles . The British pilot was hit by the missiles in the 1980s .
 President Trump and North Korean dictator Kim Jong-un slinging apocalyptic nuclear rhetoric at each other . Some analysts write it off as testosterone-addled theater . Today’s analogue is President Donald Trump and Kim Jong Un slinging nuclear rhetoric .
 Kim lacks the equivalent of what put the brakes on Fidel Castro in 1962 — adult supervision . But from McIlmoyle's angle, while Trump’s generals are restraining the chief executive, Kim lacks .
 More than half a century after sanity prevailed, recon technologies have improved by orders of magnitude . More than 50 years later, recon technology has vastly improved by leaps and beyond .
 Images of North Korea’s nuclear capabilities are acquired largely by spy satellites, drones, and sensing packages with such extended range they can be placed aboard aircraft without having to fly directly over their targets . Images of the North Korean nuclear capabilities can be acquired by satellite and drone surveillance .
 The Lockheed U-2 is still in rotation 62 years after its first flight . It's still in use as a military aircraft platform . The first flight of the U.2 took place in 1962 .
 A jet fighter pilot from Nebraska, McIlmoyle joined the now-decommissioned 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing in 1957 . The U-2 was the most sophisticated flying machine on the planet .
 It flew at altitudes that enemy planes couldn't and still can’t . Still, it flew at . altitudes . That's still impossible to attain .
 McIlmoyle’s eclectic missions ranged from monitoring weather conditions over both polar regions to sampling South Pacific winds for French atomic bomb debris . He spent most of his time in the Air Force .
 By 1962, he had so thoroughly mastered the bird that he was the designated standardization instructor pilot, second only to Rudolf Anderson . By 1962 he had become the designated instructor pilot .
 Only civilian pilots were allowed to fly U-2 missions over enemy territory . For political reasons, by order, by presidential order, only civilian pilots could fly U.2 .
 CIA pilot Francis Gary Powers was shot down over Russia in 1960 . Powers was the first CIA pilot to be shot down by Soviet Union forces in Russia .
 When the Soviets slipped nuclear weapons into Cuba, Kennedy dispensed with CIA pilots and went full military . Kennedy went from CIA pilots to full-fledged military .
 The U-2 has undergone numerous modifications since its Eisenhower-era inception . The U.2 was the first U.S. Army Air Force to fly the U.1 .
 The plane remains indispensable to the Air Force, says Dr. John Defterios . He says strategists keep talking about phasing out the plane .
 Layne Karafantis is curator of the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum’s modern military aircraft . The museum's modern military planes are housed in a museum in Washington, D.C.
 Carrying the 'football' McIlmoyle earned the Distinguished Flying Cross for his missions over Cuba . He went on to enjoy a sterling military career, which culminated in retirement in 1981 .
 In that capacity, he was responsible for the so-called “nuclear football,” a briefcase housing the computer-generated launch codes for the President . The briefcase contained the President's launch codes .
 The code would be between him and the Secretary of Defense and the Defense Command duty officer . And that code would include the secretary of Defense, the duty officer and the defense command officer .
 McIlmoyle’s final stop literally ended with a bang, when Reagan was shot on March 30, 1981 . The former White House aide was shot by President Reagan in 1981 .
 At 87, the pilot who once stewarded the nuclear codes says he hopes the wisdom of 1962 will prevail today . He hopes he will be able to use the power of the U.S. in the next generation .
 He gave JFK a 45-minute onboard briefing of a U-2 parked at Homestead Air Force Base . After the threat ended, he gave JFK an onboard briefing .
 “It was pretty impressive — he knew my wife’s name and my childrens names,” McIlmoyle says . “He knew my name and I’m not sure how much of it was going to be, but he was pretty impressed,
 Something was up at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base 50 years ago, though few there were in the know . Matt Soergel 1111 Words .
 Ed Buker, a 39-year-old Navy commander, saw the new arrivals . He saw the foxholes and bunkers going in around the Navy base around the base .
 He saw planeloads of U.S. Marines landing, saw the Marines, fresh from California, squinting in the tropical sunshine .
 He resists any temptation to make grand statements about his role in it . But he resists making such statements about it .
 He was just doing his job, following orders, looking out for his family, police say . He says he was just following orders and looking out to his family .
 He saw the U.S. destroyers and carriers and cruisers spread out over the blue Caribbean .
 At Guantanamo Bay in October 1962, he was commanding officer of VU-10, a utility squadron of planes jet fighters and World War II-era bombers that helped train sailors .
 Guantanamo was good duty, even knowing that Fidel Castro had fulminated about taking back the base . But Guantanamo was a good duty even knowing Fidel Castro was fulminating .
 She was on the golf course, and had just hit her shot off the first tee . She was hit by a golf club shot in a hole .
 Every Navy family had been told upon arrival at Guantanamo to have a emergency bag of essentials packed, to be ready for a hasty exit . Every family was told to have an emergency bag to be packed .
 The bags got unpacked within days of arrival, so there was much hurried packing everywhere, Buker said . But of course those bags were unpacked .
 By late morning, he said goodbye to his wife and their two sons, Gil and Gary, and watched them get on a school bus . He watched them go to school with his wife, two sons .
 They were bound for either a plane or a ship heading somewhere in the U.S. They were headed for either plane or ship heading to the States .
 He found out later that they had been put on a Coast Guard cutter bound for Norfolk, Va. They were put on the Coast Guard vessel .
 The Red Cross brought winter jackets to the refugees from tropical Cuba . The refugees are in need of winter jackets when they get to port .
 At Guantanamo, the sailors left behind were told to put tape over the headlights of their vehicles, so only a thin strip of light would be seen . The tape was taped over the lights of the vehicles at Guantanamo .
 Everyone at the base lined up near radios to hear President John F Kennedy's speech to the world . And that same evening, the 22nd, everyone in the base heard President Kennedy's address .
 The Soviets had missile sites in Cuba with nuclear weapons able to reach much of the U.S. The Soviets also had nuclear weapons capable of reaching the United States . The Soviet Union had a missile site in Cuba that could be used in Cuba .
 Guantanamo's civilians had been evacuated and more military men sent there . Guantanamo's civilian population had been reduced to a fraction of civilian control .
 His squadron quickly flew to Puerto Rico, to make way for the reinforcements at Guantanamo . His squadron made way for reinforcements in Guantanamo .
 He was relieved of his command and sent back to Guantanamo as a security officer . He had already put in for retirement early next year, so he was relieved .
 The rest of the crisis, he recalls, passed quietly at the Navy base as life went on just with more Marines and no women and children . He says it passed quietly as the crisis passed quietly .
 The day he got in his single-seat fighter, the F8U, to log some flying time . The F8 is a single-seater fighter fighter .
 Spread below him was the United States blockade of Cuba, with ships lined up to the horizon . The U.S. blockade was spread below him .
 JU hired him and he taught there for 19 years, writing several books on Florida history . After that, he taught at JU and wrote several books .
 Some of his colleagues knew about his time at Guantanamo Bay, but he insists he wasn't all that impressed by it himself . He insists he was not impressed by his time in Guantanamo Bay .
 The U.S., the Soviet Union and Cuba were on the brink of nuclear war in October . If the memories of key players from key players are to be trusted, the superpowers were indeed on brink of war .
 The hideous possibility sprang like a beanstalk from the seed of misinformation . The profoundly simple message that echoes from the conference hall is that it is that the hideous possibility arose from a seed of ignorance .
 Pierre Salinger was President John F Kennedy's press secretary at the time of the U.S.-Soviet confrontation . Salinger: The world was even closer to nuclear war than the Kennedy administration believed .
 Jorge Risquet, a member of Cuba's Politburo, said Cuban leaders were convinced a U.S. invasion of their island nation was imminent . Cuban leaders convinced a United States invasion was imminent, he said .
 A Soviet source, reportedly Sergei Khrushchev, reportedly told Salinger that Fidel Castro urged his Soviet allies to push the buttons that would send nuclear missiles on their way to devastate the U.S. A source reportedly said that the son of the late Soviet leader told the conference that
 The younger Khrushchev denied being the source, but presumably someone at the conference made the assertion on good authority . The youngerKhrushchev denies being the .
 In October 1962, Khrushchev had the wisdom in October 1962 to abstain from making a preemptive strike .
 The consequences, he could be sure, would have been disastrous for his own country, he says . The consequences would be disastrous for the U.S. He says .
 Cubans told conferees that 270,000 Cuban and Soviet troops were ready to fight the U.S. Cubans said they would be ready to take on the United States .
 Former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara says 40,000 Soviets were four times the number U.S. intelligence had estimated . Of that number, 40,00 were Soviets, four times that the United States had estimated, McNamara said .
 Ignorance, fear and misread signals provided fertile ground for the start of a terrible war . "Ignorance and fear" provided fertile grounds for start of war .
 Kremlin leaders took time to take a cold shower and think things through . The White House gave the Kremlin leaders time to think about the situation .
 Khrushchev called back his missiles, after extracting from the United States a pledge that it would not undertake the invasion it apparently never intended anyway . Faced with a naval blockade, Khrrushchev calls back his missile .
 One way to prevent war is to keep the channels of communication freeflowing, says David Cameron . One way is to prevent conflict is to allow communication to flow freely, he says .
 Gorbachev and Bush hold promise that there will not be another confrontation that escalates so dangerously as the Cuban missile crisis did .
 McNamara credited the Cuban leader, President John F Kennedy and Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev with saving the world from destruction . McNamara retired behind closed doors with his Cold War foe .
 Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen also are attending . Former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni interpreted American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Castro, McNamara and other Cuban and American actors in that Cold War drama were studying newly declassified documents on the role that U.S. covert action played in the months leading up to the crisis . Castro and McNamara were studying documents .
 Many historic papers will be released during the gathering, including documents from the Cuban government, the CIA, the Pentagon, the White House and other governments that played a role in the crisis .
 A portion of the documents, made available to The Associated Press in Washington, shows that the crisis did not end with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove offensive weapons, as is widely believed . The documents were made available in Washington .
 Khrushchev worried that an 'irrational' Castro would renew tensions with the United States perhaps even provoke war . The Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba, but the U.S. pulled them .
 Anastas Mikoyan, then Soviet first deputy premier, was the catalyst for the reversal of Khrushchev's order, authors say . The authors say the Soviets reversed the order, which was reversed by the Soviets .
 Mikoyan "preempted Khrushchev's order to run the blockade and ordered Soviet ships to stop just short of the quarantine line"
 It remains unclear whether Mikoyan reversed or circumvented the decision on his own or convinced Khrushchev of its perils .
 Welch said the order was reversed just hours before Soviet ships reached U.S. forces . Welch said it was reversed hours before the ships reached the United States forces .
 The book will serve as a backdrop for a third conference scheduled for Jan.-29 in Moscow . It will feature, for the first time, Soviet, American and Cuban officials who participated in the crisis . Soviet troops began installing missiles in Cuba capable of reaching the U.S.
 Secret correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev concerning the missile crisis is expected to be released at the conference . Harvard officials say the correspondence will be made public .
 Participants are optimistic that 12 never-released letters exchanged between Kennedy and Khrushchev would be declassified by the United States government in time to be presented and analyzed at the Moscow meeting .
 The conference is the latest manifestation of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's policy of ""glasnost,"" or openness . The conference will be held in Moscow, Russia .
 JFK's son, John F Kennedy Jr., will join McNamara, Bundy, Bundy and Sorenson . JFK press secretary Pierre Salinger, Gen. Gen. Edward M Kennedy, D-Mass., and Gen. McGeorge Bundy will also join the list .
 William Smith, Graham Allison, William Smith and Graham Allison discuss missile crisis . The panel includes former aide to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and former Kennedy School dean .
 Soviet participants will include former Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, Anatoli Dobrynin, the former ambassador to the United States . Sergei Khrushchev, son of the former Soviet leader, will also attend the event .
 The Cubans are sending three to six senior officials who participated in the crisis . Cubans will send three or six officials involved in the incident . The Cuban government is sending senior officials to Cuba .
 The book said details on the Khrushchev order to ignore the blockade came from a largely unknown work by dissident Soviet historian Roy Medvedev .
 Much of the work was confirmed by Mikoyan's son, Sergo, who was an aide to his father during the crisis . The Harvard authors said much of their work had been independently confirmed by Sergo .
 "We are therefore inclined to believe Mikoyan's confirmation all the more strongly,"" they wrote .
 The authors conclude that the missiles in Cuba probably did not have warheads . The authors also conclude that they also concluded that the missile in Cuba was probably not carrying warheads .
 The theory that the warheads were blocked by the quarantine is at odds with a recent disclosure by a former ambassador to Cuba . Alekseev said in a recent Soviet magazine that 42 medium-range missiles were fully operational .
 The authors suggested that Alekseev and others in the Soviet diplomatic corps were not getting accurate information from Moscow about the missiles . But the authors said that the information was not accurate .
 50 years ago, a U.S. Air Force U2 spy plane captured photographic proof that the Soviet Union was installing offensive nuclear missile sites in Cuba . The U2 plane was captured by the United States Air Force in Havana, Cuba .
 Another photo revealed a surface-to-air missile assembly depot . The depot is a place to supply the offensive sites . Another photo reveals a surface to air missile .
 President John F Kennedy spoke to the nation from the Oval Office eight days after the photos were taken .
 Unmistakable evidence has established the fact that a series of offensive missile sites are now in preparation on that imprisoned island . Unmistakenaken evidence has been established that a number of offensive missiles are now being prepared .
 Kennedy estimated after the fact that the chances of war were somewhere between one and three and even even . Kennedy estimated that after the war, war chances would be between 1 and 3 .
 Harvard's John F Kennedy School of Government professor David Gergen . He's director of the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs and professor at Harvard .
 We can look back and be thankful that the Cold War ended with a whimper rather than a bang . We have lots of problems today but none of them pose anything like the risks that we saw then . So I think that as a reminder of nuclear danger .
 Kennedy was faced with a choice to accept missiles in Cuba or attack . Kennedy faced a choice between accepting missiles and attacking Cuba .
 He chose to avoid both of those options and crafted a third choice . He chose not to choose between the two options .
 Kennedy came up with a unique cocktail of three elements: a public deal, a private ultimatum and a secret sweetener . Kennedy: "It's a pretty imaginative, but I'd say unique cocktail cocktail"
 Khrushchev withdrew the missiles and we pledge not to invade Cuba . So the public deal was, you withdraw the missiles, and we will pledge to not invade Cuba. So the deal was public . It was a public deal .
 "The private ultimatum said, unless you tell us within 24 hours that you're withdrawing the missiles, we'll act unilaterally to eliminate them," he said . "We're going to act unilaterally," he added .
 Khrushchev had pointed to U.S. missiles in Turkey as essentially analogous to the weapons that were in Cuba . And then, thirdly, as a secret sweetener, he had pointed out that the weapons in Turkey were similar to those in Cuba, he said .
 If missiles are withdrawn from Cuba within six months, there will not be missiles in Turkey . We're not going to make a trade with you, but, he said, if the missiles are pulled from Cuba .
 President Barack Obama had a private sweetener in order to back down on Twitter . He was humiliated by his comments .
 That red line also prevented war and helped preserve the peace for decades . "That red line" was also a key to preventing war in Afghanistan .
 In fact, it's the failure to place red lines that's often invited aggression . "Red lines" often invite aggression, says CNN's John Sutter .
 President Obama was correct on red lines, with respect to the ways they can constrain the competition, and therefore contribute to preventing war, he says .
 In 1962, in the course of 13 days, the U.S. and the Soviet Union sort of rushed to the precipice . The United States and the USSR sort to the brink of war .
 U.S. and Iran are moving inexorably towards a confrontation, CNN's Peter Bergen says . A president will have a choice between attacking or acquiescing in an Iranian nuclear arsenal, he says . Bergen: The United States and Iran could face a confrontation over the next
 CNN.com's John Sutter offers a look at both the two options . Sutter: "It usually leads me to conclude, well, maybe the other one is better than I thought"
 President Barack Obama has rejected many of the options that he would have rejected previously . Obama says he was "intensely inventive" when he looked at the two alternatives that were only realistic choices .
 After the election, whomever is elected will become intensely focused and inventive about options that are not very good I call them ugly options, very ugly options but that would nonetheless be better than attack or acquiesce . So I think we're now into a season where .
 Graham Allison is director of the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs . Graham Allison: We need to know more about climate change in the U.S. and beyond .
 Harvard's John F Kennedy School of Government professor is also a Harvard professor of government . He's also a government professor at Harvard's JFK Kennedy School .
 Culp grew up in Virginia Beach, Va., and his father, Joseph, is now retired and living in Maitland . Culp: "I don't have a lot of natural Kennedy attributes. I'm not a natural Kennedy."
 The smallest Kennedy had to lose quite a bit of body bulk to match the physique of the smallest .
 The accent required endless sessions of listening to tapes of Kennedy's speeches, working on the cadences, the ""ur-em-ah"" vocalized pauses that the Kennedys have been famous for .
 Culp said he wanted to know so much about Kennedy and have his speech and mannerisms down so perfect that all he had to worry about was giving a natural Kennedy reaction to every situation facing him .
 In the middle of a career full of one-shot roles on TV and minor roles as ""party guest number 2"" in films from Fearless to Nurse Betty, Culp has the part of a lifetime .
 Culp "nails the younger Kennedy's uneasy awareness that the old guard doesn't respect his intelligence or savvy,"" critic Frank Grabrenya said .
 Study of the missile crisis gave Culp an insight as to why the Kennedy brothers are still revered .
 "In spite of all the scandalous things that have been said about them, these guys were noble, when the chips were down," says former president George W. Bush . Bush: "When the chips are down, they were noble"
 The fate of humanity really did hang in the balance in October 1962 when the U.S. and the Soviet Union went right to the brink of nuclear war over the presence of Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba .
 A misread signal, an overhasty action, a oversupply of belligerence on either side -and the whole world could have gone up in flames - could have happened without a single mistake .
 The crisis spawned the highly regarded made-for-TV ""Missiles of October"" back in 1974 . And in fact, the crisis spawned a highly regarded 'Missile of October' in 1974.
 There is no flash in ""Thirteen Days,"" no glitzy special effects, no overt displays of emotionalism . The film is set in New York City, New York .
 "This is a movie populated by grim-faced men in suits and uniforms, talking earnestly, weighing their words carefully, walking on eggshells at the edge of apocalypse . This is the movie . It's a movie that's populated with grim-looking men in . suits and
 Kennedy confidant Kenneth O'Donnell is the Kennedy White House's most famous White House aide . Kennedy confidants include John and Robert Kennedy, and Kenneth O’Donnell .
 Greenwood brings to the role a questioning intelligence and the sense of a man fully indeed, agonizingly aware of the momentous implications of his every action and word . Greenwood's performance as the main character has been described as "a questioning intelligence" The film is set to be released on
 JFK, RFK and O'Donnell pressed the president to use air strikes and an invasion to remove missiles from Cuba . The story of "Thirteen Days" is not so much the story of JFK and the U.S. government vs. the Russians .
 Curtis Le May, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and civilian adviser Dean Acheson argue forcefully for a U.S. attack on Russia . They also express doubts that the young president has the spine to stand up to the Russians .
 In one scene, Acheson recalls that Joseph P Kennedy, the president's father, was an advocate of appeasement during World War II and wonders aloud whether that inclination was passed down to the Kennedy sons .
 Bobby Kennedy is shown arguing that a surprise attack by the U.S. on the missile bases would smack of a reverse Pearl Harbor . Bobby Kennedy argued that a . surprise attack on a missile base would be a 'reverse Pearl Harbor' Bobby Kennedy was shown arguing a surprise .
 O'Donnell, his role enlarged for dramatic purposes by the filmmakers, is presented as the character most aware of the military's intransigence and hostility to the commander .
 He urges the president to follow his own instincts as to the best way to defuse the crisis . The president should follow his instincts, he says .
 The picture is essentially an ensemble piece, and Costner fits surprisingly well into the ensemble . The film is essentially a film that stars Costner in a variety of roles .
 The most jarring aspect of his performance is his Boston accent, which is comically broad . The actor's Boston accent is too broad, too broad .
 Narrows Plaza, Longston Place, Tall Firs, South Sound, SeaTac North, Cinema 17, Lacey. Lacey, Seattle, Washington State.
 Bruce Greenwood, Kevin Costner, Steven Culp, Kevin Conway and Kevin Conway are among the actors in the film . The film is based on a novel about the lives of Kevin Conway, who is married to Kevin Conway .
 U.S. was in a standoff with the Soviet Union over ""Red" missiles in Cuba in 1962 . Today we explore The Dallas Morning News of Oct. 1962 .
 Acting United Nations Secretary U Thant asked President John F Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev to give the United Nations a chance to settle things . Acting U.N. Secretary U. Thant asks President Kennedy and Prime Minister Nikita Krushchev to give the U
 A Gallup Poll found that 84 percent of Americans backed JFK's blockade of Cuba . A Gallup poll found that the blockade was supported by 84 percent .
 In Richardson, Fox & Jacobs' three-bedroom Accent homes were priced at $18,200 . Fox and Jacobs' 3-bedroom homes are located in Richardson .
 Dallas school trustee Lee McShan Jr. wanted a Conelrad radio-alert system in each school . Dallas school trustees wanted to use the system in all schools .
 Planned Parenthood Federation said more than a million American women used birth-control pills . The average price was $3.50 for a month's supply . Planned Parenthood says the average cost of the birth control pills is $3 .
 20th Century Fox president Darryl Zanuck fired Cleopatra director Joseph Mankiewicz and said he'd edit the $32 million picture himself . Shirley Booth starred in Hazel based on Ted Key 's cartoon maid in The Saturday Evening Post .