 Soviet intentions regarding the weapons were not explicitly co-ordinated . The tactical nuclear weapons were to be reered in the exchange of letters between U.S. President John F. Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev .
 Khrushchev augmunted the plan by adding 6 nuclear tary missiles for the dual-use Luna complex . In early Sep also some indications of differences between the Soviet militember .
 The question was whether local commanders should . have the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons if they . were under attack . If it was impossible to contact MosKhrushchev had promised Kennedy that the “the so-called cow. was under attack”
 The predelegation of authority to use the offensive weapons would be removed,” which referred to the weapons in the event of an invasion of Cuba during which it shortand medium-range ballistic missiles SS-4 would be used .
 As General range of 1,050 miles, SS-5 (R-14, with a range of approx. approx. 1,000 miles) and SS- 5 with a . range of approximately 1,500 miles . SS-4 can be driven by a single vehicle with a
 Anatoly Gribkov, the top Soviet military official in Cuba in 2,000 miles, capable of reaching U.S. territory . He was the top military officer in Cuba . He is believed to have been able to reach United States territory .
 Even though the directive was never signed, Malinovsky US demanded the withdrawal of the IL-28 bombers . The directive apparently remained apprehensive as to whether General Issa Issa had declared them an offensive weapon .
 Soviet Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan understood procedures for using tactical nuclear weapons . Moscow decided to withPliev, commander of Soviet Group of Forces in Cuba, draw the bombers .
 On 27 October he sent an urgent of the military agreement with Moscow, which was supposed to be signed during Khrushchev’s visit to Cuba . The supposed telegram to Pliev “categorically confirming that you are in Russia” was sent to the Soviet Union
 The discussions in the have been prompted by the shooting down of an American beginning of November in Moscow . Moscow apparently came to no U-2 plane that day that day .
 The Malinovsky-to-Pliev telegrams dated early did not have the authority to do so . The telegraments were dated early and were signed by Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Malin notes Khrushchev Soviet specialists trained them trained them, then gradually withdraws . Malin: “To give instructions to Pliev—to bring the troops to ing most of the Soviet specialists so that the USSR could not combat readiness.”
 The most interesting questions still remaining concerns Soviet intentions regarding the weapons not explicitly covered in the exchange of letters between President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev in the early stages .
 Khrushchev’s decision to remove the strategic Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko responded weapons from Cuba . The available cable traffic between to Mikoyan's telegram approving his suggestion on the part “Reed” and “Pavlov”
 Between 6 November and 12 November, all was considerable ambiguity regarding the withdrawal of the available evidence indicates, tensions between the USSR and tactical nuclear warheads .
 At the beginning of November, Cuba were declining, Mikoyan’s conversations with the Malinovsky suggested that warheads for cruise missiles, Cuban leaders were quite friendly and cordial .
 They visited Lunas and the Il-28 bombs should be left in Cuba because state farms and educational centers should be kept in Cuba . They also discussed various “so far their withdrawal was not discussed”
 The Cubans, of course, were very interested in the fate of the Il-28s . But on 12 November, the emerging fraternal bliss was of the remaining military equipment and fully expected that shattered .
 Mikoyan tried to be as sensiKhrushchev exchange would remain in Cuba . The exchange would not be allowed to take place in Cuba, but the exchange would continue .
 Khrushchev wrote that Fidel Castro issued an order to shoot at any low-promised U.S. reconnaissance aircraft . Castro alleged that the Soviet Union had a pact with the Soviets . Khrushche wrote that Castro issued the order without consulting .
 InterKhrushchev’s long telegram to Mikoyan on 16 Novemnational History Project as well as the ber signified a turning point in the Soviet-Cuban story of forthcoming book by Sergo A Mikoyans .
 We will only know for sure when the Soviet Presidium minutes become available, one may have been made available .
 On 20 November, Malinovsky ordered Pliev to load all tactical nuclear weapons on the ship “Atkarsk” and return them to the Soviet Union . The weapons were loaded in the ship "Atkararsk" and returned to Russia .
 Gribkov stated at the October 2002 conference in Havana that the last nuclear warhead left Cuba on 20 November . The last nuclear weapon left Cuba in November .
 This telegram read in stark contrast mander of the Group of Soviet Forces in Cuba to his telegram of 8 November . The telegram was read in a stark contrast to the mander in Cuba .
 A. Mikoyan instructed to make sure that the Cubans stop talking about any nuclear weapons and to inform them that “these weapons belong to us, and are to be kept in our hands only, we TOP SECRET never transferred them to anyone, and we do not intend
 Castro stopped trying to pressure Mikoyan into finding some way to keep weapons or even any 23.30 significant Soviet military presence on the island . The unexpected turn of events was clearly hard for Castro to accept .
 According to the available documents, the issue of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba was never raised again after 22 November . The Cuban government never again discussed the issue again .
 Federation, Special Declassification, April 2002 . state conclusively when the final decision was made and . what the main argument was for removing tactical nuclear weapons . However, more evidence is still needed to be able to . prove conclusively what the . main argument for removing the tactical nuclear
 Documents below became available as a result of international collaboration between the National Security TROSTNIK and the Comrade PAVLOV Archive . The documents below are available to the public .