 The speech launched the future president’s political career and, among conservatives, has achieved a near mythical status .
 For the past year CONELRAD has been researching a comprehensive history of this famous broadcast . The history of the broadcast has been documented in a comprehensive way .
 The Great Communicator's televised pitch for the Republican Party first aired nationally on July 1, 2012 . We are not quite ready to post a completed article, but we thought we would observe the occasion of this anniversary .
 CONELRAD obtained a few selected telegrams from the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum . What follows is a selection of telegramas from Reagan's Presidential Library .
 Out of what was purported to be thousands of such responses, only a few dozen were preserved . Only a handful of responses were preserved from thousands of responses .
 Phyllis Schlafly’s sister-in-law, Eleanor, was the only member of the so-called Arizona Mafia to thank Reagan for his speech . Dean Burch, the Chairman of the Republican National Committee, praised Reagan's speech .
 Other members of the inner circle, namely Denison Kitchel and William J Baroody, actively tried to stop A Time for Choosing from airing . A Time For Choosing will be aired on Channel 4 at 8.30pm .
 Most accounts cite their nervousness over Reagan’s remarks on Social Security . The motives ascribed to them for this action vary .
 The next telegram comes from F Clifton White, the architect of Goldwater’s stunning nomination victory . White was Goldwater's architect of the nomination victory.
 White, who had wanted to become RNC Chairman, found himself inexplicably marginalized during the general election campaign . White had hoped to be the Republican Party Chairman of the Republican National Committee .
 On January 4, 1966, the Gipper was back on television announcing his candidacy for the Republican nomination for governor of California . Batz’s prophecy, but a little over a year later, a little more than a year after, he ran for the GOP nomination .
 The "Classified Facility" was stocked with food, water and every other imaginable accoutrement necessary for surviving a nuclear war . In addition to food and water, the facility had a full compliment of clergy .
 The bureaucratic language of the missive avoids reference to why clergy would be needed, but the author does note that civilian religious professionals might be otherwise occupied during an emergency .
 These particular men of God would also be difficult to vet for entrance to the super-bunker, says CNN.com.com .
 The solution was to ask the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower, Personnel and Reserve, Charles G Finucane, for “chaplains from either the Regular or Reserve Corps” of the United States military .
 Mr Hoegh’s clergy requisition went directly to the circular file, because more than two years later, the chaplain gap was still an issue of concern .
 We can only pray that Mount Weather now has the religious staff it needs . But it will be up to future historians to find out what happened .
 Historian and author David Krugler came across this document in his research files . The document was found in the archives of the National Geographic Geographic Geographic Society .
 The Classified Location’s Chief, J Leo Bourassa, is one of the co-signatories to the document . The evidence that the document is referring to Mount Weather is the fact that the Classified Chief of the . Chief is a member of the classified Location
 Nixon might have been a good president, too, but Kennedy proved that he was . Kennedy proved to be a great president, but Nixon was a good man .
 If Kennedy wasn’t killed he might have become the greatest president ever, he might be the best president ever . Kennedy was killed in June 1963 .
 We may have more posts on this subject in the future but, for now, this is our fond farewell to that magical period when the end seemed so close .
 We begin with an advertisement from page G9 of the October 28, 1962 edition of the Los Angeles Times . This week marks the 50th anniversary of the publication of the first edition of this article .
 In Los Angeles, CD officials saw no reason to deviate from their normal schedule . CD officials see no reason for deviating from their usual schedule .
 California state CD authorities thought better of the notion of testing sirens during an international crisis and requested a moratorium .
 In Los Angeles area supermarkets, a two-day wave of “panic buying” was touched off by a civil defense official’s call for Angelenos to stock up . But there were a few overzealous cities that decided to keep to their monthly schedule regardless of the
 Woronovich of Baldwin Hills took heed of the advisory and spent a whopping $55.85.85 . Woronovovovich spent the most of the day in California .
 In Houston, Texas, a customer spent $600 on groceries and headed straight for his fallout shelter . Meanwhile, in Houston, the customer headed straight to his shelter .
 Miamians, arguably the ones most likely to be incinerated, were told to remain calm and treat the imminent threat of atomic attack as they would a hurricane .
 One woman was so frazzled by the Cuban crisis that she evacuated her city without her children . One woman evacuated her home in Havana without her kids .
 She realized that they were missing when a military policeman directing traffic in Key West, Florida stopped her . She was stopped by a military officer directing traffic .
 The officer pointed out that he saw no children in her vehicle . During the course of their brief conversation, the woman referenced her kids .
 Marion Miller failed in her suicide attempt and so did the two superpowers that so depressed her . Marion Miller's suicide attempt was unsuccessful .
 The family members of select White House staff assemble in a fenced-in area at Washington’s Reno Reservoir for a motorcade ride out of the city to an undisclosed relocation site . The young officer responded with a plan to have the family assembled in an area at a f
 Captain Shepard does not include a Plan B to address the inevitable D.C. evacuation gridlock and general panic .
 Robert F Kennedy says of the arrangement in the film, Thirteen Days, “Of course, that’s for morale.” But, as Robert F. Kennedy says, ‘Of course . That's for morale,’ he says .
 The White House was used as a private residence for the President of the United States . Mrs. Kennedy Kennedy was assassinated in October 1962 .
 Previously a packet has been distributed to be opened only in an emergency, which describes the location to which dependents could go at such a time . Relocation of Dependents of Personnel Involved in the White House Emergency Plan .
 A more workable plan appears to be a formation of a motorcade, to move dependents in a group to a relocation site outside of the Washington area . Because during a Civil Defense emergency, transportation restrictions will be set up and movements may be difficult .
 This area is within the fenced portion of the Reno Reservoir, with an entrance off of Belt Road . The entrance is a little more than a block north of Albemarle Street .
 In time of a Civil Defense alert, dependents covered by this plan are instructed to proceed to this assembly area .
 A Civil Defense Pass will be required for each individual . Only those covered by this memorandum may be included in this memorandum .
 "You are requested to keep current the information filed with the Office of the Naval Aide as to the number and ages of your dependents"
 Minimal supplies of food and water will be included in the planning, so that it will not be necessary for dependents to bring any additional equipment . Minimal water and food supplies will also be included, as well as other supplies of equipment .
 They are urged not to attempt to bring personal belongings . Because of space limitations, they are urged to not attempt to carry personal belongings.
 This memorandum shall serve as a pass for your dependents to the relocation site pending issuance of a Civil Defense Pass . This memorandum is intended to provide a temporary pass for those who want to relocate .
 The dramatic televised speech that announced the blockade of Castro’s Cuba was hyped in advance by the media and was seen by 50 million American viewers . 50 million Americans tuned in to hear the speech .
 People stopped at appliance store windows to witness the young commander-in-chief stand up to Khruschev in glorious black and white .
 The seminal event of Kennedy’s brief presidency has been written about and analyzed endlessly . It has been re-staged or excerpted for television dramas and major motion pictures .
 Everyone who lived through those times remembers the speech and everyone else knows about it . Even if it is by watching a lame miniseries like The Kennedys, it's important to remember it .
 Richard M. Nixon gave a televised address on the 'Cuban Crisis' in 1960 . The address was a few days later by Kennedy’s vanquished Republican rival for the White House in 1960, Nixon .
 Two years after his razor-thin defeat for the highest office in the land, the former Vice President was locked in a tight campaign to unseat Democratic incumbent Edmund G Brown as governor of California .
 Nixon, of course, would famously lose this race, but at the time of his speech he undoubtedly considered it a part of his grand strategy to earn a re-match with Kennedy in 1964 . Nixon would never win this race .
 Governor Brown, meanwhile, was being briefed on the Cuban situation by the President in Washington . Governor Brown was taking to the airwaves to talk about the Cuban crisis in Cuba .
 The story only made it to page 4 in the Los Angeles Times . Perhaps because the candidate, a private citizen, did not have the power to start a nuclear war .
 Nixon’s address would originate from San Diego and would be broadcast throughout the state .
 Not exactly the stuff of stop-at-the-appliance store appointment viewing . Instead of stop at the kitchen sink, it's more likely to be used as a TV set .
 Nixon went up against The Roy Rogers and Dale Evans Show and something called Restless Guy to speak to the people of California . Nixon went on to win the show .
 Hitt was no doubt shocked when her candidate lost the race to Governor Brown on November 6th . The notorious “last press conference’s” the following day prompted the notorious ‘last press conferences’ the next day . Hitt won't be surprised when she
 Nixon would rise from the ashes six years later and win the White House . His Cuba speech remains nearly forgotten, but his Cuba speech is nearly forgotten .
 CONELRAD is still waiting to hear back from the Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum to see if they have a transcript or film of the television special . Richard Nixon's presidential library and Museum has not released a transcript of the special .
 Paul Weeks, “Street Crowd Here Listens to President,” Los Angeles Times, October 23, 1962, 1. Paul Weeks .
 Carl Greenberg, “Nixon to Make Special TV Talk on Cuba Crisis,” Los Angeles Times, October 27, 1962, 4.4.5.6.7.9.5 .
 In preparing this series of posts on the recovered memories of the Cuban missile crisis, we got to wondering what was on television and radio during the crisis .
 We decided to limit our review to the Los Angeles area since it is where CONELRAD is based . It is where the microfilm of L.A.’s wonderful newspaper past resides .